The Project Gutenberg EBook of Kennedy Square, by F. Hopkinson Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Kennedy Square

Author: F. Hopkinson Smith

Release Date: December, 2003 [Etext #4746]
Posting Date: January 6, 2010

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KENNEDY SQUARE ***




Produced by Duncan Harrod





KENNEDY SQUARE

By F. Hopkinson Smith




Author's Preface:

"Kennedy Square, in the late fifties, was a place of birds and trees and
flowers; of rude stone benches, sagging arbors smothered in vines, and
cool dirt paths bordered by sweet-smelling box. Giant magnolias filled
the air with their fragrance, and climbing roses played hide-and-seek
among the railings of the rotting fence. Along the shaded walks laughing
boys and girls romped all day, with hoop and ball, attended by old black
mammies in white aprons and gayly colored bandannas; while in the more
secluded corners, sheltered by protecting shrubs, happy lovers sat and
talked, tired wayfarers rested with hats off, and staid old gentlemen
read by the hour, their noses in their books.

"Outside of all this color, perfume, and old-time charm; outside the
grass-line and the rickety wooden fence that framed them in, ran an
uneven pavement splashed with cool shadows and stained with green mould.
Here, in summer, the watermelon man stopped his cart; and there, in
winter, upon its broken bricks, old Moses unhooked his bucket of oysters
and ceased for a moment his droning call.

"On the shady side of the square, and half hidden in ivy, was a Noah's
Ark church, topped by a quaint belfry holding a bell that had not rung
for years, and faced by a clock-dial all weather-stains and cracks,
around which travelled a single rusty hand. In its shadow to the right
lay the home of the archdeacon, a stately mansion with Corinthian
columns reaching to the roof and surrounded by a spacious garden filled
with damask roses and bushes of sweet syringa. To the left crouched
a row of dingy houses built of brick, their iron balconies hung in
flowering vines, the windows glistening with panes of wavy glass purpled
by age.

"On the sunny side of the square, opposite the church, were more houses,
high and low: one all garden, filled with broken-nosed statues hiding
behind still more magnolias; and another all veranda and honeysuckle,
big rocking-chairs and swinging hammocks; and still others with porticos
curtained by white jasmine or Virginia creeper."--From "The Fortunes of
Oliver Horn."





KENNEDY SQUARE




CHAPTER I



On the precise day on which this story opens--some sixty or more years
ago, to be exact--a bullet-headed, merry-eyed, mahogany-colored young
darky stood on the top step of an old-fashioned, high-stoop house,
craning his head up and down and across Kennedy Square in the effort to
get the first glimpse of his master, St. George Wilmot Temple, attorney
and counsellor-at-law, who was expected home from a ducking trip down
the bay.

Whether it was the need of this very diet, or whether St. George had
felt a sudden longing for the out-of-doors, is a matter of doubt, but
certain it is that some weeks before the very best shot in the county
had betaken himself to the Eastern Shore of Maryland, accompanied by
his guns, his four dogs, and two or three choice men of fashion--young
bloods of the time--men with whom we shall become better acquainted as
these chronicles go on--there to search for the toothsome and elusive
canvas-back for which his State was famous.

That the darky was without a hat and in his shirt-sleeves, and it
winter--the middle of January, really--the only warm thing about him
being the green baize apron tied about his waist, his customary livery
when attending to his morning duties--did not trouble him in the least.
Marse George might come any minute, and he wanted to be the first to
welcome him.

For the past few weeks Todd had had the house to himself. Coal-black
Aunt Jemima, with her knotted pig-tails, capacious bosom, and unconfined
waist, forty years his senior and ten shades darker in color, it is
true, looked after the pots and pans, to say nothing of a particular
spit on which her master's joints and game were roasted; but the upper
part of the house, which covered the drawing-room, dining-room, bedroom,
and dressing-room in the rear, as well as the outside of the dwelling,
including even the green-painted front door and the slant of white
marble steps that dropped to the brick sidewalk, were the especial
property of the chocolate-colored darky.

To these duties was added the exclusive care of the master himself--a
care which gave the boy the keenest delight, and which embraced every
service from the drawing off of St. George Wilmot Temple's boots to the
shortening of that gentleman's slightly gray hair; the supervision of
his linen, clothes, and table, with such side issues as the custody of
his well-stocked cellar, to say nothing of the compounding of various
combinations, sweet, sour, and strong, the betrayal of whose secrets
would have cost the darky his place.

"Place" is the word, for Todd was not St. George's slave, but the
property of a well-born, if slightly impoverished, gentleman who lived
on the Eastern Shore, and whose chief source of income was the hiring
out to his friends and acquaintances of just such likely young darkies
as Todd--a custom common to the impecunious of those days.

As Mr. Temple, however, did not come under either one of the
above-mentioned classes--the "slightly impoverished gentleman" never
having laid eyes on him in his life--the negotiations had to be
conducted with a certain formality. Todd had therefore, on his arrival,
unpinned from the inside of his jacket a portentous document signed
with his owner's name and sealed with a red wafer, which after such
felicitous phrases as--"I have the distinguished honor," etc.--gave the
boy's age (21), weight (140 pounds), and height (5 feet 10 inches)--all
valuable data for identification in case the chattel conceived a notion
of moving further north (an unnecessary precaution in Todd's case).
To this was added the further information that the boy had been raised
under his master's heels, that he therefore knew his pedigree, and that
his sole and only reason for sparing him from his own immediate service
was his own poverty and the fact that while under St. George's care the
boy could learn how "to wait on quality."

As to the house itself--the "Temple Mansion," as it was called--that
was as much a part of Kennedy Square as the giant magnolias gracing the
park, or the Noah's Ark church, with its quaint belfry and cracked bell,
which faced its shady walks. Nobody, of course, remembered how long it
had been built--that is, nobody then alive--I mean the very date. Such
authorities as Major Clayton were positive that the bricks had been
brought from Holland; while Richard Horn, the rising young scientist,
was sure that all the iron and brass work outside were the product of
Sheffield; but in what year they had all been put together had always
been a disputed question.

That, however, which was certain and beyond doubt, was that St. George's
father, old General Dorsey Temple, had purchased the property near the
close of the preceding century; that he had, with his characteristic
vehemence, pushed up the roof, thrust in two dormer windows, and smashed
out the rear wall, thus enlarging the dining-room and giving increased
space for a glass-covered porch ending in a broad flight of wooden steps
descending to a rose-garden surrounded by a high brick wall; that thus
encouraged he had widened the fireplaces, wainscoted the hall, built a
new mahogany spider-web staircase leading to his library on the second
floor, and had otherwise disported himself after the manner of a man
who, having suddenly fallen heir to a big pot of money, had ever after
continued oblivious to the fact that the more holes he punched in
its bottom the less water would spill over its top. The alterations
complete, balls, routs, and dinners followed to such distinguished
people as Count Rochambeau, the Marquis de Castellux, Marquis de
Lafayette, and other high dignitaries, coming-of-age parties for the
young bloods--quite English in his tastes was the old gentleman--not
to mention many other extravagances which were still discussed by the
gossips of the day.

With the general's death--it had occurred some twenty years before--the
expected had happened. Not only was the pot nearly empty, but the
various drains which it had sustained had so undermined the family
rent-roll that an equally disastrous effect had been produced on the
mansion itself (one of the few pieces of property, by the way, that
the father had left to his only son and heir unencumbered, with the
exception of a suit in chancery from which nobody ever expected a
penny), the only dry spots in St. George's finances being the few ground
rents remaining from his grandmother's legacy and the little he could
pick up at the law.

It is not to be wondered at, therefore, that certain changes and
deteriorations had taken place inside and out of the historic
building--changes which never in the slightest degree affected the
even-tempered St. George, who had retained his own private apartments
regardless of the rest of the house--but changes which, in all justice
to the irascible old spendthrift, would have lifted that gentleman out
of his grave could he have realized their effect and extent. What a
shock, for instance, would the most punctilious man of his time have
received when he found his front basement rented for a law office, to
say nothing of a disreputable tin sign nailed to a shutter--where in
the olden time he and his cronies had toasted their shins before blazing
logs, the toddies kept hot on the hearth! And what a row would he have
raised had he known that the rose-garden was entirely neglected and
given over to the dogs and their kennels; the library in the second
story stripped of its books and turned into a guest-chamber, and the
books themselves consigned to the basement; the oak-panelled dining-room
transformed into a bedchamber for St. George, and the white-and-gold
drawing-room fronting the street reduced to a mere living-room where his
son and heir made merry with his friends! And then the shrinkages all
about! When a room could be dispensed with, it was locked up. When a
shingle broke loose, it stayed loose; and so did the bricks capping the
chimneys, and the leaky rain-spouts that spattered the dingy bricks, as
well as the cracks and crannies that marred the ceilings and walls.

And yet so great was Todd's care over the outside fittings of the
house--details which were necessarily in evidence, and which determined
at a glance the quality of the folks inside--that these several
crumblings, shake-downs, and shrinkages were seldom noticed by the
passer-by. The old adage that a well-brushed hat, a clean collar,
polished shoes, and immaculate gloves--all terminal details--make
the well-dressed man, no matter how shabby or how ill-fitting his
intermediate apparel, applied, according to Todd's standards, to houses
as well as Brummels. He it was who soused the windows of purple glass,
polished the brass knobs, rubbed bright the brass knocker and brass
balls at the top and bottom of the delightful iron railings, to say
nothing of the white marble steps, which he attacked with a slab of
sandstone and cake of fuller's-earth, bringing them to so high a state
of perfection that one wanted to apologize for stepping on them. Thus
it was that the weather-beaten rainspouts, stained bricks, sagging roof,
and blistered window-sashes were no longer in evidence. Indeed, their
very shabbiness so enhanced the brilliancy of Todd's handiwork that the
most casual passers-by were convinced at a glance that gentlefolk lived
within.


On this particular morning, then, Todd had spent most of the time since
daylight--it was now eight o'clock--in the effort to descry his master
making his way along the street, either afoot or by some conveyance, his
eyes dancing, his ears alert as a rabbit's, his restless feet marking
the limit of his eagerness. In his impatience he had practised every
step known to darkydom in single and double shuffle; had patted juba on
one and both knees, keeping time with his heels to the rhythm; had slid
down and climbed up the railings a dozen times, his eyes on the turn in
the street, and had otherwise conducted himself as would any other boy,
black or white, who was at his wits' end to know what to do with the
next second of his time.

Aunt Jemima had listened to the racket until she had lost all patience,
and at last threw up the basement window:

"Go in an' shet dat do'--'fo' I come up dar an' smack ye--'nough ter
make a body deef ter hear ye," she called, her black shining face
dividing the curtains. "How you know he's a-comin'?"

Todd leaned over the railing and peered down: "Mister Harry Rutter done
tol' me--said dey all 's a-comin'--de jedge an' Doctor Teackle an'
Marse George an' de hull kit an' bilin'. Dey's been gone mos' two weeks
now,--dey's a-comin' I tell ye--be yere any minute."

"I b'liebe dat when I sees it. Fool nigger like you b'liebe anything.
You better go inside 'fo' you catch yo' dea'f. I gin ye fair warnin'
right now dat I ain't gwineter nuss ye,--d'ye yere?--standin' out dar
like a tarr-pin wid yo' haid out. Go in I tell ye!" and she shut the
window with a bang and made her way to the kitchen.

Todd kept up his double shuffle with everything going--hands, feet,
and knees--thrashed his arms about his chest and back to keep up the
circulation and with a final grimace in the direction of the old cook
maintained his watch.

"I spec's it's de fog dat's kep' 'em," he muttered anxiously, his feet
still in action. "Dat bay boat's mos' allus late,--can't tell when
she'll git in. Only las' week--Golly!--dar he is--DAT'S HIM!"

A mud-bespattered gig was swinging around the corner into the Square,
and with a swerve in its course was heading to where Todd stood.

The boy sprang down the steps:

"Yere he is, Aunt Jemima!" he shouted, as if the old cook could have
heard him through three brick walls.

The gig came to a stand-still and began to unload: first the dogs, who
had been stowed under their master's feet since they left the steamboat
wharf, and who with a clear bound to the sidewalk began scouring in mad
circles, one after another, up and down Todd's immaculate steps, the
four in full cry until the entire neighborhood was aroused, the late
sleepers turning over with the remark--"Temple's at home," and the early
risers sticking their heads out of the windows to count the ducks as
they were passed out. Next the master: One shapely leg encased in
an English-made ducking boot, then its mate, until the whole of his
handsome, well-knit, perfectly healthy and perfectly delightful body was
clear of the cramped conveyance.

"Hello, Todd!" he burst out, his face aglow with his drive from the
boat-landing--"glad to see you! Here, take hold of these guns---easy
now, they won't hurt you; one at a time, you lunkhead! And now pull
those ducks from under the seat. How's Aunt Jemima?--Oh, is that
you aunty?" She had come on the run as soon as she heard the dogs.
"Everything all right, aunty--howdy--" and he shook her hand heartily.

The old woman had made a feint to pull her sleeves down over her plump
black arms and then, begrudging the delay, had grasped his outstretched
hand, her face in a broad grin.

"Yes, sah, dat's me. Clar' to goodness, Marse George, I's glad ter
git ye home. Lawd-a-massy, see dem ducks! Purty fat, ain't dey, sah?
My!--dat pair's jes' a-bustin'! G'long you fool nigger an' let me hab
'em! G'way f'om dere I tell ye!"

"No,--you pick them up, Todd--they're too heavy for you, aunty. You go
back to your kitchen and hurry up breakfast--waffles, remember,--and
some corn pone and a scallop shell or two--I'm as hungry as a bear."

The whole party were mounting the steps now, St. George carrying the
guns, Todd loaded down with the game--ten brace of canvas-backs and
redheads strung together by their bills--the driver of the gig following
with the master's big ducking overcoat and smaller traps--the four dogs
crowding up trying to nose past for a dash into the wide hall as soon as
Todd opened the door.

"Anybody been here lately, Todd?" his master asked, stopping for a
moment to get a better grip of his heaviest duck gun.

"Ain't nobody been yere partic'ler 'cept Mister Harry Rutter. Dey alls
knowed you was away. Been yere mos' ev'ry day--come ag'in yisterday."

"Mr. Rutter been here!--Well, what did he want?"

"Dunno, sah,--didn't say. Seemed consid'ble shook up when he foun' you
warn't to home. I done tol' him you might be back to-day an' den ag'in
you mightn't--'pended on de way de ducks was flyin'. Spec' he'll be
roun' ag'in purty soon--seemed ter hab sumpin' on his min'. I'll tu'n de
knob, sah. Yere--git down, you imp o' darkness,--you Floe!--you Dandy!
Drat dem dogs!--Yere, YERE!" but all four dogs were inside now, making
a sweepstakes of the living-room, the rugs and cushions flying in every
direction.

Although Todd had spent most of the minutes since daylight peering up
and down the Square, eager for the first sight of the man whom he loved
with an idolatry only to be found in the negro for a white man whom he
respects, and who is kind to him, he had not neglected any of his other
duties. There was a roaring wood fire behind brass andirons and fender.
There was a breakfast table set for two--St. George's invariable custom.
"Somebody might drop in, you know, Todd." There was a big easy-chair
moved up within warming distance of the cheery blaze; there were pipes
and tobacco within reach of the master's hand; there was the
weekly newspaper folded neatly on the mantel, and a tray holding an
old-fashioned squat decanter and the necessary glasses--in fact, all
the comforts possible and necessary for a man who having at twenty-five
given up all hope of wedded life, found himself at fifty becoming
accustomed to its loss.

St. George seized the nearest dog by the collar, cuffed him into
obedience as an example to the others, ordered the four to the hearth
rug, ran his eye along the mantel to see what letters had arrived in his
absence, and disappeared into his bedroom. From thence he emerged
half an hour later attired in the costume of the day--a jaunty
brown velveteen jacket, loose red scarf, speckled white
waistcoat--single-breasted and of his own pattern and cut--dove-gray
trousers, and white gaiters. No town clothes for St. George as long as
his measure was in London and his friends were good enough to bring
him a trunk full every year or two. "Well-cut garments may not make
a gentleman," he would often say to the youngsters about him, "but
slip-shod clothes can spoil one."

He had drawn up to the table now, Todd in white jacket hovering about
him, bringing relays of waffles, hot coffee, and more particularly the
first of a series of great scallop-shells filled with oysters which he
had placed on the well-brushed hearth to keep hot while his master was
dressing.

Fifty he was by the almanac, and by the old family Bible as well, and
yet he did not look it. Six feet and an inch; straight, ruddy-checked,
broad-shouldered, well-rounded, but with his waist measure still under
control; slightly gray at the temples, with clean-shaven face, laughing
eyes, white teeth, and finely moulded nose, brow, and chin, he was
everything his friends claimed--the perfect embodiment of all that was
best in his class and station, and of all that his blood had bequeathed
him.

And fine old fellows they were if we can believe the historians of the
seventeenth century: "Wearing the falchion and the rapier, the cloth
coat lined with plush and embroidered belt, the gold hat-band and the
feathers, silk stockings and garters, besides signet rings and other
jewels; wainscoting the walls of their principal rooms in black oak and
loading their sideboards with a deal of rich and massive silver plate
upon which was carved the arms of their ancestors;--drinking, too,
strong punch and sack from 'silver sack-cups'--(sack being their
favorite)--and feasting upon oysters and the most delicious of all the
ducks of the world."

And in none of their other distinguishing qualities was their descendant
lacking. In the very lift of his head and brace of his shoulders; in the
grace and ease with which he crossed the room, one could see at a glance
something of the dash and often the repose of the cavalier from whom
he had sprung. And the sympathy, kindness, and courtesy of the man
that showed in every glance of his eye and every movement of his
body--despite his occasional explosive temper--a sympathy that drifted
in to an ungovernable impulse to divide everything he owned into two
parts, and his own half into two once more if the other fellow needed
it; a kindness that made every man his friend, and a courtesy which,
even in a time when men lifted their hats to men, as well as to women,
had gained for him, the town over, the soubriquet of "Gentleman George";
while to every young girl and youth under twenty he was just "dear Uncle
George"--the one man in all Kennedy Square who held their secrets.


But to our breakfast once more. All four dogs were on their feet now,
their tails wagging expectantly, their noses at each of his knees, where
they were regaled at regular intervals with choice bits from his plate,
the snapping of their solemn jaws expressing their thanks. A second
scallop-shell was next lifted from the hearth with the tongs, and
deposited sizzling hot on a plate beside the master, the aroma of the
oysters filling the room. These having disappeared, as had the former
one, together with the waffles and coffee, and the master's appetite
being now on the wane, general conversation became possible.

"Did Mr. Rutter look ill, Todd?" he continued, picking up the thread of
the talk where he had left it. "He wasn't very well when I left."

"No, sah,--neber see him look better. Been up a li'l' late I
reckon,--Marse Harry mos' gen'ally is a li'l' mite late, sah--" Todd
chuckled. "But dat ain't nuthin' to dese gemmans. But he sho' do wanter
see ye. Maybe he stayed all night at Mister Seymour's. If he did an' he
yered de rumpus dese rapscallions kicked up--yes--dat's you I'm talkin'
to"--and he looked toward the dogs--"he'll be roun' yere 'fo' ye gits
fru yo' bre'kfus'. Dey do say as how Marse Harry's mighty sweet in dat
quarter. Mister Langdon Willits's snoopin' roun' too, but Miss Kate
ain't got no use fer him. He ain't quality dey say."

His master let him run on; Aunt Jemima was Todd's only outlet during
his master's absence, and as this was sometimes clogged by an uplifted
broom, he made the best use he could of the opportunities when he
and his master were alone. When "comp'ny" were present he was as
close-mouthed as a clam and as noiseless as a crab.

"Who told you all this gossip, Todd?" exclaimed St. George with a smile,
laying down his knife and fork.

"Ain't nary one tol' me--ain't no use bein' tol'. All ye got to do is
to keep yo' eyes open. Be a weddin' dar 'fo' spring. Look out, sah--dat
shell's still a-sizzlin'. Mo' coffee, sah? Wait till I gits some hot
waffles--won't take a minute!" and he was out of the room and downstairs
before his master could answer.

Hardly had he slammed the kitchen door behind him when the clatter and
stamp of a horse's hoofs were heard Outside, followed by an impatient
rat-a-tat-tat on the knocker.

The boy dropped his dishes: "Fo' Gawd, dat's Mister Harry!" he cried as
he started on a run for the door. "Don't nobody bang de do' down like
dat but him."

A slender, thoroughly graceful young fellow of twenty-one or two, booted
and spurred, his dark eyes flashing, his face tingling with the sting of
the early morning air, dashed past the obsequious darky and burst into
Temple's presence with the rush of a north-west breeze. He had ridden
ten miles since he vaulted into the saddle, had never drawn rein uphill
or down, and neither he nor the thoroughbred pawing the mud outside had
turned a hair.

"Hello, Uncle George!" Temple, as has been said, was Uncle George to
every girl and youth in Kennedy Square.

"Why, Harry!" He had sprung from his seat, napkin in hand and had him
by both shoulders, looking into his eyes as if he wanted to hug him, and
would the first thing he knew. "Where are you from--Moorlands? What a
rollicking chap you are, and you look so well and handsome, you dog!
And now tell me of your dear mother and your father. But first down
with you--here--right opposite--always your place, my dear Harry. Todd,
another shell of oysters and more waffles and coffee--everything, Todd,
and blazing hot: two shells, Todd--the sight of you, Harry, makes me
ravenous again, and I could have eaten my boots, when I got home an hour
ago, I was so hungry. But the mare"--here he moved to the window--"is
she all right? Spitfire, I suppose--you'd kill anything else, you
rascal! But you haven't tied her!"

"No--never tie her--break her heart if I did. Todd, hang up this coat
and hat in the hall before you go."

"That's what you said of that horse you bought of Hampson--ran away,
didn't he?" persisted his host, his eyes on the mare, which had now
become quiet.

"Yes, and broke his leg. But Spitfire's all right--she'll stand. Where
will I sit--here? And now what kind of a time did you have, and who were
with you?"

"Clayton, Doctor Teackle, and the judge."

"And how many ducks did you get?" and he dropped into his chair.

"Twenty-one," answered St. George, dry-washing his white shapely hands,
as he took his seat--a habit of his when greatly pleased.

"All canvas-backs?"

"No--five redheads and a mallard."

"Where did you put up?" echoed Harry, loosening his riding-jacket to
give his knife and fork freer play.

"I spent a week at Tom Coston's and a week at Craddock. Another lump of
sugar, Todd."

The boy laughed gently: "Lazy Tom's?"

"Lazy Tom's--and the best-hearted fellow in the world. They're going to
make him a judge, they say and--"

"--What of--peach brandy? No cream in mine, Todd."

"No--you scurrilous dog--of the Common Court," retorted St. George,
looking at him over the top of his cup. "Very good lawyer is Tom--got
horse sense and can speak the truth--make a very good judge."

Again Harry laughed--rather a forced laugh this time, as if he were
trying to make himself agreeable but with so anxious a ring through it
that Todd busied himself about the table before going below for fresh
supplies, making excuse of collecting the used dishes. If there were to
be any revelations concerning the situation at the Seymour house, he did
not intend to miss any part of them.

"Better put Mrs. Coston on the bench and set Tom to rocking the cradle,"
said the young man, reaching for the plate of corn pone. "She's a
thoroughbred if ever I saw one, and does credit to her blood. But go
on--tell me about the birds. Are they flying high?--and the duck blinds;
have they fixed them up? They were all going to pot when I was there
last."

"Birds out of range, most of them--hard work getting what I did. As to
the blinds, they are still half full of water--got soaking wet trying to
use one. I shot most of mine from the boat just as the day broke," and
then followed a full account of what the party had bagged, with details
of every day's adventures. This done, St. George pushed back his chair
and faced the young man.

"And now you take the witness-stand, sir--look me in the eyes, put your
hand on your fob-pocket and tell me the truth. Todd says you have
been here every day for a week looking as if you had lost your last
fip-penny-bit and wild to see me. What has happened?"

"Todd has a vivid imagination." He turned in his seat, stretched out
his hand, and catching one of the dogs by the nose rubbed his head
vigorously.

"Go on--all of it--no dodging the king's counsellor. What's the matter?"

The young man glanced furtively at Todd, grabbed another dog, rubbed
their two ears together in play, and in a lowered voice, through which a
tinge of sadness was only too apparent, murmured:

"Miss Kate--we've had a falling out."

St. George lowered his head suddenly and gave a low whistle:--"Falling
out?--what about?"

Again young Rutter glanced at Todd, whose back was turned, but whose
ears were stretched to splitting point. His host nodded understandingly.

"There, Todd--that will do; now go down and get your breakfast. No
more waffles, tell Aunt Jemima. Bring the pipes over here and throw on
another log... that's right." A great sputtering of sparks followed--a
spider-legged, mahogany table was wheeled into place, and the dejected
darky left the room for the regions below.

"So you two have had a quarrel! Oh, Harry!--when will you learn to think
twice before you speak? Whose fault was it?" sighed St. George, filling
the bowl of his pipe with his slender fingers, slowly tucking in each
shred and grain.

"Mine."

"What did you say?" (Puff-puff.)

"Nothing--I couldn't. She came in and saw it all." The boy had his
elbows on the table now, his cheeks sunk in his hands.

St. George looked up: "Drunk, were you?"

"Yes."

"Where?"

"At Mrs. Cheston's ball last week."

"Have you seen her since?"

"No--she won't let me come near her. Mr. Seymour passed me yesterday and
hardly spoke to me."

St. George canted his chair and zigzagged it toward the blazing hearth;
then he said thoughtfully, without looking at the young man:

"Well, this is a pretty kettle of fish! Have you told your father?"

"No--he wouldn't understand."

"And I know you didn't tell your mother." This came with the tone of
positive conviction.

"No--and don't you. Mother is daft on the subject. If she had her way,
father would never put a drop of wine on the table. She says it is
ruining the county--but that's mother's way."

St. George stooped over, fondled one of the dogs for a moment--two had
followed Todd out of the room--settled back in his chair again, and
still looking into the fire, said slowly:

"Bad business--bad business, Harry! Kate is as proud as Lucifer and
dislikes nothing on earth so much as being made conspicuous. Tell me
exactly what happened."

"Well, there isn't anything to tell," replied the young fellow, raising
his head and leaning back in his chair, his face the picture of despair.
"We were all in the library and the place was boiling-hot, and they had
two big bowls, one full of eggnog and the other full of apple-toddy: and
the next thing I knew I was out in the hall and met Kate on the stairs.
She gave a little smothered scream, and moaned--'Oh, Harry!--and you
promised me!'--and then she put her hands to her face, as if to shut me
out of her sight. That sobered me somewhat, and after I got out on the
porch into the night air and had pulled myself together, I tried to find
her and apologize, but she had gone home, although the ball wasn't half
over.

"Then this was not the first time?" He was still at the hot coals, both
hands outfanned, to screen his face from the blaze.

"No--I'm sorry to say it wasn't. I told her I would never fail her
again, and she forgave me, but I don't know what she'll do now. She
never forgives anybody who breaks his word--she's very queer about
it. That's what I came to see you about. I haven't slept much nights,
thinking it over, and so I had the mare saddled, as soon as it got
light, hoping you would be home. Todd thought you might be--he saw Dr.
Teackle's Joe, who said you were all coming to-day."

Again there was a long pause, during which Temple continued to study the
coals through his open fingers, the young man sitting hunched up in
his chair, his handsome head dropped between his shoulders, his glossy
chestnut hair, a-frouze with his morning ride, fringing his collar
behind.

"Harry," said St. George, knocking the ashes slowly from his pipe on
the edge of the fender, and turning his face for the first time toward
him,--"didn't I hear something before I went away about a ball at your
father's--or a dance--or something, when your engagement was to be
announced?"

The boy nodded.

"And was it not to be something out of the ordinary?" he continued,
looking at the boy from under his eyelids--"Teackle certainly told me
so--said that your mother had already begun to get the house in order--"

Again Harry nodded--as if he had been listening to an indictment, every
word of which he knew was true.

St. George roused himself and faced his guest: "And yet you took this
time, Harry, to--"

The boy threw up both hands in protest:

"Don't!--DON'T! Uncle George! It's the ball that makes it all the worse.
That's why I've got no time to lose; that's why I've haunted this place
waiting for you to get back. Mother will be heart-broken if she finds
out and I don't know what father would do."

St. George laid his empty pipe on the table and straightened his body
in the chair until his broad shoulders filled the back. Then his brow
darkened; his indignation was getting the better of him.

"I don't know what has come over you young fellows, Harry!" he at last
broke out, his eyes searching the boy's. "You don't seem to know how
to live. You've got to pull a shoat out of a trough to keep it from
overeating itself, but you shouldn't be obliged to pull a gentleman away
from his glass. Good wine is good food and should be treated as such. My
cellar is stocked with old Madeira--some port--some fine sherries--so
is your father's. Have you ever seen him abuse them?--have you ever
seen Mr. Horn or Mr. Kennedy, or any of our gentlemen around here, abuse
them? It's scandalous, Harry! damnable! I love you, my son--love you
in a way you know nothing of, but you've got to stop this sort of thing
right off. And so have these young roysterers you associate with. It's
getting worse every day. I don't wonder your dear mother feels about it
as she does. But she's always been that way, and she's always been right
about it, too, although I didn't use to think so." This last came with
a lowered voice and a deep, indrawn sigh, and for the moment checked the
flow of his wrath.

Harry hung his head still lower, but he did not attempt to defend
himself.

"Who else were making vulgarians of themselves at Mrs. Cheston's?" St.
George continued in a calmer tone, stretching his shapely legs until the
soles of his shoes touched the fender.

"Mark Gilbert, Tom Murdoch, Langdon Willits, and--"

"Willits, eh?--Well, I should expect it of Willits. He wasn't born a
gentleman--that is, his grandfather wasn't a gentleman--married his
overseer's daughter, if I remember right:--but you come of the
best blood in the State,--egad!--none better! You have something to
maintain--some standard to keep up. A Rutter should never be found
guilty of anything that would degrade his name. You seem to forget
that--you--damn me, Harry!--when I think of it all--and of Kate--my
sweet, lovely Kate,--and how you have made her suffer--for she loves
you--no question of that--I feel like wringing your neck! What the devil
do you mean, Sir?" He was up on his feet now, pacing the room, the dogs
following his every movement with their brown agate eyes, their soft,
silky ears straightening and falling.

So far the young fellow had not moved nor had he offered a word in
defence. He knew his Uncle George--better let him blow it all out, then
the two could come together. At last he said in a contrite tone--his
hands upraised:

"Don't scold me, Uncle George. I've scolded myself enough--just say
something to help me. I can't give Kate up--I'd sooner die. I've always
made a fool of myself--maybe I'll quit doing it after this. Tell me how
I can straighten this out. She won't see me--maybe her father won't.
He and my father--so Tom Warfield told me yesterday--had a talk at the
club. What they said I don't know, but Mr. Seymour was pretty mad--that
is, for him--so Tom thought from the way he spoke."

"And he ought to be mad--raging mad! He's only got one daughter, and she
the proudest and loveliest thing on earth, and that one he intends to
give to you"--Harry looked up in surprise--"Yes--he told me so. And here
you are breaking her heart before he has announced it to the world. It's
worse than damnable, Harry--it's a CRIME!"

For some minutes he continued his walk, stopping to look out of the
window, his eyes on the mare who, with head up and restless eyes, was on
the watch for her master's return; then he picked up his pipe from the
table, threw himself into his chair again, and broke into one of his
ringing laughs.

"I reckon it's because you're twenty, Harry, I forgot that. Hot
blood--hot temper,--madcap dare-devil that you are--not a grain of
common-sense. But what can you expect?--I was just like you at your age.
Come, now, what shall we do first?"

The young fellow rose and a smile of intense relief crept over his face.
He had had many such overhaulings from his uncle, and always with this
ending. Whenever St. George let out one of those big, spontaneous,
bubbling laughs straight from his heart, the trouble, no matter how
serious, was over. What some men gained by anger and invective St.
George gained by good humor, ranging from the faint smile of toleration
to the roar of merriment. One reason why he had so few enemies--none,
practically--was that he could invariably disarm an adversary with a
laugh. It was a fine old blade that he wielded; only a few times in his
life had he been called upon to use any other--when some under-dog was
maltreated, or his own good name or that of a friend was traduced, or
some wrong had to be righted--then his face would become as hot steel
and there would belch out a flame of denunciation that would scorch
and blind in its intensity. None of these fiercer moods did the boy
know;--what he knew was his uncle's merry side--his sympathetic, loving
side,--and so, following up his advantage, he strode across the room,
settled down on the arm of his uncle's chair, and put his arm about his
shoulders.

"Won't you go and see her, please?" he pleaded, patting his back,
affectionately.

"What good will that do? Hand me a match, Harry."

"Everything--that's what I came for."

"Not with Kate! She isn't a child--she's a woman," he echoed back
between the puffs, his indignation again on the rise. "And she is
different from the girls about here," he added, tossing the burned match
in the fire. "When she once makes up her mind it stays made up."

"Don't let her make it up! Go and see her and tell her how I love her
and how miserable I am. Tell her I'll never break another promise to
her as long as I live. Nobody ever holds out against you. Please, Uncle
George! I'll never come to you for anything else in the world if you'll
help me this time. And I won't drink another drop of anything you don't
want me to drink--I don't care what father or anybody else says. Oh,
you've GOT to go to her!--I can't stand it any longer! Every time I
think of Kate hidden away over there where I can't get at her, it drives
me wild. I wouldn't ask you to go if I could go myself and talk it out
with her--but she won't let me near her--I've tried, and tried; and Ben
says she isn't at home, and knows he lies when he says it! You will go,
won't you?"

The smoke from his uncle's pipe was coming freer now--most of it
escaping up the throat of the chimney with a gentle swoop.

"When do you want me to go?" He had already surrendered. When had he
ever held out when a love affair was to be patched up?

"Now, right away."

"No,--I'll go to-night,--she will be at home then," he said at last,
as if he had just made up his mind, the pipe having helped--"and do
you come in about nine and--let me know when you are there, or--better
still, wait in the hall until I come for you."

"But couldn't I steal in while you are talking?"

"No--you do just as I tell you. Not a sound out of you, remember, until
I call you."

"But how am I to know? She might go out the other door and--"

"You'll know when I come for you."

"And you think it will be all right, don't you?" he pleaded. "You'll
tell her what an awful time I've had, won't you, Uncle George?"

"Yes, every word of it."

"And that I haven't slept a wink since--"

"Yes--and that you are going to drown yourself and blow your head off
and swallow poison. Now off with you and let me think how I am to begin
straightening out this idiotic mess. Nine o'clock, remember, and in the
hall until I come for you."

"Yes--nine o'clock! Oh!--you good Uncle George! I'll never forget you
for it," and with a grasp of St. George's hand and another outpouring
of gratitude, the young fellow swung wide the door, clattered down the
steps, threw his leg over Spitfire, and dashed up the street.




CHAPTER II



If Kate's ancestors had wasted any part of their substance in too lavish
a hospitality, after the manner of the spendthrift whose extravagances
were recounted in the preceding chapter, there was nothing to indicate
it in the home of their descendants. No loose shutters, crumbling
chimneys, or blistered woodwork defaced the Seymour mansion:--the touch
of the restorer was too apparent. No sooner did a shutter sag or a hinge
give way than away it went to the carpenter or the blacksmith; no sooner
did a banister wabble, or a table crack, or an andiron lose a leg, than
up came somebody with a kit, or a bag, or a box of tools, and they were
as good as new before you could wink your eye. Indeed, so great was the
desire to keep things up that it was only necessary (so a wag said) to
scratch a match on old Seymour's front door to have its panels repainted
the next morning.

And then its seclusion:--while its neighbors--the Temple mansion among
them--had been placed boldly out to the full building line where they
could see and be seen, the Seymours, with that spirit of aloofness which
had marked the family for generations, had set their dwelling back ten
paces, thrown up a hedge of sweet-smelling box to screen the inmates
from the gaze of passers-by, planted three or four big trees as
protection for the upper windows, and, to insure still greater privacy,
had put up a swinging wooden gate, kept shut by a ball and chain, its
clang announcing the entrance of each and every visitor.

And this same spirit was manifest the moment you stepped into the wide
hall, glanced at the old family portraits marching steadily, one after
another, up the side of the spacious stairs (revarnished every other
year)--entered the great drawing-room hung with yellow satin
and decorated with quaint mirrors, and took a scat in one of the
all-embracing arm-chairs, there to await the arrival of either the
master of the house or his charming daughter.

If it were the master to whom you wished to pay your respects, one
glance at the Honorable Howard Douglass Seymour would have convinced you
that he was precisely the kind of man who should have had charge of
so well-ordered a home: so well brushed was he--so clean-shaven--so
immaculately upholstered--the two points of his collar pinching his
cheeks at the same precise angle; his faultless black stock fitting to
perfection, the lapels of his high-rolled coat matching exactly. And
then the correct parting of the thin gray hair and the two little gray
brush-tails of lovelocks that were combed in front of his ears, there
to become a part of the two little dabs of gray whiskers that stretched
from his temples to his bleached cheekbones. Yes--a most carefully
preserved, prim, and well-ordered person was Kate's father.

As to the great man's career, apart from his service in the legislature,
which won him his title, there was no other act of his life which
marked him apart from his fellows. Suffice it to say that he was born
a gentleman without a penny to his name; that he married Kate's mother
when she was twenty and he forty (and here is another story, and a sad
one)--she the belle of her time--and sole heir to the estate of her
grandfather, Captain Hugh Barkeley, the rich ship-owner--and that the
alliance had made him a gentleman of unlimited leisure, she, at her
death, having left all her property to her daughter Kate, with the
Honorable Prim as custodian.

And this trust, to his credit be it said--for Seymour was of Scotch
descent, a point in his favor with old Captain Barkeley, who was
Scotch on his mother's side, and, therefore, somewhat canny--was most
religiously kept, he living within his ample means--or Kate's, which was
the same thing--discharging the duties of father, citizen, and friend,
with the regularity of a clock--so many hours with his daughter, so many
hours at his club, so many hours at his office; the intermediate minutes
being given over to resting, dressing, breakfasting, dining, sleeping,
and no doubt praying; the precise moment that marked the beginning and
ending of each task having been fixed years in advance by this most
exemplary, highly respectable, and utterly colorless old gentleman of
sixty.

That this dry shell of a man could be the father of our spontaneous
lovely Kate was one of the things that none of the younger people around
Kennedy Square could understand--but then few of them had known her
beautiful mother with her proud step and flashing eyes.

But it is not the punctilious, methodical Prim whom St. George wishes to
see to-night; nor does he go through any of the formalities customary
to the house. There is no waiting until old Ben, the family butler in
snuff-colored coat and silver buttons, shuffles upstairs or into the
library, or wherever the inmates were to be found, there to announce
"Massa George Temple." Nor did he send in his card, or wait until his
knock was answered. He simply swung back the gate until the old chain
and ball, shocked at his familiarity, rattled itself into a rage, strode
past the neatly trimmed, fragrant box, pushed open the door--no front
door was ever locked in the daytime in Kennedy Square, and few at
night--and halting at the bottom step, called up the silent stairs in a
voice that was a joyous greeting in itself:

"Kate, you darling! come down as quick as your dear little feet will
carry you! It's Uncle George, do you hear?--or shall I come up and bring
you down in my arms, you bunch of roses? It won't be the first time."
The first time was when she was a year old.

"Oh!--is that you, Uncle George? Yes,--just as soon as I do up my back
hair." The voice came from the top of the stairs--a lark's voice singing
down from high up. "Father's out and--"

"Yes--I know he's out; I met him on his way to the club. Hurry now--I've
got the best news in the world for you."

"Yes--in a minute."

He knew her minutes, and how long they could be, and in his impatience
roamed about the wide hall examining the old English engravings and
colored prints decorating the panels until he heard her step overhead
and looking up watched her cross the upper hall, her well-poised,
aristocratic head high in air, her full, well-rounded, blossoming body
imaged in the loose embroidered scarf wound about her sloping shoulders.
Soon he caught the wealth of her blue-black hair in whose folds her
negro mammy had pinned a rose that matched the brilliancy of her cheeks,
two stray curls wandering over her neck; her broad forehead, with
clearly marked eyebrows, arching black lashes shading lustrous,
slumbering eyes; and as she drew nearer, her warm red lips, exquisite
teeth, and delicate chin, and last, the little feet that played hide and
seek beneath her quilted petticoat: a tall, dark, full-blooded, handsome
girl of eighteen with an air of command and distinction tempered by a
certain sweet dignity and delicious coquetry--a woman to be loved even
when she ruled and to be reverenced even when she trifled.

She had reached the floor now, and the two arm in arm, he patting her
hand, she laughing beside him, had entered the small library followed by
the old butler bringing another big candelabra newly lighted.

"It's so good of you to come," she cried, her face alight with the joy
of seeing him--"and you look so happy and well--your trip down the bay
has done you a world of good. Ben says the ducks you sent father are the
best we have had this winter. Now tell me, dear Uncle George"--she had
him in one of the deep arm-chairs by this time, with a cushion behind
his shoulders--"I am dying to hear all about it."

"Don't you 'dear Uncle George' me until you've heard what I've got to
say."

"But you said you had the best news in the world for me," she laughed,
looking at him from under her lashes.

"So I have."

"What is it?"

"Harry."

The girl's face clouded and her lips quivered. Then she sat bolt
upright.

"I won't hear a word about him. He's broken his promise to me and I will
never trust him again. If I thought you'd come to talk about Harry, I
wouldn't have come down."

St. George lay back in his chair, shrugged his shoulders, stole a
look at her from beneath his bushy eyebrows, and said with an assumed
dignity, a smile playing about his lips:

"All right, off goes his head--exit the scoundrel. Much as I could do
to keep him out of Jones Falls this morning, but of course now it's
all over we can let Spitfire break his neck. That's the way a gentleman
should die of love--and not be fished out of a dirty stream with his
clothes all bespattered with mud."

"But he won't die for love. He doesn't know what love means or he
wouldn't behave as he does. Do you know what really happened, Uncle
George?" Her brown eyes were flashing, her cheeks aflame with her
indignation.

"Oh, I know exactly what happened. Harry told me with the tears running
down his cheeks. It was dreadful--INEXCUSABLE--BARBAROUS! I've been that
way myself--tumbled half-way down these same stairs before you were born
and had to be put to bed, which accounts for the miserable scapegrace I
am to-day." His face was in a broad smile, but his voice never wavered.

Kate looked at him and put out her hand. "You never did--I won't believe
a word of it."

"Ask your father, my dear. He helped carry me upstairs, and Ben pulled
off my boots. Oh, it was most disgraceful! I'm just beginning to live it
down," and he reached over and patted the girl's cheek, his hearty laugh
ringing through the room.

Kate was smiling now--her Uncle George was always irresistible when he
was like this.

"But Harry isn't you," she pouted.

"ISN'T ME!--why I was ten times worse! He's only twenty-one and I was
twenty-five. He's got four years the better of me in which to reform."

"He'll NEVER be like you--you never broke a promise in your life. He
gave me his word of honor he would never get--yes--I'm just going to
say it--drunk--again: yes--that's the very word--DRUNK! I don't care--I
won't have it! I won't have anything to do with anybody who breaks his
promise, and who can't keep sober. My father was never so in his life,
and Harry shall never come near me again if he--"

"Hold on!--HOLD ON! Oh, what an unforgiving minx! You Seymours are all
like tinder boxes--your mother was just like you and so was--"

"Well, not father," she bridled, with a toss of her head.

St. George smiled queerly--Prim was one of his jokes. "Your father, my
dear Kate, has the milk of human kindness in his veins, not red fighting
blood. That makes a whole lot of difference. Now listen to me:--you love
Harry--"

"No! I DESPISE him! I told him so!" She had risen from her seat and had
moved to the mantel, where she stood looking into the fire, her back
toward him.

"Don't you interrupt me, you blessed girl--just you listen to Uncle
George for a minute. You DO love Harry--you can't help it--nobody can.
If you had seen him this morning you would have thrown your arms around
him in a minute--I came near doing it myself. Of course he's wild,
reckless, and hot-headed like all the Rutters and does no end of foolish
things, but you wouldn't love him if he was different. He's just like
Spitfire--never keeps still a minute--restless, pawing the ground, or
all four feet in the air--then away she goes! You can't reason with
her--you don't wish to; you get impatient when she chafes at the bit
because you are determined she shall keep still, but if you wanted her
to go like the wind and she couldn't, you'd be more dissatisfied than
ever. The pawing and chafing is of no matter; it is her temperament
that counts. So it is with Harry. He wouldn't be the lovable, dashing,
high-spirited young fellow he is if he didn't kick over the traces once
in a while and break everything to pieces--his promises among them. And
it isn't his fault--it's the Spanish and Dutch blood in his veins--the
blood of that old hidalgo and his Dutch ancestor, De Ruyter--that crops
out once in a while. Harry would be a pirate and sweep the Spanish main
if he had lived in those days, instead of being a gentleman who values
nothing in life so much as the woman he loves."

He had been speaking to her back all this time, the girl never moving,
the outlines of her graceful body in silhouette against the blaze.

"Then why doesn't he prove it?" she sighed. She liked old hidalgos and
had no aversion to pirates if they were manly and brave about their
work.

"He does--and he lives up to his standard except in this one failing
for which I am truly sorry. Abominable I grant you--but there are many
things which are worse."

"I can't think of anything worse," she echoed with a deep sigh, walking
slowly toward him and regaining her chair, all her anger gone, only the
pain in her heart left. "I don't want Harry to be like the others, and
he can't live their lives if he's going to be my husband. I want him
to be different,--to be big and fine and strong,--like the men who have
made the world better for their having lived in it--that old De Ruyter,
for instance, that his father is always bragging about--not a weak,
foolish boy whom everybody can turn around their fingers. Some of my
girl friends don't mind what the young men do, or how often they break
their word to them so that they are sure of their love. I do, and I
won't have it, and I have told Harry so over and over again. It's such
a cowardly thing--not to be man enough to stand up and say 'No--I won't
drink with you!' That's why I say I can't think of his doing anything
worse."

St. George fixed his eyes upon her. He had thought he knew the girl's
heart, but this was a revelation to him. Perhaps her sorrow, like that
of her mother, was making a well-rounded woman of her.

"Oh, I can think of a dozen things worse," he rejoined with some
positiveness. "Harry might lie; Harry might be a coward; Harry might
stand by and hear a friend defamed; Harry might be discourteous to a
woman, or allow another man to be--a thing he'd rather die than permit.
None of these things could he be or do. I'd shut my door in his face if
he did any one of them, and so should you. And then he is so penitent
when he has done anything wrong. 'It was my fault--I would rather hang
myself than lose Kate. I haven't slept a wink, Uncle George.' And he was
so handsome when he came in this morning--his big black eyes flashing,
his cheeks like two roses--so straight and strong, and so graceful and
wholesome and lovable. I wouldn't care, if I were you, if he did slip
once in a while--not any more than I would if Spitfire stumbled. And
then again"--here he moved his chair close to her own so he could get
his hand on hers the easier--"if Spitfire does stumble, there is the
bridle to pull her up, but for this she might break her neck. That's
where you come in, Kate. Harry's in your hands--has been since the hour
he loved you. Don't let him go headlong to the devil--and he will if you
turn him loose without a bridle."

"I can't do him any good--he won't mind anything I say. And what
dependence can I place on him after this?" her voice sank to a tone
of helpless tenderness. "It isn't his being drunk altogether; he will
outgrow that, perhaps, as you say you did, and be man enough to say no
next time; but it's because he broke his promise to me. That he will
never outgrow! Oh, it's wicked!--wicked for him to treat me so. I have
never done anything he didn't want me to do! and he has no right to--Oh,
Uncle George, it's--"

St. George leaned nearer and covered her limp fingers with his own
tender grasp.

"Try him once more, Kate. Let me send him to you. It will be all over
in a minute and you will be so happy--both of you! Nothing like making
up--it really pays for the pain of a quarrel."

The outside door shut gently and there was a slight movement in the hall
behind them, but neither of them noticed it. Kate sat with her head up,
her mind at work, her eyes watching the firelight. It was her future she
was looking into. She had positive, fixed ideas of what her station in
life as a married woman should be;--not what her own or Harry's birth
and position could bring her. With that will-o'-the-wisp she had no
sympathy. Her grandfather in his early days had been a plain, seafaring
man even if his ancestry did go back to the time of James I, and her
mother had been a lady, and that too without the admixture of a single
drop of the blood of any Kennedy Square aristocrat. That Harry was
well born and well bred was as it should be, but there was something
more;--the man himself. That was why she hesitated. Yes--it WOULD "all
be over in a minute," just as Uncle George said, but when would the
next break come? And then again there was her mother's life with all the
misery that a broken promise had caused her. Uncle George was not the
only young gallant who had been put to bed in her grandfather's house.
Her mother had loved too--just as much as she loved Harry--loved with
her whole soul--until grandpa Barkeley put his foot down.

St. George waited in silence as he read her mind. Breaches between
most of the boys and girls were easily patched up--a hearty cry, an
outstretched hand--"I am so sorry," and they were in each other's arms.
Not so with Kate. Her reason, as well as her heart, had to be satisfied.
This was one of the things that made her different from all the other
girls about her, and this too was what had given her first place in
the affections and respect of all who knew her. Her heart he saw was
uppermost to-night, but reason still lurked in the background.

"What do you think made him do it again?" she murmured at last in a
voice barely audible, her fingers tightening in his palm. "He knows how
I suffer and he knows too WHY I suffer. Oh, Uncle George!--won't you
please talk to him! I love him so, and I can't marry him if he's like
this. I can't!--_I_ CAN'T!"

A restrained smile played over St. George's face. The tide was setting
his way.

"It won't do a bit of good," he said calmly, smothering his joy. "I've
talked to him until I'm tired, and the longer I talk the more wild he
is to see you. Now it's your turn and there's no time to lose. I'll have
him here in five minutes," and he glanced at the clock. She raised her
hand in alarm:

"I don't want him yet. You must see him first--you must--"

"No, I won't see him first, and I'm not going to wait a minute. Talk to
him yourself; put your arms around him and tell him everything you have
told me--now--to-night. I'm going for him," and he sprang to his feet.

"No!--you must not! You SHALL not!" she cried, clutching nervously at
his arm, but he was out of the room before she could stop him.

In the silent hall, hat in hand, his whole body tense with expectancy,
stood Harry. He had killed time by walking up and down the long strip of
carpet between the front door and the staircase, measuring his nervous
steps to the length of the pattern, his mind distracted by his fears
for the outcome--his heart thumping away at his throat, a dull fright
gripping him when he thought of losing her altogether.

St. George's quick step, followed by his firm clutch of the inside knob,
awoke him to consciousness. He sprang forward to catch his first word.

"Can I go in?" he stammered.

St. George grabbed him by the shoulder, wheeled him around, and faced
him.

"Yes, you reprobate, and when you get in go down on your knees and beg
her pardon, and if I ever catch you causing her another heartache I'll
break your damned neck!--do you hear?"


With the shutting of the swinging gate the wily old diplomat regained
his normal good-humored poise, his face beaming, his whole body tingling
at his success. He knew what was going on behind the closed curtains,
and just how contrite and humble the boy would be, and how Kate would
scold and draw herself up--proud duchess that she was--and how Harry
would swear by the nine gods, and an extra one if need be--and
then there would come a long, long silence, broken by meaningless,
half-spoken words--and then another silence--so deep and absorbing that
a full choir of angels might have started an anthem above their heads
and neither of them would have heard a word or note.

And so he kept on his way, picking his steps between the moist places
in the path to avoid soiling his freshly varnished boots; tightening the
lower button of his snug-fitting plum-colored coat as a bracing to his
waist-line; throwing open the collar of his overcoat the wider to
give his shoulders the more room--very happy--very well satisfied with
himself, with the world, and with everybody who lived in it.




CHAPTER III



Moorlands was ablaze!

From the great entrance gate flanked by moss-stained brick posts capped
with stone balls, along the avenue of oaks to the wide portico leading
to the great hall and spacious rooms, there flared one continuous burst
of light. On either side of the oak-bordered driveway, between the
tree-trunks, crackled torches of pine knots, the glow of their curling
flames bringing into high relief the black faces of innumerable
field-hands from the Rutter and neighboring plantations, lined up
on either side of the gravel road--teeth and eyeballs flashing white
against the blackness of the night. Under the porches hung festoons
of lanterns of every conceivable form and color, while inside the wide
baronial hall, and in the great drawing-room with the apartments
beyond, the light of countless candles, clustered together in silver
candelabras, shed a soft glow over the groups of waiting guests.

To-night Colonel Talbot Rutter of Moorlands, direct descendant of
the house of De Ruyter, with an ancestry dating back to the Spanish
Invasion, was to bid official welcome to a daughter of the house of
Seymour, equally distinguished by flood and field in the service of
its king. These two--God be thanked--loved each other, and now that the
young heir to Moorlands was to bring home his affianced bride, soon
to become his wedded wife, no honor could be too great, no expense too
lavish, no welcome too joyful.

Moreover, that this young princess of the blood might be accorded
all the honors due her birth, lineage, and rank, the colonel's own
coach-and-four, with two postilions and old Matthew on the box--twenty
years in the service--his whip tied with forget-me-nots, the horses'
ears streaming with white ribbons--each flank as smooth as satin and
each panel bright as a mirror--had been trundled off to Kennedy Square,
there to receive the fairest of all her daughters, together with such
other members of her royal suite--including His Supreme Excellency
the Honorable Prim--not forgetting, of course, Kate's old black mammy,
Henny, who was as much a part of the fair lady's belongings when she
went afield as her ostrich-plume fan, her white gloves, or the wee
slippers that covered her enchanting feet.

Every detail of harness, wheel, and brake--even the horn itself--had
passed under the colonel's personal supervision; Matthew on the box
straight as a hitching-post and bursting with pride, reins gathered,
whip balanced, the leaders steady and the wheel horses in line. Then the
word had been given, and away they had swept round the circle and so on
down the long driveway to the outer gate and Kennedy Square. Ten miles
an hour were the colonel's orders and ten miles an hour must Matthew
make, including the loading and unloading of his fair passenger and her
companions, or there would be the devil to pay on his return.

And the inside of the house offered no less a welcome. Drawn up in the
wide hall, under the direct command of old Alec, the head butler, were
the house servants;--mulatto maids in caps, snuff-colored second butlers
in livery, jet-black mammies in new bandannas and white aprons--all in a
flutter of excitement, and each one determined to get the first glimpse
of Marse Harry's young lady, no matter at what risk.

Alec himself was a joy to look upon--eyeballs and teeth gleaming, his
face one wide, encircling smile. Marse Harry was the apple of his eye,
and had been ever since the day of his birth. He had carried him on his
back when a boy; had taught him to fish and hunt and to ride to hounds;
had nursed him when he fell ill at the University in his college days,
and would gladly have laid down his life for him had any such necessity
arisen. To-night, in honor of the occasion, he was rigged out in a
new bottle-green coat with shiny brass buttons, white waistcoat, white
gloves three sizes too big for him, and a huge white cravat flaring out
almost to the tips of his ears. Nothing was too good for Alec--so his
mistress thought--and for the best of reasons. Not only was he the
ideal servant of the old school, but he was the pivot on which the whole
establishment moved. If a particular brand or vintage was needed, or a
key was missing, or did a hair trunk, or a pair of spurs, or last
week's Miscellany, go astray--or even were his mistress's spectacles
mislaid--Alec could put his hand upon each and every item in so short a
space of time that the loser was convinced the old man had hidden them
on purpose, to enjoy their refinding. Moorlands without old Alec would
hive been a wheel without a hub.

As a distinct feature of all these preparations--and this was the
best part of the programme--Harry was to meet Kate at the outer gate
supported by half a dozen of his young friends and hers--Dr. Teackle,
Mark Gilbert, Langdon Willits, and one or two others--while Mrs. Rutter,
Mrs. Cheston, Mrs. Richard Horn, and a bevy of younger women and girls
were to welcome her with open arms the moment her dainty feet cleared
the coach's step. This was the way princesses of the blood had been
welcomed from time immemorial to palaces and castles high, and this was
the way their beloved Kate was to make entry into the home of her lord.

Soon the flash of the coach lamps was seen outside the far gate. Then
there came the wind of a horn--a rollicking, rolling, gladsome sound,
and in the wink of an eyelid every one was out on the portico straining
their eyes, listening eagerly. A joyous shout now went up from the
negroes lining the fences; from the groups about the steps and along the
driveway.

"Here she comes!"

The leaders with a swing pranced into view as they cleared the gate
posts. There came a moment's halt at the end of the driveway; a
postilion vaulted down, threw wide the coach door and a young man sprang
in. It was Harry!... Snap!! Crack!! Toot--toot!!--and they were off
again, heading straight for the waiting group. Another prolonged,
winding note--louder--nearer--one of triumph this time!--a galloping,
circling dash toward the porch crowded with guests--the reining in of
panting leaders--the sudden gathering up of the wheel horses, back on
their haunches--the coach door flung wide and out stepped Kate--Harry's
hand in hers, her old mammy behind, her father last of all.

"Oh, such a lovely drive! and it was so kind of you, dear colonel, to
send for me! Oh, it was splendid! And Matthew galloped most all the
way." She had come as a royal princess, but she was still our Kate. "And
you are all out here to meet me!" Here she kissed Harry's mother--"and
you too, Uncle George--and Sue--Oh, how fine you all look!"--and with a
curtsy and a joyous laugh and a hand-clasp here and there, she bent her
head and stepped into the wide hall under the blaze of the clustered
candles.

It was then that they caught their breaths, for no such vision of beauty
had ever before stood in the wide hall of Moorlands, her eyes shining
like two stars above the rosy hue of her cheek; her skin like a shell,
her throat and neck a lily in color and curves. And her poise; her
gladsomeness; her joy at being alive and at finding everybody else
alive; the way she moved and laughed and bent her pretty head; the
ripples of gay laughter and the low-pitched tone of the warm greetings
that fell from her lips!

No wonder Harry was bursting with pride; no wonder Langdon Willits
heaved a deep sigh when he caught the glance that Kate flashed at Harry
and went out on the porch to get a breath of fresh air; no wonder St.
George's heart throbbed as he watched them both and thought how near all
this happiness had come to being wrecked; no wonder the servants tumbled
over each other in their eagerness to get a view of her face and gown,
and no wonder, too, that the proud, old colonel who ruled his house with
a rod of iron, determined for the first time in his life to lay down
the sceptre and give Kate and Harry full sway to do whatever popped into
their two silly heads.

And our young Lochinvar was fully her match in bearing, dress, and
manners,--every inch a prince and every inch a Rutter,--and with such
grace of movement as he stepped beside her, that even punctilious,
outspoken old Mrs. Cheston--who had forgiven him his escapade, and who
was always laughing at what she called the pump-handle shakes of some
of the underdone aristocrats about her, had to whisper to the nearest
guest--"Watch Harry, my dear, if you would see how a thoroughbred
manages his legs and arms when he wishes to do honor to a woman.
Admirable!--charming! No young man of my time ever did better." And Mrs.
Cheston knew, for she had hobnobbed with kings and queens, her husband
having represented his government at the Court of St. James--which fact,
however, never prevented her from calling a spade a spade; nor was she
ever very particular as to what the spade unearthed.

Yes--a very gallant and handsome young man was our prince as he handed
Kate up the stairs on her way to the dressing-room, and looked it in his
pearl-gray coat with buttons of silver, fluffy white silk scarf, high
dog-eared collar, ivory-white waistcoat, and tight-fitting trousers of
nankeen yellow, held close to the pumps with invisible straps. And a
very gallant and handsome young fellow he felt himself to be on this
night of his triumph, and so thought Kate--in fact she had fallen in
love with him over again--and so too did every one of the young girls
who crowded about them, as well as the dominating, erect aristocrat of
a father, and the anxious gentle mother, who worshipped the ground on
which he walked.

Kate had noted every expression that crossed his face, absorbing him in
one comprehensive glance as he stood in the full blaze of the candles,
her gaze lingering on his mouth and laughing eyes and the soft sheen of
his brown hair, its curved-in ends brushing the high velvet collar of
his coat--and so on down his shapely body to his shapely feet. Never had
she seen him so adorable--and he was all her own, and for life!

As for our dear St. George Temple, who had never taken his eyes off
them, he thought they were the goodliest pair the stars ever shone upon,
and this his happiest night. There would be no more stumbling after
this. Kate had the bridle well in hand now; all she needed was a clear
road, and that was ahead of both horse and rider.

"Makes your blood jump in your veins, just to look at them, doesn't
it, Talbot?" cried St. George to Harry's father when Kate
disappeared--laying his hand as he spoke on the shoulder of the man with
whom he had grown up from a boy. "Is there anything so good as the love
of a good woman?--the wise old prophet places her beyond the price of
rubies."

"Only one thing, St. George--the love of a good man--one like yourself,
you dear old fellow. And why the devil you haven't found that out years
ago is more than I can understand. Here you are my age, and you might
have had a Kate and Harry of your own by this time, and yet you live a
stupid old--"

"No, I won't hear you talk so, colonel!" cried a bride of a year. "Uncle
George is never stupid, and he couldn't be old. What would all these
young girls do--what would I have done" (another love affair with St.
George as healer and mender!)--"what would anybody have done without
him? Come, Miss Lavinia--do you hear the colonel abusing Uncle George
because he isn't married? Speak up for him--it's wicked of you, colonel,
to talk so."

Miss Lavinia Clendenning, who was one of St. George's very own, in spite
of her forty-odd years, threw back her head until the feathers in her
slightly gray hair shook defiantly:

"No--I won't say a word for him, Sue. I've given him up forever. He's a
disgrace to everybody who knows him."

"Oh, you renegade!" exclaimed St. George in mock alarm.

"Yes,--a positive disgrace! He'll never marry anybody, Sue, until he
marries me. I've begged him on my knees until I'm tired, to name the
day, and he won't! Just like all you shiftless Marylanders, sir--never
know when to make up your minds."

"But you threw me over, Lavinia, and broke my heart," laughed Temple
with a low bow, his palms flattened against his waistcoat in assumed
humility.

"When?"

"Oh, twenty years ago."

"Oh, my goodness gracious! Of course I threw you over then;--you were
just a baby in arms and I was old enough to be your mother--but now it's
different. I'm dying to get married and nobody wants me. If you were a
Virginian instead of a doubting Marylander, you would have asked me a
hundred times and kept on asking until I gave in. Now it's too late.
I always intended to give in, but you were so stupid you couldn't or
wouldn't understand."

"It's never too late to mend, Lavinia," he prayed with hands extended.

"It's too late to mend you, St. George! You are cracked all over, and as
for me--I'm ready to fall to pieces any minute. I'm all tied up now with
corset laces and stays and goodness knows what else. No--I'm done with
you."

While this merry badinage was going on, the young people crowding the
closer so as not to lose a word, or making room for the constant stream
of fresh arrivals on their way toward the dressing-rooms above, their
eyes now and then searching the top of the stairs in the hope of getting
the first glimpse of Kate, our heroine was receiving the final touches
from her old black mammy. It took many minutes. The curl must be
adjusted, the full skirts pulled out or shaken loose, the rare jewels
arranged before she was dismissed with--"Dah, honey chile, now go-long.
Ain't nary one on 'em ain't pizen hongry for ye--any mos' on 'em 'll
drown derselves 'fo' mawnin' becos dey can't git ye."

She is ready now, Harry beside her, her lace scarf embroidered with pink
rosebuds floating from her lovely shoulders, her satin skirt held firmly
in both hands that she might step the freer, her dainty silk stockings
with the ribbons crossed about her ankles showing below its edge.

But it was the colonel who took possession of her when she reached the
floor of the great hall, and not her father nor her lover.

"No, Harry--stand aside, sir. Out with you! Kate goes in with me!
Seymour, please give your arm to Mrs. Rutter." And with the manner of a
courtier leading a princess into the presence of her sovereign, the
Lord of Moorlands swept our Lady of Kennedy Square into the brilliant
drawing-room crowded with guests.


It was a great ball and it was a great ballroom--in spaciousness, color,
and appointments. No one had ever dreamed of its possibilities before,
although everybody knew it was the largest in the county. The gentle
hostess, with old Alec as head of the pulling-out-and-moving-off
department, had wrought the change. All the chairs, tables, sofas, and
screens, little and big, had either been spirited away or pushed back
against the wall for tired dancers. Over the wide floor was stretched
a linen crash; from the ceiling and bracketed against the white walls,
relieved here and there by long silken curtains of gold-yellow, blazed
clusters of candles, looking for all the world like so many bursting
sky-rockets, while at one end, behind a mass of flowering plants, sat a
quartette of musicians, led by an old darky with a cotton-batting head,
who had come all the way from Philadelphia a-purpose.

Nor had the inner man been forgotten: bowls of hot apple toddy steamed
away in the dining-room; bowls of eggnog frothed away in the library;
ladlings of punch, and the contents of several old cut-glass decanters,
flanked by companies of pipe-stem glasses, were being served in the
dressing-rooms; while relays of hot terrapin, canvas-back duck, sizzling
hot; olio, cold joints; together with every conceivable treatment and
condition of oysters--in scallop shells, on silver platters and
in wooden plates--raw, roasted, fried, broiled, baked, and
stewed--everything in fact that could carry out the colonel's watchword,
"Eat, drink, and be merry," were within the beck and call of each and
every guest.

And there were to be no interludes of hunger and thirst if the host
could help it. No dull pauses nor recesses, but one continued round,
lasting until midnight, at which hour the final banquet in the
dining-room was to be served, and the great surprise of the evening
reached--the formal announcement of Harry and Kate's engagement,
followed by the opening of the celebrated bottle of the Jefferson 1800
Monticello Madeira, recorked at our young hero's birth.

And it goes without saying that there were no interludes. The fun began
at once, a long line of merry talk and laughter following the wake of
the procession, led by the host and Kate, the colonel signalling at last
to the cotton-batting with the goggle spectacles, who at once struck up
a polka and away they all went, Harry and Kate in the lead, the whole
room in a whirl.

This over and the dancers out of breath, Goggles announced a
quadrille--the colonel and St. George helping to form the sets. Then
followed the schottische, then another polka until everybody was tired
out, and then with one accord the young couples rushed from the hot
room, hazy with the dust of lint from the linen crash, and stampeded for
the cool wide stairs that led from the great hall. For while in summer
the shadows on some vine-covered porch swallowed the lovers, in winter
the stairs were generally the trysting-place--and the top step the one
most sought--because there was nobody behind to see. This was the roost
for which Kate and Harry scampered, and there they intended to sit until
the music struck up again.

"Oh, Kate, you precious darling, how lovely you look!" burst out Harry
for the hundredth time when she had nestled down beside him--"and what a
wonderful gown! I never saw that one before, did I?"

"No--you never have," she panted, her breath gone from her dance and the
dash for the staircase. "It's my dear mother's dress, and her scarf too.
I had very little done to it--only the skirt made wider. Isn't it soft
and rich? Grandpa used to bring these satins from China."

"And the pearls--are they the ones you told me about?" He was adjusting
them to her throat as he spoke--somehow he could not keep his hands from
her.

"Yes--mother's jewels. Father got them out of his strong-box for me this
morning. He wanted me to wear them to-night. He says I can have them all
now. She must have been very beautiful, Harry--and just think, dear--she
was only a few years older than I am when she died. Sometimes when I
wear her things and get to thinking about her, and remember how young
and beautiful she was and how unhappy her life, it seems as if I must
be unhappy myself--somehow as if it were not right to have all this
happiness when she had none." There was a note of infinite pathos in her
voice--a note one always heard when she spoke of her mother. Had Harry
looked deeper into her eyes he might have found the edges of two tears
trembling on their lids.

"She never was as beautiful as you, my darling--nobody ever was--nobody
ever could be!" he cried, ignoring all allusion to her mother. Nothing
else counted with the young fellow to-night--all he knew and cared for
was that Kate was his very own, and that all the world would soon know
it.

"That's because you love me, Harry. You have only to look at her
portrait in father's room to see how exquisite she was. I can never be
like her--never so gracious, so patient, no matter how hard I try."

He put his fingers on her lips: "I won't have you say it. I won't let
anybody say it. I could hardly speak when I saw you in the full light of
the hall. It was so dark in the coach I didn't know how you looked, and
I didn't care; I was so glad to get hold of you. But when your cloak
slipped from your shoulders and you--Oh!--you darling Kate!" His eye
caught the round of her throat and the taper of her lovely arm--"I am
going to kiss you right here--I will--I don't care who--"

She threw up her hands with a little laugh. She liked him the better for
daring, although she was afraid to yield.

"No--NO--Harry! They will see us--don't--you mustn't!"

"Mustn't what! I tell you, Kate, I am going to kiss you--I don't care
what you say or who sees me. It's been a year since I kissed you in
the coach--forty years--now, you precious Kate, what difference does it
make? I will, I tell you--no--don't turn your head away."

She was struggling feebly, her elbow across her face as a shield,
meaning all the time to raise her lips to his, when her eyes fell on
the figure of a young man making his way toward them. Instantly her back
straightened.

"There's Langdon Willits at the bottom of the stairs talking to Mark
Gilbert," she whispered in dismay. "See--he is coming up. I wonder what
he wants."

Harry gathered himself together and his face clouded. "I wish he was at
the bottom of the sea. I don't like Willits--I never did. Neither does
Uncle George. Besides, he's in love with you, and he always has been."

"What nonsense, Harry," she answered, opening her fan and waving it
slowly. She knew her lover was right--knew more indeed than her lover
could ever know: she had used all the arts of which she was mistress to
keep Willits from proposing.

"But he IS in love with you," Harry insisted stiffly. "Won't he be
fighting mad, though, when he hears father announce our engagement at
supper?" Then some tone in her voice recalled that night on the sofa
when she still held out against his pleading, and with it came the
thought that while she could be persuaded she could never be driven.
Instantly his voice changed to its most coaxing tones: "You won't dance
with him, will you, Kate darling? I can't bear to see you in anybody
else's arms but my own."

Her hand grasped his wrist with a certain meaning in the pressure.

"Now don't be a goose, Harry. I must be polite to everybody, especially
to-night--and you wouldn't have me otherwise."

"Yes, but not to him."

"But what difference does it make? You are too sensible not to
understand, and I am too happy, anyway, to want to be rude to anybody.
And then you should never be jealous of Langdon Willits."

"Well, then, not a round dance, please, Kate." He dare not oppose her
further. "I couldn't stand a round dance. I won't have his arm touch
you, my darling." And he bent his cheek close to hers.

She looked at him from under her shadowed lids as she had looked at
St. George when she greeted him at the foot of the stairs; a gleam
of coquetry, of allurement, of joy shining through her glances like
delicate antennae searching to feel where her power lay. Should she
venture, as her Uncle George had suggested, to take the reins in her
own hands and guide this restive, mettlesome thoroughbred, or should
she surrender to him? Then a certain mischievous coquetry possessed her.
With a light, bubbling laugh she drew her cheek away.

"Yes, any kind of a dance that he or anybody else wants that I can
give him," she burst out with a coquettish twist of her head, her eyes
brimming with fun.

"But I'm on your card for every single dance," he demanded, his eyes
again flashing. "Look at it--I filled it up myself," and he held up his
own bit of paste-board so she could read the list. "I tell you I won't
have his arm around you!"

"Well, then, he sha'n't touch even the tips of my fingers, you dreadful
Mr. Bluebeard." She had surrendered now. He was never so compelling as
when determined to have his own way. Again her whole manner changed;
she was once more the sweetheart: "Don't let us bother about cards, my
darling, or dances, or anything. Let us talk of how lovely it is to be
together again. Don't you think so, Harry?" and she snuggled the closer
to his arm, her soft cheek against his coat.

Before Harry could answer, young Willits, who had been edging his way
up the stairs two steps at a time, avoiding the skirts of the girls,
reaching over the knees of the men as he clung to the hand-rail, stood
on the step below them.

"It's my next dance, Miss Kate, isn't it?" he asked eagerly, scanning
her face--wondering why she looked so happy.

"What is it to be, Mr. Willits?" she rejoined in perfunctory tones,
glancing at her own blank card hanging to her wrist: he was the last man
in the world she wanted to see at this moment.

"The schottische, I think--yes, the schottische," he replied nervously,
noticing her lack of warmth and not understanding the cause.

"Oh, I'm all out of breath--if you don't mind," she continued evasively;
"we'll wait for the next one." She dared not invite him to sit down,
knowing it would make Harry furious--and then again she couldn't stand
one discordant note to-night--she was too blissfully happy.

"But the next one is mine," exclaimed Harry suddenly, examining his own
dancing-card. He had not shifted his position a hair's breadth, nor did
he intend to--although he had been outwardly polite to the intruder.

"Yes--they'd all be yours, Harry, if you had your way," this in a thin,
dry tone--"but you mustn't forget that Miss Kate's free, white, and
twenty-one, and can do as she pleases."

Harry's lips straightened. He did not like Willits's manner and he was
somewhat shocked at his expression; it seemed to smack more of the
cabin than of the boudoir--especially the boudoir of a princess like his
precious Kate. He noticed, too, that the young man's face was flushed
and his utterance unusually rapid, and he knew what had caused it.

"They will be just what Miss Seymour wants them to be, Willits." The
words came in hard, gritting tones through half-closed lips, and the
tightening of his throat muscles. This phase of the Rutter blood was
dangerous.

Kate was startled. Harry must not lose his self-control. There must be
no misunderstandings on this the happiest night of her life.

"Yes," she said sweetly, with a gracious bend of her head--"but I do
want to dance with Mr. Willits, only I don't know which one to give
him."

"Then give me the Virginia reel, Miss Kate, the one that comes just
before supper, and we can go all in together--you too, Harry," Willits
insisted eagerly. "See, Miss Kate--your card is still empty," and he
turned toward her the face of the one hanging to her wrist.

"No, never the reel, Kate, that is mine!" burst out Harry determinedly,
as a final dismissal to Willits. He lowered his voice, and in a
beseeching tone said--"Father's set his heart on our dancing the reel
together--please don't give him the reel!"

Kate, intent on restoring harmony, arched her neck coyly, and said in
her most bewitching tones--the notes of a robin after a shower: "Well,
I can't tell yet, Mr. Willits, but you shall have one or the other; just
leave it to me--either the reel or the schottische. We will talk it over
when I come down."

"Then it's the reel, Miss Kate, is it not?" he cried, ignoring Harry
completely, backing away as he retraced his steps, a look of triumph on
his face.

She shook her head at him, but she did not answer. She wanted to get rid
of him as quickly as possible. Willits had spoiled everything. She was
so happy before he came, and Harry was so adorable. She wished now she
had not drawn away her cheek when he tried to kiss her.

"Don't be angry, Harry, dear," she pleaded coaxingly, determined to get
her lover back once more. "He didn't mean anything--he only wanted to be
polite."

"He didn't want to be polite," the angry lover retorted. "He meant to
force himself in between us; that is what he meant, and he's always at
it, every chance he gets. He tried it at Mrs. Cheston's the other night
until I put a stop to it, but there's one thing certain--he'll stop it
when our engagement is announced after supper or I'll know the reason
why."

Kate caught her breath. A new disturbing thought entered her mind.
It was at Mrs. Cheston's that both Willits and Harry had misbehaved
themselves, and it was Harry's part in the sequel which she had
forgiven. The least said about that night the better.

"But he is your guest, Harry," she urged at last, still determined to
divert his thoughts from Willits and the loss of the dance--"OUR guest,"
she went on--"so is everybody else here to-night, and we must do what
everybody wants us to, not be selfish about it. Now, my darling--you
couldn't be impolite to anybody--don't you know you couldn't? Mrs.
Cheston calls you 'My Lord Chesterfield'--I heard her say so to-night."

"Yes, I know, Kate"--he softened--"that's what father said about my
being polite to him--but all the same I didn't want Willits invited, and
it's only because father insisted that he's here. Of course, I'm
going to be just as polite to him as I can, but even father would feel
differently about him if he had heard what he said to you a minute ago."

"What did he say?" She knew, but she loved to hear him defend her. This,
too, was a way out--in a minute he would be her old Harry again.

"I won't even repeat it," he answered doggedly.

"You mean about my being twenty-one? That was rather ungallant, wasn't
it?"

Again that long look from under her eyelids--he would have succumbed at
once could he have seen it.

"No, the other part of it. That's not the way to speak to a lady.
That's what I dislike him for. He never was born a gentleman. He isn't a
gentleman and never can be a gentleman."

Kate drew herself up--the unreasonableness of the objection jarred
upon her. He had touched one of her tender spots--pride of birth was
something she detested.

"Don't talk nonsense, Harry," she replied in a slightly impatient voice.
Moods changed with our Kate as unexpectedly as April showers. "What
difference should it make to you or anybody else whether Langdon
Willits's grandmother was a countess or a country girl, so she was
honest and a lady?" Her head went up with a toss as she spoke, for this
was one of Kate's pet theories.

"But he's not of my class, Kate, and he shouldn't be here. I told father
so."

"Then make him one," she answered stoutly, "if only for to-night, by
being extra polite and courteous to him and never letting him feel that
he is outside of what you call 'your class.' I like Mr. Willits, and
have always liked him. He is invariably polite to me, and he can be very
kind and sympathetic at times. Listen! they are calling us, and there
goes the music--come along, darling--it's a schottische and we'll dance
it together."

Harry sprang up, slipped his arm around Kate's waist, lifted her to her
feet, held her close, and kissed her squarely on the mouth.

"There, you darling! and another one--two--three! Oh, you precious! What
do I care about Willits or any other red-headed lower county man that
ever lived? He can have fifty grandmothers if he pleases and I won't say
a word--kiss me--kiss me again. Quick now or we'll lose the dance," and,
utterly oblivious as to whether any one had seen them or not, the two
raced down the wide stairs.




CHAPTER IV



While all this gayety was going on in the ballroom another and equally
joyous gathering was besieging the serving tables in the colonel's
private den--a room leading out of the larger supper room, where he kept
his guns and shooting togs, and which had been pressed into service for
this one night.

These thirsty gentlemen were of all ages and tastes, from the young
men just entering society to the few wrinkled bald-pates whose legs
had given out and who, therefore, preferred the colonel's Madeira and
terrapin to the lighter pleasures of the dance.

In and out of the groups, his ruddy, handsome face radiant with the joy
that welled up in his heart, moved St. George Temple. Never had he been
in finer form or feather--never had he looked so well--(not all the
clothes that Poole of London cut came to Moorlands). Something of the
same glow filtered through him that he had felt on the night when the
two lovers had settled their difficulties, and he had swung back through
the park at peace with all the world.

All this could be seen in the way he threw back his head, smiling right
and left; the way he moved his hands--using them as some men do words or
their eyebrows--now uplifting them in surprise at the first glimpse
of some unexpected face, his long delicate fingers outspread in
exclamations of delight; now closing them tight when he had those of the
new arrival in his grasp--now curving them, palms up, as he lifted to
his lips the fingers of a grande dame. "Keep your eyes on St. George,"
whispered Mrs. Cheston, who never missed a point in friend or foe and
whose fun at a festivity often lay in commenting on her neighbors,
praise or blame being impartially mixed as her fancy was touched. "And
by all means watch his hands, my dear. They are like the baton of an
orchestra leader and tell the whole story. Only men whose blood and
lineage have earned them freedom from toil, or men whose brains throb
clear to their finger-tips, have such hands. Yes! St. George is very
happy to-night, and I know why. He has something on his mind that he
means to tell us later on."

Mrs. Cheston was right: she generally was--St. George did have something
on his mind--something very particular on his mind--a little speech
really which was a dead secret to everybody except prying Mrs.
Cheston--one which was to precede the uncorking of that wonderful old
Madeira, and the final announcement of the engagement--a little speech
in which he meant to refer to their two dear mothers when they were
girls, recalling traits and episodes forgotten by most, but which from
their very loveliness had always lingered in his heart and memory.

Before this important event took place, however, there were some matters
which he intended to look after himself, one of them being the bowl of
punch and its contiguous beverages in the colonel's den. This seemed to
be the storm centre to-night, and here he determined, even at the risk
of offending his host, to set up danger-signals at the first puff of
wind. The old fellows, if they chose, might empty innumerable ladles
full of apple toddy or compounds of Santa Cruz rum and pineapples into
their own persons, but not the younger bloods! His beloved Kate had
suffered enough because of these roysterers. There should be one ball
around Kennedy Square in which everybody would behave themselves, and he
did not intend to mince his words when the time came. He had
discussed the matter with the colonel when the ball opened, but little
encouragement came from that quarter.

"So far as these young sprigs are concerned, St. George," Rutter had
flashed back, "they must look out for themselves. I can't curtail my
hospitality to suit their babyships. As for Harry, you're only wasting
your time. He is made of different stuff--it's not in his blood and
couldn't be. Whatever else he may become he will never be a sot. Let him
have his fling: once a Rutter, always a Rutter," and then, with a ring
in his voice, "when my son ceases to be a gentleman, St. George, I will
show him the door, but drink will never do it."

Dr. Teackle had also been on the alert. He was a young physician just
coming into practice, many of the younger set being his patients, and
he often acted as a curb when they broke loose. He, with St. George's
whispered caution in his ears, had also tried to frame a word of protest
to the colonel, suggesting in the mildest way that that particular
bowl of apple toddy be not replenished--but the Lord of the Manor
had silenced him with a withering glance before he had completed his
sentence. In this dilemma he had again sought out St. George.

"Look out for Willits, Uncle George. He'll be staggering in among the
ladies if he gets another crack at that toddy. It's an infernal shame to
bring these relays of punch in here. I tried to warn the colonel, but he
came near eating me up. Willits has had very little experience in this
sort of thing and is mixing his eggnog with everything within his reach.
That will split his head wide open in the morning."

"Go and find him, Teackle, and bring him to me," cried St. George; "I'll
stay here until you get him. Tell him I want to see him--and Alec"--this
to the old butler who was skimming past, his hands laden with
dishes--"don't you bring another drop of punch into this room until you
see me."

"But de colonel say dat--"

"--I don't care what the colonel says; if he wants to know why, tell him
I ordered it. I'm not going to have this night spoiled by any tomfoolery
of Talbot's, I don't care what he says. You hear me, Alec? Not a drop.
Take out those half-empty bowls and don't you serve another thimbleful
of anything until I say so." Here he turned to the young doctor, who
seemed rather surprised at St. George's dictatorial air--one rarely
seen in him. "Yes--brutal, I know, Teackle, and perhaps a little
ill-mannered, this interfering with another man's hospitality, but if
you knew how Kate has suffered over this same stupidity you would say I
was right. Talbot never thinks--never cares. Because he's got a head as
steady as a town clock and can put away a bottle of port without winking
an eyelid, he believes anybody else can do the same. I tell you this
sort of thing has got to stop or sooner or later these young bloods
will break the hearts of half the girls in town.... Careful! here comes
Willits--not another word.... Oh, Mr. Willits, here you are! I was
just going to send for you. I want to talk to you about that mare of
yours--is she still for sale?" His nonchalance was delightful.

"No, Mr. Temple; I had thought of keeping her, sir," the young man
rejoined blandly, greatly flattered at having been specially singled out
by the distinguished Mr. Temple. "But if you are thinking of buying
my mare, I should be most delighted to consider it. If you will permit
me--I will call upon you in the morning." This last came with elaborate
effusiveness. "But you haven't a drop of anything to drink, Mr. Temple,
nor you either, doctor! Egad! What am I thinking of! Come, won't you
join me? The colonel's mixtures are--"

"Better wait, Mr. Willits," interrupted St. George calmly and with the
air of one conversant with the resources of the house. "Alec has just
taken out a half-emptied bowl of toddy." He had seen at a glance that
Teackle's diagnosis of the young man's condition was correct.

"Then let us have a swig at the colonel's port--it's the best in the
county."

"No, hold on till the punch comes. You young fellows don't know how to
take care of your stomachs. You ought to stick to your tipple as you do
to your sweetheart--you should only have one."

"--At a time," laughed Teackle.

"No, one ALL the time, you dog! When I was your age, Mr. Willits, if
I drank Madeira I continued to drink Madeira, not to mix it up with
everything on the table."

"By Jove, you're right, Mr. Temple! I'm sticking to one girl--Miss
Kate's my girl to-night. I'm going to dance the Virginia reel with her."

St. George eyed him steadily. He saw that the liquor had already reached
his head or he would not have spoken of Kate as he did. "Your choice is
most admirable, Mr. Willits," he said suavely, "but let Harry have Miss
Kate to-night," adding, as he laid his hand confidingly on the young
man's shoulder--"they were made to step that dance together."

"But she said she would dance it with me!" he flung back--he did not
mean to be defrauded.

"Really?" It was wonderful how soft St. George's voice could be. Teackle
could not have handled a refractory patient the better.

"Well, that is," rejoined Willits, modified by Temple's tone--"she is to
let me know--that was the bargain."

Still another soft cadence crept into St. George's voice: "Well, even
if she did say she would let you know, do be a little generous. Miss
Seymour is always so obliging; but she ought really to dance the reel
with Harry to-night." He used Kate's full name, but Willits's head was
buzzing too loudly for him to notice the delicately suggested rebuke.

"Well, I don't see that, and I'm not going to see it, either. Harry's
always coming in between us; he tried to get Miss Kate away from me a
little while ago, but he didn't succeed."

"Noblesse oblige, my dear Mr. Willits," rejoined St. George in a more
positive tone. "He is host, you know, and the ball is given to Miss
Seymour, and Harry can do nothing else but be attentive." He felt like
strangling the cub, but it was neither the time nor place--nothing
should disturb Kate's triumph if he could help it. One way was to keep
Willits sober, and this he intended to do whether the young man liked it
or not--if he talked to him all night.

"But it is my dance," Willits broke out. "You ask him if it isn't my
dance--he heard what Miss Kate said. Here comes Harry now."

Like a breath of west wind our young prince blew in, his face radiant,
his eyes sparkling. He had entirely forgotten the incident on the stairs
in the rapture of Kate's kisses, and Willits was once more one of the
many guests he was ready to serve and be courteous to.

"Ah, gentlemen--I hope you have everything you want!" he cried with
a joyous wave of his hand. "Where will I get an ice for Kate, Uncle
George? We are just about beginning the Virginia reel and she is so
warm. Oh, we have had such a lovely waltz! Why are you fellows not
dancing? Send them in, Uncle George." He was brimming over with
happiness.

Willits moved closer: "What did you say? The Virginia reel? Has it
begun?" His head was too muddled for quick thinking.

"Not yet, Willits, but it will right away--everybody is on the floor
now," returned Harry, his eyes in search of something to hold Kate's
refreshment.

"Then it is my dance, Harry. I thought the reel was to be just before
supper or I would have hunted Miss Kate up."

"So it is," laughed Harry, catching up an empty plate from the serving
table and moving to where the ices were spread. "You ought to know,
for you told her yourself. It is about to begin. They were taking their
partners when I left."

"Then that's MY reel," Willits insisted. "You heard what Miss Kate said,
Harry--that's what I told you too, Mr. Temple," and he turned to St.
George for confirmation.

"Oh, but you are mistaken, Langdon," continued Harry, bending over the
dish. "She said she would decide later on whether to give you the reel
or a schottische--and she has. Miss Kate dances this reel with me."
There was a flash in his eye as he spoke, but he was still the host.

"And I suppose you will want the one after supper too," snapped Willits.
He had edged closer and was now speaking to Harry's bent back.

"Why, certainly, if Miss Kate is willing and wishes it," rejoined Harry
simply, still too intent on having the ice reach his sweetheart at the
earliest possible moment to notice either Willits's condition or his
tone of voice.

Willits sprang forward just as Harry regained his erect position. "No
you won't, sir!" he cried angrily. "I've got some rights here and I'm
going to protect them. I'll ask Miss Kate myself and find out whether I
am to be made a fool of like this," and before St. George could prevent
started for the door.

Harry dropped the plate on the table and blocked the enraged man's exit
with his outstretched arm. He was awake now--wide awake--and to the
cause.

"You'll do nothing of the kind, Langdon--not in your present state. Pull
yourself together, man! Miss Seymour is not accustomed to be spoken of
in that way and you know it. Now don't be foolish--stay here with Uncle
George and the doctor until you cool down. There are the best of reasons
why I should dance the reel with Miss Kate, but I can't explain them
now."

"Neither am I, Mr. Harry Rutter, accustomed to be spoken to in that way
by you or anybody else. I don't care a rap for your explanations. Get
out of my way, or you'll be sorry," and he sprang one side and flung
himself out of the room before Harry could realize the full meaning of
his words.

St. George saw the flash in the boy's eyes, and stretching out his hand
laid it on Harry's arm.

"Steady, my boy! Let him go--Kate will take care of him."

"No! I'll take care of him!--and now!" He was out of the room and the
door shut behind him before Temple could frame a reply.

St. George shot an anxious, inquiring look at Teackle, who nodded his
head in assent, and the two hurried from the room and across the expanse
of white crash, Willits striding ahead, Harry at his heels, St. George
and the doctor following close behind.

Kate stood near the far door, her radiant eyes fixed on Harry's
approaching figure--the others she did not see. Willits reached her
first:

"Miss Kate, isn't this my dance?" he burst out--"didn't you promise me?"

Kate started and for a moment her face flushed. If she had forgotten
any promise she had made it certainly was not intentional. Then her mind
acted. There must be no bad blood here--certainly not between Harry and
Willits.

"No, not quite that, Mr. Willits," she answered in her sweetest voice,
a certain roguish coquetry in its tones. "I said I'd think it over, and
you never came near me, and so Harry and I are--"

"But you DID promise me." His voice could be heard all over the
room--even the colonel, who was talking to a group of ladies, raised
his head to listen, his companions thinking the commotion was due to the
proper arranging of the dance.

Harry's eyes flashed; angry blood was mounting to his cheeks. He was
amazed at Willits's outburst.

"You mean to contradict Miss Kate! Are you crazy, Willits?"

"No, I am entirely sane," he retorted, an ugly ring in his voice.

Everybody had ceased talking now. Good-natured disputes over the young
girls were not uncommon among the young men, but this one seemed to have
an ominous sound. Colonel Rutter evidently thought so, for he had now
risen from his seat and was crossing the room to where Harry and the
group stood.

"Well, you neither act nor talk as if you were sane," rejoined Harry
in cold, incisive tones, inching his way nearer Kate, as if to be the
better prepared to defend her.

Willits's lip curled. "I am not beholden to you, sir, for my conduct,
although I can be later on for my words. Let me see your dancing-card,
Miss Kate," and he caught it from her unresisting hand. "There--what did
I tell you!" This came with a flare of indignation. "It was a blank when
I saw it last and you've filled it in, sir, of your own accord!" Here he
faced Harry. "That's your handwriting--I'll leave it to you, Mr. Temple,
if it isn't his handwriting."

Harry flushed scarlet and his eyes blazed as he stepped toward the
speaker. Kate shrank back in alarm--she had read Harry's face and knew
what was behind it.

"Take that back, Langdon--quick! You are my guest, but you mustn't say
things like that here. I put my name on the card because Miss Kate asked
me to. Take it back, sir--NOW!--and then make an humble apology to Miss
Seymour.

"I'll take back nothing! I've been cheated out of a dance. Here--take
her--and take this with her!" and he tore Kate's card in half and threw
the pieces in his host's face.

With the spring of a cat, Harry lunged forward and raised his arm as
if to strike Willits in the face: Willits drew himself up to his full
height and confronted him: Kate shrivelled within herself, all the color
gone from her cheeks. Whether to call out for help or withdraw quietly,
was what puzzled her. Both would concentrate the attention of the whole
room on the dispute.

St. George, who was boiling with indignation and disgust, but still cool
and himself, pushed his way into the middle of the group.

"Not a word, Harry," he whispered in low, frigid tones. "This can be
settled in another way." Then in his kindest voice, so loud that all
could hear--"Teackle, will you and Mr. Willits please meet me in the
colonel's den--that, perhaps, is the best place after all to straighten
out these tangles. I'll join you there as soon as I have Miss Kate
safely settled." He bent over her: "Kate, dear, perhaps you had better
sit alongside of Mrs. Rutter until I can get these young fellows
cooled off"--and in a still lower key--"you behaved admirably, my
girl--admirably. I'm proud of you. Mr. Willits has had too much to
drink--that is what is the matter with him, but it will be all over in a
minute--and, Harry, my boy, suppose you help me look up Teackle," and he
laid his hand with an authoritative pressure on the boy's arm.

The colonel had by this time reached the group and stood trying to catch
the cue. He had heard the closing sentence of St. George's instructions,
but he had missed the provocation, although he had seen Harry's uplifted
fist.

"What's the matter, St. George?" he inquired nervously.

"Just a little misunderstanding, Talbot, as to who was to dance with our
precious Kate," St. George answered with a laugh, as he gripped Harry's
arm the tighter. "She is such a darling that it is as much as I can do
to keep these young Romeos from running each other through the body,
they are so madly in love with her. I am thinking of making off with her
myself as the only way to keep the peace. Yes, you dear girl, I'll
come back. Hold the music up for a little while, Talbot, until I can
straighten them all out," and with his arm still tight through Harry's,
the two walked the length of the room and closed the far door behind
them.

Kate looked after them and her heart sank all the lower. She knew the
feeling between the two men, and she knew Harry's hot, ungovernable
temper--the temper of the Rutters. Patient as he often was, and
tender-hearted as he could be, there flashed into his eyes now and then
something that frightened her--something that recalled an incident
in the history of his house. He had learned from his gentle mother
to forgive affronts to himself; she had seen him do it many times,
overlooking what another man would have resented, but an affront to
herself or any other woman was a different matter: that he would never
forgive. She knew, too, that he had just cause to be offended, for in
all her life no one had ever been so rude to her. That she herself was
partly to blame only intensified her anxiety. Willits loved her, for he
had told her so, not once, but several times, although she had answered
him only with laughter. She should have been honest and not played the
coquette: and yet, although the fault was partly her own, never had she
been more astonished than at his outburst. In all her acquaintance with
him he had never lost his temper. Harry, of course, would lay it to
Willits's lack of breeding--to the taint in his blood. But she knew
better--it was the insanity produced by drink, combined with his
jealousy of Harry, which had caused the gross outrage. If she had only
told Willits herself of her betrothal and not waited to surprise him
before the assembled guests, it would have been fairer and spared every
one this scene.

All these thoughts coursed through her mind as with head still proudly
erect she crossed the room on the colonel's arm, to a seat beside
her future mother-in-law, who had noticed nothing, and to whom not a
syllable of the affair would have been mentioned, all such matters being
invariably concealed from the dear lady.

Old Mrs. Cheston, however, was more alert; not only had she caught the
anger in Harry's eyes, but she had followed the flight of the torn
card as its pieces fell to the floor. She had once been present at a
reception given by a prime minister when a similar fracas had occurred.
Then it was a lady's glove and not a dancing-card which was thrown in a
rival's face, and it was a rapier that flashed and not a clenched fist.

"What was the matter over there, Talbot?" she demanded, speaking from
behind her fan when the colonel came within hearing.

"Nothing! Some little disagreement about who should lead the Virginia
reel with Kate. I have stopped the music until they fix it up."

"Don't talk nonsense, Talbot Rutter, not to me. There was bad blood over
there--you better look after them. There'll be trouble if you don't."

The colonel tucked the edge of a rebellious ruffle inside his
embroidered waistcoat and with a quiet laugh said: "St. George is
attending to them."

"St. George is as big a fool as you are about such things. Go, I tell
you, and see what they are doing in there with the door shut."

"But, my dear Mrs. Cheston," echoed her host with a deprecating wave of
his hand--"my Harry would no more attack a man under his own roof than
you would cut off your right hand. He's not born that way--none of us
are."

"You talk like a perfect idiot, Talbot!" she retorted angrily. "You seem
to have forgotten everything you knew. These young fellows here are so
many tinder boxes. There will be trouble I tell you--go out there and
find out what is going on," she reiterated, her voice increasing
in intensity. "They've had time enough to fix up a dozen Virginia
reels--and besides, Kate is waiting, and they know it. Look! there's
some one coming out--it's that young Teackle. Call him over here and
find out!"

The doctor, who had halted at the door, was now scrutinizing the faces
of the guests as if in search of some one. Then he moved swiftly to
the far side of the room, touched Mark Gilbert, Harry's most intimate
friend, on the shoulder, and the two left the floor.

Kate sat silent, a fixed smile on her face that ill concealed her
anxiety. She had heard every word of the talk between Mrs. Cheston and
the colonel, but she did not share the old lady's alarm as to any actual
conflict. She would trust Uncle George to avoid that. But what kept
Harry? Why leave her thus abruptly and send no word back? In her dilemma
she leaned forward and touched the colonel's arm.

"You don't think anything is the matter, dear colonel, do you?"

"With whom, Kate?"

"Between Harry and Mr. Willits. Harry might resent it--he was very
angry." Her lips were quivering, her eyes strained. She could hide
her anxiety from her immediate companions, but the colonel was Harry's
father.

The colonel turned quickly: "Resent it here! under his own roof, and the
man his guest? That is one thing, my dear, a Rutter never violates,
no matter what the provocation. I have made a special exception in
Mr. Willits's favor to-night and Harry knows it. It was at your dear
father's request that I invited the young fellow. And then again, I hear
the most delightful things about his own father, who though a plain man
is of great service to his county--one of Mr. Clay's warmest adherents.
All this, you see, makes it all the more incumbent that both my son and
myself should treat him with the utmost consideration, and, as I have
said, Harry understands this perfectly. You don't know my boy; I would
disown him, Kate, if he laid a hand on Mr. Willits--and so should you."




CHAPTER V



When Dr. Teackle shut the door of the ballroom upon himself and Mark
Gilbert the two did not tarry long in the colonel's den, which was still
occupied by half a dozen of the older men, who were being beguiled by a
relay of hot terrapin that Alec had just served. On the contrary, they
continued on past the serving tables, past old Cobden Dorsey, who was
steeped to the eyes in Santa Cruz rum punch; past John Purviance, and
Gatchell and Murdoch, smacking their lips over the colonel's Madeira,
dived through a door leading first to a dark passage, mounted to a short
flight of steps leading to another dark passage, and so on through a
second door until they reached a small room level with the ground. This
was the colonel's business office, where he conducted the affairs of the
estate--a room remote from the great house and never entered except
on the colonel's special invitation and only then when business of
importance necessitated its use.

That business of the very highest importance--not in any way connected
with the colonel, though of the very gravest moment--was being enacted
here to-night, could be seen the instant Teackle, with Gilbert at
his heels, threw open the door. St. George and Harry were in one
corner--Harry backed against the wall. The boy was pale, but perfectly
calm and silent. On his face was the look of a man who had a duty to
perform and who intended to go through with it come what might. On the
opposite side of the room stood Willits with two young men, his most
intimate friends. They had followed him out of the ballroom to learn the
cause of his sudden outburst, and so far had only heard Willits's
side of the affair. He was now perfectly sober and seemed to feel
his position, but he showed no fear. On the desk lay a mahogany case
containing the colonel's duelling pistols. Harry had taken them from his
father's closet as he passed through the colonel's den.

St. George turned to the young doctor. His face was calm and thoughtful,
and he seemed to realize fully the gravity of the situation.

"It's no use, Teackle," St. George said with an expressive lift of his
fingers. "I have done everything a man could, but there is only one
way out of it. I have tried my best to save Kate from every unhappiness
to-night, but this is something much more important than woman's tears,
and that is her lover's honor."

"You mean to tell me, Uncle George, that you can't stop this!" Teackle
whispered with some heat, his eyes strained, his lips twitching. Here
he faced Harry. "You sha'n't go on with this affair, I tell you, Harry.
What will Kate say? Do you think she wants you murdered for a foolish
thing like this!--and that's about what will happen."

The boy made no reply, except to shake his head. He knew what Kate would
say--knew what she would do, and knew what she would command him to do,
could she have heard Willits's continued insults in this very room but
a moment before while St. George was trying to make him apologize to his
host and so end the disgraceful incident.

"Then I'll go and bring in the colonel and see what he can do!" burst
out Teackle, starting for the door. "It's an outrage that--"

"You'll stay here, Teackle," commanded St. George--"right where you
stand! This is no place for a father. Harry is of age."

"But what an ending to a night like this!"

"I know it--horrible!--frightful!--but I would rather see the boy lying
dead at my feet than not defend the woman he loves." This came in a
decisive tone, as if he had long since made up his mind to this phase of
the situation.

"But Langdon is Harry's guest," Teackle pleaded, dropping his voice
still lower to escape being heard by the group at the opposite end
of the room--"and he is still under his roof. It is never done--it is
against the code. Besides"--and his voice became a whisper--"Harry never
levelled a pistol at a man in his life, and this is not Langdon's first
meeting. We can fix it in the morning. I tell you we must fix it."

Harry, who had been listening quietly, reached across the table, picked
up the case of pistols, handed it to Gilbert, whom he had chosen as his
second, and in a calm, clear, staccato tone--each word a bullet rammed
home--said:

"No--Teackle, there will be no delay until to-morrow. Mr. Willits has
forfeited every claim to being my guest and I will fight him here and
now. I could never look Kate in the face, nor would she ever speak to
me again, if I took any other course. You forget that he virtually told
Kate she lied," and he gazed steadily at Willits as if waiting for the
effect of his shot.

St. George's eyes kindled. There was the ring of a man in the boy's
words. He had seen the same look on the elder Rutter's face in a similar
situation twenty years before. As a last resort he walked toward where
Willits stood conferring with his second.

"I ask you once more, Mr. Willits"--he spoke in his most courteous
tones (Willits's pluck had greatly raised him in his estimation)--"to
apologize like a man and a gentleman. There is no question in my mind
that you have insulted your host in his own house and been discourteous
to the woman he expects to marry, and that the amende honorable should
come from you. I am twice your age and have had many experiences of this
kind, and I would neither ask you to do a dishonorable thing nor would I
permit you to do it if I could prevent it. Make a square, manly apology
to Harry."

Willits gazed at him with a certain ill-concealed contempt on his face.
He was at the time loosening the white silk scarf about his throat in
preparation for the expected encounter. He evidently did not believe a
word of that part of the statement which referred to Harry's engagement.
If Kate had been engaged to Harry she would have told him so.

"You are only wasting your time, Mr. Temple," he answered with an
impatient lift of his chin as he stripped his coat from his broad
shoulders. "You have just said there is only one way to settle this--I
am ready--so are my friends. You will please meet me outside--there is
plenty of firelight under the trees, and the sooner we get through this
the better. The apology should not come from me, and will not. Come,
gentlemen," and he stepped out into the now drizzling night, the glare
of the torches falling on his determined face and white shirt as he
strode down the path followed by his seconds.

Seven gentlemen hurriedly gathered together, one a doctor and another in
full possession of a mahogany case containing two duelling pistols with
their accompanying ammunition, G. D. gun caps, powder-horn, swabs and
rammers, and it past eleven o'clock at night, would have excited but
little interest to the average darky--especially one unaccustomed to the
portents and outcomes of such proceedings.

Not so Alec, who had absorbed the situation at a glance. He had
accompanied his master on two such occasions--one at Bladensburg and the
other on a neighboring estate, when the same suggestive tokens had been
visible, except that those fights took place at daybreak, and after
every requirement of the code had been complied with, instead of under
the flare of smoking pine torches and within a step of the contestant's
front door. He had, besides, a most intimate knowledge of the contents
of the mahogany case, it being part of his duty to see that these
defenders of the honor of all the Rutters--and they had been in frequent
use--were kept constantly oiled and cleaned. He had even cast some
bullets the month before under the colonel's direction. That he was
present to-night was entirely due to the fact that having made a short
cut to the kitchen door in order to hurry some dishes, he had by the
merest chance, and at the precise psychological moment, run bump up
against the warlike party just before they had reached the duelling
ground. This was a well-lighted path but a stone's throw from the porch,
and sufficiently hidden by shrubbery to be out of sight of the ballroom
windows.

The next moment the old man was in full cry to the house. He had heard
the beginning of the trouble while he was carrying out St. George's
orders regarding the two half-emptied bowls of punch and understood
exactly what was going to happen, and why.

"Got de colonel's pistols!" he choked as he sped along the gravel walk
toward the front door the quicker to reach the ballroom--"and Marse
Harry nothin' but a baby! Gor-a-Mighty! Gor-a-Mighty!" Had they all been
grown-ups he might not have minded--but his "Marse Harry," the child he
brought up, his idol--his chum!--"Fo' Gawd, dey sha'n't kill 'im--dey
sha'n't!--DEY SHA'N'T!!"

He had reached the porch now, swung back the door, and with a sudden
spring--it was wonderful how quick he moved--had dashed into the
ballroom, now a maze of whirling figures--a polka having struck up to
keep everybody occupied until the reel was finally made up.

"Marse Talbot!--Marse Talbot!" All domestic training was cast aside, not
a moment could be lost--"All on ye!--dey's murder outside--somebody go
git de colonel!--Oh, Gawd!--somebody git 'im quick!"

Few heard him and nobody paid any attention to his entreaties; nor
could anybody, when they did listen, understand what he wanted--the men
swearing under their breath, the girls indignant that he had blocked
their way. Mrs. Rutter, who had seen his in-rush, sat aghast. Had Alec,
too, given way, she wondered--old Alec who had had full charge of the
wine cellar for years! But the old man pressed on, still shouting, his
voice almost gone, his eyes bursting from his head.

"Dey's gwineter murder Marse Harry--I seen 'em! Oh!--whar's de colonel!
Won't somebody please--Oh, my Gawd!--dis is awful! Don't I tell ye dey's
gwineter kill Marse Harry!"

Mrs. Cheston, sitting beside Kate, was the only one who seemed to
understand.

"Alec!" she called in her imperious voice--"Alec!--come to me at once!
What is the matter?"

The old butler shambled forward and stood trembling, the tears streaming
down his cheeks.

"Yes, mum--I'm yere! Oh, can't ye git de colonel--ain't nobody else'll
do--"

"Is it a duel?"

"Yes, mum! I jes' done see 'em! Dey's gwineter kill my Marse Harry!"

Kate sprang up. "Where are they?" she cried, shivering with fear. The
old man's face had told the story.

"Out by de greenhouse--dey was measurin' off de groun'--dey's got de
colonel's pistols--you kin see 'em from de winder!"

In an instant she had parted the heavy silk curtains and lifted the
sash. She would have thrown herself from it if Mrs. Cheston had not held
her, although it was but a few feet from the ground.

"Harry!" she shrieked--an agonizing shriek that reverberated through
the ballroom, bringing everybody and everything to a stand-still. The
dancers looked at each other in astonishment. What had happened? Who had
fainted?

The colonel now passed through the room. He had been looking after the
proper handling of the famous Madeira, and had just heard that Alec
wanted him, and was uncertain as to the cause of the disturbance. A
woman's scream had reached his ears, but he did not know it was Kate's
or he would have quickened his steps.

Again Kate's voice pierced the room:

"Harry! HARRY!"--this time in helpless agony. She had peered into the
darkness made denser by the light rain, and had caught a glimpse of a
man standing erect without his coat, the light of the torches bringing
his figure into high relief--whose she could not tell, the bushes were
so thick.

The colonel brushed everybody aside and pulled Kate, half fainting, into
the room. Then he faced Mrs. Cheston.

"What has happened?" he asked sharply. "What is going on outside?"

"Just what I told you. Those fools are out there trying to murder each
other!"

Two shots in rapid succession rang clear on the night air.

The colonel stood perfectly still. No need to tell him now what had
happened, and worse yet, no need to tell him what WOULD happen if
he showed the slightest agitation. He was a cool man, accustomed to
critical situations, and one who never lost his head in an emergency.
Only a few years before he had stopped a runaway hunter, with a girl
clinging to a stirrup, by springing straight at the horse's head and
bringing them both to the ground unhurt. It only required the same
instantaneous concentration of all his forces, he said to himself, as
he gazed into old Alec's terror-stricken face framed by the open window.
Once let the truth be known and the house would be in a panic--women
fainting, men rushing out, taking sides with the combatants, with
perhaps other duels to follow--Mrs. Rutter frantic, the ball suddenly
broken up, and this, too, near midnight, with most of his guests ten
miles and more from home.

Murmurs of alarm were already reaching his ears: What was it?--who had
fainted?--did the scream come from inside or outside the room?--what was
the firing about?

He turned to allay Kate's anxiety, but she had cleared the open window
at a bound and was already speeding toward where she had seen the
light on the man's shirt. For an instant he peered after her into the
darkness, and then, his mind made up, closed the sash with a quick
movement, flung together the silk curtains and raised his hand to
command attention.

"Keep on with the dance, my friends; I'll go and find out what has
happened--but it's nothing that need worry anybody--only a little burnt
powder. Alec, go and tell Mr. Grant, the overseer, to keep better order
outside. In the meantime let everybody get ready for the Virginia reel;
supper will be served in a few minutes. Will you young gentlemen please
choose your partners, and will some one of you kindly ask the music to
start up?"

Slowly, and quite as if he had been called to the front door to welcome
some belated guest, he walked the length of the room preceded by Alec,
who, agonized at his master's measured delay, had forged ahead to open
the door. This closed and they out of sight, the two hurried down the
path.

Willits lay flat on the ground, one arm stretched above his head. He
had measured his full length, the weight of his shoulder breaking some
flower-pots as he fell. Over his right eye gaped an ugly wound from
which oozed a stream of blood that stained his cheek and throat. Dr.
Teackle, on one knee, was searching the patient's heart, while Kate, her
pretty frock soiled with mud, her hair dishevelled, sat crouched in the
dirt rubbing his hands--sobbing bitterly--crying out whenever Harry,
who was kneeling beside her, tried to soothe her:--"No!--No!--My heart's
broken--don't speak to me--go away!"

The colonel, towering above them, looked the scene over, then he
confronted Harry, who had straightened to his feet on seeing his father.

"A pretty piece of work--and on a night like this! A damnable piece of
work, I should say, sir!... Has he killed him, Teackle?"

The young doctor shook his head ominously.

"I cannot tell yet--his heart is still beating."

St. George now joined the group. He and Gilbert and the other seconds
had, in order to maintain secrecy, been rounding up the few negroes who
had seen the encounter, or who had been attracted to the spot by the
firing.

"Harry had my full consent, Talbot--there was really nothing else to do.
Only an ounce of cold lead will do in some cases, and this was one of
them." He was grave and deliberate in manner, but there was an infinite
sadness in his voice.

"He did--did he?" retorted the colonel bitterly. "YOUR full consent!
YOURS! and I in the next room!" Here he beckoned to one of the negroes
who, with staring eyeballs, stood gazing from one to the other. "Come
closer, Eph--not a whisper, remember, or I'll cut the hide off your back
in strips. Tell the others what I say--if a word of this gets into the
big house or around the cabins I'll know who to punish. Now two or three
of you go into the greenhouse, pick up one of those wide planks, and
lift this gentleman onto it so we can carry him. Take him into my
office, doctor, and lay him on my lounge. He'd better die there than
here. Come, Kate--do you go with me. Not a syllable of this, remember,
Kate, to Mrs. Rutter, or anybody else. As for you, sir"--and he looked
Harry squarely in the face--"you will hear from me later on."

With the same calm determination, he entered the ballroom, walked to the
group forming the reel, and, with a set smile on this face indicating
how idle had been everybody's fears, said loud enough to be heard by
every one about him:

"Only one of the men, my dear young people, who has been hurt in the
too careless use of some firearms. As to dear Kate--she has been
so upset--she happened unfortunately to see the affair from the
window--that she has gone to her room and so you must excuse her for a
little while. Now everybody keep on with the dance."

With his wife he was even more at ease. "The same old root of all evil,
my dear," he said with a dry laugh--"too much peach brandy, and this
time down the wrong throats--and so in their joy they must celebrate by
firing off pistols and wasting my good ammunition," an explanation
which completely satisfied the dear lady--peach brandy being capable of
producing any calamity, great or small.

But this would not do for Mrs. Cheston. She was a woman who could be
trusted and who never, on any occasion, lost her nerve. He saw from the
way she lifted her eyebrows in inquiry, instead of framing her question
in words, that she fully realized the gravity of the situation. The
colonel looked at her significantly, made excuse to step in front of
her, his back to the room, and with his forefinger tapping his forehead,
whispered:

"Willits."

The old lady paled, but she did not change her expression.

"And Harry?" she murmured in return.

The colonel kept his eyes upon her, but he made no answer. A hard, cold
look settled on his face--one she knew--one his negroes feared when he
grew angry.

Again she repeated Harry's name, this time in alarm:

"Quick!--tell me--not killed?"

"No--I wish to God he were!"




CHAPTER VI



The wounded man lay on a lounge in the office room, which was dimly
lighted by the dying glow of the outside torches and an oil lamp
hurriedly brought in. No one was present except St. George, Harry, the
doctor, and a negro woman who had brought in some pillows and hot water.
All that could be done for him had been done; he was unconscious and his
life hung by a thread. Harry, now that the mysterious thing called his
"honor" had been satisfied, was helping Teackle wash the wound prior to
an attempt to probe for the ball.

The boy was crying quietly--the tears streaming unbidden down his
cheeks--it was his first experience at this sort of thing. He had been
brought up to know that some day it might come and that he must then
face it, but he had never before realized the horror of what might
follow. And yet he had not reached the stage of regret; he was sorry for
the wounded man and for his suffering, but he was not sorry for his own
share in causing it. He had only done his duty, and but for a stroke of
good luck he and Willits might have exchanged places. Uncle George had
expressed his feelings exactly when he said that only a bit of cold lead
could settle some insults, and what insult could have been greater than
the one for which he had shot Willits? What was a gentleman to do? Go
around meeting his antagonist every day?--the two ignoring each other?
Or was he to turn stable boy, and pound him with his fists?--or, more
ridiculous still, have him bound over to keep the peace, or bring an
action for--Bah!--for what?--Yes--for what? Willits hadn't struck
him, or wounded him, or robbed him. It had been his life or Willits's.
No--there was no other way--couldn't be any other way. Willits knew
it when he tore up Kate's card--knew what would follow. There was no
deception--nothing underhand. And he had got precisely what he deserved,
sorry as he felt for his sufferings.

Then Kate's face rose before him--haunted him. Why hadn't she seen
it this way? Why had she refused to look at him--refused to answer
him--driven him away from her side, in fact?--he who had risked his life
to save her from insult! Why wouldn't she allow him to even touch
her hand? Why did she treat Willits--drunken vulgarian as he
was--differently from the way she had treated him? She had broken off
her engagement with him because he was drunk at Mrs. Cheston's ball,
where nobody had been hurt but himself, and here she was sympathizing
with another drunken man who had not only outraged all sense of decency
toward her, but had jeopardized the life of her affianced husband who
defended her against his insults; none of which would have happened had
the man been sober. All this staggered him.

More astounding still was her indifference. She had not even asked if he
had escaped unhurt, but had concentrated all her interest upon the
man who had insulted her. As to his own father's wrath--that he had
expected. It was his way to break out, and this he knew would continue
until he realized the enormity of the insult to Kate and heard how he
and St. George had tried to ward off the catastrophe. Then he would not
only change his opinion, but would commend him for his courage.

Outside the sick-room such guests as could be trusted were gathered
together in the colonel's den, where they talked in whispers. All agreed
that the ladies and the older men must be sent home as soon as possible,
and in complete ignorance of what had occurred. If Willits lived--of
which there was little hope--his home would be at the colonel's until
he fully recovered, the colonel having declared that neither expense nor
care would be spared to hasten his recovery. If he died, the body would
be sent to his father's house later on.

With this object in view the dance was adroitly shortened, the supper
hurried through, and within an hour after midnight the last carriage and
carryall of those kept in ignorance of the duel had departed, the only
change in the programme being the non-opening of the rare old bottle
of Madeira and the announcement of Harry's and Kate's engagement--an
omission which provoked little comment, as it had been known to but few.

Kate remained. She had tottered upstairs holding on to the hand-rail
and had thrown herself on a bed in the room leading out of the
dressing-room, where she lay in her mud-stained dress, the silken
petticoat torn and bedraggled in her leap from the window. She was
weeping bitterly, her old black mammy sitting beside her trying to
comfort her as best she could.

With the departure of the last guest--Mr. Seymour among them; the
colonel doing the honors; standing bare-headed on the porch, his face
all smiles as he bade them good-by--the head of the house of Rutter
turned quickly on his heel, passed down the corridor, made his way along
the long narrow hall, and entered his office, where the wounded man lay.
Harry, the negro woman, and Dr. Teackle alone were with him.

"Is there any change?" he asked in a perfectly even voice. Every vestige
of the set smile of the host had left his face. Harry he did not even
notice.

"Not much--he is still alive," replied the doctor.

"Have you found the ball?"

"No--I have not looked for it--I will presently."

The colonel moved out a chair and sat down beside the dying man, his
eyes fixed on the lifeless face. Some wave of feeling must have swept
through him, for after a half-stifled sigh, he said in a low voice, as
if to himself:

"This will be a fine story to tell his father, won't it?--and here
too--under my roof. My God!--was there ever anything more disgraceful!"
He paused for a moment, his eyes still on the sufferer, and then went
on--this time to the doctor--"His living so long gives me some hope--am
I right, Teackle?"

The doctor nodded, but he made no audible reply. He had bent closer to
the man's chest and was at the moment listening intently to the labored
breathing, which seemed to have increased.

Harry edged nearer to the patient, his eyes seeking for some move of
life. All his anger had faded. Willits, his face ablaze with drink and
rage, his eyes flashing, his strident voice ringing out--even Kate's
shocked, dazed face, no longer filled his mind. It was the suffering
man--trembling on the verge of eternity, shot to death by his own
ball--that appealed to him. And then the suddenness of it all--less than
an hour had passed since this tall, robust young fellow stood before him
on the stairs, hanging upon every word that fell from Kate's lips--and
here he lay weltering in his own blood.

Suddenly his father's hopeful word to the doctor sounded in his ears.
Suppose, after all, Willits SHOULD get well! Then Kate would understand
and forgive him! As this thought developed in his mind his spirits
rose. He scanned the sufferer the more intently, straining his neck,
persuading himself that a slight twitching had crossed the dying man's
face. Almost instantaneously the doctor rose to his feet.

"Quick, Harry!--hand me that brandy! It's just as I hoped--the ball has
ploughed outside the skull--the brain is untouched. It was the shock
that stunned him. Leave the room everybody--you too, colonel--he'll come
to in a minute and must not be excited."

Harry sprang from his chair, a great surge of thankfulness rising in
his heart, caught up the decanter, filled a glass and pressed it to the
sufferer's lips. The colonel sat silent and unmoved. He had seen too
many wounded men revive and then die to be unduly excited. That Willets
still breathed was the only feature of his case that gave him any hope.

Harry shot an inquiring glance at his father, and receiving only a cold
stare in return, hurried from the room, his steps growing lighter as he
ran. Kate must hear the good news and with the least possible delay. He
would not send a message--he would go himself; then he could explain and
relieve her mind. She would listen to his pleading. It was natural she
should have been shocked. He himself had been moved to sympathy by the
sufferer's condition--how much more dreadful, then, must have been the
sight of the wounded man lying there among the flower-pots to a woman
nurtured so carefully and one so sensitive in spirit! But it was all
over--Willits would live--there would be a reconciliation--everything
would be forgiven and everything forgotten.

All these thoughts crowded close in his mind as he rushed up the stairs
two steps at a time to where his sweetheart lay moaning out her heart.
He tapped lightly and her old black mammy opened the door on a crack.

"It's Marse Harry, mistis," she called back over her shoulder--"shall I
let him come in?"

"No!--no!--I don't want to see him; I don't want to see anybody--my
heart is broken!" came the reply in half-stifled sobs.

Harry, held at bay, rested his forehead against the edge of the door so
his voice could reach her the better.

"But Willits isn't going to die, Kate dear. I have just left him; it's
only a scalp wound. Dr. Teackle says he's all right. The shock stunned
him into unconsciousness."

"Oh, I don't care what Dr. Teackle says! It's you, Harry!--You! You
never once thought of me--Oh, why did you do it?"

"I did think of you, Kate! I never thought of anything else--I am not
thinking of anything else now."

"Oh, to think you tried to murder him! You, Harry--whom I loved so!" she
sobbed.

"It was for you, Kate! You heard what he said--you saw it all. It was
for you--for nobody else--for you, my darling! Let me come in--let me
hold you close to me and tell you."

"No!--NO--NO! My heart is broken! Come to me, mammy!"

The door shut gently and left him on the outside, dazed at the outcry,
his heart throbbing with tenderness and an intense, almost ungovernable
impulse to force his way into the room, take her in his arms, and
comfort her.

The closed door brought him to his senses. To-morrow, after all, would
be better, he confessed to himself humbly. Nothing more could be done
to-night. Yes--to-morrow he would tell her all. He turned to descend the
stairs and ran almost into Alec's arms. The old man was trembling with
excitement and seemed hardly able to control himself. He had come in
search of him, and had waited patiently at Kate's door for the outcome
of the interview, every word of which he had overheard.

"Marse Talbot done sont me fer ye, Marse Harry," he said in a low voice;
"he wants ye in his li'l' room. Don't ye take no notice what de young
mistis says; she ain't griebin' fer dat man. Dat Willits blood ain't no
'count, nohow; dey's po' white trash, dey is--eve'ybody knows dat. Let
Miss Kate cry herse'f out; dat's de on'y help now. Mammy Henny'll look
arter her till de mawnin'"--to none of which did Harry make answer.

When they reached the bottom step leading to the long hall the old man
stopped and laid his hand on his young master's shoulder. His voice was
barely audible and two tears stood in his eyes.

"Don't you take no notice ob what happens to-night, son," he whispered.
"'Member ye kin count on ol' Alec. Ain't neber gwineter be nothin' come
'twixt me an' you, son. I ain't neber gwineter git tired lovin' ye--you
won't fergit dat, will ye?"

"No, Alec, but Mr. Willits will recover. Dr. Teackle has just said so."

"Oh, dat ain't it, son--it's you, Marse Harry. Don't let 'em down
ye--stand up an' fight 'em back."

Harry patted the old servant tenderly on the arm to calm his fears. His
words had made but little impression on him. If he had heard them at all
he certainly did not grasp their import. What he was wanted for he could
not surmise--nor did he much care. Now that Kate had refused to see him
he almost wished that Willits's bullet had found its target.

"Where did you say my father was, Alec?" he asked in a listless voice.

"In his li'l' room, son; dey's all in dar, Marse George Temple, Mister
Gilbert--dem two gemmans who stood up wid Mister Willits--dey's all
dar. Don't mind what dey say, honey--jes' you fall back on ol' Alec. I
dassent go in; maybe I'll be yere in de pantry so ye kin git hold o' me.
I'se mos' crazy, Marse Harry--let me git hold oh yo' hand once mo', son.
Oh, my Gawd!--dey sha'n't do nothin' to ye!"

The boy took the old man's hand in his, patted it gently and resumed his
walk. The least said the better when Alec felt like this. It was Kate's
voice that pierced his ears--Kate's sobs that wrenched his heart: "You
never thought of me!" Nothing else counted.

Harry turned the handle of the door and stepped boldly in, his head
erect, his eyes searching the room. It was filled with gentlemen, some
sitting, some standing; not only those who had taken part in the duel,
but three or four others who were in possession of the secret that lay
heavy on everybody's mind.

He looked about him: most of the candles had burned low in the socket;
some had gone out. The few that still flickered cast a dim, ghostly
light. The remains of the night's revel lay on the larger table and the
serving tables:--a half empty silver dish of terrapin, caked over with
cold grease; portion of a ham with the bone showing; empty and partly
filled glasses and china cups from which the toddies and eggnog had
been drunk. The smell of rum and lemons intermingled with the smoke of
snuffed-out candle wicks greeted his nostrils--a smell he remembered for
years and always with a shudder.

There had evidently been a heated discussion, for his father was walking
up and down the room, his face flushed, his black eyes blazing with
suppressed anger, his plum-colored coat unbuttoned as if to give him
more breathing space, his silk scarf slightly awry. St. George Temple
must have been the cause of his wrath, for the latter's voice was
reverberating through the room as Harry stepped in.

"I tell you, Talbot, you shall not--you DARE not!" St. George was
exclaiming, his voice rising in the intensity of his indignation. His
face was set, his eyes blazing; all his muscles taut. He stood like an
avenging knight guarding some pathway. Harry looked on in amazement--he
had never seen his uncle like this before.

The colonel wheeled about suddenly and raised his clenched hand. He
seemed to be nervously unstrung and for a moment to have lost his
self-control.

"Stop, St. George!" he thundered. "Stop instantly! Not another word, do
you hear me? Don't strain a friendship that has lasted from boyhood or
I may forget myself as you have done. No man can tell me what I shall
or shall not do when my honor is at stake. Never before has a Rutter
disgraced himself and his blood. I am done with him, I tell you!"

"But the man will get well!" hissed St. George, striding forward and
confronting him. "Teackle has just said so--you heard him; we all heard
him!"

"That makes no difference; that does not relieve my son."

Rutter had now become aware of Harry's presence. So had the others, who
turned their heads in the boy's direction, but no one spoke. They had
not the lifelong friendship that made St. George immune, and few of them
would have dared to disagree with Talbot Rutter in anything.

"And now, sir"--here the colonel made a step towards where Harry stood,
the words falling as drops of water fall on a bared head--"I have
sent for you to tell you just what I have told these gentlemen. I have
informed them openly because I do not wish either my sense of honor or
my motives to be misunderstood. Your performances to-night have been so
dastardly and so ill-bred as to make it impossible for me ever to live
under the same roof with you again." Harry started and his lips parted
as if to speak, but he made no sound. "You have disgraced your blood and
violated every law of hospitality. Mr. Willits should have been as safe
here as you would have been under his father's roof. If he misbehaved
himself you could have ordered his carriage and settled the affair next
day, as any gentleman of your standing would have done. I have sent for
a conveyance to take you wherever you may wish to go." Then, turning to
St. George, "I must ask you, Temple, to fill my place and see that these
gentlemen get their proper carriages, as I must join Mrs. Rutter, who
has sent for me. Good-night," and he strode from the room.

Harry stared blankly into the faces of the men about him: first at St.
George and then at the others--one after another--as if trying to read
what was passing in their minds. No one spoke or moved. His father's
intentions had evidently been discussed before the boy's arrival and
the final denunciation had, therefore, been received with less of the
deadening effect than it had produced on himself. Nor was it a surprise
to old Alec, who despite his fears had followed Harry noiselessly into
the room, and who had also overheard the colonel's previous outbreak as
to his intended disposition of his young master.

St. George, who during the outburst had stood leaning against the
mantel, his eyes riveted on Harry, broke the silence.

"That, gentlemen," he exclaimed, straightening to his feet, one hand
held high above his head, "is the most idiotic and unjust utterance that
ever fell from Talbot Rutter's lips! and one he will regret to his dying
day. This boy you all know--most of you have known him from childhood,
and you know him, as I do, to be the embodiment of all that is brave
and truthful. He is just of age--without knowledge of the world, his
engagement to Kate Seymour, as some of you are aware, was to be made
known to-night. Willits was drunk or he would not have acted as he did.
I saw it coming and tried to stop him. That he was drunk was Rutter's
own fault, with his damned notions of drowning everybody in drink
every minute of the day and night. I saw the whole affair and heard the
insult, and it was wholly unprovoked. Harry did just what was right, and
if he hadn't I'd either have made Willits apologize or I would have shot
him myself the moment the affair could have been arranged, no
matter where we were. I know perfectly well"--here he swept his eyes
around--"that there is not a man in this room who does not feel as I do
about Rutter's treatment of this boy, and so I shall not comment further
upon it." He dropped his clenched hand and turned to Harry, his voice
still clear and distinct but with a note of tenderness through it. "And
now, that pronunciamentos are in order, my boy, here is one which has
less of the Bombastes Furioso in it than the one you have just listened
to--but it's a damned sight more humane and a damned sight more
fatherly, and it is this:--hereafter you belong to me--you are my son,
my comrade, and, if I ever have a dollar to give to any one, my heir.
And now one thing more, and I don't want any one of you gentlemen within
sound of my voice ever to forget it: When hereafter any one of you
reckon with Harry you will please remember that you reckon with me."

He turned suddenly. "Excuse me one moment, gentlemen, and I will then
see that you get your several carriages. Alec!--where's Alec?"

The old darky stepped out of the shadow. "I'm yere, sah."

"Alec, go and tell Matthew to bring my gig to the front porch--and be
sure you see that your young master's heavy driving-coat is put inside.
Mr. Harry spends the night with me."




CHAPTER VII



The secrecy enjoined upon everybody conversant with the happenings at
Moorlands did not last many hours. At the club, across dinner tables, at
tea, on the street, and in the libraries of Kennedy Square, each
detail was gone over, each motive discussed. None of the facts were
exaggerated, nor was the gravity of the situation lightly dismissed.
Duels were not so common as to blunt the sensibilities. On the contrary,
they had begun to be generally deplored and condemned, a fact largely
due to the bitterness resulting from a famous encounter which had taken
place a year or so before between young Mr. Cocheran, the son of a rich
landowner, and Mr. May--the circumstances being somewhat similar, the
misunderstanding having arisen at a ball in Washington over a reigning
belle, during which Mr. May had thrown his card in Cocheran's face. In
this instance all the requirements of the code were complied with.
The duel was fought in an open space behind Nelson's Hotel, near the
Capitol, Mr. Cocheran arriving at half-past five in the morning in a
magnificent coach drawn by four white horses, his antagonist reaching
the grounds in an ordinary conveyance, the seconds and the two surgeons
on horseback. Both fired simultaneously, with the result that May
escaped unhurt, while Cocheran was shot through the head and instantly
killed.

Public opinion, indeed, around Kennedy Square, was, if the truth be
told, undergoing many and serious changes. For not only the duel but
some other of the traditional customs dear to the old regime were
falling into disrepute--especially the open sideboards, synonymous
with the lavish hospitality of the best houses. While most of the older
heads, brought up on the finer and rarer wines, knew to a glass the
limit of their endurance, the younger bloods were constantly losing
control of themselves, a fact which was causing the greatest anxiety
among the mothers of Kennedy Square.

This growing antipathy had been hastened and solidified by another
tragedy quite as widely discussed as the Cocheran and May duel--more so,
in fact, since this particular victim of too many toddies had been the
heir of one of the oldest residents about Kennedy Square--a brilliant
young surgeon, self-exiled because of his habits, who had been thrown
from his horse on the Indian frontier--an Iowa town, really--shattering
his leg and making its amputation necessary. There being but one other
man in the rough camp who had ever seen a knife used--and he but a
student--the wounded surgeon had directed the amputation himself, even
to the tying of the arteries and the bandages and splints. Only then did
he collapse. The hero--and he was a hero to every one who knew of his
coolness and pluck, in spite of his recognized weakness--had returned to
his father's house on Kennedy Square on crutches, there to consult some
specialists, the leg still troubling him. As the cripple's bedroom was
at the top of the first flight of stairs, the steps of which--it being
summer--were covered with China matting, he was obliged to drag himself
up its incline whenever he was in want of something he must fetch
himself. One of these necessities was a certain squat bottle like those
which had graced the old sideboards. Half a dozen times a day would he
adjust his crutches, their steel points preventing his slipping, and
mount the stairs to his room, one step at a time.

Some months after, when the matting was taken up, the mother took her
youngest boy--he was then fifteen--to the steps:

"Do you see the dents of your brother's crutches?--count them. Every one
was a nail in his coffin." They were--for the invalid died that winter.

These marked changes in public opinion, imperceptible as they had been
at first, were gradually paving the way, it may be said, for the dawn
of that new order of things which only the wiser and more farsighted
men--men like Richard Horn--were able to discern. While many of the old
regime were willing to admit that the patriarchal life, with the negro
as the worker and the master as the spender, had seen its best days, but
few of them, at the period of these chronicles, realized that the genius
of Morse, Hoe, and McCormick, and a dozen others, whose inventions were
just beginning to be criticised, and often condemned, were really the
chief factors in the making of a new and greater democracy: that the
cog, the drill, the grate-bar, and the flying shuttle would ere long
supplant the hoe and the scythe; and that when the full flood of this
new era was reached their old-time standards of family pride, reckless
hospitality, and even their old-fashioned courtesy would well-nigh be
swept into space. The storm raised over this and the preceding duel had
they but known it, was but a notch in the tide-gauge of this flood.

"I understand, St. George, that you could have stopped that disgraceful
affair the other night if you had raised your hand," Judge Pancoast
had blurted out in an angry tone at the club the week following. "I did
raise it, judge," replied St. George, calmly drawing off his gloves.

"They don't say so--they say you stood by and encouraged it."

"Quite true," he answered in his dryest voice. "When I raised my hand it
was to drop my handkerchief. They fired as it fell."

"And a barbarous and altogether foolish piece of business, Temple.
There is no justification for that sort of thing, and if Rutter wasn't
a feudal king up in his own county there would be trouble over it. It's
God's mercy the poor fellow wasn't killed. Fine beginning, isn't it, for
a happy married life?"

"Better not have any wife at all, judge, than wed a woman whose good
name you are afraid to defend with your life. There are some of us who
can stand anything but that, and Harry is built along the same lines. A
fine, noble, young fellow--did just right and has my entire confidence
and my love. Think it over, judge," and he strolled into the card-room,
picked up the morning paper, and buried his face in its columns, his
teeth set, his face aflame with suppressed disgust at the kind of blood
running in the judge's veins.

The colonel's treatment of his son also came in for heated discussion.
Mrs. Cheston was particularly outspoken. Such quixotic action on the
ground of safeguarding the rights of a young drunkard like Willits,
who didn't know when he had had enough, might very well do for a
self-appointed autocrat like Rutter, she maintained, but some equally
respectable people would have him know that they disagreed with him.

"Just like Talbot Rutter," she exclaimed in her outspoken, decided
way--"no sense of proportion. High-tempered, obstinate as a mule, and
a hundred years--yes, five hundred years behind his time. And he--could
have stopped it all too if he had listened to me. Did you ever hear
anything so stupid as his turning Harry--the sweetest boy who ever
lived--out of doors, and in a pouring rain, for doing what he would have
done himself! Oh, this is too ridiculous--too farcical. Why, you can't
conceive of the absurdity of it all--nobody can! Gilbert was there and
told me every word of it. You would have thought he was a grand duke or
a pasha punishing a slave--and the funniest thing about it is that he
believes he is a pasha. Oh--I have no patience with such contemptible
family pride, and that's what is at the bottom of it."

Some of the back county aristocrats, on the other hand--men who lived by
themselves, who took their cue from Alexander Hamilton, Lee, and Webb,
and believed in the code as the only means of arbitrating a difficulty
of any kind between gentlemen--stoutly defended the Lord of Moorlands.

"Rutter did perfectly right to chuck the young whelp out of doors.
Outrageous, sir--never is done--nothing less than murder. Ought to be
prosecuted for challenging a man under his own roof--and at night too.
No toss-up for position, no seconds except a parcel of boys. Vulgar,
sir--infernally vulgar, sir. I haven't the honor of Colonel Rutter's
acquaintance--but if I had I'd tell him so--served the brat right--damn
him!"

Richard Horn was equally emphatic, but in a far different way. Indeed he
could hardly restrain himself when discussing it.

"I can think of nothing my young boy Oliver would or could do when he
grows up," he exclaimed fiercely--his eyes flashing, "which would shut
him out of his home and his dear mother's care. The duel is a relic of
barbarism and should be no longer tolerated; it is mob law, really,
and indefensible, with two persons defying the statutes instead of a
thousand. But Rutter is the last man in the world to take the stand he
has, and I sincerely regret his action. There are many bitter days ahead
of him."

Nor were the present conditions, aspirations, and future welfare of the
two combatants, and of the lovely girl over whom they had quarrelled,
neglected by the gossipers. No day passed without an extended discussion
of their affairs. Bearers of fresh news were eagerly welcomed both to
toddy and tea tables.

Old Morris Murdoch, who knew Willits's father intimately, being a strong
Clay man himself, arrived at one of these functions with the astounding
information that Willits had called on Miss Seymour, wearing his hat in
her presence to conceal his much-beplastered head. That he had then
and there not only made her a most humble apology for his ill-tempered
outbreak, which he explained was due entirely to a combination of
egg-and-brandy, with a dash of apple-toddy thrown in, but had declared
upon his honor as a gentleman that he would never again touch
the flowing bowl. Whereupon--(and this excited still greater
astonishment)--the delighted young lady had not only expressed her
sympathy for his misfortunes, but had blamed herself for what had
occurred!

Tom Tilghman, a famous cross-country rider, who had ridden in post haste
from his country seat near Moorlands to tell the tale--as could be seen
from his boots, which were still covered with mud--boldly asserted of
his own knowledge that the wounded man, instead of seeking his native
shore, as was generally believed, would betake himself to the Red
Sulphur Springs (where Kate always spent the summer)--accompanied by
three saddle horses, two servants, some extra bandages, and his devoted
sister, there to regain what was left of his health and strength. At
which Judge Pancoast had retorted--and with some heat--that Willits
might take a dozen saddle horses and an equal number of sisters, and
a bale of bandages if he were so minded, to the Springs, or any other
place, but he would save time and money if he stayed at home and looked
after his addled head, as no woman of Miss Seymour's blood and breeding
could possibly marry a man whose family escutcheon needed polishing as
badly as did his manners. That the fact--the plain, bold fact--and here
the judge's voice rose to a high pitch--was that Willits was boiling
drunk until Harry's challenge sobered him, and that Kate hated
drunkenness as much as did Harry's mother and the other women who had
started out to revolutionize society.

What that young lady herself thought of it all not even the best-posted
gossip in the club dared to venture an opinion. Moreover, such was
the respect and reverence in which she was held, and so great was the
sympathy felt for her situation, that she was seldom referred to in
connection with Harry or the affair except with a sigh, followed by
a "Too bad, isn't it?--enough to break your heart," and such like
expressions.

What the Honorable Prim thought of it all was apparent the next day at
the club when he sputtered out with:

"Here's a nice mess for a man of my position to find himself in! Do you
know that I am now pointed out as the prospective father-in-law of a
young jackanapes who goes about with a glass of grog in one hand and a
pistol in the other. I am not accustomed to having my name bandied about
and I won't have it--I live a life of great simplicity, minding my own
business, and I want everybody else to mind theirs. The whole affair
is most contemptible and ridiculous and smacks of the tin-armor age.
Willits should have been led quietly out of the room and put to bed
and young Rutter should have been reprimanded publicly by his father.
Disgraceful on a night like that when my daughter's name was on
everybody's lips."

After which outburst he had shut himself up in his house, where, so he
told one of his intimates, he intended to remain until he left for the
Red Sulphur Springs, which he would do several weeks earlier than was
his custom--a piece of news which not only confirmed Tom Tilghman's
gossip, but lifted several eyebrows in astonishment and set one or two
loose tongues to wagging.

Out at Moorlands, the point of view varied as the aftermath of the
tragedy developed, the colonel alone pursuing his daily life without
comment, although deep down in his heart a very maelstrom was boiling
and seething.

Mrs. Rutter, as fate would have it, on hearing that Kate was too ill
to go back to town, had gone the next morning to her bedside, where she
learned for the first time not only of the duel--which greatly shocked
her, leaving her at first perfectly limp and helpless--but of Harry's
expulsion from his father's house--(Alec owned the private wire)--a
piece of news which at first terrified and then keyed her up as tight as
an overstrung violin. Like many another Southern woman, she might shrink
from a cut on a child's finger and only regain her mental poise by
a liberal application of smelling salts, but once touch that boy of
hers--the child she had nourished and lived for--and all the rage of the
she-wolf fighting for her cub was aroused. What took place behind the
closed doors of her bedroom when she faced the colonel and flamed out,
no one but themselves knew. That the colonel was dumfounded--never
having seen her in any such state of mind--goes without saying. That he
was proud of her and liked her the better for it, is also true--nothing
delighted him so much as courage;--but nothing of all this, impressive
as it was, either weakened or altered his resolve.

Nor did he change front to his friends and acquaintances: his
honorable name, he maintained, had been trailed in the mud; his boasted
hospitality betrayed; his house turned into a common shamble. That his
own son was the culprit made the pain and mortification the greater, but
it did not lessen his responsibility to his blood. Had not Foscari, to
save his honor, in the days of the great republic, condemned his own son
Jacopo to exile and death? Had not Virginius slain his daughter? Should
he not protect his own honor as well? Furthermore, was not the young
man's father a gentleman of standing--a prominent man in the State--a
friend not only of his own friend, Henry Clay, but of the governor as
well? He, of course, would not have Harry marry into the family had
there been a marriageable daughter, but that was no reason why Mr.
Willits's only son should not be treated with every consideration. He,
Talbot Rutter, was alone responsible for the honor of his house. When
your right hand offends you cut it off. His right hand HAD offended him,
and he HAD cut it off. Away, then, with the spinning of fine phrases!

And so he let the hornets buzz--and they did swarm and buzz and sting.
As long as his wrath lasted he was proof against their assaults--in fact
their attacks only confirmed him in his position. It was when all this
ceased, for few continued to remonstrate with him after they had heard
his final: "I decline to discuss it with you, madame," or the more
significant: "How dare you, sir, refer to my private affairs without my
permission?"--it was, I say, when all this ceased, and when neither his
wife, who after her first savage outbreak had purposely held her
peace, nor any of the servants--not even old Alec, who went about
with streaming eyes and a great lump in his throat--dared renew their
entreaties for Marse Harry's return, that he began to reflect on his
course.

Soon the great silences overawed him--periods of loneliness when he
sat confronting his soul, his conscience on the bench as judge; his
affections a special attorney:--silences of the night, in which he would
listen for the strong, quick, manly footstep and the closing of the door
in the corridor beyond:--silences of the dawn, when no clatter of
hoofs followed by a cheery call rang out for some one to take
Spitfire:--silences of the breakfast table, when he drank his coffee
alone, Alec tip-toeing about like a lost spirit. Sometimes his heart
would triumph and he begin to think out ways and means by which the past
could be effaced. Then again the flag of his pride would be raised aloft
so that he and all the people could see, and the old hard look would
once more settle in his face, the lips straighten and the thin fingers
tighten. No--NO! No assassins for him--no vulgar brawlers--and it was
at best a vulgar brawl--and this too within the confines of Moorlands,
where, for five generations, only gentlemen had been bred!

And yet, product as he was of a regime that worshipped no ideals but
its own; hide-bound by the traditions of his ancestry; holding in secret
disdain men and women who could not boast of equal wealth and lineage;
dictatorial, uncontradictable; stickler for obsolete forms and
ceremonies--there still lay deep under the crust of his pride the heart
of a father, and, by his standards, the soul of a gentleman.

What this renegade son of his thought of it all; this disturber of his
father's sleeping and waking hours, was far easier to discover. Dazed as
Harry had been at the parental verdict and heart-broken as he still was
over the dire results, he could not, though he tried, see what else he
could have done. His father, he argued to himself, had shot and killed
a man when he was but little older than himself, and for an offence much
less grave than Willits's insult to Kate: he had frequently boasted of
it, showing him the big brass button that had deflected the bullet and
saved his life. So had his Uncle George, five years before--not a dead
man that time, but a lame one--who was still limping around the club and
very good friends the two, so far as he knew. Why then blame HIM? As
for the law of hospitality being violated, that was but one of the
idiosyncrasies of his father, who was daft on hospitality. How could
Willits be his guest when he was his enemy? St. George had begged the
wounded man to apologize; if he had done so he would have extended
his hand and taken him to Kate, who, upon a second apology, would have
extended her hand, and the incident would have been closed. It was
Willits's stubbornness and bad breeding, then, that had caused the
catastrophe--not his own bullet.

Besides no real harm had been done--that is, nothing very serious.
Willits had gained strength rapidly--so much so that he had sat up the
third day. Moreover, he had the next morning been carried to one of the
downstairs bedrooms, where, he understood, Kate had sent her black mammy
for news of him, and where, later on, he had been visited by both Mrs.
Rutter and Kate--a most extraordinary condescension on the young girl's
part, and one for which Willits should be profoundly grateful all the
days of his life.

Nor had Willits's people made any complaint; nor, so far as he could
ascertain, had any one connected with either the town or county
government started an investigation. It was outside the precincts of
Kennedy Square, and, therefore, the town prosecuting attorney (who
had heard every detail at the Chesapeake from St. George) had not been
called upon to act, and it was well known that no minion of the law in
and about Moorlands would ever dare face the Lord of the Manor in any
official capacity.

Why, then, had he been so severely punished?




CHAPTER VIII



While all this talk filled the air it is worthy of comment that after
his denunciation of Pancoast's views at the club, St. George never
again discussed the duel and its outcome. His mind was filled with more
important things:--one in particular--a burning desire to bring the
lovers together, no matter at what cost nor how great the barriers. He
had not, despite his silence, altered a hair-line of the opinion he had
held on the night he ordered the gig, fastened Harry's heavy coat around
the young man's shoulders, and started back with him through the rain
to his house on Kennedy Square; nor did he intend to. This, summed up,
meant that the colonel was a tyrant, Willits a vulgarian, and Harry a
hot-headed young knight, who, having been forced into a position where
he could neither breathe nor move, had gallantly fought his way out.

The one problem that gave him serious trouble was the selection of the
precise moment when he should make a strategic move on Kate's heart;
lesser problems were his manner of approaching her and the excuses
he would offer for Harry's behavior. These not only kept him awake at
night, but pursued him like an avenging spirit when he sought the quiet
paths of the old square, the dogs at his heels. The greatest of all
barriers, he felt assured, would be Kate herself. He had seen enough of
her in that last interview, when his tender pleading had restored the
harmonies between herself and Harry, to know that she was no longer the
child whose sweetness he loved, or the girl whose beauty he was proud
of--but the woman whose judgment he must satisfy. Nor could he see that
any immediate change in her mental attitude was likely to occur. Some
time had now passed since Harry's arrival at his house, and every day
the boy had begged for admission at Kate's door, only to be denied by
Ben, the old butler. His mother, who had visited her exiled son almost
daily, had then called on her, bearing two important pieces of news--one
being that after hours of pleading Harry had consented to return to
Moorlands and beg his father's pardon, provided that irate gentleman
should send for him, and the other the recounting of a message of
condolence and sympathy which Willits had sent Harry from his sick-bed,
in which he admitted that he had been greatly to blame. (An admission
which fairly bubbled out of him when he learned that Harry had assisted
Teackle in dressing his wound.)

And yet with all this pressure the young girl had held her own. To every
one outside the Rutter clan she had insisted that she was sorry for
Harry, but that she could never marry a man whose temper she could
not trust. She never put this into words in answering the well-meant
inquiries of such girl friends as Nellie Murdoch, Sue Dorsey, and the
others; then her eyes would only fill with tears as she begged them not
to question her further. Nor had she said as much to her father, who on
one occasion had asked her the plump question--"Do you still intend to
marry that hot-head?"--to which she had returned the equally positive
answer--"No, I never shall!" She reserved her full meaning for St.
George when he should again entreat her--as she knew he would at the
first opportunity--to forget the past and begin the old life once more.

At the end of the second week St. George had made up his mind as to
his course; and at the end of the third the old diplomat, who had dared
defeat before, boldly mounted the Seymour steps. He would appeal to
Harry's love for her, and all would be well. He had done so before,
picturing the misery the boy was suffering, and he would try it again.
If he could only reach her heart through the armor of her reserve she
would yield.

She answered his cheery call up the stairway in person, greeting him
silently, but with arms extended, leading him to a seat beside her,
where she buried her face in her hands and burst into tears.

"Harry has tried to see you every day, Kate," he began, patting her
shoulders lovingly in the effort to calm her. "I found him under your
window the other night; he walks the streets by the hour, then he
comes home exhausted, throws himself on his bed, and lies awake till
daylight."

The girl raised her head and looked at him for a moment. She knew
what he had come for--she knew, too, how sorry he felt for her--for
Harry--for everybody who had suffered because of this horror.

"Uncle George," she answered, choking back her tears, speaking slowly,
weighing each word--"you've known me from a little girl--ever since my
dear mother died. You have been a big brother to me many, many times and
I love you for it. If I were determined to do anything that would
hurt me, and you found it out in time, you would come and tell me so,
wouldn't you?"

St. George nodded his head in answer, but he did not interrupt. Her
heart was being slowly unrolled before him, and he would wait until it
was all bare.

"Now," she continued, "the case is reversed, and you want me to do
something which I know will hurt me."

"But you love him, Kate?"

"Yes--that is the worst part of it all," she answered with a stifled
sob--"yes, I love him." She lifted herself higher on the cushions and
put her beautiful arms above her head, her eyes looking into space as
if she was trying to solve the problem of what her present resolve would
mean to both herself and Harry.

St. George began again: "And you remember how--"

She turned impatiently and dropped one hand until it rested on his own.
He thought he had never seen her look so lovely and never so unhappy.
Then she said in pleading tones--her eyes blinded by half-restrained
tears:

"Don't ask me to REMEMBER, dear Uncle George--help me to forget! You can
do no kinder thing for both of us."

"But think of your whole future happiness, Kate--think how important it
is to you--to Harry--to everybody--that you should not shut him out of
your life."

"I have thought! God knows I have thought until sometimes I think I
shall go mad. He first breaks his promise about drinking and I forgive
him; then he yields to a sudden impulse and behaves like a mad-man and
you ask me to forgive him again. He never once thinks of me, nor of my
humiliation!" Her lips were quivering, but her voice rang clear.

"He thinks of nothing else BUT you," he pleaded. "Let your heart
work--don't throw him into the street as his father has done. He loves
you so."

"_I_--throw HIM in the street! He has thrown ME--mortified me before
everybody--behaved like a--No,--I can't--I won't discuss it!"

"May I--"

"No--not another word. I love you too much to let this come between us.
Let us talk of something else--anything--ANYTHING."

The whole chart of her heart had been unrolled. Her head and not her
heart was dominant. He felt, moreover, that no argument of his would
be of any use. Time might work out the solution, but this he could not
hasten. Nor, if the truth be told, did he blame her. It was, from
the girl's point of view, most unfortunate, of course, that the two
calamities of Harry's drunkenness and the duel had come so close
together. Perhaps--and for the first time in his life he weakened before
her tears--perhaps if he had thrown the case of pistols out of the
window, sent one man to his father and the other back to Kennedy Square,
it might all have been different--but then again, could this have been
done, and if it had been, would not all have to be done over again the
next day? At last he asked hopelessly:

"Have you no message for Harry?"

"None," she answered resolutely.

"And you will not see him?"

"No--we can never heal wounds by keeping them open." This came calmly,
and as if she had made up her mind, and in so determined a tone that he
saw it meant an end to the interview.

He rose from his seat and without another word turned toward the door.
She gained her feet slowly, as if the very movement caused her pain; put
her arms around his neck, kissed him on the cheek, followed him to the
door, waved her hand to him as she watched him pick his way across the
square, and threw herself on her lounge in an agony of tears.


That night St. George and Harry sat by the smouldering wood fire; the
early spring days were warm and joyous, but the nights were still cool.
The boy sat hunched up in his chair, his face drawn into lines from the
anxiety of the past week; his mind absorbed in the story that St. George
had brought from the Seymour house. As in all ardent temperaments, these
differences with Kate, which had started as a spark, had now developed
into a conflagration which was burning out his heart. His love for Kate
was not a part of his life--it was ALL of his life. He was ready now for
any sacrifice, no matter how humiliating. He would go down on his knees
to his father if she wished it. He would beg Willits's pardon--he would
abase himself in any way St. George should suggest. He had done what
he thought was right, and he would do it over again under like
circumstances, but he would grovel at Kate's feet and kiss the ground
she stepped on if she required it of him.

St. George, who had sat quiet, examining closely the backs of his finely
modelled hands as if to find some solution of the difficulty written in
their delicate articulated curves, heard his outburst in silence.
Now and then he would call to Todd, who was never out of reach of his
voice--no matter what the hour--to replenish the fire or snuff the
candles, but he answered only in nods and monosyllables to Harry. One
suggestion only of the heart-broken lover seemed to promise any
result, and that was his making it up with his father as his mother
had suggested. This wall being broken down, and Willits no longer
an invalid, perhaps Kate would see matters in a different and more
favorable light.

"But suppose father doesn't send for me, Uncle George, what will I do
then?"

"Well, he is your father, Harry."

"And you think then I had better go home and have it out with him?"

St. George hesitated. He himself would have seen Rutter in Hades before
he would have apologized to him. In fact his anger choked him so every
time he thought of the brutal and disgraceful scene he had witnessed
when the boy had been ordered from his home, that he could hardly get
his breath. But then Kate was not his sweetheart, much as he loved her.

"I don't know, Harry. I am not his son," he answered in an undecided
way. Then something the boy's mother had said rose in his mind: "Didn't
your mother say that your father's loneliness without you was having its
effect?--and wasn't her advice to wait until he should send for you?"

"Yes--that was about it."

"Well, your mother would know best. Put that question to her next time
she comes in--I'm not competent to answer it. And now let us go to
bed--you are tired out, and so am I."




CHAPTER IX



Mysterious things are happening in Kennedy Square. Only the very wisest
men know what it is all about--black Moses for one, who tramps the brick
walks and makes short cuts through the dirt paths, carrying his tin
buckets and shouting: "Po' ole Moses--po' ole fellah! O-Y-S-T-E-R-S!
O-Y-STERS!" And Bobbins, the gardener, who raked up last year's autumn
leaves and either burned them in piles or spread them on the flower-beds
as winter blankets. And, of course, Mockburn, the night watchman:
nothing ever happens in and around Kennedy Square that Mockburn doesn't
know of. Many a time has he helped various unsteady gentlemen up the
steps of their houses and stowed them carefully and noiselessly away
inside, only to begin his rounds again, stopping at every corner to
drone out his "All's we-l-l!" a welcome cry, no doubt, to the stowaways,
but a totally unnecessary piece of information to the inhabitants,
nothing worse than a tippler's tumble having happened in the forty years
of the old watchman's service.

I, of course, am in the secret of the mysterious happenings and have
been for more years than I care to admit, but then I go ten better than
Mockburn. And so would you be in the secret had you watched the process
as closely as I have done.

It is always the same!

First the crocuses peep out--dozens of crocuses. Then a spread of tulips
makes a crazy-quilt of a flowerbed; next the baby buds, their delicate
green toes tickled by the south wind, break into laughter. Then the
stately magnolias step free of their pods, their satin leaves falling
from their alabaster shoulders--grandes dames these magnolias! And then
there is no stopping it: everything is let loose; blossoms of peach,
cherry, and pear; flowers of syringa--bloom of jasmine, honeysuckle,
and Virginia creeper; bridal wreath in flowers of white and wistaria in
festoons of purple.

Then come the roses--millions of roses; on single stalks; in clusters,
in mobs; rushing over summer-houses, scaling fences, swarming up
trellises--a riotous, unruly, irresistible, and altogether lovable lot
these roses when they break loose!

And the birds! What a time they are having--thrush, bobolinks,
blackbirds, nightingales, woodpeckers, little pee-wees, all fluttering,
skimming, chirping; bursting their tiny throats for the very joy of
living. And they are all welcome--and it wouldn't make any difference to
them if they hadn't been; they would have risked it anyway, so tempting
are the shady paths and tangled arbors and wide-spreading elms and
butternuts of Kennedy Square.

Soon the skies get over weeping for the lost winter and dry their eyes,
and the big, warm, happy sun sails over the tree-tops or drops to sleep,
tired out, behind the old Seymour house, and the girls come out in their
white dresses and silk sashes and the gallants in their nankeens and
pumps and the old life of out-of-doors begins once more.


And these are not the only changes that the coming of spring has
wrought. What has been going on deep down in the tender, expectant
hearts of root and bulb, eager for expression, had been at work in
Harry's own temperament. The sunshine of St. George's companionship has
already had its effect; the boy is thawing out; his shrinking shyness,
born of his recent trouble, is disappearing like a morning frost. He is
again seen at the club, going first under St. George's lee and then on
his own personal footing.

The Chesapeake, so St. George had urged upon him, was the centre of
news--the headquarters, really, of the town, where not only the current
happenings and gossip of Kennedy Square were discussed, but that of the
country at large. While the bald-heads, of course, would be canvassing
the news from Mexico, which was just beginning to have an ugly look, or
having it out, hammer and tongs, over the defeat of Henry Clay, to
which some rabid politicians had never become reconciled, the younger
gentry--men of Harry's own tastes--would be deploring the poor showing
the ducks were making, owing to the up-river freshets which had spoiled
the wild celery; or recounting the doings at Mrs. Cheston's last ball;
or the terrapin supper at Mr. Kennedy's, the famous writer; or perhaps
bemoaning the calamity which had befallen some fellow member who had
just found seven bottles out of ten of his most precious port corked
and worthless. But whatever the topics, or whoever took sides in their
discussion, none of it, so St. George argued, could fail to interest a
young fellow just entering upon the wider life of a man of the world,
and one, of all others, who needed constant companionship. Then again,
by showing himself frequently within its walls, Harry would become
better known and better liked.

That he was ineligible for membership, being years too young, and that
his continued presence, even as a guest, was against the rules, did not
count in his case, or if it did count, no member, in view of what the
lad had suffered, was willing to raise the question. Indeed, St. George,
in first introducing him, had referred to "my friend, Mr. Rutter," as
an "out of town guest," laughing as he did so, everybody laughing in
return, and so it had gone at that.

At first Harry had dreaded meeting his father's and his uncle's friends,
most of whom, he fancied, might be disposed to judge him too harshly.
But St. George had shut his ears to every objection, insisting that the
club was a place where a man could be as independent as he pleased, and
that as his guest he would be entitled to every consideration.

The boy need not have been worried. Almost every member, young and
old, showed by his manner or some little act of attention that their
sympathies were with the exile. While a few strait-laced old Quakers
maintained that it was criminal to blaze away at your fellow-man with
the firm intention of blowing the top of his head off, and that
Harry should have been hung had Willits died, there were others more
discerning--and they were largely in the majority--who stood up for the
lad however much they deplored the cause of his banishment. Harry, they
argued, had in his brief career been an unbroken colt, and more or less
dissipated, but he at least had not shown the white feather. Boy as he
was, he had faced his antagonist with the coolness of a duellist of a
score of encounters, letting Willits fire straight at him without so
much as the wink of an eyelid; and, when it was all over, had been man
enough to nurse his victim back to consciousness. Moreover--and this
counted much in his favor--he had refused to quarrel with his irate
father, or even answer him. "Behaved himself like a thoroughbred, as he
is," Dorsey Sullivan, a famous duellist, had remarked in recounting the
occurrence to a non-witness. "And I must say, sir, that Talbot
served him a scurvy trick, and I don't care who hears me say it."
Furthermore--and this made a great impression--that rather than
humiliate himself, the boy had abandoned the comforts of his palatial
home at Moorlands and was at the moment occupying a small, second-story
back room (all, it is true, Gentleman George could give him), where he
was to be found any hour of the day or night that his uncle needed him
in attendance upon that prince of good fellows.

One other thing that counted in his favor, and this was conclusive with
the Quakers--and the club held not a few--was that no drop of liquor
of any kind had passed the boy's lips since the eventful night when St.
George prepared the way for their first reconciliation.

Summed up, then, whatever Harry had been in the past, the verdict at
the present speaking was that he was a brave, tender-hearted, truthful
fellow who, in the face of every temptation, had kept his word.
Moreover, it was never forgotten that he was Colonel Talbot Rutter's
only son and heir, so that no matter what the boy did, or how angry the
old autocrat might be, it could only be a question of time before his
father must send for him and everything at Moorlands go on as before.


It was on one of these glorious never-to-be-forgotten spring days, then,
a week or more after St. George had given up the fight with Kate--a day
which Harry remembered all the rest of his life--that he and his uncle
left the house to spend the afternoon, as was now their custom, at the
Chesapeake. The two had passed the early hours of the day at the Relay
House fishing for gudgeons, the dogs scampering the hills, and having
changed their clothes for something cooler, had entered the park by the
gate opposite the Temple Mansion, as being nearest to the club; a path
Harry loved, for he and Kate had often stepped it together--and then
again, it was the shortest cut to her house.

As the beauty and quiet of the place with its mottling of light and
shade took possession of him he slackened his pace, lagging a little
behind his uncle, and began to look about him, drinking in the
loveliness of the season. The very air breathed tenderness, peace, and
comfort. Certainly his father's heart must be softening toward him;
surely his bitterness could not last. No word, it is true, had yet come
to him from Moorlands, though only the week before his mother had
been in to see him, bringing him news of his father and what her son's
absence had meant to every one, old Alec especially. She had not, she
said, revived the subject of the boy's apology; she had thought it
better to wait for the proper opportunity, which might come any day,
but certain it was that his father was most unhappy, for he would shut
himself up hours at a time in his library, locking the door and refusing
to open it, no matter who knocked, except to old John Gorsuch, his man
of business. She had also heard him tossing on his bed at night, or
walking about his room muttering to himself.

Did these things, he wondered on this bright spring morning, mean a
final reconciliation, or was he, after all, to be doomed to further
disappointment? Days had passed since his mother had assured him of this
change in his father, and still no word had come from him. Had he at
last altered his mind, or, worse still, had his old obstinacy again
taken possession of him, hardening his heart so that he would never
relent? And so, with his mind as checkered as the shadow-flecked path on
which they stepped, he pursued his way beneath the wide-spreading trees.

When the two had crossed the street St. George's eye rested upon a group
on the sidewalk of the club. The summer weather generally emptied
the coffee-room of most of its habitues, sending many of them to the
easy-chairs on the sprinkled pavement, one or two tipped back against
the trees, or to the balconies and front steps. With his arm in Harry's
he passed from one coterie to another in the hope that he might catch
some word which would be interesting enough to induce him to fill one
of the chairs, even for a brief half-hour, but nothing reached his
ears except politics and crops, and he cared for neither. Harding--the
pessimist of the club--a man who always had a grievance (and this time
with reason, for the money stringency was becoming more acute every
day), tried to beguile him into a seat beside him, but he shook
his head. He knew all about Harding, and wanted none of his kind of
talk--certainly not to-day.

"Think of it!" he had heard the growler say to Judge Pancoast as he was
about to pass his chair--"the Patapsco won't give me a cent to move my
crops, and I hear all the others are in the same fix. You can't get a
dollar on a house and lot except at a frightful rate of interest. I tell
you everything is going to ruin. How the devil do you get on without
money, Temple?" He was spread out in his seat, his legs apart, his fat
face turned up, his small fox eyes fixed on St. George.

"I don't get on," remarked St. George with a dry smile. He was still
standing. "Why do you ask?" Money rarely troubled St. George; such small
sums as he possessed were hived in this same Patapsco Bank, but the
cashier had never refused to honor one of his checks as long as he had
any money in their vaults, and he didn't think they would begin now.
"Queer question for you to ask, Harding" (and a trifle underbred, he
thought, one's private affairs not being generally discussed at a club).
"Why does it interest you?"

"Well, you always say you despise money and yet you seem happy and
contented, well dressed, well groomed"--here he wheeled St.
George around to look at his back--"yes, got on one of your London
coats--Hello, Harry!--glad to see you," and he held out his hand to
the boy. "But really, St. George, aren't you a little worried over the
financial outlook? John Gorsuch says we are going to have trouble, and
John knows."

"No"--drawled St. George--"I'm not worried."

"And you don't think we're going to have another smash-up?" puffed
Harding.

"No," said St. George, edging his way toward the steps of the club as
he spoke. He was now entirely through with Harding; his financial
forebodings were as distasteful to him as his comments on his clothes
and bank account.

"But you'll have a julep, won't you? I've just sent John for them. Don't
go--sit down. Here, John, take Mr. Temple's order for--"

"No, Harding, thank you." The crushed ice in the glass was no cooler nor
crisper than St. George's tone. "Harry and I have been broiling in the
sun all the morning and we are going to go where it is cool."

"But it's cool here," Harding called after him, struggling to his feet
in the effort to detain him. There was really no one in the club he
liked better than St. George.

"No--we'll try it inside," and with a courteous wave of his hand and a
feeling of relief in his heart, he and Harry kept on their way.

He turned to mount the steps when the sudden pushing back of all the
chairs on the sidewalk attracted his attention. Two ladies were picking
their way across the street in the direction of the club. These, on
closer inspection, proved to be Miss Lavinia Clendenning and her niece,
Sue Dorsey, who had been descried in the offing a few minutes before by
the gallants on the curbstone, and who at first had been supposed to be
heading for Mrs. Pancoast's front steps some distance away, until the
pair, turning sharply, had borne down upon the outside chairs with all
sails set--(Miss Clendenning's skirts were of the widest)--a shift of
canvas which sent every man to his feet with a spring.

Before St. George could reach the group, which he did in advance of
Harry, who held back--both ladies being intimate friends of Kate's--old
Captain Warfield, the first man to gain his feet--very round and fat was
the captain and very red in the face (1812 Port)--was saying with his
most courteous bow:

"But, my dear Miss Lavinia, you have not as yet told us to what we are
indebted for this mark of your graciousness; and Sue, my dear, you grow
more like your dear mother every day. Why are you two angels abroad at
this hour, and what can we do for you?"

"To the simple fact, my dear captain," retorted the irresistible
spinster, spreading her skirts the wider, both arms akimbo--her thin
fingers acting as clothespins, "that Sue is to take her dancing lesson
next door, and as I can't fly in the second-story window, having mislaid
my wings, I must use my feet and disturb everybody. No, gentlemen--don't
move--I can pass."

The captain made so profound a salaam in reply that his hat grazed the
bricks of the sidewalk.

"Let me hunt for them, Miss Lavinia. I know where they are!" he
exclaimed, with his hand on his heart.

"Where?" she asked roguishly, twisting her head on one side with the
movement of a listening bird.

"In heaven, my lady, where they are waiting your arrival," he answered,
with another profound sweep of his hand and dip of his back, his bald
head glistening in the sunlight as he stooped before her.

"Then you will never get near them," she returned with an equally low
curtsy and a laugh that nearly shook her side curls loose.

St. George was about to step the closer to take a hand in the
badinage--he and the little old maid were forever crossing swords--when
her eyes fell upon him. Instantly her expression changed. She was one of
the women who had blamed him for not stopping the duel, and had been on
the lookout for him for days to air her views in person.

"So you are still in town, are you?" she remarked frigidly in lowered
tones. "I thought you had taken that young firebrand down to the Eastern
Shore to cool off."

St. George frowned meaningly in the effort to apprise her ladyship that
Harry was within hearing distance, but Miss Lavinia either did not, or
would not, understand.

"Two young boobies, that's what they are, breaking their hearts over
each other," she rattled on, gathering the ends of her cape the closer.
"Both of them ought to be spanked and put to bed. Get them into each
other's arms just as quick as you can. As for Talbot Rutter, he's the
biggest fool of the three, or was until Annie Rutter got hold of him.
Now I hear he is willing to let Harry come back, as if that would do any
good. It's Kate who must be looked after; that Scotch blood in her
veins makes her as pig-headed as her father. No--I don't want your arm,
sir--get out of my way."

If the courtiers heard--and half of them did--they neither by word
or expression conveyed that fact to Harry or St. George. It was not
intended for their ears, and, therefore, was not their property. With
still more profound salutations from everybody, the three bareheaded men
escorted them to the next stoop, the fourth going ahead to see that the
door was properly opened, and so the ladies passed on, up and inside
the house. This over, the group resumed its normal condition on the
sidewalk, the men regaining their seats and relighting their cigars (no
gentleman ever held one in evidence when ladies were present)--fresh
orders being given to the servants for the several interrupted mixtures
with which the coterie were wont to regale themselves.

Harry, who had stood with shoulders braced against a great tree on
the sidewalk, had heard every word of the old maid's outburst, and an
unrestrained burst of joy had surged up in his heart. His father was
coming round! Yes--the tide was turning--it would not be long before
Kate would be in his arms!




CHAPTER X



St. George held no such sanguine view, although he made no comment.
In fact the outbreak had rather depressed him. He knew something of
Talbot's stubbornness and did not hope for much in that direction, nor,
if the truth be told, did he hope much in Kate's. Time alone could heal
her wounds, and time in the case of a young girl, mistress of herself,
beautiful, independent, and rich, might contain many surprises.

It was with a certain sense of relief, therefore, that he again sought
the inside of the club. Its restful quiet would at least take his
mind from the one subject which seemed to pursue him and which Miss
Clendenning's positive and, as he thought, inconsiderate remarks had so
suddenly revived.

Before he had reached the top step his face broke out into a broad
smile. Instantly his spirits rose. Standing in the open front door,
with outstretched hand, was the man of all others he would rather have
seen--Richard Horn, the inventor.

"Ah, St. George, but I'm glad to see you!", cried Richard. "I have been
looking for you all the afternoon and only just a moment ago got sight
of you on the sidewalk. I should certainly have stepped over to
your house and looked you up if you hadn't come. I've got the most
extraordinary thing to read to you that you have ever listened to in the
whole course of your life. How well you look, and what a fine color you
have, and you too, Harry. You are in luck, my boy. I'd like to stay a
month with Temple myself."

"Make it a year, Richard," cried St. George, resting his hand
affectionately on the inventor's shoulder. "There isn't a chair in
my house that isn't happier when you sit in it. What have you
discovered?--some new whirligig?"

"No, a poem. Eighteen to twenty stanzas of glorious melody imprisoned in
type."

"One of your own?" laughed St. George--one of his merry vibrating laughs
that made everybody happier about him. The sight of Richard had swept
all the cobwebs out of his brain.

"No, you trifler!--one of Edgar Allan Poe's. None of your scoffing, sir!
You may go home in tears before I am through with you. This way, both of
you."

The three had entered the coffee-room now, Richard's arm through St.
George's, Harry following close. The inventor drew out the chairs one
after another, and when they were all three seated took a missive from
his pocket and spread it out on his knee, St. George and Harry keeping
their eyes on his every movement.

"Here's a letter, St. George"--Richard's voice now fell to a serious
key--"which I have just received from your friend and mine, Mr. N.
P. Willis. In it he sends me this most wonderful poem cut from his
paper--the Mirror--and published, I discover to my astonishment, some
months back. I am going to read it to you if you will permit me. It
certainly is a most remarkable production. The wonder to me is that I
haven't seen it before. It is by that Mr. Poe you met at my house some
years ago--you remember him?--a rather sad-looking man with big head and
deep eyes?" Temple nodded in answer, and Harry's eyes glistened: Poe
was one of his university's gods. "Just let me read to you what Willis
says"--here he glanced down the letter sheet: "'Nothing, I assure you,
my dear Horn, has made so great a stir in literary circles as this
"Raven" of Poe's. I am sending it to you knowing that you are interested
in the man. If I do not mistake I first met Poe one night at your
house.' And a very extraordinary night it was, St. George," said
Richard, lifting his eyes from the sheet. "Poe, if you remember, read
one of his stories for us, and both Latrobe and Kennedy were so charmed
that they talked of nothing else for days."

St. George remembered so clearly that he could still recall the tones
of Poe's voice, and the peculiar lambent light that flashed from out the
poet's dark eyes--the light of a black opal. He settled himself back in
his chair to enjoy the treat the better. This was the kind of talk he
wanted to-day, and Richard Horn, of all others, was the man to conduct
it.

The inventor's earnestness and the absorbed look on St. George's and
Harry's faces, and the fact that Horn was about to read aloud, had
attracted the attention of several near-by members, who were already
straining their ears, for no one had Richard's gift for reading.

In low, clear tones, his voice rising in intensity as the weird pathos
of the several stanzas gripped his heart, he unfolded the marvellous
drama until the very room seemed filled with the spirit of both the man
and the demon. Every stanza in his clear enunciation seemed a separate
string of sombre pearls, each syllable aglow with its own inherent
beauty. When he ceased it was as if the soul of some great 'cello had
stopped vibrating, leaving only the memory of its melody. For a few
seconds no one moved nor spoke. No one had ever heard Richard in finer
voice nor had they ever listened to more perfect rhythmic beauty. So
great was the effect on the audience that one old habitue, in speaking
of it afterward, insisted that Richard must have seen the bird roosting
over the door, so realistic was his rendering.

Harry had listened with bated breath, absorbing every tone and
inflection of Richard's voice. He and Poe had been members of the same
university, and the poet had always been one of his idols--the man of
all others he wanted most to know. Poe's former room opening into the
corridor had invariably attracted him. He had frequently looked about
its bare walls wondering how so great an inspiration could have
started from such meagre surroundings. He had, too, with the romantic
imagination of a boy, pictured to himself the kind of man he was, his
looks, voice, and manner, and though he had never seen the poet in the
flesh, somehow the tones of Richard's voice recalled to him the very
picture he had conjured up in his mind in his boyhood days.

St. George had also listened intently, but the impression was quite
different from the one made on the younger man. Temple thought only of
Poe's despondency, of his striving for a better and happier life; of his
poverty--more than once had he gone down into his own pockets to relieve
the poor fellow's urgent necessities, and he was still ready to do
it again--a readiness in which he was almost alone, for many of the
writer's earlier friends had of late avoided meeting him whenever he
passed through Kennedy Square. Even Kennedy, his life-long friend, had
begun to look upon him as a hopeless case.

This antipathy was also to be found in the club. Even with the memory
of Richard's voice in their ears one of the listeners had shrugged his
shoulders, remarking with a bitter laugh that musical as was the poem,
especially as rendered by Richard, it was, after all, like most of Poe's
other manuscripts, found in a bottle, or more likely "a bottle found
in a manuscript," as that crazy lunatic couldn't write anything worth
reading unless he was half drunk. At which St. George had blazed out:

"Hush, Bowdoin! You ought to be willing to be blind drunk half your time
if you could write one stanza of it! Please let me have it, Richard,"
and he took the sheet from his friend's hand, that he and Harry might
read it at their leisure when they reached home.

Harry's blood had also boiled at the rude thrust. While under the spell
of Richard's voice a cord in his own soul had vibrated as does a glass
globe when it responds in perfect harmony to a note from a violin.
He too had a Lenore whose loss had wellnigh broken his heart. This
in itself was an indissoluble bond between them. Besides, he could
understand the poet as Alec and his mother and his Uncle George
understood himself. He had begun now to love the man in his heart.

With his mind filled with these thoughts, his hunger for Kate aroused
tenfold by the pathos and weird beauty of what he had just heard, he
left the group of men who were still discussing the man and his verses,
and joined his uncle outside on the top step of the club's high stoop,
from which could be seen the full length of the sun-flecked street
on which the clubhouse stood, as well as the park in all its spring
loveliness.

Unconsciously his eyes wandered across the path where Kate's house
stood. He could see the tall chimneys and the slope of the quaint roof,
and but that the foliage hid the lower part, could have seen Kate's own
windows. She was still at home, he had heard, although she was expected
to leave for the Red Sulphur any day.

Suddenly, from away up the street, past the corner of the park, there
reached his ears a low winding note, which grew louder as it turned
the corner, followed by the rattle of wheels and the clatter of horses'
feet. He leaned forward and craned his head in the direction of the
sound, his heart in his throat, the blood mounting to his cheeks. If
that was not his father's horn it was wonderfully like it. At the
same moment a coach-and-four swept in sight, driven by a man in a
whitey-brown coat and stiff furry hat, with two grooms behind and a
coachman next to him on the box. It was heading straight for the club.

Every man was on his feet.

"By Jove!--it's Rutter. Bowdoin!--Clayton!--here comes the colonel!"

Again the horn gave out a long withering, wiry note ringing through the
leaves and along the brick pavement, and the next instant the leaders
were gathered up, the wheel-horses hauled taut, the hub of the front
wheel of the coach halting within an inch of the horse-block of the
club.

"Bravo, Rutter! Best whip in the county! Not a man in England could have
done it better. Let me help you down!"

The colonel shook his head good-humoredly, rose in his seat, shifted a
bunch of violets to his inner lapel, slipped off his driving-coat, threw
it across the rail, dropped his whip in the socket, handed his heavy
gloves to his groom, and slid gracefully to the sidewalk. There he shook
hands cordially with the men nearest him, excused himself for a moment
until he had inspected his off leader's forefoot--she had picked up a
stone on the way in from Moorlands--patted the nigh wheel-horse, stamped
his own feet lustily as if to be sure he was all there, and, with a
lordly bow to those about him, slowly mounted the steps of the club.

Harry had already risen to his feet and stood trembling, one hand
clutching the iron railing that guarded the marble steps. A great throb
of joy welled up in his throat. His mother was right--the loneliness
had overpowered his father; he still loved him, and Miss Clendenning's
prediction was coming true! Not only was he willing to forgive him, but
he had come himself to take him home. He could hardly wait until his
father reached his side, so eager was he to open his arms and hands and
his lips in apology--and Kate!--what joy would be hers!

St. George had also gained his feet. What had brought the colonel into
town, he said to himself, and in such state--and at this hour of the
day, too? Could it be that Harry was the cause?

"How were the roads, Talbot?" he called out in his customary cheery
tones. He would start fair, anyway.

The colonel, who, head down, had been mounting the marble steps one at
a time, inspecting each slab as he climbed, after the manner of men
thoroughly satisfied with themselves, and who at the same time are
conscious of the effect of their presence on those about them, raised
his head and gazed in astonishment at the speaker. Then his body
straightened up and he came to a stand-still. He looked first into St.
George's face, then into Harry's, with a cold, rigid stare; his lips
shut tight, his head thrown back, his whole frame stiff as an iron
bar--and without a word of recognition of any kind, passed through the
open door and into the wide hall. He had cut both of them dead.

Harry gave a half-smothered cry of anguish and turned to follow his
father into the club.

St. George, purple with rage, laid his hand on the boy's arm, so tight
that the fingers sank into the flesh: there were steel clamps inside
these delicate palms when occasion required.

"Keep still," he hissed--"not a word, no outburst. Stay here until I
come for you. Stop, Rutter: stand where you are!" The two were
abreast of each other now. "You dare treat your son in that way?
Horn--Murdoch--Warfield--all of you come out here! What I've got to say
to Talbot Rutter I want you to hear, and I intend that not only you but
every decent man and woman in Kennedy Square shall hear!"

The colonel's lips quivered and his face paled, but he did not flinch,
nor did his eyes drop.

"You are not a father, Talbot--you are a brute! There is not a dog
in your kennels that would not treat his litter better than you have
treated Harry! You turned him out in the night without a penny to his
name; you break his mother's heart; you refuse to hear a word he has
to say, and then you have the audacity to pass him on the steps of this
club where he is my guest--my guest, remember--look him squarely in
the face and ignore him. That, gentlemen, is what Talbot Rutter did one
minute ago. You have disgraced your blood and your name and you have
laid up for your old age untold misery and suffering. Never, as long
as I live, will I speak to you again, nor shall Harry, whom you have
humiliated! Hereafter _I_ am his father! Do you hear?"

During the whole outburst the colonel had not moved a muscle of his face
nor had he shifted his body a quarter of an inch. He stood with his
back to the door through which could be seen the amazed faces of his
fellow-members--one hand tight shut behind his back, the other loose by
his side, his eyes fixed on his antagonist. Then slowly, one word at a
time, as if he had purposely measured the intervals of speech, he said,
in a voice hardly heard beyond the door, so low was it:

"Are--you--through--St. George?"

"Yes, by God!--I am, and forever!"

"Then, gentlemen"--and he waved his hand courteously to the astounded
listeners--"may I ask you all to join me? John, bring the juleps!"




CHAPTER XI



All the way back to his house St. George's wrath kept him silent. He had
rarely been so stirred. He was not a brawler--his whole life had been
one of peace; his whole ambition to be the healer of differences, and
yet there were some things he could not stand. One of these was cruelty
to a human being, and Rutter's public disowning of Harry was cruelty of
the most contemptible kind. But one explanation of such an outrage
was possible--the man's intolerable egoism, added to his insufferable
conceit. Only once did Temple address Harry, walking silently by his
side under the magnolias, and then only to remark, more to himself than
to his companion--"It's his damned, dirty pride, Harry--that's what it
is!"

Harry also held his peace. He had no theories regarding his father's
conduct: only facts confronted him, one being that he had purposely
humiliated him before the men who had known him from a boy, and with
whom his future life must be cast. The end had come now. He was adrift
without a home. Even Kate was lost. This last attack of his father's
would widen the breach between them, for she would never overlook this
last stigma when she heard of it, as she certainly must. Nobody would
then be left on his side except his dear mother, the old house servants,
and St. George, and of these St. George alone could be of any service to
him.

It had all been so horrible too, and so undeserved--worse than anything
he had ever dreamed of; infinitely worse than the night he had been
driven from Moorlands. Never in all his life had he shown his father
anything but obedience and respect; furthermore, he had loved and
admired him; loved his dash and vigor; his superb physique for a man of
his years--some fifty odd--loved too his sportsmanlike qualities--not a
man in the county was his equal in the saddle, and not a man in his own
or any other county could handle the ribbons so well. If his father had
not agreed with him as to when and where he should teach a vulgarian
manners, that had been a question about which gentlemen might differ,
but to have treated him with contempt, to insult him in public, leaving
him no chance to defend himself--force him, really, into a position
which made it impossible for him to strike back--was altogether a
different thing, and for that he would never, never forgive him.

Then a strange thing happened in the boy's mind. It may have been the
shifting of a grain of gray matter never called into use before; or it
may have been due to some stranded red corpuscle which, dislodged by the
pressure he had lately been called upon to endure, had rushed headlong
through his veins scouring out everything in its way until it reached
his thinking apparatus. Whatever the cause, certain it was that the
change in the boy's view of life was as instantaneous as it was radical.

And this was quite possible when his blood is considered. There had
been, it is true, dominating tyrants way back in his ancestry, as well
as spend-thrifts, drunkards, roysterers, and gamesters, but so far as
the records showed there had never been a coward. That old fellow De
Ruyter, whose portrait hung at Moorlands and who might have been his
father, so great was the resemblance, had, so to speak, held a shovel in
one hand and a sword in the other in the days when he helped drown out
his own and his neighbors' estates to keep the haughty don from gobbling
up his country. One had but to look into Harry's face to be convinced
that he too would have followed in his footsteps had he lived in that
ancestor's time.

It was when the boy, smarting under his father's insult, was passing
under the blossoms of a wide-spreading magnolia, trying to get a glimpse
of Kate's face, if by any chance she should be at her window, that this
grain of gray matter, or lively red corpuscle--or whatever it might
have been--forced itself through. The breaking away was slow--little
by little--as an underground tunnel seeks an opening--but the light
increased with every thought-stroke, its blinding intensity becoming so
fierce at last that he came to a halt, his eyes on the ground, his whole
body tense, his mind in a whirl.

Suddenly his brain acted.

To sit down and snivel would do no good; to curse his father would
be useless and wicked; to force himself on Kate sheer madness.
But--BUT--BUT--he was twenty-two!--in perfect health and not ashamed
to look any man in the face. St. George loved him--so did his precious
mother, and Alec, and a host of others. Should he continue to sit in
ashes, swaddled in sackcloth--or should he meet the situation like
a man? Then as his mental vision became accustomed to the glare, two
things stood out clear in his mind--to win Kate back, no matter at what
cost--and to compel his father's respect.


His mother was the first to hear the music of this new note of
resolve, and she had not long to wait. She had come to town with the
colonel--indeed it was at her request that he had ordered the coach
instead of coming in on horseback, as was his custom--and was at the
moment quietly resting on St. George's big sofa.

"It is all over, mother," Harry cried in a voice so firm and determined
that his mother knew at once something unusual had happened--"and you
might as well make up your mind to it--I have. Father walked into the
club five minutes ago, looked me square in the face, and cut me dead;
and he insulted Uncle George too, who gave him the greatest dressing
down you ever heard in your life." He had learned another side of his
uncle's character--one he should never cease to be grateful for--his
outspoken defence of him before his equals.

Mrs. Rutter half rose from her seat in blank astonishment. She was
a frail little woman with pale-blue eyes and a figure like a curl of
smoke.

"Your--father--did not--speak--to--you!" she exclaimed excitedly. "You
say--your father--But how dare he!"

"But he did!" replied Harry in a voice that showed the incident still
rankled in his mind--"and right in the club, before everybody."

"And the other gentlemen saw it?" She stood erect, her delicate body
tightening up. There was a strain of some old-time warrior in her blood
that would brook no insult to her son.

"Yes, half a dozen gentlemen saw it. He did it purposely--so they COULD
see. I'll never forgive him for it as long as I live. He had no business
to treat me so!" His voice choked as he spoke, but there was no note of
surrender or of fear.

She looked at him in a helpless sort of way. "But you didn't answer
back, did you, my son?" This came in a tone as if she feared to hear the
details, knowing the boy's temperament, and his father's.

"I didn't say a word; Uncle George wouldn't let me. I'm glad now he
stopped me, for I was pretty mad, and I might have said something I
would have been sorry for." The mother gave a sigh of relief, but she
did not interrupt, nor did she relax the tautness of her body. "You
ought to have heard Uncle George, though!" Harry rushed on. "He told him
there was not a dog at Moorlands who would not have treated his puppy
better than he had me--and another thing he told him--and that was that
after to-day I was HIS son forever!"

St. George had been standing at the front window with his back to them,
looking out upon the blossoms. At this last outburst he turned, and said
over his shoulder:

"Yes--that's true, Annie--that's what I said and what I mean. There is
no use wasting any more time over Talbot, and I don't intend to."

"But Mr. Rutter will get over his temper." (She never called him by any
other name.)

"Then he will have to come here and say so. I shall never step foot in
his house until he does, nor will Harry. As to his forgiving Harry--the
boot is on the other leg; it is Talbot, not the boy he outraged, who
must straighten out to-day's work. There was not a man who heard him who
was not ashamed of him. Oh!--I have no patience with this sort of thing!
The only son he's got--his only child! Abominable--unforgivable! And it
will haunt him to his dying day! Poor as I am, alone in the world and
without a member of my family above ground, I would not change places
with him. No--Annie--I know how you feel, and God knows I have felt
for you all these years, but I tell you the end has come! It's
finished--over--I told him so to his face, and I mean it!"

The slight body sank back into her chair and her eyes filled with tears.
Harry knelt beside her and put his arms about her. This mother, frail
as she was, had always been his refuge and comfort: now he must do the
comforting! (Keep moving, old red corpuscle, there is a lot of work
ahead of you!)

"Don't worry, you dear little mother," he said tenderly. "I don't know
how it's coming out, but it will come out somehow. Let father go: Kate
is the only thing that counts now. I don't blame her for anything she
has done, and I don't blame myself either. All I know is that everything
has gone wrong. But, wrong or right, I'm going to stay here just as long
as Uncle George will let me. He's been more of a father to me than my
own. It's you I can't get along without, you precious little mother,"
and he patted her pale cheeks. "Won't you come in every day--and bring
Alec too?" then, as if he had not yet asked her consent--"You don't mind
my being here, do you?"

She drew his head close to her lips and kissed his cheek. "No, my son,
I don't mind--I'm glad. Every night of my life I thank my Maker that
you are here." She raised her eyes to St. George, who stood looking down
upon them both, and in a voice barely audible, an unbidden sob choking
her utterance, faltered--"It's only one more proof of your goodness, St.
George."

He raised his hand in protest and a faint smile crossed his face. "Don't
talk that way. Annie."

"I will--it's true. It is a proof of your goodness. I have never
deserved it. I don't now--but you never fail me." Her voice was clearer
now--her cheeks, too, had regained some of their color. Harry listened
wonderingly, his arm still around her.

"I couldn't do anything else, Annie--nobody could under the
circumstances." His voice had dropped almost to a whisper.

"But it was for me you did it, St. George. I would rather think of it
that way; it makes it easier. Say you did it for me."

St. George stooped down, raised her thin white hand to his lips, kissed
it reverently, and without a word of any kind walked to the door of his
bedroom and shut it behind him.

Mrs. Rutter's hand dropped to her lap and a smile of intense relief
passed over her face. She neither looked after St. George, nor did she
offer any explanation to Harry; she merely bent forward and continued
her caresses, stroking the boy's glossy hair, patting the white temples
with her delicate fingers, smoothing the small, well-set ears and the
full brown throat, kissing his forehead, her eyes reading his face,
wondering if she had spoken too freely and yet regretting nothing: what
she had said had come straight from her heart and she was not ashamed of
it.

The boy lay still, his head against her breast. That his mother had been
stirred even in a greater degree over what St. George had said to her
than she had been by his father's treatment of him was evident in the
trembling movement of the soft hands caressing his hair and in the way
her breath came and went. Under her soothing touch his thoughts went
back to the events of the morning:--his uncle's defiant tones as he
denounced his father; his soft answer to his mother; her pleading words
in reply, and then the reverent kiss.

Suddenly, clear as the tones of a far-off convent bell sifting down
from some cloud-swept crag, there stole into his mind a memory of his
childhood--a legend of long ago, vague and intangible--one he could not
put into words--one Alec had once hinted at. He held his breath trying
to gather up the loose ends--to make a connected whole; to fit the parts
together. Then, as one blows out a candle, leaving total darkness, he
banished it all from his mind.

"Mother dear!--mother dear!" he cried tenderly, and wound his arms the
closer about her neck.

She gathered him up as she had done in the old days when he was a child
at her breast; all the intervening years seemed blotted out. He was her
baby boy once more--her constant companion and unending comfort: the one
and only thing in her whole life that understood her.

Soon the warmth and strength of the full man began to reach her heart.
She drew him still closer, this strong son who loved her, and in the
embrace there grew a new and strange tenderness--one born of confidence.
It was this arm which must defend her now; this head and heart which
must guide her. She was no longer adrift.

The two had not moved when St. George re-entered the room some moments
later. Harry's head still lay on her breast, the thin, transparent hands
tight about his neck.




CHAPTER XII



The colonel's treatment of Harry at the club had cleared the air of
any doubt that either the boy or St. George might have had concerning
Rutter's frame of mind. Henceforth the boy and the man would conduct
their lives as if the Lord of Moorlands did not exist.

So the boy unpacked the things which Alec had brought in, and with
his mother's assistance--who came in once a week--hung up his
hunting-clothes in the closet, racked up his guns and fishing-rods over
the mantel, and suspended his favorite saddle by a stirrup on a hook in
the hall. Then the two had set out his books and miniatures; one of his
mother, which he kissed tenderly, with the remark that it wasn't half as
pretty as the original, and then propped up in the place of honor in
the middle of his desk, and another of his father, which he placed on an
adjoining table--as well as his few belongings and knickknacks. And so
the outcast settled down determined not only to adapt himself to the
comforts--or want of them--to be found under St. George's roof, but to
do it cheerfully, gratefully, and like a man and a gentleman.

To none of all this did his father offer a single objection. "Make a
clean sweep of Mr. Harry Rutter's things," he had said to Alec, "so that
I may be relieved from the annoyance of a second delivery."

Alec had repeated the order to Harry word for word, adding: "Don't you
sass back, Marse Harry--let him blow hisse'f out--he don't mean nothin'.
He's dat mad he's crazy--gits dat way sometimes--den purty soon he's
fit to bust hisse'f wide open a-cryin'! I see him do dat once when you
warn't mo'n so high, and de doctor said you was daid fo' sho'."

Harry made no reply, but it did not ruffle his temper. His duty was no
longer to be found at Moorlands; his Uncle George claimed him. All his
hours would now be devoted to showing him how grateful he was for his
protection and guidance. Time enough for his father, and time enough
for Kate, for that matter, should the clouds ever lift--as lift they
would--but his Uncle George first, last, and all the time.

And St. George appreciated it to the full. Never had he been so happy.
Even the men at the club saw the change, and declared he looked ten
years younger--fifteen really, when Harry was with him, which was
almost always the case--for out of consideration for St. George and the
peculiar circumstances surrounding the boy's condition, his birth and
station, and the pride they took in his pluck, the committee had at
last stretched the rule and had sent Mr. Henry Gilmor Rutter of
Moorlands--with special reference to "Moorlands," a perennial invitation
entitling him to the club's privileges--a card which never expired
because it was systematically renewed.

And it was not only at the club that the two men were inseparable. In
their morning walks, the four dogs in full cry; at the races; in the
hunts, when some one loaned both Harry and his uncle a mount--at night,
when Todd passed silently out, leaving all the bottled comforts behind
him--followed by--"Ah, Harry!--and you won't join me? That's right, my
son--and I won't ask you," the two passed almost every hour of the day
and night together. It was host one minute and father the next.

And this life, if the truth be told, did not greatly vary from the one
the boy had always led, except that there was more of town and less of
country in it than he had heretofore been accustomed to. The freedom
from all care--for the colonel had trained Harry to neither business nor
profession--was the same, and so was the right to employ his time as he
pleased. At Moorlands he was busy over his horses and dogs, his sporting
outfits, riding to hounds, cock-fights--common in those days--and, of
course, assisting his father and mother in dispensing the hospitality of
the house. In Kennedy Square St. George was his chief occupation, and
of the two he liked the last the best. What he had hungered for all his
life was sympathy and companionship, and this his father had never given
him; nor had he known what it was since his college days. Advice, money,
horses, clothes, guns--anything and everything which might, could, or
would redound to the glory of the Rutters had been his for the asking,
but the touch of a warm hand, the thrill in the voice when he had done
something to please and had waited for an acknowledgment--that had never
come his way. Nothing of this kind was needed between men, his father
would say to Harry's mother--and his son was a man now. Had their child
been a daughter, it would have been quite another thing, but a son was
to be handled differently--especially an only son who was sole heir to
one's entire estate.

And yet it must not be thought that the outcast spent his time in sheer
idleness. St. George would often find him tucked away in one of his big
chairs devouring some book he had culled from the old general's library
in the basement--a room adjoining the one occupied by a firm of young
lawyers--Pawson & Pawson (only one brother was alive)--with an entrance
on the side street, it being of "no use to me" St. George had said--"and
the rent will come in handy." Tales of the sea especially delighted the
young fellow--the old admiral's blood being again in evidence--and so
might have been the mother's fine imagination. It was Defoe and Mungo
Park and Cooke who enchained the boy's attention, as well as many of the
chronicles of the later navigators. But of the current literature of
the day--Longfellow, Margaret Fuller, Hawthorne, and Emerson--no one
appealed to him as did the man Poe. He and St. George had passed many
an hour discussing him. Somehow the bond of sympathy between himself and
the poet had become the stronger. Both had wept bitter tears over the
calamities that had followed an unrequited love.

It was during one of these talks--and the poet was often under
discussion--that St. George had suddenly risen from his chair, lighted
a candle, and had betaken himself to the basement--a place he seldom
visited--from which he brought back a thin, crudely bound, and badly
printed, dust-covered volume bearing the title "Tamerlane:--by a
Bostonian." This, with a smile he handed to Harry. Some friend had given
him the little book when it was first published and he had forgotten
it was in the house until he noted Harry's interest in the author. Then
again, he wanted to see whether it was the boy's literary taste, never
much in evidence, or his romantic conception of the much-talked-of poet,
which had prompted his intense interest in the man.

"Read these poems, Harry, and tell me who wrote them," said St. George,
dusting the book with a thrash of his handkerchief and tossing it to the
young fellow.

The boy caught it, skimmed through the thin volume, lingered over one or
two pages, absorbing each line, and replied in a decided and delighted
voice: "The same man who wrote 'The Raven,' of course--there can't be
any doubt of it. I can hear Mr. Horn's voice in every line. Why didn't
you let me have it before?"

"Are you sure?" asked St. George, watching him closely.

"Am I sure?--of course I am! Listen to this:

"'We grew in age--and--love--together, Roaming the forest and the
wild--'

"That's Kate and me, Uncle George," and he smiled sadly. "And then this
line:

"'I saw no heaven but in her eyes.'

"And then these lines in 'The Raven'--wait--I will read them." He had
the sheet of paper in his pocket which Richard Horn had read from at the
club, and knew the poem now by heart:

"'Tell this soul with sorrow laden, if, within the distant Aidenn, It
shall clasp a sainted maiden whom the angels call Lenore'--

"That's me again. I wish I could read it like Mr. Horn. What a voice--so
deep--so musical--like a great organ, or, rather, like one of the big
strings on his violin."

"And what a mind, too, Harry," rejoined St. George. "Richard is a long
way ahead of his time. His head is full of things that few around here
understand. They hear him play the violin or read, and some go away
calling him a genius, but when he talks to them about the way the
railroads are opening up, and the new telegraph this man Morse is
at work on, and what is going to come of it--or hear him discuss the
development of the country along scientific lines, they shrug their
shoulders and tap their foreheads. You want to talk to him every chance
you get. That is one reason I am glad they let you permanently into the
club, for he is too busy in his work-shop at home to speak to anybody.
Nobody will do you so much good--and he likes you, Harry. He said to me
only the other night when I was dining with him--the night you were at
Mrs. Cheston's--that he felt sorry for you; that it was not your fault,
or the fault of your father--but that you both had been caught in the
ebb-tide of a period."

Harry laughed: "What did he mean by that?"

"I'll be hanged if I know. You made so good a guess on the Tamerlane,
that it's just occurred to me to try you on this," and St. George
laughed heartily. (St. George was adrift on the ebb-tide himself did he
but know it.)

Harry thought earnestly for a moment, pondering upon what the inventor
could have had in his mind. It couldn't have been politics that Mr. Horn
meant; nor failure of the crops; nor the way the slaves were treated.
None of these things affected him. Indeed none of them did he know
anything of. Nor was he an expert on duelling. It must have been Kate.
Yes--of course--it was Kate and her treatment of him. The "tide" was
what had swept them apart.

"Oh, I know," he cried in an animated tone. "He meant Kate. Tell
me--what did he say about her?" He had searched his books for some
parallel from which to draw a conclusion, but none of them had given him
any relief. May be Mr. Horn had solved the problem.

"He said she was the first of the flood, though he was mighty sorry for
you both; and he said, too, that, as she was the first to strike out for
the shore, Kennedy Square ought to build a triumphal arch for her," and
St. George looked quizzically at Harry.

"Well, do you think there is any common sense in that?" blurted out the
boy, twisting himself in his chair so he could get a better look at his
uncle's face.

"No--it doesn't sound like it, but it may be profound wisdom all the
same, if you can only see it from Richard's point of view. Try it.
There's a heap of brains under his cranium."

Harry fell to tapping the arm of his chair. Queer reasoning this of Mr.
Horn's, he said to himself. He had always thought that he and his father
were on the tip-top of any kind of tide, flood or ebb--and as for Kate,
she was the white gull that skimmed its crest!

Again Harry dropped into deep thought, shifting his legs now and then in
his restless, impatient way. If there was any comfort to be gotten out
of this new doctrine he wanted to probe it to the bottom.

"And what does he say of Mr. Poe? Does he think he's a drunken lunatic,
like some of the men at the club?"

"No, he thinks he is one of the greatest literary geniuses the country
has yet produced. He has said so for years--ever since he began to
write. Willis first became acquainted with Mr. Poe through a letter
Richard gave him, and now that the papers are full of him, and everybody
is talking about him, these backbiters like Bowdoin want to get into
line and say they always thought so. But Richard has never wavered. Of
course Poe loses his balance and topples backward once in a while--but
he's getting over it. That is his mistake and it is unfortunate, but
it isn't a crime. I can forgive him anything he does so he keeps to
his ideals. If he had had a better bringing up and knew the difference
between good rain-water Madeira and bad pump water and worse whiskey he
would keep as straight as a church deacon. Too bad he doesn't."

"Well," Harry answered at last, rising from his chair and brushing the
ashes of his pipe from his clothes--"I don't know anything about Mr.
Horn's tides, but he's right about Mr. Poe--that is, I hope he is. We've
both, got a 'Lost Lenore,'" and his voice quivered. All Harry's roads
ended at Kate's door.

And so with these and other talks, heart-burnings, outings, sports, and
long tramps in the country, the dogs scampering ahead, the summer days
slipped by.




CHAPTER XIII



Such were the soft, balmy conditions in and around the Temple
Mansion--conditions bringing only peace and comfort--(heart-aches were
kept in check)--when one August morning there came so decided a change
of weather that everybody began at once to get in out of the wet. The
storm had been brewing for some days up Moorlands way, where all
Harry's storms started, but up to the present moment there had been no
indications in and about Kennedy Square of its near approach, or even of
its existence.

It was quite early in the day when the big drops began to patter down on
Todd's highly polished knocker. Breakfast had been served and the mail
but half opened--containing among other missives a letter from Poe
acknowledging one from St. George, in which he wrote that he might
soon be in Kennedy Square on his way to Richmond--a piece of news which
greatly delighted Harry--and another from Tom Coston, inviting them both
to Wesley for the fall shooting, with a postscript to the effect that
Willits was "still at the Red Sulphur with the Seymours"--(a piece
of news which greatly depressed him)--when Todd answered a thunderous
rat-a-tat and immediately thereafter recrossed the hall and opened
the dining-room door just wide enough to thrust in first his scared
face--then his head--shoulder--arm--and last his hand, on the palm of
which lay a small, greasy card bearing the inscription:

John Gadgem, Agent.

The darky, evidently, was not in a normal condition, for after a
moment's nervous hesitation, his eyes over his shoulder as if fearing he
was being followed, he squeezed in the rest of his body, closed the door
softly behind him, and said in a hoarse whisper to the room at large:

"Dat's de same man been here three times yisterday. He asked fust fer
Marse Harry, an' when I done tol' him he warn't home--you was 'sleep
upstairs, Marse Harry, but I warn't gwineter 'sturb ye--he say he come
back dis mawnin'."

"Well, but what does he want?" asked Harry, dropping a lump of sugar in
his cup. He had been accumstomed to be annoyed by agents of all kinds
who wanted to sell him one thing or another--and so he never allowed
any one to get at him unless his business was stated beforehand. He had
learned this from his father.

"I dun'no, sah."

"What does he look like, Todd?" cried St. George, breaking the seal of
another letter.

"Wall, he ain't no gemman--he's jus' a pusson I reckon. I done tol'
him you warn't out o' bed yit, but he said he'd wait. I got him shet
outside, but I can't fool him no mo'. What'll I do now?"

"Well, what do you think he wants, then?" Harry burst out impatiently.

"Well," said Todd--"ef I was to tell ye God's truf', I reckon he wants
money. He says he's been to de big house--way out to de colonel's, and
dey th'owed him out--and now he's gwineter sit down yere till somebody
listens to him. It won't do to fool wid him, Marse Harry--I see dat de
fus' time he come. He's a he-one--and he's got horns on him for sho'.
What'll I do?"

Both Harry and St. George roared.

"Why bring him in, of course--a 'pusson' with horns on him will be worth
seeing."

A shabby, wizened-faced man; bent-in-the-back, gimlet-eyed, wearing a
musty brown coat, soiled black stock, unspeakable linen, and skin-tight
trousers held to his rusty shoes by wide straps--showing not only
the knuckles of his knees but the streaked thinness of his upper
shanks--(Cruikshank could have drawn him to the life)--sidled into the
room, mopping his head with a red cotton handkerchief which he took from
his hat.

"My name is GADgem, gentleman--Mr. John GADgem of GADgem & Combes.

"I am looking for Mr. Harry Rutter, whom I am informed--I would not
say POSitively--but I am inFORMED is stopping with you, Mr. Temple.
You forget me, Mr. Temple, but I do not forget you, sir. That little
foreclosure matter of Bucks vs. Temple--you remember when--"

"Sit down," said St. George curtly, laying down his knife and fork.
"Todd, hand Mr. Gadgem a chair."

The gimlet-eyed man--and it was very active--waved his hand
deprecatingly.

"No, I don't think that is necessary. I can stand. I preFER to stand.
I am acCUStomed to stand--I have been standing outside this gentleman's
father's door now, off and on, for some weeks, and--"

"Will you tell me what you want?" interrupted Harry, curtly. References
to Moorlands invariably roused his ire.

"I am coming to that, sir, slowly, but surely. Now that I have found
somebody that will listen to me--that is, if you are Mr. Harry Rutter--"
The deferential air with which he said this was admirable.

"Oh, yes--I'm the man," answered Harry in a resigned voice.

"Yes, sir--so I supposed. And now I look at you, sir"--here the gimlet
was in full twist--"I would make an affidavit to that effect before any
notary." He began loosening his coat with his skinny fingers, fumbling
in his inside pocket, thrusting deep his hand, as if searching for an
elusive insect in the vicinity of his arm-pit, his talk continuing:
"Yes, sir, before any notary, you are so exactly like your father.
Not that I've seen your father, sir, VERY MANY TIMES"--the elusive
had evidently escaped, for his hand went deeper. "I've only seen him
once--ONCE--and it was enough. It was not a pleasant visit, sir--in
fact, it was a most UNpleasant visit. I came very near having cause
for action--for assault, really. A very polite colored man was all that
prevented it, and--Ah--here it is!" He had the minute pest now. "Permit
me to separate the list from the exhibits."

At this Gadgem's hand, clutching a bundle of papers, came out with a
jerk--so much of a jerk that St. George, who was about to end the comedy
by ordering the man from the room, stopped short in his protest, his
curiosity getting the better of him to know what the fellow had found.

"There, sir." Here he drew a long slip from the package, held it between
his thumb and forefinger, and was about to continue, when St. George
burst out with:

"Look here, Gadgem--if you have any business with Mr. Rutter you will
please state it at once. We have hardly finished breakfast."

"I beg, sir, that you will not lose your temper. It is unBUSinesslike to
lose one's temper. Gadgem & Combes, sir, NEVER lose their temper. They
are men of peace, sir--ALways men of peace. Mr. Combes sometimes resorts
to extreme measures, but NEVER Mr. Gadgem. _I_ am Mr. Gadgem, sir," and
he tapped his soiled shirt-front with his soiled finger-nail. "PEACE
is my watchword, that is why this matter has been placed in my hands.
Permit me, sir, to ask you to cast your eye over this."

Harry, who was getting interested, scanned the long slip and handed it
to St. George, who studied it for a moment and returned it to Harry.

"You will note, I beg of you, sir, the first item." There was a tone
of triumph now in Gadgem's voice. "One saddle horse sixteen hands high,
bought of Hampson & Co. on the"--then he craned his neck so as to see
the list over Harry's shoulder--"yes--on the SECOND of LAST September.
Rather overdue, is it not, sir, if I may be permitted to remark?" This
came with a lift of the eyebrows, as if Harry's oversight had been too
naughty for words.

"But what the devil have I got to do with this?" The boy was thoroughly
angry now. The lift of Gadgem's eyebrows did it.

"You rode the horse, sir." This came with a certain air of "Oh! I have
you now."

"Yes, and he broke his leg and had to be shot," burst out Harry in a
tone that showed how worthless had been the bargain.

"EXactly, sir. So your father told me, sir. You don't remember having
PAID Mr. Hampson for him beFORE he broke his leg, do you, sir?" He
had him pinned fast now--all he had to do was to watch his victim's
struggles.

"Me? No, of course not!" Harry exploded.

"EXactly so, sir--so your father told me. FORcibly, sir--and as if he
was quite sure of it."

Again he looked over Harry's shoulder, following the list with his
skinny finger. At the same time he lowered his voice--became even
humble. "Ah, there it is--the English racing saddle and the pair of
blankets, and the--might I ask you, sir, whether you have among your
papers any receipt for--?"

"But I don't pay these bills--I never pay any bills." Harry's tone had
now reached a higher pitch.

"EXactly so, sir--just what your father said, sir, and with such
vehemence that I moved toward the door." Out went the finger again, the
insinuating voice keeping up. "And then the five hundred dollars from
Mr. Slater--you see, sir, we had all these accounts placed in our
hands with the expectation that your father would liquidate at one fell
swoop--these were Mr. Combes's very words, sir: 'ONE FELL SWOOP.'" This
came with an inward rake of his hand, his fingers grasping an imaginary
sickle, Harry's accumulated debts being so many weeds in his way.

"And didn't he? He always has," demanded the culprit.

"EXactly so, sir--exactly what your father said."

"Exactly what?"

"That he had heretofore always paid them."

"Well, then, take them to him!" roared Harry, breaking loose again. "I
haven't got anything to do with them, and won't."

"Your father's PREcise words, sir," purred Gadgem. "And by the time he
had uttered them, sir, I was out of the room. It was here, sir, that the
very polite colored man, Alec by name, so I am informed, and of whom I
made mention a few moments ago, became of inVALuable assistance--of very
GREAT assistance, sir."

"You mean to tell me that you have seen my father--handed him these
bills, and that he has refused to pay them?" Harry roared on.

"I DO, sir." Gadgem had straightened his withered body now and was
boring into Harry's eyes with all his might.

"Will you tell me just what he said?" The boy was still roaring, but the
indignant tone was missing.

"He said--you will not be offended, sir--you mean, of course, sir, that
you would like me to state exACTly what your father said, proceeding as
if I was under oath." It is indescribable how soft and mellifluous his
voice had now become.

Harry nodded.

"He said, sir, that he'd be DAMNED if he'd pay another cent for a
hot-headed fool who had disgraced his family. He said, sir, that you
were of AGE--and were of age when you contracted these bills. He said,
sir, that he had already sent you these accounts two days after he
had ordered you from his house. And FInally, sir--I say, finally, sir,
because it appeared to me at the time to be conclusive--he said, sir,
that he would set the dogs on me if I ever crossed his lot again. HENCE,
sir, my appearing three times at your door yesterday. HENCE, sir,
my breaking in upon you at this unseemly hour in the morning. I am
particular myself, sir, about having my morning meal disturbed; cold
coffee is never agreeable, gentlemen--but in this case you must admit
that my intrusion is pardonable."

The boy understood now.

"Come to think of it I have a bundle of papers upstairs tied with a
red string which came with my boxes from Moorlands. I threw them in
the drawer without opening them." This last remark was addressed to St.
George, who had listened at first with a broad smile on his face, which
had deepened to one of intense seriousness as the interview continued,
and which had now changed to one of ill-concealed rage.

"Mr. Gadgem," gritted St. George between his teeth--he had risen from
the table during the colloquy and was standing with his back to the
mantel, the blood up to the roots of his hair.

"Yes, sir."

"Lay the packages of bills with the memoranda on my desk, and I will
look them over during the day."

"But, Mr. Temple," and his lip curled contemptuously--he had had that
same trick played on him by dozens of men.

"Not another word, Mr. Gadgem. I said--I--would
look--them--over--during--the--day. You've had some dealings with me and
know exactly what kind of a man I am. When I want you I will send for
you. If I don't send for you, come here to-morrow morning at ten o'clock
and Mr. Rutter will give you his answer. Todd, show Mr. Gadgem out."

"But, Mr. Temple--you forGET that my duty is to--"

"I forget nothing. Todd, show Mr. Gadgem out."

With the closing of the door behind the agent, St. George turned to
Harry. His eyes were snapping fire and his big frame tense with anger.
This phase of the affair had not occurred to him--nothing in which money
formed an important part ever did occur to him.

"A cowardly piece of business, Harry, and on a par with everything he
has done since you left his house. Talbot must be crazy to act as he
does. He can't break you down in any other way, so he insults you before
his friends and now throws these in your face"--and he pointed to
the package of bills where Gadgem had laid it--"a most extraordinary
proceeding. Please hand me that list. Thank you.... Now this third item
... this five hundred dollars--did you get that money?"

"Yes--and another hundred the next day, which isn't down," rejoined the
young man, running his eye over the list.

"Borrowed it?"

"Yes, of course--for Gilbert. He got into a card scrape at the tavern
and I helped him out. I told my father all about it and he said I had
done just right; that I must always help a friend out in a case like
that, and that he'd pay it. All he objected to was my borrowing it of a
tradesman instead of my coming to him." It was an age of borrowing and a
bootmaker was often better than a banker.

"Well--but why didn't you go to him?" He wanted to get at all the facts.

"There wasn't time. Gilbert had to have the money in an hour, and it was
the only place where I could get it."

"Of course there wasn't time--never is when the stakes are running
like that." St. George folded up the memorandum. He knew something of
Talbot's iron will, but he never supposed that he would lose his sense
of what was right and wrong in exercising it. Again he opened the
list--rather hurriedly this time, as if some new phase had struck
him--studied it for a moment, and then asked with an increased interest
in his tones:

"Did Gilbert give you back the money you loaned him?"

"Yes--certainly; about a month afterward." Here at least was an asset.

St. George's face lighted up. "And what did you do with it?"

"Took it to my father and he told me to use it; that he would settle
with Mr. Slater when he paid his account;--when, too, he would thank him
for helping me out."

"And when he didn't pay it back and these buzzards learned you had quit
your father's house they employed Gadgem to pick your bones."

"Yes--it seems so; but, Uncle George, it's due them!" exclaimed
Harry--"they ought to have their money. I would never have taken a
dollar--or bought a thing if I had not supposed my father would pay for
them." There was no question as to the boy's sense of justice--every
intonation showed it.

"Of course it's due--due by you, too--not your father; that's the worst
of it. And if he refuses to assume it--and he has--it is still to
be paid--every cent of it. The question is how the devil is it to be
paid--and paid quickly. I can't have you pointed out as a spendthrift
and a dodger. No, this has got to be settled at once."

He threw himself into a chair, his mind absorbed in the effort to
find some way out of the difficulty. The state of his own bank account
precluded all relief in that direction. To borrow a dollar from the
Patapsco on any note of hand he could offer was out of the question, the
money stringency having become still more acute. Yet help must be had,
and at once. Again he unfolded the slip and ran his eyes over the items,
his mind in deep thought, then he added in an anxious tone:

"Are you aware, Harry, that this list amounts to several thousand
dollars?"

"Yes--I saw it did. I had no idea it was so much. I never thought
anything about it in fact. My father always paid--paid for anything I
wanted." Neither did the young fellow ever concern himself about the
supply of water in the old well at Moorlands. His experience had been
altogether with the bucket and the gourd: all he had had to do was to
dip in.

Again St. George ruminated. It had been many years since he had been so
disturbed about any matter involving money.

"And have you any money left, Harry?"

"Not much. What I have is in my drawer upstairs."

"Then I'll lend you the money." This came with a certain
spontaneity--quite as if he had said to a companion who had lost his
umbrella--"Take mine!"

"But have you got it, Uncle George?" asked Harry in an anxious tone.

"No--not that I know of," he replied simply, but with no weakening of
his determination to see the boy through, no matter at what cost.

"Well--then--how will you lend it?" laughed Harry. Money crises had not
formed part of his troubles.

"Egad, my boy, I don't know!--but somehow."

He rang the bell and Todd put in his head. "Todd, go around
outside,--see if young Mr. Pawson is in his office below us, present my
compliments and say that it will give me great pleasure to call upon him
regarding a matter of business."

"Yes, sah--"

"--And, Todd--say also that if agreeable to him, I will be there in ten
minutes."


Punctually at ten o'clock on the following morning the shrivelled body
and anxious face of the agent was ushered by Todd into St. George's
presence--Dandy close behind sniffing at his thin knees, convinced that
he was a suspicious person. This hour had been fixed by Temple in case
he was not sent for earlier, and as no messenger had so far reached
the bill collector he was naturally in doubt as to the nature of his
reception. He had the same hat in his hand and the same handkerchief--a
weekly, or probably a monthly comfort--its dingy red color defrauding
the laundry.

"I have waited, sir," Gadgem began in an unctuous tone, his eyes on
the dog, who had now resumed his place on the hearth rug--"waited
IMpatiently, relying upon the word and honor of--"

"There--that will do, Gadgem," laughed St. George good-naturedly.
Somehow he seemed more than usually happy this morning--bubbling over,
indeed, ever since Todd had brought him a message from the young lawyer
in the basement but half an hour before. "Keep that sort of talk for
those who like it. No, Todd, you needn't bring Mr. Gadgem a chair, for
he won't be here long enough to enjoy it. Now listen," and he took the
memorandum from his pocket. "These bills are correct. Mr. Rutter has
had the money and the goods. Take this list which I have signed to my
attorney in the office underneath and be prepared to give a receipt in
full for each account at twelve o'clock to-morrow. I have arranged to
have them paid in full. Good-morning."

Gadgem stared. He did not believe a word about finding the money
downstairs. He was accustomed to being put off that way and had already
formulated his next tactical move. In fact he was about to name it with
some positiveness, recounting the sort of papers which would follow and
the celerity of their serving, when he suddenly became aware that St.
George's eyes were fixed upon him and instantly stopped breathing.

"I said good-morning, Mr. Gadgem," repeated St. George sententiously.
There was no mistaking his meaning.

"I heard you, sir," hesitated the collector--"_I_ heard you diSTINCTly,
but in cases of this kind there is--"

St. George swung back the door and stood waiting. No man living or dead
had ever doubted the word of St. George Wilmot Temple, not even by
a tone of the voice, and Gadgem's was certainly suggestive of a
well-defined and most offensive doubt. Todd moved up closer; Dandy rose
to his feet, thinking he might be of use. The little man looked from
one to the other. He might add an action for assault and battery to the
claim, but that would delay its collection.

"Then at TWELVE o'clock, to-morrow, Mr. Temple," he purred blandly.

"At twelve o'clock!" repeated St. George coldly, wondering which end of
the intruder he would grapple when he threw him through the front door
and down the front steps.

"I will be here on the stroke of the clock, sir--on the STROKE," and
Gadgem slunk out.

For some minutes St. George continued to walk up and down the room,
stooping once in a while to caress the setter; dry-washing his hands;
tapping his well-cut waistcoat with his shapely fingers, his thumbs
in the arm-holes; halting now and then to stretch himself to the
full height of his body. He had outwitted the colonel--taught him a
lesson--let him see that he was not the only "hound in the pack," and,
best of all, he had saved the boy from annoyance and possibly from
disgrace.

He was still striding up and down the room, when Harry, who had
overslept himself as usual, came down to breakfast. Had some friend of
his uncle found a gold mine in the back yard--or, better still, had Todd
just discovered a forgotten row of old "Brahmin Madeira" in some dark
corner of his cellar--St. George could not have been more buoyant.

"Glad you didn't get up any earlier, you good-for-nothing sleepy-head!"
he cried in welcoming, joyous tones. "You have just missed that
ill-smelling buzzard."

"What buzzard?" asked Harry, glancing over the letters on the mantel in
the forlorn hope of finding one from Kate.

"Why, Gadgem--and that is the last you will ever see of him."

"Why?--has father paid him?" he asked in a listless way, squeezing
Dandy's nose thrust affectionately into his hand--his mind still on
Kate. Now that Willits was with her, as every one said, she would never
write him again. He was a fool to expect it, he thought, and he sighed
heavily.

"Of course he hasn't paid him--but I have. That is, a friend of mine
has--or will."

"You have!" cried Harry with a start. He was interested now--not for
himself, but for St. George: no penny of his uncle's should ever go to
pay his debts. "Where did the money come from?"

"Never you mind where the money came from. You found it for Gilbert--did
he ask you where you got it? Why should you ask me?"

"Well, I won't; but you are mighty good to me, Uncle George, and I am
very grateful to you." The relief was not overwhelming, for the burden
of the debt had not been heavy. It was only the sting of his father's
refusal that had hurt. He had always believed that the financial tangle
would be straightened out somehow.

"No!--damn it!--you are not grateful. You sha'n't be grateful!" cried
St. George with a boyish laugh, seating himself that he might fill his
pipe the better from a saucer of tobacco on the table. "If you were
grateful it would spoil it all. What you can do, however, is to thank
your lucky stars that that greasy red pocket-handkerchief will never
be aired in your presence again. And there's another thing you can be
thankful for now that you are in a thankful mood, and that is that Mr.
Poe will be at Guy's to-morrow, and wants to see me." He had finished
filling the pipe bowl, and had struck a match.

The boy's eyes danced. Gadgem, his father, his debts, everything--was
forgotten.

"Oh, I'm so glad! How do you know?"

"Here's a letter from him." (Puff-puff.)

"And can I see him?"

"Of course you can see him! We will have him to dinner, my boy! Here
comes Todd with your coffee. Take my seat so I can talk to you while I
smoke."




CHAPTER XIV



Although St. George dispensed his hospitality without form or pretence,
never referring to his intended functions except in a casual way, the
news of so unusual a dinner to so notorious a man as Edgar Allan Poe
could not long be kept quiet.

While a few habitues occupying the arm-chairs on the sidewalk of the
club were disappointed at not being invited,--although they knew that
ten guests had always been St. George's limit,--others expressed their
disapproval of the entire performance with more than a shrug of the
shoulders. Captain Warfleld was most outspoken. "Temple," he said, "like
his father, is a law unto himself, and always entertains the queerest
kind of people; and if he wants to do honor to a man of that stamp, why
that, of course, is his business, not mine." At which old Tom Purviance
had blurted out--"And a shiftless vagabond too, Warfield, if what I hear
is true. Fine subject for St. George to waste his Madeira on!" Purviance
had never read a dozen lines of anybody's poetry in his life, and looked
upon all literary men as no better than play actors.

It was then that Richard Horn, his eyes flashing, had retorted:

"If I did not know how kind-hearted you were, Purviance, and how
thoughtless you can sometimes be in your criticisms, I might ask you to
apologize to both Mr. Poe and myself. Would it surprise you to know that
there is no more truth in what you say than there is in the reports of
that gentleman's habitual drunkenness? It was but a year ago that I met
him at his cousin's house and I shall never forget him. Would it also
surprise you to learn that he has the appearance of a man of very great
distinction?--that he was faultlessly attired in a full suit of black
and had the finest pair of eyes in his head I have ever looked into? Mr.
Poe is not of your world, or of mine--he is above it. There is too much
of this sort of ill-considered judgment abroad in the land. No--my dear
Purviance--I don't want to be rude and I am sure you will not think I
am personal. I am only trying to be just to one of the master spirits
of our time so that I won't be humiliated when his real worth becomes a
household word."

The women took a different view.

"I can't understand what Mr. Temple is thinking of," said the wife
of the archdeacon to Mrs. Cheston. "This Mr. Poe is something
dreadful--never sober, I hear. Mr. Temple is invariably polite to
everybody, but when he goes out of his way to do honor to a man like
this he only makes it harder for those of us who are trying to help our
sons and brothers--" to which Mrs. Cheston had replied with a twinkle
in her mouse eyes and a toss of her gray head:--"So was Byron, my dear
woman--a very dreadful and most disreputable person, but I can't spare
him from my Library, nor should you."

None of these criticisms would have affected St. George had he heard
them, and we may be sure no one dared tell him. He was too busy, in
fact--and so was Harry, helping him for that matter--setting his house
in order for the coming function.

That the table itself might be made the more worthy of the great man,
orders were given that the big silver loving-cup--the one presented
to his father by no less a person than the Marquis de Castellux
himself--should be brought out to be filled later on with Cloth of Gold
roses so placed that their rich color and fragrance would reach both
the eyes and the nostrils of his guests, while the rest of the family
silver, brightened to a mirror finish by Todd, was either sent down to
Aunt Jemima to be ready for the special dishes for which the house was
famous, or disposed on the side-board and serving-table for instant use
when required. Easy-chairs were next brought from upstairs--tobacco and
pipes, with wax candles, were arranged on teak-wood trays, and an extra
dozen or so of bubble-blown glasses banked on a convenient shelf. The
banquet room too, for it was late summer, was kept as cool as the season
permitted, the green shutters being closed, thus barring out the heat of
early September--and the same precaution was taken in the dressing-room,
which was to serve as a receptacle for hats and canes.

And Todd as usual was his able assistant. All the darky's training came
into play when his master was giving a dinner: what Madeira to decant,
and what to leave in its jacket of dust, with its waistcoat of a label
unlaundered for half a century; the temperature of the claret; the
exact angle at which the Burgundy must be tilted and when it was to be
opened--and how--especially the "how"--the disturbing of a single grain
of sediment being a capital offence; the final brandies, particularly
that old Peach Brandy hidden in Tom Coston's father's cellar during
the war of 1812, and sent to that gentleman as an especial "mark of my
appreciation to my dear friend and kinsman, St. George Wilmot Temple,"
etc., etc.--all this Todd knew to his finger ends.

For with St. George to dine meant something more than the mere
satisfying of one's hunger. To dine meant to get your elbows next to
your dearest friend--half a dozen or more of your dearest friends, if
possible--to look into their faces, hear them talk, regale them with the
best your purse afforded, and last and best of all to open for them your
rarest wines--wines bred in the open, amid tender, clustering leaves;
wines mellowed by a thousand sunbeams; nurtured, cared for, and put
tenderly to sleep, only to awake years thereafter to warm the hearts and
cheer the souls of those who honored them with their respect and never
degraded them with their debauchery.

As for the dishes themselves--here St. George with Jemima's help was
pastmaster: dishes sizzling hot; dishes warm, and dishes stone cold.
And their several arrivals and departures, accompanied by their several
staffs: the soup as an advance guard--of gumbo or clams--or both if you
chose; then a sheepshead caught off Cobb's Island the day before, just
arrived by the day boat, with potatoes that would melt in your mouth--in
gray jackets these; then soft-shell crabs--big, crisp fellows, with
fixed bayonets of legs, and orderlies of cucumber--the first served on
a huge silver platter with the coat-of-arms of the Temples cut in the
centre of the rim and the last on an old English cut-glass dish. Then
the woodcock and green peas--and green corn--their teeth in a broad
grin; then an olio of pineapple, and a wonderful Cheshire cheese, just
arrived in a late invoice--and marvellous crackers--and coffee--and
fruit (cantaloupes and peaches that would make your mouth water), then
nuts, and last a few crusts of dry bread! And here everything came to
a halt and all the troops were sent back to the barracks--(Aunt Jemima
will do for the barracks).

With this there was to follow a change of base--a most important change.
Everything eatable and drinkable and all the glasses and dishes were to
be lifted from the table--one half at a time--the cloth rolled back and
whisked away and the polished mahogany laid bare; the silver coasters
posted in advantageous positions, and in was to rattle the light
artillery:--Black Warrior of 1810--Port of 1815--a Royal Brown Sherry
that nobody knew anything about, and had no desire to, so fragrant was
it. Last of all the notched finger-bowls in which to cool the delicate,
pipe-stem glasses; and then, and only then, did the real dinner begin.

All this Todd had done dozens and dozens of times before, and all this
(with Malachi's assistance--Richard Horn consenting--for there was
nothing too good for the great poet) would Todd do again on this
eventful night.

As to the guests, this particular feast being given to the most
distinguished literary genius the country had yet produced,--certainly
the most talked of--those who were bidden were, of course, selected with
more than usual care: Mr. John P. Kennedy, the widely known author and
statesman, and Mr. John H. B. Latrobe, equally noteworthy as counsellor,
mathematician, and patron of the fine arts, both of whom had been Poe's
friends for years, and who had first recognized his genius; Richard
Horn, who never lost an opportunity to praise him, together with Judge
Pancoast, Major Clayton, the richest aristocrat about Kennedy Square and
whose cellar was famous the county over--and last, the Honorable Prim.
Not because old Seymour possessed any especial fitness one way or the
other for a dinner of this kind, but because his presence would afford
an underground communication by which Kate could learn how fine and
splendid Harry was--(sly old diplomat St. George!)--and how well he
had appeared at a table about which were seated the best Kennedy Square
could produce.

"I'll put you right opposite Mr. Poe, Harry--so you can study him at
your leisure," St. George had said when discussing the placing of the
guests, "and be sure you look at his hands, they are just like a girl's,
they are so soft and white. And his eyes--you will never forget them.
And there is an air about him too--an air of--well, a sort of haughty
distraction--something I can't quite explain--as if he had a contempt
for small things--things that you and I, and your father and all of us
about here, believe in. Blood or no blood, he's a gentleman, even if he
does come of very plain people;--and they were players I hear. It seems
natural, when you think it over, that Latrobe and Kennedy and Horn
should be men of genius, because their blood entitles them to it, but
how a man raised as Mr. Poe has been should--well--all I can say is that
he upsets all our theories."

"But I think you are wrong, Uncle George, about his birth. I've been
looking him up and his grandfather was a general in the Revolution."

"Well, I'm glad of it--and I hope he was a very good general, and very
much of a gentleman--but there is no question of his descendant being a
wonder. But that is neither here nor there--you'll be right opposite and
can study him in your own way."


Mr. Kennedy arrived first. Although his family name is the same as that
which dignifies the scene of these chronicles, none of his ancestors, so
far as I know, were responsible for its title. Nor did his own domicile
front on its confines. In fact, at this period of his varied and
distinguished life, he was seldom seen in Kennedy Square, his duties at
Washington occupying all his time, and it was by the merest chance that
he could be present.

"Ah, St. George!" he exclaimed, as he handed his hat to Todd and grasped
his host's hand. "So very good of you to let me come. How cool and
delicious it is in here--and the superb roses--Ah yes!--the old
Castellux cup. I remember it perfectly; your father once gave me a sip
from its rim when I was a young fellow. And now tell me--how is our
genius? What a master-stroke is his last--the whole country is ringing
with it. How did you get hold of him?"

"Very easily. He wrote me he was passing through on his way to Richmond,
and you naturally popped into my head as the proper man to sit next
him," replied St. George in his hearty manner.

"And you were on top of him, I suppose, before he got out of bed. Safer,
sometimes," and he smiled significantly.

"Yes, found him at Guy's. Sit here, Kennedy, where the air is cooler."

"And quite himself?" continued the author, settling himself in a chair
that St. George had just drawn out for him.

"Perhaps a little thinner, and a little worn. It was only when I told
him you were coming, that I got a smile out of him. He never forgets you
and he never should."

Again Todd answered the knocker and Major Clayton, Richard Horn, and Mr.
Latrobe joined the group. The major, who was rather stout, apologized
for his light seersucker coat, due, as he explained, to the heat,
although his other garments were above criticism. Richard, however,
looked as if he had just stepped out of an old portrait in his dull-blue
coat and white silk scarf, St. George's eyes lighting up as he took in
the combination--nothing pleased St. George so much as a well-dressed
man, and Richard never disappointed him, while Latrobe, both in his
dress and dignified bearing, easily held first place as the most
distinguished looking man in the room.

The Honorable Prim now stalked in and shook hands gravely and with much
dignity, especially with Mr. Kennedy, whose career as a statesman he
had always greatly admired. St. George often said, in speaking of this
manner of the Scotchman's, that Prim's precise pomposity was entirely
due to the fact that he had swallowed himself and couldn't digest the
meal; that if he would once in a while let out a big, hearty laugh it
might split his skin wide enough for him to get a natural breath.

St. George kept his eyes on Harry when the boy stepped forward and shook
Prim by the hand, but he had no need for anxiety. The face of the young
prince lighted up and his manner was as gracious as if nothing had ever
occurred to mar the harmony between the Seymour clan and himself.

Everybody had seated themselves now--Malachi having passed around a
course of palm-leaf fans--Clayton, Latrobe, and Horn at one open window
overlooking the tired trees--it was in the dog days--Seymour and the
judge at the other, while St. George took a position so that he could
catch the first glimpse of the famous poet as he crossed the Square--(it
was still light), the dinner hour having arrived and Todd already
getting nervous.

Once more the talk dwelt on the guest of honor--Mr. Kennedy, who, of all
men of his time, could best appreciate Poe's genius, and who, with Mr.
Latrobe, had kept it alive, telling for the hundredth time the old story
of his first meeting with the poet, turning now and then to Latrobe for
confirmation.

"Oh, some ten or more years ago, wasn't it, Latrobe? We happened to be
on the committee for awarding a prize story, and Poe had sent in his
'Manuscript in a Bottle' among others. It would have broken your hearts,
gentlemen, to have seen him. His black coat was buttoned up close to his
chin--seedy, badly worn--he himself shabby and down at the heels, but
erect and extremely courteous--a most pitiable object. My servant wasn't
going to let him in at first, he looked so much the vagrant."

"And you know, of course, Kennedy, that he had no shirt on under that
coat, don't you?" rejoined Latrobe, rising from his seat as he spoke and
joining St. George at the window.

"Do you think so?" echoed Mr. Kennedy.

"I am positive of it. He came to see me next day and wanted me to let
him know whether he had been successful. He said if the committee only
knew how much the prize would mean to him they would stretch a point in
his favor. I am quite sure I told you about it at the time, St. George,"
and he laid his hand on his host's shoulder.

"There was no need of stretching it, Latrobe," remarked Richard Horn
in his low, incisive voice, his eyes on Kennedy's face, although he
was speaking to the counsellor. "You and Kennedy did the world a great
service at the right moment. Many a man of brains--one with something
new to say--has gone to the wall and left his fellow men that much
poorer because no one helped him into the Pool of Healing at the
right moment." (Dear Richard!--he was already beginning to understand
something of this in his own experience.)

Todd's entrance interrupted the talk for a moment. His face was screwed
up into knots, both eyes lost in the deepest crease. "Fo' Gawd, Marse
George," he whispered in his master's ear--"dem woodcock'll be sp'iled
if dat gemman don't come!"

St. George shook his head: "We will wait a few minutes more, Todd. Tell
Aunt Jemima what I say."

Clayton, who despite the thinness of his seersucker coat, had kept his
palm-leaf fan busy since he had taken his seat, and who had waited until
his host's ear was again free, now broke in cheerily:

"Same old story of course, St. George. Another genius gone astray. Bad
business, this bee of literature, once it gets to buzzing." Then with a
quizzical glance at the author: "Kennedy is a lamentable example of what
it has done for him. He started out as a soldier, dropped into law,
and now is trying to break into Congress again--and all the time
writes--writes--writes. It has spoiled everything he has tried to do
in life--and it will spoil everything he touches from this on--and now
comes along this man Poe, who--"

"--No, he doesn't come along," chimed in Pancoast, who so far had kept
silence, his palm-leaf fan having done all the talking. "I wish he
would."

"You are right, judge," chuckled Clayton, "and that is just my point.
Here I say, comes along this man Poe and spoils my dinner. Something,
I tell you, has got to be done or I shall collapse. By the way,
Kennedy--didn't you send Poe a suit of clothes once in which to come to
your house?"

The distinguished statesman, who had been smiling at the major's
good-natured badinage, made no reply: that was a matter between the poet
and himself.

"And didn't he keep everybody waiting?" persisted Clayton, "until your
man found him and brought him back in your own outfit--only the shirt
was four sizes too big for his bean-pole of a body. Am I right?" he
laughed.

"He has often dined with me, Clayton," replied Kennedy in his most
courteous and kindly tone, ignoring the question as well as all allusion
to his charity--"and never in all my experience have I ever met a more
dazzling conversationalist. Start him on one of his weird tales and let
him see that you are interested and in sympathy with him, and you will
never forget it. He gave us parts of an unfinished story one night at my
house, so tremendous in its power that every one was frozen stiff in his
seat."

Again Clayton cut in, this time to St. George. He was getting horribly
hungry, as were the others. It was now twenty minutes past the dinner
hour and there were still no signs of Poe, nor had any word come from
him. "For mercy's sake, St. George, try the suit-of-clothes method--any
suit of clothes--here--he can have mine! I'll be twice as comfortable
without them."

"He couldn't get into them," returned St. George with a smile--"nor
could he into mine, although he is half our weight; and as for our
hats--they wouldn't get further down on his head than the top of his
crown."

"But I insist on the experiment," bubbled Clayton good-naturedly.
"Here we are, hungry as wolves and everything being burned up. Try the
suit-of-clothes trick--Kennedy did it--and it won't take your Todd ten
minutes to go to Guy's and bring him back inside of them."

"Those days are over for Poe," Kennedy remarked with a slight frown. The
major's continued allusions to a brother writer's poverty, though pure
badinage, had begun to jar on the author.

For the second time Todd's face was thrust in at the door. It now looked
like a martyr's being slowly roasted at the stake.

"Yes, Todd--serve dinner!" called St. George in a tone that showed how
great was his disappointment. "We won't wait any longer, gentlemen.
Geniuses must be allowed some leeway. Something has detained our guest."

"He's got an idea in his head and has stopped in somewhere to write it
down," continued Clayton in his habitual good-natured tone: it was the
overdone woodcock--(he had heard Todd's warning)--that still filled his
mind.

"I could forgive him for that," exclaimed the judge--"some of his best
work, I hear, has been done on the spur of the moment--and you should
forgive him too, Clayton--unbeliever and iconoclast as you are--and you
WOULD forgive him if you knew as much about new poetry as you do about
old port."

Clayton's stout body shook with laughter. "My dear Pancoast," he cried,
"you do not know what you are talking about. No man living or dead
should be forgiven who keeps a woodcock on the spit five minutes over
time. Forgive him! Why, my dear sir, your poet ought to be drawn and
quartered, and what is left of him boiled in oil. Where shall I sit, St.
George?"

"Alongside of Latrobe. Kennedy, I shall put you next to Poe's vacant
chair--he knows and loves you best. Seymour, will you and Richard
take your places alongside of Pancoast, and Harry, will you please sit
opposite Mr. Kennedy?"

And so the dinner began.




CHAPTER XV



Whether it was St. George's cheery announcement: "Well, gentlemen, I am
sorry, but we still have each other, and so we will remember our guest
in our hearts even if we cannot have his charming person," or whether
it was that the absence of Poe made little difference when a dinner with
St. George was in question--certain it is that before many moments the
delinquent poet was for the most part forgotten.

As the several dishes passed in review, Malachi in charge of the small
arms--plates, knives, and forks--and Todd following with the heavier
guns--silver platters and the like--the talk branched out to more
diversified topics: the new omnibuses which had been allowed to run in
the town; the serious financial situation, few people having recovered
from the effects of the last great panic; the expected reception to
Mr. Polk; the new Historical Society, of which every one present was a
member except St. George and Harry; the successful experiments which the
New York painter, a Mr. Morse, was making in what he was pleased to call
Magnetic Telegraphy, and the absurdity of his claim that his invention
would soon come into general use--every one commenting unfavorably
except Richard Horn:--all these shuttlecocks being tossed into mid-air
for each battledore to crack, and all these, with infinite tact the
better to hide his own and his companions' disappointment over the loss
of his honored guest--did St. George keep on the move.

With the shifting of the cloth and the placing of the coasters--the
nuts, crusts of bread, and finger-bowls being within easy reach--most
of this desultory talk ceased. Something more delicate, more human, more
captivating than sport, finance, or politics; more satisfying than
all the poets who ever lived, filled everybody's mind. Certain Rip Van
Winkles of bottles with tattered garments, dust-begrimed faces, and
cobwebs in their hair were lifted tenderly from the side-board and
awakened to consciousness (some of them hadn't opened their mouths for
twenty years, except to have them immediately stopped with a new cork),
and placed in the expectant coasters, Todd handling each one with the
reverence of a priest serving in a temple. Crusty, pot-bellied old
fellows, who hadn't uttered a civil word to anybody since they had
been shut up in their youth, now laughed themselves wide open. A
squat, lean-necked, jolly little jug without legs--labelled in
ink--"Crab-apple, 1807," spread himself over as much of the mahogany
as he could cover, and admired his fat shape upside down in its polish.
Diamond-cut decanters--regular swells these--with silver chains and
medals on their chests--went swaggering round, boasting of their
ancestors; saying "Your good health" every time any one invited them to
have a drop--or lose one--while a modest little demijohn--or rather a
semi-demi-little-john--all in his wicker-basket clothes, with a card
sewed on his jacket--like a lost boy (Peggy Coston of Wesley did the
sewing) bearing its name and address--"Old Peach, 1796, Wesley, Eastern
Shore," was placed on St. George's right within reach of his hand. "It
reminds me of the dear woman herself, gentleman, in her homely outside
and her warm, loving heart underneath, and I wouldn't change any part of
it for the world."

"What Madeira is this, St. George?" It was the judge who was
speaking--he had not yet raised the thin glass to his lips; the old
wine-taster was too absorbed in its rich amber color and in the delicate
aroma, which was now reaching his nostrils. Indeed a new--several new
fragrances, were by this time permeating the room.

"It is the same, judge, that I always give you."

"Not your father's Black Warrior?"

"Yes, the 1810. Don't you recognize it? Not corked, is it?"

"Corked, my dear man! It's a posy of roses. But I thought that was all
gone."

"No, there are a few bottles still in my cellar--some--How many are
there, Todd, of the Black Warrior?"

"Dat's de las' 'cept two, Marse George."

"Dying in a good cause, judge--I'll send them to you to-morrow."

"You'll do nothing of the kind, you spendthrift. Give them to Kennedy or
Clayton."

"No, give them to nobody!" laughed Kennedy. "Keep them where they are
and don't let anybody draw either cork until you invite me to dinner
again."

"Only two bottles left," cried Latrobe in consternation! "Well, what the
devil are we going to do when they are gone?--what's anybody going to
do?" The "we" was the key to the situation. The good Madeira of Kennedy
Square was for those who honored it, and in that sense--and that sense
only--was common property.

"Don't be frightened, Latrobe," laughed St. George--"I've got a lot
of the Blackburn Reserve of 1812 left. Todd, serve that last bottle
I brought up this morning--I put it in that low decanter next to--Ah,
Malachi--you are nearest. Pass that to Mr. Latrobe, Malachi--Yes, that's
the one. Now tell me how you like it. It is a little pricked, I think,
and may be slightly bruised in the handling. I spent half an hour
picking out the cork this morning--but there is no question of its
value."

"Yes," rejoined Latrobe, moistening his lips with the topaz-colored
liquid--"it is a little bruised. I wouldn't have served it--better lay
it aside for a month or two in the decanter. Are all your corks down to
that, St. George?"

"All the 1810 and '12--dry as powder some of them. I've got one over
on the sideboard that I'm afraid to tackle"--here he turned to Clayton:
"Major, you are the only man I know who can pick out a cork properly.
Yes, Todd--the bottle at the end, next to that Burgundy--carefully now.
Don't shake it, and--"

"Well--but why don't YOU draw the cork yourself, St. George?"
interrupted the major, his eyes on Todd, who was searching for the
rarity among the others flanking the sideboard.

"I dare not--that is, I'm afraid to try. You are the man for a cork
like that--and Todd!--hand Major Clayton the corkscrew and one of those
silver nutpicks."

The Honorable Prim bent closer. "What is it, St. George, some old Port?"
he asked in a perfunctory way. Rare old wines never interested him.
"They are an affectation," he used to say.

"No, Seymour--it's really a bottle of the Peter Remsen 1817 Madeira."

The bottle was passed, every eye watching it with the greatest interest.

"No, never mind the corkscrew, Todd,--I'll pick it out," remarked
the major, examining the hazardous cork with the care of a watchmaker
handling a broken-down chronometer. "You're right, St. George--it's too
far gone. Don't watch me, Seymour, or I'll get nervous. You'll hoodoo
it--you Scotchmen are the devil when it comes to anything fit to drink,"
and he winked at Prim.

"How much is there left of it, St. George?" asked Latrobe, watching the
major manipulate the nutpick.

"Not a drop outside that bottle."

"Let us pray--for the cork," sighed Latrobe. "Easy--E-A-SY, major--think
of your responsibility, man!"

It was out now, the major dusting the opening with one end of his
napkin--his face wreathed in smiles when his nostrils caught the first
whiff of its aroma.

"By Jupiter!--gentlemen!--When I'm being snuffed out I'll at least go
like a gentleman if I have a drop of this on my lips. It's a bunch
of roses--a veritable nosegay. Heavens!--what a bouquet! Some fresh
glasses, Todd."

Malachi and Todd both stepped forward for the honor of serving it, but
the major waved them aside, and rising to his feet began the round of
the table, filling each slender pipe-stem glass to the brim.

Then the talk, which had long since drifted away from general topics,
turned to the color and sparkle of some of the more famous wines
absorbed these many years by their distinguished votaries. This
was followed by the proper filtration and racking both of Ports and
Madeiras, and whether milk or egg were best for the purpose--Kennedy
recounting his experience of different vintages both here and abroad,
the others joining in, and all with the same intense interest that a
group of scientists or collectors would have evinced in discussing some
new discovery in chemistry or physics, or the coming to light of some
rare volume long since out of print--everybody, indeed, taking a hand
in the discussion except Latrobe, whose mouth was occupied in the slow
sipping of his favorite Madeira--tilting a few drops now and then on
the end of his tongue, his eyes devoutly closed that he might the better
relish its flavor and aroma.

It was all an object lesson to Harry, who had never been to a dinner of
older men--not even at his father's--and though at first he smiled at
what seemed to him a great fuss over nothing, he finally began to take
a broader view. Wine, then, was like food or music, or poetry--or
good-fellowship--something to be enjoyed in its place--and never out of
it. For all that, he had allowed no drop of anything to fall into his
own glass--a determination which Todd understood perfectly, but which he
as studiously chose to ignore--going through all the motions of filling
the glass so as not to cause Marse Harry any embarrassment. Even the
"1817" was turned down by the young man with a parrying gesture which
caught the alert eyes of the major.

"You are right, my boy," the bon vivant said sententiously. "It is a
wine for old men. But look after your stomach, you dog--or you may wake
up some fine morning and not be able to know good Madeira from bad. You
young bloods, with your vile concoctions of toddies, punches, and other
satanic brews, are fast going to the devil--your palates, I am speaking
of. If you ever saw the inside of a distillery you would never drink
another drop of whiskey. There's poison in every thimbleful. There's
sunshine in this, sir!" and he held the glass to his eyes until the
light of the candles flashed through it.

"But I've never seen the inside or outside of a distillery in my life,"
answered Harry with a laugh, a reply which did not in the least quench
the major's enthusiasms, who went on dilating, wine-glass in hand, on
the vulgarity of drinking STANDING UP--the habitual custom of whiskey
tipplers--in contrast with the refinement of sipping wines SITTING
DOWN--one being a vice and the other a virtue.

Richard, too, had been noticing Harry. He had overheard, as the dinner
progressed, a remark the boy had made to the guest next him, regarding
the peculiar rhythm of Poe's verse--Harry repeating the closing lines
of the poem with such keen appreciation of their meaning that Richard
at once joined in the talk, commending him for his insight and
discrimination. He had always supposed that Rutter's son, like all the
younger bloods of his time, had abandoned his books when he left college
and had affected horses and dogs instead. The discovery ended in his
scrutinizing Harry's face the closer, reading between the lines--his
father here, his mother there--until a quick knitting of the brows,
and a flash from out the deep-brown eyes, upset all his preconceived
opinions; he had expected grit and courage in the boy--there couldn't
help being that when one thought of his father--but where did the lad
get his imagination? Richard wondered--that which millions could not
purchase. "A most engaging young man in spite of his madcap life," he
said to himself--"I don't wonder St. George loves him."

When the bell in the old church struck the hour of ten, Harry again
turned to Richard and said with a sigh of disappointment:

"I'm afraid it's too late to expect him--don't you think so?"

"Yes, I fear so," rejoined Richard, who all through the dinner had never
ceased to bend his ear to every sound, hoping for the rumble of wheels
or the quick step of a man in the hall. "Something extraordinary must
have happened to him, or he may have been called suddenly to Richmond
and taken the steamboat." Then leaning toward his host he called across
the table: "Might I make a suggestion, St. George?"

St. George paused in his talk with Mr. Kennedy and Latrobe and raised
his head:

"Well, Richard?"

"I was just saying to young Rutter here, that perhaps Mr. Poe has
been called suddenly to Richmond and has sent you a note which has not
reached you."

"Or he might be ill," suggested Harry in his anxiety to leave no
loophole through which the poet could escape.

"Or he might be ill," repeated Richard--"quite true. Now would you mind
if I sent Malachi to Guy's to find out?"

"No, Richard--but I'll send Todd. We can get along, I expect, with
Malachi until he gets back. Todd!"

"Yes, sah."

"You go to Guy's and ask Mr. Lampson if Mr. Poe is still in the hotel.
If he is not there ask for any letter addressed to me and then come
back. If he is in, go up to his room and present my compliments, and say
we are waiting dinner for him."

Todd's face lengthened, but he missed no word of his master's
instructions. Apart from these his mind was occupied with the number of
minutes it would take him to run all the way to Guy's Hotel, mount the
steps, deliver his message, and race back again. Malachi, who was nearly
twice his age, and who had had twice his experience, might be all right
until he reached that old Burgundy, but "dere warn't nobody could handle
dem corks but Todd; Malachi'd bust 'em sho' and spile 'em 'fo' he could
git back."

"'Spose dere ain't no gemman and no letter, den what?" he asked as a
last resort.

"Then come straight home."

"Yes, sah," and he backed regretfully from the room and closed the door
behind him.

St. George turned to Horn again: "Very good idea, Richard--wonder I
hadn't thought of it before. I should probably had I not expected
him every minute. And he was so glad to come. He told me he had never
forgotten the dinner at Kennedy's some years ago, and when he heard you
would be here as well, his whole face lighted up. I was also greatly
struck with the improvement in his appearance, he seemed more a man of
the world than when I first knew him--carried himself better and was
more carefully dressed. This morning when I went in he--"

The door opened silently, and Todd, trembling all over, laid his hand on
his master's shoulder, cutting short his dissertation.

"Marse George, please sah, can I speak to you a minute?" The boy looked
as if he had just seen a ghost.

"Speak to me! Why haven't you taken my message, Todd?"

"Yes, sah--dat is--can't ye step in de hall a minute, Marse
George--now--right away?"

"The hall!--what for?--is there anything the matter?"

St. George pushed back his chair and followed Todd from the room:
something had gone wrong--something demanding instant attention or Todd
wouldn't be scared out of his wits. Those nearest him, who had overheard
Todd's whispered words, halted in their talk in the hope of getting some
clew to the situation; others, further away, kept on, unconscious that
anything unusual had taken place.

Several minutes passed.

Again the door swung wide, and a man deathly pale, erect, faultlessly
dressed in a full suit of black, the coat buttoned close to his chin,
his cavernous eyes burning like coals of fire, entered on St. George's
arm and advanced toward the group.

Every guest was on his feet in an instant.

"We have him at last!" cried St. George in his cheeriest voice. "A
little late, but doubly welcome. Mr. Poe, gentlemen."

Kennedy was the first to extend his hand, Horn crowding close, the
others waiting their turn.

Poe straightened his body, focussed his eyes on Kennedy, shook his
extended hand gravely, but without the slightest sign of recognition,
and repeated the same cold greeting to each guest in the room. He spoke
no word--did not open his lips--only the mechanical movement of his
outstretched hand--a movement so formal that it stifled all exclamations
of praise on the part of the guests, or even of welcome. It was as if he
had grasped the hands of strangers beside an open grave.

Then the cold, horrible truth flashed upon them:

Edgar Allan Poe was dead drunk!


The silence that followed was appalling--an expectant silence like that
which precedes the explosion of a bomb. Kennedy, who had known him
the longest and best, and who knew that if his mind could once be set
working he would recover his tongue and wits, having seen him before in
a similar crisis, stepped nearer and laid both hands on Poe's shoulders.
Get Poe to talking and he would be himself again; let him once be
seated, and ten chances to one he would fall asleep at the table.

"No, don't sit down, Mr. Poe--not yet. Give us that great story of
yours--the one you told at my house that night--we have never forgotten
it. Gentlemen, all take your seats--I promise you one of the great
treats of your lives."

Poe stood for an instant undecided, the light of the candles illumining
his black hair, pallid face, and haggard features; fixed his eyes on
Todd and Malachi, as if trying to account for their presence, and
stood wavering, his deep, restless eyes gleaming like slumbering coals
flashing points of hot light.

Again Mr. Kennedy's voice rang out:

"Any one of your stories, Mr. Poe--we leave it to you."

Everybody was seated now, with eyes fixed on the poet. Harry, overcome
and still dazed, pressed close to Richard, who, bending forward, had put
his elbow on the table, his chin in his hand. Clayton wheeled up a big
chair and placed it back some little distance so that he could get a
better view of the man. Seymour, Latrobe, and the others canted their
seats to face the speaker squarely. All felt that Kennedy's tact had
saved the situation and restored the equilibrium. It was the poet now
who stood before them--the man of genius--the man whose name was known
the country through. That he was drunk was only part of the performance.
Booth had been drunk when he chased a super from the stage; Webster made
his best speeches when he was half-seas-over--was making them at that
very moment. It was so with many other men of genius the world over. If
they could hear one of Poe's poems--or, better still, one of his short
stories, like "The Black Cat" or the "Murders in the Rue Morgue"--it
would be like hearing Emerson read one of his Essays or Longfellow
recite his "Hyperion." This in itself would atone for everything.
Kennedy was right--it would be one of the rare treats of their lives.

Poe grasped the back of the chair reserved for him, stood swaying for an
instant, passed one hand nervously across his forehead, brushed back a
stray lock that had fallen over his eyebrow, loosened the top button
of his frock coat, revealing a fresh white scarf tied about his neck,
closed his eyes, and in a voice deep, sonorous, choked with tears one
moment, ringing clear the next--word by word--slowly--with infinite
tenderness and infinite dignity and with the solemnity of a condemned
man awaiting death--repeated the Lord's Prayer to the end.


Kennedy sat as if paralyzed. Richard Horn, who had lifted up his hands
in horror as the opening sentence reached his ears, lowered his head
upon his chest as he would in church. There was no blasphemy in this! It
was the wail of a lost soul pleading for mercy!

Harry, cowering in his chair, gazed at Poe in amazement. Then a throb of
such sympathy as he had never felt before shook him to his depths. Could
that transfigured man praying there, the undried tears still on his
lids, be the same who had entered on his uncle's arm but a few moments
before?

Poe lifted his head, opened his eyes, walked in a tired, hopeless way
toward the mantel and sank into an easy-chair. There he sat with bowed
head, his face in his hands.

One by one the men rose to their feet and, with a nod or silent pressure
of St. George's palm, moved toward the door. When they spoke to each
other it was in whispers: to Todd, who brought their hats and canes; to
Harry, whom, unconsciously, they substituted for host; shaking his hand,
muttering some word of sympathy for St. George. No--they would find
their way, better not disturb his uncle, etc. They would see him in
the morning, etc., and thus the group passed out in a body and left the
house.

Temple himself was profoundly moved. The utter helplessness of the man;
his abject and complete surrender to the demon which possessed him--all
this appalled him. He had seen many drunken men in his time--roysterers
and brawlers, most of them--but never one like Poe. The poet seemed to
have lost his identity--nothing of the man of the world was left--in
speech, thought, or movement.

When Harry re-entered, his uncle was sitting beside the poet, who had
not yet addressed him a word; nor had he again raised his head. Every
now and then the sound of an indrawn breath would escape Poe, as if hot
tears were choking him.

St. George waved his hand meaningly.

"Tell Todd I'll ring for him when I want him, Harry," he whispered, "and
now do you go to sleep." Then, pointing to the crouching man, "He must
stay in my bed here to-night; I won't leave him. What a pity! O God!
what a pity! Poor fellow--how sorry I am for him!"

Harry was even more affected. Terrified and awestruck, he mounted the
stairs to his room, locked his chamber door, and threw himself on his
bed, his mother's and Kate's pleadings sounding in his ears, his mind
filled with the picture of the poet standing erect with closed eyes, the
prayer his mother had taught him falling from his lips. This, then,
was what his mother and Kate meant--this--the greatest of all
calamities--the overthrow of a MAN.

For the hundredth time he turned his wandering search-light into his own
heart. The salient features of his own short career passed in review:
the fluttering of the torn card as it fell to the floor; the sharp crack
of Willits's pistol; the cold, harsh tones of his father's voice when
he ordered him from the house; Kate's dear eyes streaming with tears
and her uplifted hands--their repellent palms turned toward him as she
sobbed--"Go away--my heart is broken!" And then the refrain of the poem
which of late had haunted him night and day:

     "Disaster following fast and following faster,
     Till his song one burden bore,"

and then the full, rich tones of Poe's voice pleading with his Maker:

"Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us."

Yes:--Disaster had followed fast and faster. But why had it followed
him? What had he done to bring all this misery upon himself? How could
he have acted differently? Wherein had he broken any law he had been
taught to uphold, and if he had broken it why should he not be forgiven?
Why, too, had Kate turned away from him? He had promised her never to
drink again; he had kept that promise, and, God helping him, he would
always keep it, as would any other man who had seen what he had just
seen to-night. Perhaps he had trespassed in the duel, and yet he would
fight Willits again were the circumstances the same, and in this view
Uncle George upheld him. But suppose he had trespassed--suppose he had
committed a fault--as his father declared--why should not Kate forgive
him? She had forgiven Willits, who was drunk, and yet she would not
forgive him, who had not allowed a drop to pass his lips since he had
given her his promise. How could she, who could do no wrong, expect to
be forgiven herself when she not only shut her door in his face, but
left him without a word or a line? How could his father ask forgiveness
of his God when he would not forgive his son? Why were these two
different from his mother and his Uncle George, and even old Alec--who
had nothing but sympathy for him? Perhaps his education and training
had been at fault. Perhaps, as Richard Horn had said, his standards of
living were old-fashioned and quixotic.

Only when the gray dawn stole in through the small window of his room
did the boy fall asleep.




CHAPTER XVI



Not only Kennedy Square, but Moorlands, rang with accounts of the dinner
and its consequences. Most of those who were present and who witnessed
the distressing spectacle had only words of sympathy for the unfortunate
man--his reverent manner, his contrite tones, and abject humiliation
disarming their criticism. They felt that some sudden breaking down
of the barriers of his will, either physical or mental, had led to the
catastrophe. Richard Horn voiced the sentiments of Poe's sympathizers
when, in rehearsing the episode the next afternoon at the club, he had
said:

"His pitiable condition, gentlemen, was not the result of debauchery.
Poe neither spoke nor acted like a drunken man; he spoke and acted like
a man whom a devil had overcome. It was pathetic, gentlemen, and it was
heart-rending--really the most pitiful sight I ever remember witnessing.
His anguish, his struggle, and his surrender I shall never forget; nor
will his God--for the prayer came straight from his heart."

"I don't agree with you, Horn," interrupted Clayton. "Poe was plumb
drunk! It is the infernal corn whiskey he drinks that puts the devil
in him. It may be he can't get anything else, but it's a damnable
concoction all the same. Kennedy has about given him up--told me so
yesterday, and when Kennedy gives a fellow up that's the last of him."

"Then I'm ashamed of Kennedy," retorted Horn. "Any man who can write as
Poe does should be forgiven, no matter what he does--if he be honest.
There's nothing so rare as genius in this world, and even if his flame
does burn from a vile-smelling wick it's a flame, remember!--and one
that will yet light the ages. If I know anything of the literature
of our time Poe will live when these rhymers like Mr. Martin Farquhar
Tupper, whom everybody is talking about, will be forgotten. Poe's
possessed of a devil, I tell you, who gets the better of him once in a
while--it did the night of St. George's dinner."

"Very charitable in you, Richard," exclaimed Pancoast, another
dissenter--"and perhaps it will be just as well for his family, if he
has any, to accept your view--but, devil or no devil, you must confess,
Horn, that it was pretty hard on St. George. If the man has any sense of
refinement--and he must have from the way he writes--the best way out of
it is for him to own up like a man and say that Guy's barkeeper filled
him too full of raw whiskey, and that he didn't come to until it was too
late--that he was very sorry, and wouldn't do it again. That's what I
would have done, and that's what you, Richard, or any other gentleman,
would have done."

Others, who got their information second hand, followed the example of
St. George's guests censuring or excusing the poet in accordance with
their previous likes or dislikes. The "what-did-I-tell-yous"--Bowdoin
among them--and there were several--broke into roars of laughter when
they learned what had happened in the Temple mansion. So did those who
had not been invited, and who still felt some resentment at St. George's
oversight.

Another group; and these were also to be found at the club--thought only
of St. George--old Murdock, voicing their opinions when he said: "Temple
laid himself out, so I hear, on that dinner, and some of us know what
that means. And a dinner like that, remember, counts with St. George. In
the future it will be just as well to draw the line at poets as well as
actors."

The Lord of Moorlands had no patience with any of their views. Whether
Poe was a drunkard or not did not concern him in the least. What did
trouble him was the fact that St. George's cursed independence had made
him so far forget himself and his own birth and breeding as to place a
chair at his table for a man in every way beneath him. Hospitality of
that kind was understandable in men like Kennedy and Latrobe--one the
leading literary light of his State, whose civic duties brought him in
contact with all classes--the other a distinguished man of letters as
well as being a poet, artist, and engineer, who naturally touched the
sides of many personalities. So, too, might Richard Horn be excused for
stretching the point--he being a scientist whose duty it was to welcome
to his home many kinds of people--this man Morse among them, with his
farcical telegraph; a man in the public eye who seemed to be more or
less talked about in the press, but of whom he himself knew nothing, but
why St. George Temple, who in all probability had never read a line
of Poe's or anybody else's poetry in his life, should give this sot a
dinner, and why such sane gentlemen as Seymour, Clayton, and
Pancoast should consider it an honor to touch elbows with him, was as
unaccountable as it was incredible.

Furthermore--and this is what rankled deepest in his heart--St. George
was subjecting his only son, Harry, to corrupting influences, and at a
time, too, when the boy needed the uplifting examples of all that was
highest in men and manners.

"And you tell me, Alec," he blazed out on hearing the details, "that
the fellow never appeared until the dinner was all over and then came in
roaring drunk?"

"Well, sah, I ain't yered nothin' 'bout de roarin', but he suttinly was
'how-come-ye-so'--fer dey couldn't git 'im upstairs 'less dey toted him
on dere backs. Marse George Temple gin him his own baid an' sot up mos'
ob de night, an' dar he stayed fur fo' days till he come to. Dat's what
Todd done tol' me, an' I reckon Todd knows."

The colonel was in his den when this conversation took place. He was
generally to be found there since the duel. Often his wife, or Alec, or
some of his neighbors would surprise him buried in his easy-chair, an
unopened book in his hand, his eyes staring straight ahead as if trying
to grasp some problem which repeatedly eluded him. After the episode at
the club he became more absorbed than ever. It was that episode, indeed,
which had vexed him most. Not that St. George's tongue-lashing worried
him--nor did Harry's blank look of amazement linger in his thoughts. St.
George, he had to confess to himself as he battled with the questions,
was the soul of honor and had not meant to insult him. It was Temple's
love for Harry which had incited the quixotic onslaught, for, as he
knew, St. George dearly loved the boy, and this in itself wiped all
resentment from the autocrat's heart. As to Harry's attitude toward
himself, this he continued to reason was only a question of time. That
young upstart had not learned his lesson yet--a harsh lesson, it was
true, and one not understood by the world at large--but then the world
was not responsible for his son's bringing up. When the boy had learned
it, and was willing to acknowledge the error of his ways, then, perhaps,
he might kill the fatted calf--that is, of course, if the prodigal
should return on all fours and with no stilted and untenable ideas about
his rights--ideas that St. George, of course, was instilling into him
every chance he got.

So far, however, he had had to admit to himself that while he had kept
steady watch of the line of hills skirting his mental horizon, up to
the present moment no young gentleman in a dilapidated suit of clothes,
inverted waist measure, and lean legs had shown himself above the sky
line. On the contrary, if all reports were true--and Alec omitted no
opportunity to keep him advised of Marse Harry's every movement--the
young Lord of Moorlands was having the time of his life, even if his
sweetheart had renounced him and his father forced him into exile. Not
only had he found a home and many comforts at Temple's--being treated as
an honored guest alongside of such men as Kennedy and Latrobe, Pancoast,
and the others, but now that St. George had publicly declared him to
be his heir, these distinctive marks of his approbation were likely
to continue. Nor could he interfere, even if he wished to--which, of
course, he did not, and never could so long as he lived.... "Damn him!"
etc., etc. And with this the book would drop from his lap and he begin
pacing the floor, his eyes on the carpet, his broad shoulders bent in
his anxiety to solve the problem which haunted him night and day:--how
to get Harry back under his roof and not yield a jot or tittle of his
pride or will--or, to be more explicit, now that the mountain would not
come to Mahomet, how could Mahomet get over to the mountain?

His friend and nearest neighbor, John Gorsuch, who was also his man
of business, opened the way. The financier's clerk had brought him
a letter, just in by the afternoon coach, and with a glance at its
contents the shrewd old fellow had at once ordered his horse and set
out for Moorlands, some two miles distant. Nor did he draw rein or break
gallop until he threw the lines to a servant beside the lower step of
the colonel's porch.

"It's the Patapsco again! It will close its doors before the week is
out!" he cried, striding into the library, where the colonel, who had
just come in from inspecting a distant field on his estate, sat dusting
his riding-boots with his handkerchief.

"Going to stop payment! Failed! What the devil do you mean, John?"

"I mean just what I say! Everything has gone to bally-hack in the city.
Here's a letter I have just received from Harding--he's on the inside,
and knows. He thinks there's some crooked business about it; they have
been loaning money on all sorts of brick-bats, he says, and the end has
come, or will to-morrow. He wanted to post me in time."

The colonel tossed his handkerchief on his writing-table: "Who will be
hurt?" he asked hurriedly, ignoring the reference to the dishonesty of
the directors.

"Oh!--a lot of people. Temple, I know, keeps his account there. He was
short of cash a little while ago, for young Pawson, who has his law
office in the basement of his house, offered me a mortgage on his
Kennedy Square property, but I hadn't the money at the time and didn't
take it. If he got it at last--and he paid heavily for it if he did--the
way things have been going--and if he put that money in the Patapsco, it
will be a bad blow to him. Harry, I hear, is with him--so I thought you
ought to know."

Rutter had given a slight start at the mention of Temple's name among
the crippled, and a strange glitter still lingered in his eyes.

"Then I presume my son is dependent on a beggar," he exclaimed, rising
from his seat, stripping off his brown velveteen riding-jacket and
hanging it in a closet behind his chair.

"Yes, it looks that way."

Gorsuch was watching the colonel closely. He had another purpose in
making his breakneck ride. He didn't have a dollar in the Patapsco, and
he knew the colonel had not; he, like himself, was too shrewd a man to
be bitten twice by the same dog; but he had a large interest in Harry
and would leave no stone unturned to bring father and son together.

The colonel again threw himself into his chair, stretched out
his slender, well-turned legs, crooked one of his russet-leather
riding-boots to be sure the spurs were still in place, and said
slowly--rather absently, as if the subject did not greatly interest him:

"Patapsco failed and St. George a beggar, eh?--Too bad!--too bad!" Then
some disturbing suspicions must have entered his head, for he roused
himself, looked at Gorsuch keenly, and asked in a searching tone: "And
you came over full tilt, John, to tell me this?"

"I thought you might help. St. George needs all the friends he's got if
this is true--and it looks to me as if it was," answered Gorsuch in a
casual way.

Rutter relaxed his gaze and resumed his position. Had his suspicions
been correct that Gorsuch's interest in Harry was greater than his
interest in the bank's failure, he would have resented it even from John
Gorsuch.

Disarmed by the cool, unflinching gaze of his man of business, his mind
again took up in review all the incidents connected with St. George and
his son, and what part each had played in them.

That Temple--good friend as he had always been--had thwarted him in
every attempt to bring about a reconciliation between himself and Harry,
had been apparent from the very beginning of the difficulty. Even
the affair at the club showed it. This would have ended quite
differently--and he had fully intended it should--had not St. George,
with his cursed officiousness, interfered with his plans. For what he
had really proposed to himself to do, on that spring morning when he had
rolled up to the club in his coach, was to mount the steps, ignore his
son at first, if he should run up against him--(and he had selected the
very hour when he hoped he would run up against him)--and then, when the
boy broke down, as he surely must, to forgive him like a gentleman and
a Rutter, and this, too, before everybody. Seymour would see it--Kate
would hear of it, and the honor of the Rutters remain unblemished.
Moreover, this would silence once and for all those gabblers who had
undertaken to criticise him for what they called his inhumanity in
banishing this only son when he was only trying to bring up that child
in the way he should go. Matters seemed to be coming his way. The
failure of the Patapsco might be his opportunity. St. George would be at
his wits' end; Harry would be forced to choose between the sidewalk and
Moorlands, and the old life would go on as before.

All these thoughts coursed through his mind as he leaned back in his
chair, his lips tight set, the jaw firm and determined--only the lids
quivering as he mastered the tears that crept to their edges. Now and
then, in his mental absorption, he would absently cross his legs only
to straighten them out again, his state of mind an open book to Gorsuch,
who had followed the same line of reasoning and who had brought the news
himself that he might the better watch its effect.

"I'm surprised that Temple should select the Patapsco. It has never got
over its last smash of four years ago," Gorsuch at last remarked. He did
not intend to let the topic drift away from Harry if he could help it.

"I am not surprised, John. St. George is the best fellow in the world,
but he never lets anything work but his heart. When you get at the
bottom of it you will find that he's backed up the bank because some
poor devil of a teller or clerk, or may be some director, is his friend.
That's enough for St. George, and further than that he never goes. He's
thrown away two fortunes now--his grandmother's, which was small but
sound--and his father's, which if he had attended to it would have kept
him comfortable all his life."

"You had some words at the club, I heard," interjected Gorsuch.

"No, he had some words, I had a julep," and the colonel smiled grimly.

"But you are still on good terms, are you not?"

"I am, but he isn't. But that is of no consequence. No man in his senses
would ever get angry with St. George, no matter what he might say or
do. He hasn't a friend in the world who could be so ill bred. And as to
calling him out--you would as soon think of challenging your wife. St.
George talks from his heart, never his head. I have loved him for thirty
years and know exactly what I am talking about--and yet let me tell
you, Gorsuch, that with all his qualities--and he is the finest-bred
gentleman I know--he can come closer to being a natural born fool than
any man of his years and position in Kennedy Square. This treatment of
my son--whom I am trying to bring up a gentleman--is one proof of
it, and this putting all his eggs into one basket--and that a rotten
basket--is another."

"Well, then--if that is your feeling about it, colonel, why not go and
see him? As I have said, he needs all the friends he's got at a time
like this." If he could bring the two men together the boy might
come home. Not to be able to wave back to Harry as he dashed past on
Spitfire, had been a privation which the whole settlement had felt.
"That is, of course," he continued, "if St. George Temple would be
willing to receive you. He would be--wouldn't he?"

"I don't know, John--and I don't care. If I should make up my mind to
go--remember, I said 'IF'--I'd go whether he liked it or not."

He HAD made up his mind--had made it up at the precise moment the
announcement of the bank's failure and St. George's probable ruin had
dropped from Gorsuch's lips--but none of this must Gorsuch suspect. He
would still be the doge and Virginius; he alone must be the judge of
when and how and where he would show leniency. Generations of Rutters
were behind him--this boy was in the direct line--connecting the past
with the present--and on Colonel Talbot Rutter of Moorlands, and on
no other, rested the responsibility of keeping the glorious name
unsmirched.


Todd, with one of the dogs at his heels, opened the door for him,
smothering a "Gor-a-Mighty!--sumpin's up fo' sho'!" when his hand
turned the knob. He had heard the clatter of two horses and their sudden
pull-up outside, and looking out, had read the situation at a glance.
Old Matthew was holding the reins of both mounts at the moment, for the
colonel always rode in state. No tying to hitching-posts or tree-boxes,
or picking up of a loose negro to watch his restless steed when he had a
stable full of thoroughbreds and quarters packed with grooms.

"Yes, Marse Colonel--yes, sah--Marse George is inside--yes, sah--but
Marse Harry's out." He had not asked for Harry, but Todd wanted him to
get all the facts in case there was to be another such scene as black
John described had taken place at the club on the occasion of the
colonel's last visit to the Chesapeake.

"Then I'll go in unannounced, and you need not wait, Todd."

St. George was in his arm-chair by the mantel looking over one of his
heavy ducking-guns when the Lord of Moorlands entered. He was the
last man in the world he expected to see, but he did not lose his
self-control or show in any way his surprise. He was host, and Rutter
was his guest; nothing else counted now.

St. George rose to his feet, laid the gun carefully on the table, and
with a cold smile on his face--one of extreme courtesy--advanced to
greet him.

"Ah, Talbot--it has been some time since I had this pleasure. Let me
draw up a chair for you--I'll ring for Todd and--"

"No, St. George. I prefer to talk to you alone."

"Todd is never an interruption."

"He may be to-day. I have something to say to you--and I don't want
either to be interrupted or misunderstood. You and I have known each
other too many years to keep up this quarrel; I am getting rather sick
of it myself."

St. George shrugged his shoulders, placed the gun carefully in the rack
by the door, and maintained an attentive attitude. He would either fight
or make peace, but he must first learn the conditions. In the meantime
he would hold his peace.

Rutter strode past him to the fireplace, opened his riding-jacket, laid
his whip on the mantel, and with his hands deep in his breeches pockets
faced the room and his host, who had again taken his place by the table.

"The fact is, St. George, I have been greatly disturbed of late by
reports which have reached me about my son. He is with you, I presume?"

St. George nodded.

Rutter waited for a verbal reply, and receiving none, forged on: "Very
greatly disturbed; so much so that I have made an especial trip from
Moorlands to call upon you and ascertain their truth."

Again St. George nodded, the smile--one of extreme civility now--still
on his face. Then he added, flicking some stray grains of tobacco from
his sleeve with his fingers: "That was very good of you, Talbot--but go
on--I'm listening."

The colonel's eyes kindled. Temple's perfect repose--something he had
not expected--was beginning to get on his nerves, He cleared his throat
impressively and continued, his voice rising in intensity:

"Instead of leading the life of a young man brought up as a gentleman,
I hear he is consorting with the lowest class of people here in your
house--people who--"

"--Are my guests," interrupted St. George calmly--loosening the buttons
of his coat in search of his handkerchief--there being more tobacco on
his clothes than he had supposed.

"Yes, you have hit it exactly--your guests--and that is another thing I
have come to tell you, for neither I nor your friends can understand how
a man of your breeding should want to surround himself with----Is it
necessary that you should understand, Talbot?"--same low, incisive but
extremely civil voice, almost monotonous in its cadences. The cambric
was in full play now.

"Of course it is necessary when it affects my own flesh and blood. You
know as well as I do that this sot, Poe, is not a fit companion for a
boy raised as my Harry has been--a man picked out of the gutter--his
family a lot of play-actors--even worse, I hear. A fellow who staggers
into your house dead drunk and doesn't sober up for a week! It's
scandalous!"

Again St. George shrugged his shoulders, but one hand was tight shut
this time, the steel claws protruding, the handkerchief alone saving
their points from pressing into the palms.

"And is that what you came from Moorlands to tell me, Talbot?" remarked
St. George casually, adjusting the lapels of his coat.

"Yes!" retorted Rutter--he was fast losing what was left of his
self-control--"that and some other things! But we will attend to Harry
first. You gave that boy shelter when--"

"Please state it correctly, Talbot. We can get on better if you stick to
the facts." The words came slowly, but the enunciation was as perfect
as if each syllable had been parted with a knife. "I didn't give him
shelter--I gave him a home--one you denied him. But go on--I prefer to
hear you out."

The colonel's eyes blazed. He had never seen St. George like this: it
was Temple's hot outbursts that had made him so easy an adversary in
their recent disputes.

"And you will please do the same, St. George," he demanded in his most
top-lofty tone, ignoring his opponent's denial. "You know perfectly well
I turned him out of Moorlands because he had disgraced his blood, and
yet you--my life-long friend--have had the bad taste to interfere and
drag him down still lower, so that now, instead of coming to his
senses and asking my pardon, he parades himself at the club and at your
dinners, putting on the airs of an injured man."

St. George drew himself up to his full height.

"Let us change the subject, Talbot, or we will both forget ourselves.
If you have anything to say to me that will benefit Harry and settle the
difficulty between him and you, I will meet you more than half-way,
but I give you fair warning that the apology must come from you. You
have--if you will permit me to say it in my own house--behaved more like
a brute than a father. I told you so the night you turned him out in the
rain for me to take care of, and I told you so again at the club when
you tried to make a laughing-stock of him before your friends--and now I
tell you so once more! Come!--let us drop the subject--what may I offer
you to drink?--you must be rather chilled with your ride in."

Rutter was about to flare out a denial when his better judgment got
the best of him; some other tactics than the ones he had used must
be brought into play. So far he had made but little headway against
Temple's astounding coolness.

"And I am to understand, then, that you are going to keep him here?"
he demanded, ignoring both his host's criticisms and his proffered
hospitality.

"I certainly am"--he was abreast of him now, his eyes boring into
his--"just as long as he wishes to stay, which I hope will be all his
life, or until you have learned to be decent to him. And by decency, I
mean companionship, and love, and tenderness--three things which your
damned, high-toned notions have always deprived him of!" His voice was
still under control, although the emphasis was unmistakable.

Rutter made a step forward, his eyes flashing, his teeth set:

"You have the impertinence, sir, to charge me with----"

"--Yes!--and it's true and you know it's true!"--the glance, steady as
a rifle, had not wavered. "No, you needn't work yourself up into a
passion--and as for your lordly, dictatorial airs, I am past the age
when they affect me--keep them for your servants. By God!--what a farce
it all is! Let us talk of something else--I am tired of it!"

The words cut like a whip, but the Lord of Moorlands had come to get
his son, not to fight St. George. Their sting, however, had completely
changed his plans. Only the club which Gorsuch had put into his hands
would count now.

"Yes--a damnable farce!" he thundered, "and one played by a man with
beggary staring him straight in the face, and yet to hear you talk one
would think you were a Croesus! You mortgaged this house to get ready
money, did you not?" He was not sure, but this was no time in which to
split words.

St. George turned quickly: "Who told you that?"

"Is it true?"

"Yes! Do you suppose I would let Harry sneak around corners to avoid his
creditors?"

The colonel gave an involuntary start, the blood mounting to the roots
of his hair, and as suddenly paled:

"You tell me that--you dared to--pay Harry's debts?" he stammered in
amazement.

"Dared!" retorted St. George, lifting his chin contemptuously. "Really,
Talbot, you amuse me. When you set that dirty hound Gadgem on his trail,
what did you expect me to do?--invite the dog to dinner?--or have him
sleep in the house until I sold furniture enough to get rid of him?"

The colonel leaned back against the mantel's edge as if for support.
All the fight was out of him. Not only was the situation greatly
complicated, but he himself was his host's debtor. The seriousness of
the whole affair confronted him. For a brief instant he gazed at the
floor, his eyes on the hearthrug, "Have you any money left, St. George?"
he asked. His voice was subdued enough now. Had he been his solicitor he
could not have been more concerned.

"Yes, a few thousand," returned St. George. He saw that some unexpected
shot had hit the colonel, but he did not know he had fired it.

"Left over from the mortgage, I suppose?--less what you paid out for
Harry?"

"Yes, left over from the mortgage, less what I paid Gadgem," he bridled.
"If you have brought any more of Harry's bills hand them out. Why the
devil you ask, Talbot, is beyond my ken, but I have no objection to your
knowing."

Rutter waved his hand impatiently, with a deprecating gesture; such
trifles were no longer important.

"You bank with the Patapsco, do you not?" he asked calmly. "Answer me,
please, and don't think I'm trying to pry into your affairs. The
matter is much more serious than you seem to think." The tone was so
sympathetic that St. George looked closer into his antagonist's face,
trying to read the cause.

"Always with the Patapsco. I have kept my account there for years," he
rejoined simply. "Why do you want to know?"

"Because it has closed its doors--or will in a few hours. It is
bankrupt!"

There was no malice in his tone, nor any note of triumph. That St.
George had beggared himself to pay his son's debts had wiped that clear.
He was simply announcing a fact that caused him the deepest concern.

St. George's face paled, and for a moment a peculiar choking movement
started in his throat.

"Bankrupt!--the Patapsco! How do you know?" He had heard some ugly
rumors at the club a few days before, but had dismissed them as part of
Harding's croakings.

"John Gorsuch received a letter last night from one of the directors;
there is no doubt of its truth. I have suspected its condition for some
time, so has Gorsuch. This brought me here. You see now how impossible
it is for my son to be any longer a burden on you."

St. George walked slowly across the room and drawing out a chair settled
himself to collect his thoughts the better;--he had remained standing
as the better way to terminate the interview should he be compelled
to exercise that right. The two announcements had come like successive
blows in the face. If the news of the bank's failure was true he was
badly, if not hopelessly, crippled--this, however, would wait, as
nothing he might do could prevent the catastrophe. The other--Harry's
being a burden to him--must be met at once.

He looked up and caught the colonel's eye scrutinizing his face.

"As to Harry's being a burden," St. George said slowly, his lip curling
slightly--"that is my affair. As to his remaining here, all I have to
say is that if a boy is old enough to be compelled to pay his debts
he is old enough to decide where he will live. You have yourself
established that rule and it will be carried out to the letter."

Rutter's face hardened: "But you haven't got a dollar in the world to
spare!"

"That may be, but it doesn't altar the situation; it rather strengthens
it." He rose from his chair: "I think we are about through now, Talbot,
and if you will excuse me I'll go down to the bank and see what is the
matter. I will ring for Todd to bring your hat and coat." He did not
intend to continue the talk. There had just been uncovered to him a
side of Talbot Rutter's nature which had shocked him as much as had the
threatened loss of his money. To use his poverty as a club to force him
into a position which would be dishonorable was inconceivable in a man
as well born as his antagonist, but it was true: he could hardly refrain
from telling him so. He had missed, it may be said, seeing another
side--his visitor's sympathy for him in his misfortune. That,
unfortunately, he did not see: fate often plays such tricks with us all.

The colonel stepped in front of him: his eyes had an ugly look in
them--the note of sympathy was gone.

"One moment, St. George! How long you are going to keep up this fool
game, I don't know; but my son stays here on one condition, and on one
condition only, and you might as well understand it now. From this time
on I pay his board. Do you for one instant suppose I am going to let you
support him, and you a beggar?"

St. George made a lunge toward the speaker as if to strike him. Had
Rutter fired point-blank at him he could not have been more astounded.
For an instant he stood looking into his face, then whirled suddenly and
swung wide the door.

"May I ask you, Talbot, to leave the room, or shall I? You certainly
cannot be in your senses to make me a proposition like that. This thing
has got to come to an end, and NOW! I wish you good-morning."

The colonel lifted his hands in a deprecatory way.

"As you will, St. George."

And without another word the baffled autocrat strode from the room.




CHAPTER XVII



There was no one at home when Harry returned except Todd, who, having
kept his position outside the dining-room door during the heated
encounter, had missed nothing of the interview. What had puzzled the
darky--astounded him really--was that no pistol-shot had followed his
master's denouncement and defiance of the Lord of Moorlands. What had
puzzled him still more was hearing these same antagonists ten minutes
later passing the time o' day, St. George bowing low and the colonel
touching his hat as he passed out and down to where Matthew and his
horses were waiting.

It was not surprising, therefore, that Todd's recital to Harry came in a
more or less disjointed and disconnected form.

"You say, Todd," he exclaimed in astonishment, "that my father was
here!" Our young hero was convinced that the visit did not concern
himself, as he was no longer an object of interest to any one at home
except his mother and Alec.

"Dat he was, sah, an' b'ilin' mad. Dey bofe was, on'y Marse George lay
low an' de colonel purty nigh rid ober de top ob de fence. Fust Marse
George sass him an' den de colonel sass him back. Purty soon Marse
George say he gwinter speak his min'--and he call de colonel a brute an'
den de colonel riz up an' say Marse George was a beggar and a puttin'
on airs when he didn't hab 'nough money to buy hisse'f a 'tater; an' den
Marse George r'ared and pitched--Oh I tell ye he ken be mighty sof' and
persimmony when he's tame--and he's mos' allers dat way--but when his
dander's up, and it suttinly riz to-day, he kin make de fur fly. Dat's
de time you wanter git outer de way or you'll git hurted."

"Who did you say was the beggar?" It was all Greek to Harry.

"Why, Marse George was--he was de one what was gwine hongry. De colonel
'lowed dat de bank was busted an'--"

"What bank?"

"Why de 'Tapsco--whar Marse George keep his money. Ain't you see me
comin' from dar mos' ebery day?"

"But it hasn't failed, has it?" He was still wondering what the quarrel
was about.

"Wall, I dunno, but I reckon sumpin's de matter, for no sooner did de
colonel git on his horse and ride away dan Marse George go git his hat
and coat hisse'f and make tracks th'ou' de park by de short cut--and you
know he neber do dat 'cept when he's in a hurry, and den in 'bout a ha'f
hour he come back ag'in lookin' like he'd seed de yahoo, only he was
mad plump th'ou'; den he hollered for me quick like, and sont me down
underneaf yere to Mr. Pawson to know was he in, and he was, and I done
tol' him, and he's dar now. He ain't neber done sont me down dar 'cept
once sence I been yere, and dat was de day dat Gadgem man come snuffin'
roun'. Trouble comin'."

Harry had now begun to take in the situation. It was evidently a matter
of some moment or Pawson would not have been consulted.

"I'll go down myself, Todd," he said with sudden resolve.

"Better lem'me tell him you're yere, Marse Harry."

"No, I'll go now," and he turned on his heel and descended the front
steps.

On the street side of the house, level with the bricks, was a door
opening into a low-ceiled, shabbily furnished room, where in the old
days General Dorsey Temple, as has been said, shared his toddies with
his cronies. There he found St. George seated at a long table piled
high with law books and papers--the top covered with a green baize cloth
embroidered with mice holes and decorated with ink stains. Beside him
was a thin, light-haired, young man, with a long, flexible neck and
abnormally high forehead, over-doming a shrewd but not unkindly face.
The two were poring over a collection of papers.

The young lawyer rose to his feet, a sickly, deferential smile playing
along his straight lips. Young aristocrats of Harry's blood and breeding
did not often darken Pawson's door, and he was extremely anxious that
his guest should in some way be made aware of his appreciation of that
fact. St. George did not move, nor did he take any other notice of
the boy's appearance than to fasten his eyes upon him for a moment in
recognition of his presence.

But Harry could not wait.

"Todd has just told me, Uncle George, that"--he caught the grave
expression on Temple's face--"Why!--Uncle George--there isn't anything
the matter, is there? It isn't true that the--"

St. George raised his head: "What isn't true, Harry?"

"That the Patapsco Bank is in trouble?"

"No, I don't think so. The bank, so far as I know, is all right; it's
the depositors who are in trouble," and one of his quaint smiles lighted
up his face.

"Broken!--failed!" cried Harry, still in doubt as to the extent of the
catastrophe, but wishing to be sympathetic and proportionably astounded
as any well-bred young man should be when his best friend was unhappy.

"I'm afraid it is, Harry--in fact I know it is--bankrupt in character as
well as in balances--a bad-smelling, nasty mess, to tell you the truth.
That's not only my own opinion, but the opinion of every man whom I
have seen, and there was quite an angry mob when I reached the teller's
window this morning. That is your own opinion also, is it not, Mr.
Pawson?--your legal summing up, I mean."

The young attorney stretched out his spare colorless hands; opened wide
his long, double-jointed fingers; pressed their ten little cushions
together, and see-sawing the bunch in front of his concave waistcoat,
answered in his best professional voice:

"As to being bankrupt of funds I should say there was no doubt of that
being their condition; as to any criminal intent or practices--that, of
course, gentlemen"--and he shrugged his shoulders in a non-committal,
non-actionable way--"is not for me to decide."

"But you think it will be months, and perhaps years, before the
depositors get a penny of their money--do you not?" persisted St.
George.

Again Pawson performed the sleight-of-hand trick, and again he
was non-committal--a second shrug alone expressing his views, the
performance ending by his pushing a wooden chair in the direction of
Harry, who was still on his feet.

Harry settled himself on its edge and fixed his eyes on his uncle. St.
George again became absorbed in the several papers, Pawson once more
assisting him, the visitor having now been duly provided for.

This raking of ashes in the hope of finding something of value
unscorched was not a pleasant task for the young lawyer. He had, years
before, conceived the greatest admiration for his landlord and was never
tired of telling his associates of how kind and considerate St. George
had always been, and of his patience in the earlier days of his lease,
Mr. Temple often refusing the rent until he was quite ready to pay
it. He took a certain pride, too, in living under the same roof, so
to speak, with one universally known as a gentleman of the old school,
whose birth, education, and habits made him the standard among his
fellows--a man without pretence or sham, living a simple and wholesome
life; with dogs, guns, priceless Madeira and Port, as well as unlimited
clothes of various patterns adapted to every conceivable service and
function--to say nothing of his being part of the best society that
Kennedy Square could afford.

Even to bow to his distinguished landlord as he was descending his front
steps was in itself one of his greatest pleasures. That he might not
miss it, he would peer from behind his office shutters until the shapely
legs of his patron could be seen between the twisted iron railing. Then
appearing suddenly and with assumed surprise, he would lift his hat with
so great a flourish that his long, thin arms and body were jerked into
semaphore angles, his face meanwhile beaming with ill-concealed delight.

Should any one of St. George's personal friends accompany him--men like
Kennedy, or General Hardisty, or some well-known man from the Eastern
Shore--one of the Dennises, or Joyneses, or Irvings--the pleasure was
intensified, the incident being of great professional advantage. "I have
just met old General Hardisty," he would say--"he was at our house," the
knowing ones passing a wink around, and the uninitiated having all
the greater respect and, therefore, all the greater confidence in that
rising young firm of "Pawson & Pawson, Attorneys and Counsellors at
Law--Wills drawn and Estates looked after."

That this rarest of gentlemen, of all men in the world, should be made
the victim of a group of schemers who had really tricked him of
almost all that was left of his patrimony, and he a member of his own
profession, was to Pawson one of the great sorrows of his life. That
he himself had unwittingly helped in its culmination made it all the
keener. Only a few weeks had passed since that eventful day when St.
George had sent Todd down to arrange for an interview, an event
which was followed almost immediately by that gentleman in person. He
remembered his delight at the honor conferred upon him; he recalled
how he had spent the whole of that and the next day in the attempt to
negotiate the mortgage on the old home at a reasonable rate of interest;
he recalled, too, how he could have lowered the rate had St. George
allowed him more time. "No, pay it and get rid of them!" St. George had
said, the "them" being part of the very accounts over which the two were
poring. And his patron had showed the same impatience when it came
to placing the money in the bank. Although his own lips were sealed
professionally by reason of the interests of another client, he had
begged St. George, almost to the verge of interference, not to give it
to the Patapsco, until he had been silenced with: "Have them put it to
my credit, sir. I have known every member of that bank for years."

All these things were, of course, unknown to Harry, the ultimate
beneficiary. Who had filled the bucket, and how and why, were
unimportant facts to him. That it was full, and ready for his use,
brought with it the same sense of pleasure he would have felt on a hot
day at Moorlands when he had gone to the old well, drawn up the ice-cold
water, and, plunging in the sweet-smelling gourd, had drank to his
heart's content.

This was what wells were made for; and so were fathers, and big,
generous men like his Uncle George, who had dozens of friends ready to
cram money into his pocket for him to hand over to whoever wanted it and
without a moment's hesitation--just as Slater had handed him the money
he needed when Gilbert wanted it in a hurry.

Nor could it be expected that Harry, even with the examination of St.
George's accounts with the Patapsco and other institutions going on
under his very eyes, understood fully just what a bank failure really
meant. Half a dozen banks, he remembered, had gone to smash some few
years before, sending his father to town one morning at daylight, where
he stayed for a week, but no change, so far as he could recall, had
happened because of it at Moorlands. Indeed, his father had bought a new
coach for his mother the very next week, out of what he had "saved from
the wreck," so he had told her.

It was not until the hurried overhauling of a mass of papers beneath
his uncle's hand, and the subsequent finding of a certain stray sheet
by Pawson, that the boy was aroused to a sense of the gravity of the
situation. And even then his interest did not become acute until,
the missing document identified, St. George had turned to Pawson and,
pointing to an item halfway down the column, had said in a lowered tone,
as if fearing to be overheard:

"You have the receipts, have you not, for everything on this
list?--Slater's account too, and Hampson's?"

"They are in the file beside you, sir."

"Well, that's a comfort, anyhow."

"And the balance"--here he examined a small book which lay open beside
him--"amounting to"--he paused--"is of course locked up in their
vaults?"

Harry had craned his head in instant attention. His quickened ears had
caught two familiar names. It was Slater who had loaned him the five
hundred dollars which he gave to Gilbert, which his father had commended
him for borrowing; and it was Hampson who had sold him the wretched
horse that had stumbled and broken his leg and had afterwards to be
shot.

"Slater, did you say, Uncle George--and Hampson? Aren't they my old
accounts?"

"Quite right, Mr. Rutter--quite right, sir." St. George tried to stop
him with a frown, but Pawson's face was turned towards Harry and he
failed to get the signal. "Quite right, and quite lucky; they were both
important items in Mr. Gadgem's list, and both checks passed through the
bank and were paid before the smash came."

The tones of Pawson's voice, the twisting together of his bony hands in
a sort of satisfied contentment, and the weary look on his uncle's face
were the opening of so many windows in the boy's brain. At the same
instant one of those creepy chills common to a man when some hitherto
undiscovered vista of impending disaster widens out before him, started
at the base of Harry's spine, crept up his shoulder-blades, shivered
along his arms, and lost itself in his benumbed fingers. This was
followed by a lump in his throat that nearly strangled him. He left his
chair and touched Pawson on the shoulder.

"Does this mean, Mr. Pawson--this money being locked up in the bank
vaults and not coming out for months--and may be never--does it mean
that Mr. Temple--well, that Uncle George--won't have enough money to
live on?" There was an anxious, vibrant tone in Harry's voice that
aroused St. George to a sense of the boy's share in the calamity and the
privations he must suffer because of it. Pawson hesitated and was about
to belittle the gravity of the situation when St. George stopped him.

"Yes--tell him--tell him everything, I have no secrets from Mr. Rutter.
Stop!--I'll tell him. It means, Harry"--and a brave smile played about
his lips--"that we will have to live on hog and hominy, may be, or
pretty nigh it--certainly for a while--not bad, old fellow, when you get
accustomed to it. Aunt Jemima makes very good hominy and--"

He stopped; the brave smile had faded from his face.

"By Jove!--that's something I didn't think of!--What will I do with the
dear old woman--It would break her heart--and Todd?"

Here was indeed something on which he had not counted! For him to forego
the luxuries that enriched his daily life was easy--he had often in his
hunting trips lived for weeks on sweet potato and a handful of cornmeal,
and slept on the bare ground with only a blanket over him, but that his
servants should be reduced to similar privations suggested possibilities
which appalled him. For the first time since the cruel announcement fell
from Rutter's lips the real situation, with all that it meant to his own
future and those dependent upon him, stared him in the face.

He looked up and caught Harry's anxious eyes scanning his own. His
old-time, unruffled spirit came to his assistance.

"No, son!" he cried in his cheeriest voice, springing to his feet--"no,
we won't worry. It will all come out right--we'll buckle down to it
together, you and I. Don't take it too much to heart--we'll get on
somehow."

But the boy was not reassured; in fact, he had become more anxious than
ever. Not only did the chill continue, but the lump in his throat grew
larger every minute.

"But, Uncle George--you told me you borrowed the money to pay those
bills my father sent me. And will you now have to pay that back as
well?" He did not ask of whom he had borrowed it, nor on what security,
nor would either Pawson or his uncle have told him, that being a
confidential matter.

"Well, that depends, Harry; but we won't have to pay it right away,
which is one comfort. And then again, I can go back to the law. I have
yet to make my maiden speech before a jury, but I can do it. Think
of it!--everybody in tears, the judge mopping his eyes--court-room
breathless. Oh, you just wait until your old uncle gets on his feet
before a bench and jury. Come along, old fellow--let us go up into the
house." Then in a serious tone--his back to Harry--"Pawson, please bring
the full accounts with you in the morning, and now let me thank you for
your courtesy. You have been extremely civil, sir, and I appreciate it
most highly."

When they had reached the front walk and were about to climb the
immaculate steps, St. George, still determined to divert the boy's
thoughts from his own financial straits, said with a laugh:

"Todd told you, of course, about your father paying me a visit this
morning, did he not?"

"Oh, yes!--a most extraordinary account. You must have enjoyed it,"
replied Harry, trying to fall into his uncle's mood, his heart growing
heavier every moment. "What did he want?"

One of St. George's heat-lightning smiles played over his face: "He
wanted two things. He first wanted you, and then he wanted a receipt for
a month's board--YOUR board, remember! He went away without either."

A new perspective suddenly opened up in Harry's mind; one that had a
gleam of sunshine athwart it.

"But, Uncle George!" he burst out--"don't forget that my father owes
you all the money you paid for me! That, of course, will eventually come
back to you." This came in a tone of great relief, as if the money was
already in his hand.

St. George's face hardened: "None of it will come back to me," he
rejoined in a positive tone. "He doesn't owe me one single penny and he
never will. That money he owes to you. Whatever you may happen to owe me
can wait until you are able to pay it. And now while I am talking about
it, there is another thing your father owes you, and that is an humble
apology, and that he will pay one of these days in tears and agony. You
are neither a beggar nor a cringing dog, and you never will be so long
as I can help it!" He stopped, rested his hand on the boy's shoulder,
and with a quiver in his voice added:

"Your hand, my son. Short commons after this, may be, but we will make
the fight together."

When the two passed through the front door and stepped into the
dining-room they found it filled with gentlemen--friends who had heard
of the crash and who had come either to extend their sympathy or offer
their bank accounts. They had heard of the catastrophe at the club and
had instantly left their seats and walked across the park in a body.

To one and all St. George gave a warm pressure of the hand and a bright
smile. Had he been the master of ceremonies at a state reception he
could not have been more self-possessed or more gallant; his troubles
were for himself, never for his guests.

"All in a lifetime--but I am not worrying. The Patapsco pulled out once
before and it may again. My only regret is that I cannot, at least for
a time, have as many of you as I would wish under my mahogany. But don't
let us borrow any trouble; certainly not to-day. Todd, get some glasses
and bring me that bottle of Madeira--the one there on the sideboard!"
Here he took the precious fluid from Todd's hand and holding high the
crusted bottle said with a dry smile--one his friends knew when his
irony was aroused: "That wine, gentlemen, saw the light at a time when
a man locked his money in an iron box to keep outside thieves from
stealing it; to-day he locks his money in a bank's vault and locks the
thieves in with it. Extraordinary, is it not, how we gentlemen trust
each other? Here, Todd, draw the cork!... Slowly.... Now hand me the
bottle--yes--Clayton, that's the same wine that you and Kennedy liked so
much the night we had Mr. Poe with us. It is really about all there is
left of my father's Black Warrior of 1810. I thought it was all gone,
but Todd found two more the other day, one of which I sent to Kennedy.
This is the other. Kennedy writes me he is keeping his until we can
drink it together. Is everybody's glass full? Then my old toast if you
will permit me: 'Here's to love and laughter, and every true friend of
my true friend my own!'"


Before the groups had dispersed Harry had the facts in his
possession--principally from Judge Pancoast, who gave him a full account
of the bank's collapse, some papers having been handed up to him on the
bench that morning. Summed up, his uncle was practically ruined--and he,
Harry, was the cause of it--the innocent cause, perhaps, but the cause
all the same: but for his father's cruelty and his own debts St. George
would never have mortgaged his home. That an additional sum--his uncle's
entire deposit--had been swallowed up in the crash was but part of the
same misfortune. Poe's lines were true, then--never so true as now:

"Some unhappy master whom unmerciful disaster Followed fast and followed
faster..."

This, then, was ever after to be his place in life--to bring misery
wherever he went.

He caught up his hat and walked through the park beside the judge,
hoping for some further details of his uncle's present plight and future
condition, but the only thing his Honor added to what he already knew
was his wonderment over the fact that St. George, having no immediate
use for the money except to pay his bills, should have raised so large a
sum on a mortgage instead of borrowing it from his friends. It was here
that Harry's heart gave a bound:--no one, then, but his uncle, Pawson,
and himself knew that he alone was responsible for the catastrophe!
That his father should have learned of his share in it did not enter the
boy's head.

Todd answered his knock on his return, and in reply to his inquiry
informed him that he must not sit up, as "Marse George" had left word
that he would be detained until late at a meeting of the creditors of
the bank.

And so the unhappy lad, his supper over, sought his bed and, as had
occurred more than once before, spent the earlier hours of the night
gazing at the ceiling and wondering what would become of him.




CHAPTER XVIII



With the breaking of the dawn Harry's mind was made up. Before the sun
was an hour high he had dressed hurriedly, stolen downstairs so as to
wake no one, and closing the front door softly behind him had taken the
long path through the park in the direction of the wharves. Once there,
he made the rounds of the shipping offices from Light Street wharf to
the Falls--and by the time St. George had finished dressing--certainly
before he was through his coffee--had entered the name of Henry Rutter
on two sets of books--one for a position as supercargo and the other,
should nothing better be open, as common seaman. All he insisted upon
was that the ship should sail at once. As to the destination, that was
of no consequence, nor did the length of the voyage make any difference.
He remembered that his intimate friend, Gilbert, had some months before
gone as supercargo to China, his father wanting him to see something of
the world; and if a similar position were open he could, of course, give
references as to his character--a question the agent asked him--but,
then, Gilbert had a father to help him. Should no such position be
available, he would ship before the mast, or serve as cook or cabin-boy,
or even scullion--but he would not live another day or hour dependent on
his dear Uncle George, who had impoverished himself in his behalf.

He selected the sea instead of going into the army as a common soldier
because the sea had always appealed to him. He loved its freedom and
its dangers. Then again, he was young and strong--could climb like a
cat--sail a boat--swim--Yes!--the sea was the place! He could get far
enough away behind its horizons to hide the struggle he must make to
accomplish the one purpose of his life--the earning of his debt.

Filled with this idea he began to perfect his plans, determining to take
no one into his confidence until the day before the ship was ready to
sail. He would then send for his mother and Alec--bring them all down
to St. George's house and announce his intention. That was the best and
wisest way. As for Kate--who had now been at home some weeks--he
would pour out his heart to her in a letter. This was better than an
interview, which she would doubtless refuse:--a letter she would be
obliged to read and, perhaps, answer. As for his dear Uncle George--it
would be like tearing his heart out to leave him, but this wrench had to
be met and it was best to do it quickly and have done with it.

When this last thought took possession a sudden faintness crept over
him. How could he leave his uncle? What St. George was to him no one
but himself knew--father, friend, comrade, adviser--standard of men and
morals--all and more was his beloved uncle. No thought of his heart but
he had given him, and never once had he been misunderstood. He could put
his arm about his uncle's neck as he would about his mother's and not
be thought effeminate or childish. And the courtesy and dignity and
fairness with which he had been treated; and the respect St. George
showed him--and he only a boy: compelling his older men friends to do
the same. Never letting him feel that any foolish act of his young life
had been criticised, or that any one had ever thought the less of him
because of them.

Breakfast over, during which no allusion was made either to what St.
George had accomplished at the conference of creditors the night before,
or to Harry's early rising--the boy made his way into the park and took
the path he loved. It was autumn, and the mild morning air bespoke an
Indian summer day. Passing beneath the lusty magnolias, which flaunted
here and there their glossy leaves, he paused under one of the big oaks,
whose branches, stripped of most of their foliage, still sheltered a
small, vine-covered arbor where he and Kate had often sat--indeed, it
was within its cool shade that he had first told her of his love. Here
he settled himself on a small wooden bench outside the retreat and gave
his thoughts full rein--not to repine, nor to revive his troubles, which
he meant to put behind him--but to plan out the letter he was to write
Kate. This must be clear and convincing and tell the whole story of his
heart. That he might empty it the better he had chosen this place made
sacred by her presence. Then again, the park was generally deserted at
this hour--the hour between the passing of the men of business and
the coming of the children and nurses--and he would not be
interrupted--certainly not before this arbor--one off by itself and away
from passers-by.

He seated himself on the bench, his eyes overlooking the park. All the
hours he had passed with Kate beneath the wide-spreading trees rose in
his mind; the day they had read aloud to each other, her pretty feet
tucked under her so that the dreadful ants couldn't touch her dainty
stockings; the morning when she was late and he had waited and fumed
stretching minutes into hours in his impatience; that summer night
when the two had hidden behind the big oak so that he could kiss her
good-night and none of the others see.

With these memories stirring, his letter was forgotten, and his head
dropped upon his breast, as if the weight of all he had lost was greater
than he could bear. Grasping his walking-stick the tighter he began
tracing figures in the gravel, his thoughts following each line.
Suddenly his ears caught the sound of a quick step--one he thought
strangely familiar.

He raised his eyes.

Kate had passed him and had given no sign of her presence!

He sprang from his seat:

"Kate!--KATE!--Are you going to treat me as my father treated me! Don't,
please!--You'll never see me again--but don't cut me like that: I have
never done anything but love you!"

The girl came to a halt, but she did not turn her head, nor did she
answer.

"Please, Kate--won't you speak to me? It may be the last time I shall
ever see you. I am going away from Kennedy Square. I was going to write
you a letter; I came out here to think of what I ought to say--"

She raised her head and half turned her trembling body so that she could
see his face, her eyes reading his.

"I didn't think you wanted me to speak to you or you would have looked
up."

"I didn't see you until you had passed. Can't we sit down here?--no one
will see us."

She suffered him to take her hand and lead her to the bench. There
she sat, her eyes still searching his face--a wondering, eager look,
discovering every moment some old remembered spot--an eyebrow, or the
line at the corner of the mouth, or the round of the cheek--each and
every one bringing back to her the days that were past and gone never to
return.

"You are going away?" she said at last--"why? Aren't you happy with
Uncle George? He would miss you, I am sure." She had let the scarf fall
from her shoulders as she spoke, bringing into view the full round of
her exquisite throat. He had caught its flash, but he could not trust
himself to look the closer.

"Not any more than I shall miss him," he rejoined sadly; "but he has
lost almost everything he had in the bank failure and I cannot have him
support me any longer--so I am going to sea."

Kate started forward and laid her hand on his wrist: "To sea!--in a
ship! Where?" The inquiry came with such suddenness and with so keen a
note of pain in her voice that Harry's heart gave a bound. It was not
St. George's losses then she was thinking of--she was thinking of him!
He raised his eyes quickly and studied her face the closer; then his
heart sank again. No!--he was wrong--there was only wonder in her gaze;
only her usual curiosity to know every detail of what was going on
around her.

With a sigh he resumed his bent position, talking to the end of his
walking-stick tracing figures in the gravel: "I shall go to Rio,
probably," he continued in the same despondent tone--"or China. That's
why I called after you. I sail day after to-morrow--Saturday at the
latest--and it may be a good many years before I get back again, and so
I didn't want to go, Kate, without telling you that--that--I forgive you
for everything you have done to me--and whether you forgive me or not,
I have kept my promises to you, and I will always keep them as long as I
live."

"What does dear Uncle George think of it?" She too was addressing the
end of the stick; gaining time to make up her mind what to do and say.
The old wound, of course, could not be opened, but she might save him
and herself from fresh ones.

"He doesn't know I am going; nobody knows but you. I have been a curse
to every one who has been kind to me, and I am going now where there
will be nobody but strangers about me. To leave Uncle George breaks my
heart, but so does it break my heart to leave my precious mother and
dear old Alec, who cries all the time and has now taken to his bed, I
hear."

She waited, but her name was not added to the list, nor did he raise his
head.

"I deserve it all, I suspect," he went on, "or it wouldn't be sent
to me; but it's over now. If I ever come back it will be when I am
satisfied with myself; if I never come back, why then my former hard
luck has followed me--that's all. And now may I talk to you, Kate, as
I used to do sometimes?" He straightened up, threw down his cane, and
turned his shoulders so he could look her squarely in the eyes. "If I
say anything that offends you you can get up and walk away and I won't
follow you, nor will I add another word. You may never see me again, and
if it is not what I ought to say, you can forget it all when I am gone.
Kate!"--he paused, and for a moment it was all he could do to control
himself. "What I want to tell you first is this--that I haven't had a
happy day or hour since that night on the stairs in my father's house.
Whether I was right or wrong I don't know; what followed is what I
couldn't help, but that part I don't regret, and if any one should
behave to you as Willits did I would do it over again. What I do regret
is the pain it has caused you. And now here comes this awful sorrow to
Uncle George, and I am the cause of that too."

She turned her face quickly, the color leaving her cheeks as if alarmed.
Had he been behaving badly again? But he swept it away with his next
sentence.

"You see, my father refused to pay any of the bills I owed and
Uncle George paid them for me--and I can't have that go on a day
longer--certainly not now."

Kate's shoulders relaxed. A sigh of relief spent itself; Harry was still
an honest gentleman, whatever else he might have done!

"And now comes the worst of it, Kate." His voice sank almost to
a whisper, as if even the birds should not hear this part of his
confession: "Yes--the worst of it--that I have had all this to
suffer--all this misery to endure--all these insults of my father to
bear without you! Always, before, we have talked things out together;
then you were shut away and I could only look up at your windows and
rack my brain wondering where you were and what you were doing. It's all
over now--you love somebody else--but I shall never love anybody else: I
can't! I don't want to! You are the last thing I kiss before I close my
eyes; I shut them and kiss only the air--but it is your lips I feel; and
you are the first thing I open them upon when I wake. It will always be
so, Kate--you are my body, my soul, and my life. I shall never have you
again, I know, but I shall have your memory, and that is sweeter and
more precious to me than all else in the world!"

"Harry!" There was a strange cadence in her voice--not of
self-defence--not of recrimination--only of overwhelming pity: "Don't
you think that I too have had my troubles? Do you think it was nothing
to me to love you as I did and have--" She stopped, drew in her breath
as if to bolster up some inward resolution, and then with a brave lift
of the head added: "No, I won't go into that--not to-day."

"Yes--tell me all of it--you can't hurt me more than you have done. But
you may be right--no, we won't talk of that part of it. And now, Kate,
I won't ask you to stay any longer; I am glad I saw you--it was better
than writing." He leaned forward: "Let me look into your face once
more, won't you?--so I can remember the better.... Yes--the same dear
eyes--and the hair growing low on the temples, and the beautiful mouth
and--No--I sha'n't forget--I never have." He rose from his seat and held
out his hand: "You'll take it, won't you?--just once--Good-by!"

She had not moved, nor had she grasped his hand; her face was still
towards him, her whole frame tense, the tears crowding to the lids.

"Sit down, Harry. I can't let you go like this. Tell me something
more of where you are going. Why must you go to sea? Can't you support
yourself here?--isn't there something you can get to do? I will see my
father and find out if--"

"No, you won't." There was a note almost of defiance in his voice--one
she had never heard before. "I am through with accepting favors from any
living man. Hereafter I stand in my own shoes, independent of everybody.
My father is the only person who has a right to give me help, and as he
refuses absolutely to do anything more than pay my board, I must fall
back on myself. I didn't see these things in this same way when Uncle
George paid my debts, or even when he took me into his home as his
guest, but I do now."

Something gave a little bound in Kate's heart. This manly independence
was one of the things she had in the old days hoped was in him. What had
come over her former lover, she wondered.

"And another thing, Kate"--she was listening eagerly--she could not
believe it was Harry who was speaking--"if you were to tell me this
moment that you loved me again and would marry me, and I still be as I
am to-day--outlawed by my father and dependent on charity--I would
not do it. I can't live on your money, and I have none of my own.
Furthermore, I owe dear Uncle George his money in such a way that I can
never pay it back except I earn it, and that I can't do here. To borrow
it of somebody else to pay him would be more disgraceful still."

Again her heart gave a bound. Her father had followed the opposite
course, and she knew for a certainty just what some men thought of him,
and she could as easily recall half a dozen younger men who had that
very summer been willing to play the same game with herself. Something
warm and sympathetic struggled up through her reserve.

"Would you stay, Harry, if I asked you to?" she said in almost a
whisper. She had not meant to put the question quite in that way, but
somehow it had asked itself.

He looked at her with his soft brown eyes, the long lashes shading their
tender brilliancy. He had guessed nothing of the newly awakened throb
in her heart; only his situation stared him in the face, and in this she
had no controlling interest; nor could she now that she loved somebody
else.

"No, Kate, it wouldn't alter anything. It would be putting off the day
when it would all have to be done over again; and then it would be still
worse because of the hopes it had raised."

"Do you really mean, Harry, that you would not stay if I asked you?" It
was not her heart which was speaking, but the pride of the woman who had
always had her own way.

"I certainly do," he answered emphatically, his voice ringing clear.
"Every day I lose is just so much taken from a decent, independent
life."

A sudden revulsion of feeling swept through her. This was the last thing
she had expected from Harry. What had come over him that he should deny
her anything?--he who had always obeyed her slightest wish. Then a new
thought entered her head--why should she humble herself to ask any more
questions? With a quick movement she gained her feet and stood toying
with her dress, arranging the lace scarf about her throat, tightening
the wide strings that held her teacup of a bonnet close to her face. She
raised her eyes and stole a glance at him. The lips were still firmly
set with the resolve that had tightened them, but his eyes were brimming
tears.

As suddenly as her pride had risen did it die out. All the tenderness of
her nature welled up. She made one step in his direction. She was about
to speak, but he had not moved, nor did his face relax. She saw that
nothing could shake his resolve; they were as far apart as if the seas
already rolled between them. She held out her hand, and with that same
note of infinite pathos which he knew so well when she spoke straight
from her heart, said as she laid her fingers in his:

"Good-by, and God bless you, Harry."

"Good-by, Kate," he murmured in barely audible tones. "May I--may
I--kiss you on the forehead, as I always used to do when I left you--"

She bent her head: he leaned over and touched the spot with his lips as
reverently as a sinner kisses the garment of a saint, then, choking down
her tears, all her body unstrung, her mind in a whirl, she turned and
passed out of the park.


That same afternoon Kate called her father into her little sitting-room
at the top of the stairs and shut the door.

"Harry Rutter is going to sea as a common sailor on one of the ships
leaving here in a couple of days. Can you find out which one?--it may be
one of your own." He was still perfunctory agent of the line.

"Young Rutter going to sea!"--the nomenclature of "my dear Harry" had
ended since the colonel had disinherited him. "Well--that is news! I
suspect that will be the best place for him; then if he plays any of his
pranks there will be somebody around with a cat-o'-nine-tails to take it
out of him. Going to sea, is he?"

Kate looked at him with lowered lids, her lips curling slightly, but
she did not defend the culprit. It was only one of what Prim called his
"jokes:" he was the last man in the world to wish any such punishment.
Moreover, she knew her father much better than the Honorable Prim knew
his daughter, and whenever she had a favor to ask was invariably careful
not to let his little tea-kettle boil over.

"Only a short time ago, father, you got a berth as supercargo on one of
my grandfather's ships for Mark Gilbert. Can't you do it for Harry?"

"But, Kate, that was quite a different thing. Mark's father came to me
and asked it as a special favor." His assumed authority at the shipping
office rarely extended to the appointing of officers--not when the
younger partners objected.

"Well, Harry's father won't come to you, nor will Harry; and it isn't
a different thing. It's exactly the same thing so far as you are
concerned, and there is a greater reason for Harry, for he is alone in
the world and he is not used to hard work of any kind, and it is cruel
to make a common sailor of him."

"Why, I thought Temple was fathering him."

"So Uncle George has, and would always look after him, but Harry is too
brave and manly to live upon him any longer, now that Uncle George has
lost most of his money. Will you see Mr. Pendergast, or shall I go down
to the office?"

Prim mused for a moment. "There may not be a vacancy," he ventured, "but
I will inquire. The Ranger sails on Friday for the River Plate, and
I will have Mr. Pendergast come and see me. Supercargoes are of very
little use, my dear, unless they have had some business training, and
this young man, of course, has had none at all."

"This young man, indeed!" thought Kate with a sigh, stifling her
indignation. "Poor Harry!--no one need treat him any longer with even
common courtesy, now that St. George, his last hold, had been swept
away."

"I think on the whole I had better attend to it myself," she added with
some impatience. "I don't want anything to go wrong about it."

"No, I'll see him, Kate; just leave it all to me."

He had already decided what to do--or what he would try to do--when he
first heard the boy wanted to leave the country. What troubled him was
what the managing partner of the line might think of the proposition.
As long as Harry remained at home and within reach any number of
things might happen--even a return of the old love. With the scapegrace
half-way around the world some other man might have a chance--Willits,
especially, who had proved himself in every way worthy of his daughter,
and who would soon be one of the leading lawyers of the State if he kept
on.

With the closing of the door upon her father, Kate threw herself upon
her lounge. One by one the salient features of her interview with Harry
passed in review: his pleading for some word of comfort; some note of
forgiveness with which to cheer the hours of his exile.--"You are the
last thing I kiss before I close my eyes." Then his open defiance of her
expressed wishes when they conflicted with his own set purpose of going
away and staying away until he made up his mind to return. While the
first brought with it a certain contented satisfaction--something she
had expected and was glad of--the last aroused only indignation and
revolt. Her brow tightened, and the determination of the old seadog--her
grandfather Barkeley--played over her countenance. She no longer, then,
filled Harry's life, controlling all his actions; she no longer inspired
his hopes. Rather than marry her he would work as a common sailor.
Yes--he had said so, and with his head up and his voice ringing brave
and clear. She was proud of him for it--she had never been so proud of
him--but why no trace of herself in his resolve; except in his allusion
to the duel, when he said he would do it again should any one insult
her? It was courteous, of course, for him to feel that way, however much
she abhorred the system of settling such disputes. But, then, he would
do that for any other woman--would, no doubt, for some woman he had not
yet seen. In this he was the son of his father and the same Harry--but
in everything else he was a changed man--and never more changed than in
his attitude toward her.

With these thoughts racking her brain she rose from the lounge and began
pacing the floor, peering out between the curtains of her room, her
eyes wandering over the park as if she could still see him between
the branches. Then her mind cleared and the true situation developed
itself:--for months she had hugged to herself the comforting thought
that she had only to stretch out her hand and bring him to her feet. He
had now looked her full in the face and proclaimed his freedom. It was
as if she had caged a bird and found the door open and the prisoner
singing in a tree overhead.


That same night she sat by her wood fire in her chamber, her old black
mammy--Mammy Henny--bending close, combing out her marvellous hair. She
had been studying the coals, watching the little castles pile and fall;
the quick smothering of slowly fading sparks under a blanket of gray
ashes, and the wavering, flickering light that died on the curling
smoke. She had not spoken for a long time, when the old woman roused
her.

"Whar was you dis mawnin', honey chile? Mister Willits done wait mo'n
ha'f a hour, den he say he come back an' fetch his sorrel horse wid him
dis arternoon an' take ye ridin'. But he ain't come--dat is, Ben done
tol' me so."

"No, mammy," she answered wearily--"I sent him word not to--I didn't
feel like riding to-day."




CHAPTER XIX



Over two years have passed away since that mournful night when Harry
with his hand in St. George's, his voice choking, had declared his
determination to leave him the next day and seek his fortunes across the
seas.

It was a cruel blow to Temple, coming as it did on the heels of his own
disaster, but when the first shock had passed he could but admire the
lad for his pluck and love him the better for his independence.

"All right, my son," he had said, concealing as best he could his
intense suffering over the loss of his companion. "I'll try and get
along. But remember I am here--and the door is always open. I don't
blame you--I would do the same thing were I in your place. And now about
Kate--what shall I say to her?"

"Nothing. I said it all this morning. She doesn't love me any more--she
would have passed me by without speaking had I not called to her. She'll
be married to Willits before I come back--if I ever do come back. But
leaving Kate is easier than leaving you. You have stuck to me all the
way through, and Kate--well--perhaps she hasn't understood--perhaps her
father has been talking to her--I don't know. Anyhow, it's all over. If
I had had any doubts about it before, this morning's talk settled it.
The sea is the best place for me. I can support myself anyway for a
while until I can help you."

Yes! the boy was right, St. George had said to himself. It was all over
between them. Kate's reason had triumphed at last. She, perhaps, was not
to blame. Her experiences had been trying and she was still confronted
by influences bitterly opposed to Harry, and largely in favor of
Willits, for, weak specimen as Prim was, he was still her father, and in
so important a step as her marriage, must naturally exercise authority.
As for his own influence, that, he realized, had come to an end at
their last interview: the whole thing, he must admit, was
disappointing--cruelly so--the keenest disappointment of his life.

Many a night since he bid Harry good-by had he sat alone by that same
fire, his dogs his only companions, the boy's words ringing in his ears:
"Leaving Kate is easier than leaving you!" Had it been the other way and
he the exile, it would have been nearer the truth, he often thought, for
nothing in his whole life had left so great a void in his heart as the
loss of the boy he loved. Not that he was ever completely disheartened;
that was not his nature; there was always daylight ahead--the day when
Harry would come back and their old life begin again. With this in store
for him he had led his life as best he could, visiting his friends
in the country, entertaining in a simple, inexpensive way, hunting at
Wesley, where he and Peggy Coston would exchange confidences and funny
stories; dining out; fishing in the early spring; getting poorer and
poorer in pocket, and yet never complaining, his philosophy being that
it would be brighter in the morning, and it always was--to him.

And yet if the truth be told his own situation had not improved--in
fact, it had grown steadily worse. Only one payment of interest had been
made on the mortgage and the owner was already threatening foreclosure
proceedings. Pawson's intervention alone had staved off the fatal climax
by promising the holder to keep the loan alive by the collection of some
old debts--borrowed money and the like--due St. George for years and
which his good nature had allowed to run on indefinitely until some of
them were practically outlawed. Indeed it was only through resources
like this, in all of which Pawson helped, and with the collecting of
some small ground rents, that kept Todd and Jemima in their places and
the larder comfortably filled. As to the bank--there was still hope that
some small percentage would be paid the depositors, it being the
general opinion that the directors were personally liable because of
the irregularities which the smash had uncovered--but this would take
months, if not years, to work out.

His greatest comfort was in the wanderer's letters. These he would watch
for with the eagerness of a girl hungry for news of her distant lover.
For the first few months these came by every possible mail, most of them
directed to himself; others to his mother, Mrs. Rutter driving in from
Moorlands to compare notes with St. George. Then, as the boy made his
way further into the interior the intervals were greater--sometimes a
month passed without news of him.

"We are short-handed," he wrote St. George, "owing to fever on the
voyage out on the Ranger, and though I am supercargo and sit at the
captain's table, I have to turn to and work like any of the others--fine
exercise, but my hands are cracked and blistered and full of tar. I'll
have to wear gloves the next time I dine with you."

Not a word of this to his mother--no such hardships for her tender ears:

"Tell me about Kate, mother"--this from Rio--"how she looks; what she
says; does she ever mention my name? My love to Alec. Is Matthew still
caring for Spitfire, or has my father sold her?" Then followed the line:
"Give my father my respectful regards; I would send my love, but he no
longer cares for it."

The dear lady did not deliver the message. Indeed Harry's departure
had so widened the breach between the colonel and herself that they
practically occupied different parts of the house as far removed from
each other as possible. She had denounced him first to his face for the
boy's self-imposed exile, and again behind his back to her intimates.
Nor did her resolve waver even when the colonel was thrown from his
horse and so badly hurt that his eyesight was greatly impaired. "It is
a judgment on you," she had said, drawing her frail body up to its full
height. "You will now learn what other people suffer," and would have
kept on upstairs to her own room had not her heart softened at his
helplessness--a new role for the colonel.

He had made no answer at the time: he never answered her back. She was
too frail to be angry with, and then she was right about his being the
cause of her suffering--the first cause of it, at least. He had not
yet arrived at the point where he censured himself for all that had
happened. In fact since Harry's sudden exit, made without a word to
anybody at Moorlands except his mother and Alec, who went to town on
a hurry message,--a slight which cut him to the quick--he had steadily
laid the blame on everybody else connected with the affair;--generally
on St. George for his interference in his peace-making programme at the
club and his refusal, when ruined financially, to send the boy back to
him in an humble and contrite spirit. Neither had he recovered from the
wrath he had felt when, having sent John Gorsuch to ascertain from
St. George the amount of money he had paid out for his son, Temple had
politely sent Gorsuch, in charge of Todd, downstairs to Pawson, who
in turn, after listening to Todd's whispered message, had with equal
politeness shown Gorsuch the door, the colonel's signed check--the
amount unfilled--still in Gorsuch's pocket.

It was only when the Lord of Moorlands went into town to spend an
hour or so with Kate--and he was a frequent visitor prior to his
accident--that his old manner returned. He loved the girl dearly and was
never tired of talking to her. She was the only woman who would listen
when he poured out his heart.

And Kate always welcomed him gladly. She liked strong, decided men
even if they sometimes erred in their conclusions. Her grandfather,
old Captain Barkeley, had had the same masterfulness. He had been in
absolute command in his earlier years, and he had kept in command all
his life. His word was law, and he was generally right. She was twelve
years old when he died, and had, therefore, ample opportunity to know.
It was her grandfather's strong personality, in fact, which had given
her so clear an idea of her father's many weaknesses. Rutter, she felt,
was a combination of both Barkeley and Prim--forceful and yet warped
by prejudices; dominating yet intolerant; able to do big things and
contented with little ones. It was forcefulness, despite his many
shortcomings, which most appealed to her.

Moreover, she saw much of Harry in him. It was that which made her so
willing to listen--she continually comparing the father to the son.
These comparisons were invariably made in a circle, beginning at
Rutter's brown eyes, taking in his features and peculiarities--many of
them reproduced in his son's--such as the firm set of the lips and the
square line of the chin--and ending, quite naturally, with the brown
orbs again. While Harry's matched the color and shape, and often the
fierce glare of the father's, they could also, she said to herself,
shine with the soft light of the mother's. It was from the mother's
side, then, that there came the willingness to yield to whatever tempted
him--it may be to drink--to a false sense of honor--to herself: Harry
being her slave instead of her master. And the other men around her--so
far as yielding was concerned (here her brow would tighten and her lips
straighten)--were no better. Even Uncle George must take her own "No"
for an answer and believe it when she meant quite a different thing. And
once more would her soul break out in revolt over the web in which she
had become entangled, and once more would she cry herself to sleep.

Nobody but her old black mammy knew how tragic had been her sufferings,
how many bitter hours she had passed, nor how many bitter tears she had
shed. Yet even old Henny could not comfort her, nor was there any one
else to whom the girl could pour out her heart. She had, it is true,
kept up her intimacy with her Uncle George--hardly a week passed that
she was not a visitor at his house or he at hers--but they had long
since refrained from discussing Harry. Not because he did not want to
talk about him, but because she would not let him--Of course not!

To Richard Horn, however, strange to say, she often turned--not so much
for confidences as for a broader understanding of life. The thoughtful
inventor was not so hedged about by social restrictions, and would break
out in spontaneous admiration of Harry, saying with a decisive nod of
his head, "A fine, splendid young fellow, my dear Kate; I recognized
it first at St. George's dinner to Mr. Poe, and if I may say so, a
much-abused young man whose only sin is that he, like many another about
us, has been born under a waning star in a sky full of murky clouds; one
that the fresh breeze of a new civilization will some day clear away"--a
deduction which Kate could not quite grasp, but which comforted her
greatly.

It delighted her, too, to hear him talk of the notable occurrences
taking place about them. "You are wonderfully intelligent, my dear,"
he had said to her on one occasion, "and should miss nothing of the
developments that are going on about us;" and in proof of it had the
very next day taken her to an exhibition of Mr. Morse's new telegraph,
given at the Institute, at which two operators, each with an instrument,
the men in sight of each other, but too far apart to be in collusion,
were sending and answering the messages through wires stretched around
the hall. She, at Richard's suggestion, had written a message herself,
which she handed to the nearest operator who had ticked it to his
fellow, and who at once read it to the audience. Even then many doubting
Thomases had cried out "Collusion," until Richard, rising in his seat,
had not only endorsed the truth of the reading, but explained the
invention, his statement silencing all opposition because of his
well-known standing and knowledge of kindred sciences.

Richard's readings also, from which Kate was never absent, and which had
now been resumed at his own house, greatly interested her. These of late
had been devoted to many of Poe's earlier poems and later tales, for
despite the scene at St. George's the inventor had never ceased to
believe in the poet.

And so with these occupations, studies, investigations, and social
pleasures--she never missing a ball or party (Willits always managing to
be with her)--and the spending of the summer months at the Red Sulphur,
where she had been pursued by half a dozen admirers--one a titled
Englishman--had the days and hours of the years of Harry's absence
passed slowly away.

At the end of the second winter a slight change occurred in the monotony
of her life. Her constant, unwavering devotee, Langdon Willits, fell
ill and had to be taken to the Eastern Shore, where the same old lot of
bandages--that is of the same pattern--and the same loyal sister were
impressed into service to nurse him back to health. The furrow Harry's
bullet had ploughed in his head still troubled him at times, especially
in the hot weather, and a horseback ride beside Kate one August day,
with the heat in the nineties, had started the subsoil of his cranium
to aching with such vehemence that Teackle had promptly packed it in ice
and ten days later its owner in blankets and had put them both aboard
the bay boat bound for the Eastern Shore.

Whether this new irritant--and everything seemed to annoy her now--had
begun to tell on our beautiful Kate, or whether the gayety of the winter
both at home and in Washington, where she had spent some weeks during
the season, had tired her out, certain it was that when the spring came
the life had gone out of her step and the color from her cheeks. Mammy
Henny had noticed it and had coddled her the more, crooning and petting
her; and her father had noticed it and had begun to be anxious, and at
last St. George had stalked in and cried out in that breezy, joyous way
of his that nothing daunted:

"Here, you sweetheart!--what have you been doing to your cheeks--all the
roses out of them and pale as two lilies--and you never out of bed until
twelve o'clock in the day and looking then as if you hadn't had a wink
of sleep all night. Not a word out of you, Seymour, until I've finished.
I'm going to take Kate down to Tom Coston's and keep her there till she
gets well. Too many stuffy balls--too many late suppers--oyster roasts
and high doings. None of that at Tom's. Up at six and to bed at ten.
I've just had a letter from him and dear Peggy is crazy to have us come.
Take your mare along, Kate, and you won't lack fresh air. Now what do
you say, Seymour?"

Of course the Honorable Prim bobbed his honorable head and said he had
been worried himself over Kate's loss of appetite, and that if Temple
would, etc., etc.--he would--etc., etc.--and so Mammy Henny began to get
pink and white and other fluffy things together, and Ben, with Todd to
help, led Joan, her own beloved saddle horse, down to the dock and saw
that she was safely lodged between decks, and then up came a coach (all
this was two days later) and my lady drove off with two hair trunks in
front and a French bonnet box behind--St. George beside her, and fat
Mammy Henny in white kerchief and red bandanna, opposite, and Todd in
one of St. George's old shooting-jackets on the box next the driver,
with his feet on two of the dogs, the others having been loaned to a
friend.

And it was a great leave-taking when the party reached the wharf. Not
only were three or four of her girl friends present, but a dozen or more
of the old merchants forsook their desks, when the coach unlimbered,
most of them crossing the cobbles--some bare-headed, and all of them in
high stocks and swallow-tail coats--pens behind their ears, spectacles
on their pates--to bid the young princess good-by.

For Kate was still "our Kate," in the widest and broadest sense and the
pride and joy of all who knew her, and many who didn't. That she had a
dozen beaux--and that some of them had tried to bore holes in each other
for love of her; and that one of them was now a wanderer and another in
a state of collapse, if report were true--was quite as it should be. Men
had died for women a hundred times less worthy and a thousand times less
beautiful, and men would die of love again. When at last she made up her
mind she would choose the right man, and in the meantime God bless her
for just being alive.

And she was never more alive or more charming than to-day.

"Oh, how delightful of you, Mr. Murdoch, and you too, Mr. Bowdoin--and
Max--and all of you, to cross those wretched stones. No, wait, I'll come
to you--" she had called out, when with a stamp of her little feet she
had shaken the pleats from her skirt--adding when they had all kissed
her hand in turn--"Yes--I am going down to be dairy-maid at Peggy
Coston's," at which the bald-headed old fellows, with their hands
upraised in protest at so great a sacrilege, bowed to the ground, their
fingers on their ruffled shirt-fronts, and the younger ones lifted their
furry hats and kept them in the air until she had crossed the gang-plank
and Todd and Mammy Henny, and Ben who had come to help, lost their
several breaths getting the impatient dogs and baggage aboard--and so
she sailed away with Uncle George as chaperon, the whole party throwing
kisses back and forth.




CHAPTER XX



Their reception at Wesley, the ancestral home of the Costons, although
it was late at night when they arrived, was none the less joyous. Peggy
was the first to welcome the invalid, and Tom was not far behind.

"Give her to me, St. George," bubbled Peggy, enfolding the girl in her
arms. "You blessed thing! Oh, how glad I am to get hold of you! They
told me you were ill, child--not a word of truth in it! No, Mr. Coston,
you sha'n't even have one of her little fingers until I get through
loving her. What's your mammy's name--Henny? Well, Henny, you take Miss
Kate's things into her room--that one at the top of the stairs."

And then the Honorable Tom Coston said he'd be doggoned if he was going
to wait another minute, and he didn't--for Kate kissed him on both
cheeks and gave him her father's message, congratulating him on his
appointment as judge, and thanking him in advance for all the kindness
he would show his daughter.

But it was not until she awoke next morning and looked out between
the posts of her high bedstead through the small, wide-open window
overlooking the bay that her heart gave the first bound of real
gladness. She loved the sky and the dash of salt air, laden now with the
perfume of budding fruit trees, that blew straight in from the sea.
She loved, too, the stir and sough of the creaking pines and the cheery
calls from the barnyard. Here she could get her mind settled; here,
too, she could forget all the little things that had bothered her--there
would be no more invitations to accept or decline; no promises she must
keep. She and her Uncle George could have one long holiday--she needed
it and, goodness knows, he needed it after all his troubles--and they
would begin as soon as breakfast was over. And they did--the dogs
plunging ahead, the two hand in hand, St. George, guide and philosopher,
pointing out this and that characteristic feature of the once famous
estate and dilating on its past glory.

"Even in my father's day," he continued, his face lighting up, "it was
one of the great show places of the county. The stables held twenty
horses and a coach, besides no end of gigs and carryalls. This
broad road on which we walk was lined with flower-beds and shaded by
live-oaks. Over there, near that little grove, were three great barns
and lesser out-buildings, besides the negro quarters, smoke-houses, and
hay-ricks. Really a wonderful place in its day, Kate."

Then he went on to tell of how the verandas were shaded with
honeysuckles, and the halls, drawing-rooms, and dining-room crowded
with furniture; how there were yellow damask curtains, and screens, and
hair-cloth sofas and a harmonicon of musical glasses which was played
by wetting one's fingers in a bowl of water and passing them over the
rims--he had played on it himself when a boy; and slaves galore--nearly
one hundred of them, not to mention a thousand acres of tillable land
to plough and harrow, as well as sheep, oxen, pigs, chickens,
ducks--everything that a man of wealth and position might have had in
the old days, and about every one of which St. George had a memory.

Then when Tom's father, who was the sole heir, took charge (here his
voice dropped to a whisper) dissolution proceedings set in--and Tom
finished them! and St. George sighed heavily as he pointed out the
changes:--the quarters in ruins, the stables falling to pieces, the
gates tied up with strings or swinging loose; and the flocks, herds,
and live-stock things of the past. Nor had a negro been left--none Tom
really owned: one by one they had been sold or hired out, or gone
off nobody knew where, he being too lazy, or too indifferent, or too
good-natured, to hunt them up. The house, as Kate had seen, was equally
neglected. Even what remained of the old furniture was on its last
legs--the curtains patched, or in shreds--the carpets worn into holes.

Kate listened eagerly, but she did not sigh. It was all charming to her
in the soft spring sunshine, the air a perfume, the birds singing, the
blossoms bursting, the peach-trees anthems of praise--and best of all
her dear Uncle George strolling at her side. And then everything was so
clean and fresh and sweet in every nook and corner of the tumble-down
house. Peggy, as she soon discovered, looked after that--in fact Peggy
looked after everything that required looking after--and everything
did--including the judge. Mr. Coston was tired, Peggy would say, or Mr.
Coston had not been very well, so she just did it herself instead of
bothering him. Since his promotion it was generally "the judge" who was
too tired, being absorbed in his court duties, etc., etc. But it always
came with a laugh, and it was always genuine, for to wait upon him and
look after him and minister to him was her highest happiness.

Good for nothing as he would have been to some women--unpractical,
lazy--a man few sensible wives would have put up with--Peggy adored
him; and so did his children adore him, and so, for that matter, did his
neighbors, many of whom, although they ridiculed him behind his back,
could never escape the charm of his personality whenever they sat beside
his rocking-chair.

This chair--the only comfortable chair in the house, by the way--had, in
his less distinguished days, been his throne. In it he would sit all day
long, cutting and whittling, filing and polishing curious trinkets of
tortoise-shell for watch-guards and tiny baskets made of cherry-stones,
cunningly wrought and finished. He was an expert, too, in corn-cob
pipes, which he carved for all his friends; and pin-wheels for
everybody's children. When it came, however, to such matters as a
missing hinge to the front door, a brick under a tottering chimney, the
straightening of a falling fence, the repairing of a loose lock on the
smoke-house--or even the care of the family carryall, which despite its
great age and infirmities was often left out in the rain to rust and
ruin--these things must, of course, wait until the overworked father of
the house found time to look after them.

The children loved him the most. They asked for nothing better than to
fix him in his big chair by the fender, throw upon the fire a basket of
bark chips from the wood-yard, and enough pitch-pine knots to wake them
up, and after filling his pipe and lighting it, snuggle close--every
bend and curve of the wide-armed splint-bottomed comfort packed full,
all waiting to hear him tell one of his stories. Sometimes it was
the tale of the fish and the cuff-button--how he once dropped his
sleeve-link overboard, and how a year afterward he was in a shallop on
the Broadwater fishing for rockflsh when he caught a splendid fellow,
which when Aunt Patience cleaned--(here his voice would drop to a
whisper)--"What do you think!--why out popped the sleeve-link that was
in his cuff this minute!" And for the hundredth time the bit of
gold would be examined by each child in turn. Or it was the witch
story--about the Yahoo wild man with great horns and a lashing tail, who
lived in the swamp and went howling and prowling about for plunder and
prey. (This was always given with a low, prolonged growl, like a dog in
pain--all the children shuddering.) And then followed the oft-told tale
of how this same terrible Yahoo once came up with Hagar, who was riding
a witch pony to get to the witches' dance in the cane-brake, and how
he made off with her to the swamp, where she had had to cook for
him--ever--ever--ever since. (Long-drawn breath, showing that all was
over for that day at least.)

Todd got the true inwardness of the situation before he had been many
days at Wesley: for the scene with the children was often repeated when
court was not in session.

"Fo' Gawd, Marse George, hab you had time to watch dat gemman, de jedge?
Dey do say he's sumpin' great, but I tell ye he's dat lazy a fly stuck
in 'lasses 'd pass him on de road."

St. George laughed heartily in reply, but he did not reprimand him.

"What makes you think so, Todd?"

"Can't help thinkin' so. I wuz standin' by de po'ch yisterday holdin'
Miss Kate's mare, when I yere de mistis ask de jedge ter go out an' git
'er some kindlin' f'om de wood-pile. He sot a-rockin' hisse'f in dat big
cheer ob his'n an' I yered him say--'Yes, in a minute,' but he didn't
move. Den she holler ag'in at him an' still he rock hisse'f, sayin' he's
comin'. Den, fust thing I knowed out she come to de woodpile an' git it
herse'f, an' den when she pass him wid 'er arms full o' wood he look
up an' say--'Peggy, come yere an' kiss me--I dunno what we'd do widout
ye--you'se de Lawd's anointed, sho'.'"

Kate got no end of amusement out of him, and would often walk with him
to court that she might listen to his drolleries--especially his queer
views of life--the simplest and most unaffected to which she had ever
bent her ears. Now and then, as time went on, despite her good-natured
toleration of his want of independence--he being always dominated by
his wife--she chanced, to her great surprise, upon some nuggets of hard
common-sense of so high an assay that they might really be graded as
wisdom--his analysis of men and women being particularly surprising.
Those little twinkling, and sometimes sleepy, eyes of his, now that she
began to study him the closer, reminded her of the unreadable eyes of
an elephant she had once seen--eyes that presaged nothing but inertia,
until whack went the trunk and over toppled the boy who had teased him.

And with this new discovery there developed at last a certain respect
for the lazy, good-natured, droll old man. Opinions which she had
heretofore laughed at suddenly became of value; criticisms which she had
passed over in silence seemed worthy of further consideration.

Peggy, however, fitted into all the tender places of her heart. She had
never known her own mother; all she remembered was a face bending close
and a soft hand that tucked in the coverlet one night when she couldn't
sleep. The memory had haunted her from the days of her childhood--clear
and distinct, with every detail in place. Had there been light enough in
her mother's bed-room, she was sure she could have added the dear face
itself to her recollection. Plump, full-bosomed, rosy-cheeked Peggy
(fifteen years younger than Tom) supplied the touch and voice, and all
the tenderness as well, that these sad memories recalled, and all that
the motherless girl had yearned for.

And the simple, uneventful life--one without restraints of any kind,
greatly satisfied her: so different from her own at home with Prim as
Chief Regulator. Everybody, to her delight, did as they pleased, each
one following the bent of his or her inclination. St. George was out at
daybreak in the duck-blinds, or, breakfast over, roaming the fields with
his dogs, Todd a close attendant. The judge would stroll over to court
an hour or more late, only to find an equally careless and contented
group blocking up the door--"po' white trash" most of them, each one
with a grievance. Whenever St. George accompanied him, and he often did,
his Honor would spend even less time on the bench--cutting short both
ends of the session, Temple laughing himself sore over the judge's
decisions.

"And he stole yo' shoat and never paid for him?" he heard his honor say
one day in a hog case, where two farmers who had been waiting hours for
Tom's coming were plaintiff and defendant. "How did you know it was yo'
shoat--did you mark him?"

"No, suh."

"Tie a tag around his neck?"

"No, suh."

"Well, you just keep yo' hogs inside yo' lot. Too many loose hogs
runnin' 'round. Case is dismissed and co't is adjourned for the day,"
which, while very poor law, was good common-sense, stray hogs on the
public highway having become a nuisance.

With these kindly examples before her, Kate soon fell into the ways of
the house. If she did not wish to get up she lay abed and Peggy brought
her breakfast with her own hands. If, when she did leave her bed, she
went about in pussy-slippers and a loose gown of lace and frills
without her stays, Peggy's only protest was against her wearing anything
else--so adorable was she. When this happy, dreamy indolence began to
pall upon her--and she could not stand it for long--she would be up at
sunrise helping Peggy wash and dress her frolicsome children or get
them off to school, and this done, would assist in the housework--even
rolling the pastry with her own delicate palms, or sitting beside the
bubbling, spontaneous woman, needle in hand, aiding with the family
mending--while Peggy, glad of the companionship, would sit with ears
open, her mind alert, probing--probing--trying to read the heart of the
girl whom she loved the better every day. And so there had crept
into Kate's heart a new peace that was as fresh sap to a dying plant,
bringing the blossoms to her cheeks and the spring of wind-blown
branches to her step.

Then one fine morning, to the astonishment of every one, and greatly to
Todd's disgust, no less a person than Mr. Langdon Willits of "Oak Hill"
(distant three miles away) dismounted at Coston's front porch, and
throwing the reins to the waiting darky, stretched his convalescent, but
still shaky, legs in the direction of the living-room, there to await
the arrival of "Miss Seymour of Kennedy Square," who, so he informed
Todd, "expected him."

Todd scraped a foot respectfully in answer, touched his cocoanut of a
head with his monkey claw of a finger, waited until the broad back of
the red-headed gentleman had been swallowed up by the open door, and
then indulged in this soliloquy:

"Funny de way dem bullets hab o' missin' folks. Des a leetle furder
down an' dere wouldn't 'a' been none o' dis yere foolishness. Pity Marse
Harry hadn't practised some mo'. Ef he had ter do it ag'in I reckon he'd
pink him so he neber be cavortin' 'roun' like he is now."

Willits's sudden appearance filled St. George with ill-concealed
anxiety. He did not believe in this parade of invalidism, nor did
he like Kate's encouraging smile when she met him--and there was no
question that she did smile--and, more portentous still, that she
enjoyed it. Other things, too, she grew to enjoy, especially the long
rides in the woods and over to the broad water. For Willits's health
after a few days of the sunshine of Kate's companionship had undergone
so renovating a process that the sorrel horse now arrived at the porch
almost every day, whereupon Kate's Joan would be led out, and the
smiled-upon gentleman in English riding-boots and brown velvet jacket
and our gracious lady in Lincoln green habit with wide hat and sweeping
plume would mount their steeds and be lost among the pines.

Indeed, to be exact, half of Kate's time was now spent in the saddle,
Willits riding beside her. And with each day's outing a new and, to St.
George, a more disturbing intimacy appeared to be growing between them.
Now it was Willits's sister who had to be considered and especially
invited to Wesley--a thin wisp of a woman with tortoise-shell sidecombs
and bunches of dry curls, who always dressed in shiny black silk and
whose only ornament was her mother's hair set in a breastpin; or it was
his father by whom she must sit when he came over in his gig--a bluff,
hearty man who generally wore a red waistcoat with big bone buttons and
high boots with tassels in front.

This last confidential relation, when the manners and bearing of
the elder man came under his notice, seemed to St. George the most
unaccountable of all. Departures from the established code always jarred
upon him, and the gentleman in the red waistcoat and tasselled boots
often wandered so far afield that he invariably set St. George's teeth
on edge. Although he had never met Kate before, he called her by her
first name after the first ten minutes of their acquaintance--his son,
he explained, having done nothing but sound her praises for the past
two years, an excuse which carried no weight in gentleman George's mind
because of its additional familiarity. He had never dared, he knew, to
extend that familiarity to Peggy--it had always been "Mrs. Coston" to
her and it had always been "Mr. Coston" to Tom, and it was now "your
Honor" or "judge" to the dispenser of justice. For though the owner
of Oak Hill lived within a few miles of the tumble-down remnant that
sheltered the Costons; and though he had fifty servants to their one, or
half a one--and broad acres in proportion, to say nothing of flocks and
herds--St. George had always been aware that he seldom crossed their
porch steps or they his. That little affair of some fifty or more years
ago was still remembered, and the children of people who did that sort
of thing must, of course, pay the penalty. Even Peggy never failed to
draw the line. "Very nice people, my dear," he had heard her say to Kate
one day when the subject of the younger man's family had come up. "Mr.
Willits senior is a fine, open-hearted man, and does a great deal of
good in the county with his money--quite a politician, and they do say
has a fair chance of some time being governor of the State. But very few
of us about here would want to marry into the family, all the same. Oh
no, my dear Kate, of course there was nothing against his grandmother.
She was a very nice woman, I believe, and I've often heard my own mother
speak of her. Her father came from Albemarle Sound, if I am right, and
was old John Willits's overseer. The girl was his daughter."

Kate had made no answer. Who Langdon Willits's grandmother was, or
whether he had any grandmother at all, did not concern her in the least.
She rather admired the young Albemarle Sound girl for walking boldly
into the Willits family--low born as she was--and making them respect
her.

But none of Peggy's outspoken warnings nor any of St. George's
silent acceptances of the several situations--always a mark of his
disapproval--checked the game of love-making which was going on--the
give-and-take stage of it, with the odds varying with each new shifting
of the cards, both Peggy and St. George growing the more nervous.

"She's going to accept him, St. George," Peggy had said to him one
morning as he stood behind her chair while she was shelling the peas for
dinner. "I didn't think so when he first came, but I believe it now. I
have said all I could to her. She has cuddled up in my arms and cried
herself sick over it, but she won't hold out much longer. Young Rutter
left her heart all torn and bleeding and this man has bound up the sore
places. She will never love anybody that way again--and may be it is
just as well. He'd have kept her guessing all her life as to what he'd
do next. I wish Willits's blood was better, for she's a dear, sweet
child and proud as she can be, only she's proud over different things
from what I would be. But you can make up your mind to it--she'll keep
him dangling for a while yet, as she did last summer at the Red Sulphur,
but she'll be his wife in a year or less--you mark my words. You haven't
yet heard from the first one, have you?--as to when he's coming home?"

St. George hadn't heard--he sighed in return--a habit of his lately: No,
not for two months or more--not since the letter in which Harry said
he had left the ship and had gone up into the interior. He had, he told
her, mentioned the boy's silence to Kate in a casual way, watching the
effect the news produced upon her--but after the remark that the mails
were always irregular from those far-away countries, she had turned the
conversation into other channels, she having caught sight of Willits,
who had just dismounted from his horse.

As to St. George's own position in the affair he felt that his hands
were still so firmly tied that he could do nothing one way or the other.
His personal intercourse with Willits had been such as he would always
have with a man with whom he was on speaking terms, but it never passed
that border. He was courteous, careful of his speech, and mindful of the
young man's devotion to Kate, whose guardian for the time being he was,
but he neither encouraged nor thwarted his suit. Kate was of age and
was fully competent to decide for herself--extremely competent, for that
matter.

How little this clear reader of women's hearts--and scores had been
spread out before him--knew of Kate's, no one but the girl herself could
have told. That she was adrift on an open sea without a rudder, and that
she had already begun to lose confidence both in her seamanship and in
her compass, was becoming more and more apparent to her every day she
lived. All she knew positively was that she had been sailing before the
wind for some weeks past with everything flying loose, and that the time
had now come for her either to "go about" or keep on her course.

Her suitor's family she had carefully considered. She had also studied
his environment and the impression he made upon those who had known him
longest:--she must now focus her mental lenses on the man himself. He
had, she knew, graduated with honors, being the valedictorian of his
class; had risen rapidly in his profession, and, from what her father
said, would soon reach a high place among his brother lawyers. There was
even talk of sending him to the legislature, where her own father, the
Honorable Prim, had achieved his title. She wished, of course, that Mr.
Willits's hair was not quite so red; she wished, too, that the knuckles
on his hands were not so large and bony--and that he was not always at
her beck and call; but these, she was forced to admit, were trifles in
the make-up of a fine man. There was, however, a sane mind under the
carrot-colored hair and a warm palm inside the knotted knuckles, and
that was infinitely more important than little physical peculiarities
which one would forget as life went on. As to his periods of ill health,
these she herself could have prevented had she told him the whole truth
that night on the stairs, or the day before when she had parried his
direct proposal of marriage--a piece of stupidity for which she never
failed to blame herself.

His future conduct did not trouble her in the least. She had long since
become convinced that Willits would never again become intemperate. He
had kept his promise, and this meant more to her than his having given
way to past temptations. The lesson he had learned at the ball had had,
too, its full effect. One he had never forgotten. Over and over again
he had apologized to her for his brutal insolence in laying his profane
hands on her dancing-card and tearing it to bits before her eyes. He
had, moreover, deeply regretted the duel and had sworn to her on his
honor as a gentleman that he would never fight another.

Each time she had listened quietly and had told him how much she was
pleased and how grateful she was for his confidence and how such fine
resolutions redounded to his credit, and yet in thinking it over the
next day she could not help comparing his meek outbursts of sorrow with
Harry's blunt statement made to her the last time she saw him in the
park, when, instead of expressing any regret for having shot Willits,
he had boldly declared that he would do it again if any such insult
were repeated. And strange to say--and this she could not understand in
herself--in all such comparisons Harry came out best.

But:--and here she had to hold on to her rudder with all her might--she
had already made one mistake, tumbling head over heels in love with
a young fellow who had mortified her before the world when their
engagement was less than a few months old, making her name and
affections a byword, and she could not and would not repeat the blunder.
This had shattered her customary self-reliance, leaving her wellnigh
helpless. Perhaps after all--an unheard-of thing in her experience--she
had better seek advice of some older and wiser pilot. Two heads, or even
three--(here her canny Scotch blood asserted itself)--were better than
one in deciding so important a matter as the choosing of a mate for
life. And yet--now she came to think it over--it was not so much a
question of heads as it was a question of shoulders on which the heads
rested. To turn to St. George, or to any member of the Willits kin, was
impossible. Peggy's views she understood. Counsel, however, she must
have, and at once.

Suddenly an inspiration thrilled her like an electric shock--one that
sent the blood tingling to the very roots of her hair. Why had she not
thought of it before! And it must be in the most casual way--quite as a
matter of general conversation, he doing all the talking and she doing
all the listening, for on no account must he suspect her purpose.

Within the hour she had tied the ribbons of her wide leghorn hat under
her dimpled chin, picked up her shawl, and started off alone, following
the lane to the main road. If the judge, by any chance, had adjourned
court he would come straight home and she would meet him on the way. If
he was still engaged in the dispensation of justice, she would wait for
him outside.

She had judged wisely. Indeed she might have waited for days for some
such moment and not found so favorable an opportunity. His Honor had
already left the bench and was then slowly making his way toward where
she stood, hugging the sidewalk trees the better to shade him from the
increasing heat. As the day had promised to be an unusually warm one, he
had attired himself in a full suit of yellow nankeen, with palm-leaf fan
and wide straw hat--a combination which so matched the color and texture
of his placid, kindly face that Kate could hardly keep from laughing
outright. Instead she quickened her steps until she stood beside him,
her lovely, fresh color heightened by her walk, her eyes sparkling, her
face wreathed in smiles.

"You are lookin' mighty cute, my Lady Kate, in yo' Paisley shawl and
sarsanet pelisse," he called out in his hearty, cheery way. "Has Peggy
seen 'em? I've been tryin' to get her some just like 'em, only my co't
duties are so pressin'. Goodness, gracious me!--but it's gettin' hot!"
Here he stopped and mopped his face, then his eyes fell upon her again:
"Bless my soul, child!--you do look pretty this mornin'--jest like yo'
mother! Where did you get all those pink and white apple-blossoms in yo'
cheeks?"

"Do you remember her, Mr. Coston?" she rejoined, ignoring his
compliment.

"Do I remember her! The belle of fo' counties, my dear--eve'ybody at her
feet; five or six gentlemen co'tin' her at once; old Captain Barkeley,
cross as a bear--wouldn't let her marry this one or that one--kep' her
guessin' night and day, till one of 'em blew his brains out, and then
she fainted dead away. Pretty soon yo' father co'ted her, and bein'
Scotch, like the old captain and sober as an owl and about as cunnin',
it wasn't long befo' everything was settled. Very nice man, yo'
father--got to have things mighty partic'lar; we young bucks used to say
he slept in a bag of lavender and powdered his cheeks every mornin'
to make him look fresh, while most of us were soakin' wet in the
duck-blinds--but that was only our joke. That's long befo' you were
born, child. But yo' mother didn't live long--they said her heart was
broken 'bout the other fellow, but there wasn't a word of truth in that
foolishness--couldn't be. I used to see her and yo' father together long
after that, and she was mighty good to him, and he was to her.
Yes--all comes back to me. Stand still, child, and let me look at
you--yes--you're plumper than yo' mother and a good deal rosier, and
you don't look so slender and white as she did, like one of those pale
Indian pipes she used to hunt in the woods. It's the Seymour in you
that's done that, I reckon."

Kate walked on in silence. It was not the first time that some of her
mother's old friends had told her practically the same story--not so
clearly, perhaps, because few had the simple, outspoken candor of the
old fellow, but enough to let her know that her father was not her
mother's first love.

"Don't be in a hurry, child, and don't let anybody choose for you," he
ran on. "Peggy and I didn't make any mistakes--and don't you. Now this
young son of Parker Willits's"--here his wrinkled face tightened up into
a pucker as if he had just bitten into an unripe persimmon--"good enough
young man, may be; goin' to be something great, I reckon--in Mr. Taney's
office, I hear, or will be next winter. I 'spect he'll keep out of
jail--most Willitses do--but keep an eye on him and watch him, and watch
yo'self too. That's more important still. The cemetery is a long ways
off when you marry the wrong man, child. And that other fellow that
Peggy tells me has been co'tin' you--Talbot Rutter's boy--he's a wild
one, isn't he?--drunk half the time and fightin' everybody who don't
agree with him. Come pretty nigh endin' young Willits, so they say. Now
I hear he's run away to sea and left all his debts behind. Talbot turned
him neck and heels out of doors when he found it out, so they tell
me--and served the scapegrace right. Don't be in a hurry, child. Right
man will come bime-by. Just the same with Peggy till I come along--there
she is now, bless her sweet heart! Peggy, you darlin'--I got so lonely
for you I just had to 'journ co't. I've been telling Lady Kate that she
mustn't be in a hurry to get married till she finds somebody that will
make her as happy as you and me." Here the judge slipped his arm around
Peggy's capacious waist and the two crossed the pasture as the nearest
way to the house.

Kate kept on her way alone.

Her only reply to the garrulous judge had been one of her rippling
laughs, but it was the laughter of bubbles with the sediment lying deep
in the bottom of the glass.




CHAPTER XXI



But all outings must come to an end. And so when the marsh grass on
the lowlands lay in serried waves of dappled satin, and the corn on the
uplands was waist high and the roses a mob of beauty, Kate threw her
arms around Peggy and kissed her over and over again, her whole heart
flowing through her lips; and then the judge got his good-by on his
wrinkled cheek, and the children on any clean spot which she found on
their molasses-covered faces; and then the cavalcade took up its line of
march for the boat-landing, Willits going as far as the wharf, where he
and Kate had a long talk in low tones, in which he seemed to be doing
all the talking and she all the listening--"But nuthin' mo'n jes' a
han'shake" (so Todd told St. George), "he lookin' like he wanter eat
her up an' she kinder sayin' dat de cake ain't brown 'nough yit fur
tastin'--but one thing I know fo' sho'--an' dat is she didn't let 'im
kiss 'er. I wuz leadin' his horse pas' whar dey wuz standin', an'
de sorrel varmint got cuttin' up an' I kep' him prancin' till Mister
Willits couldn't stay wid her no longer. Drat dat red-haided--"

"Stop, Todd--be careful--you mustn't speak that way of Mr. Willits."

"Well, Marse George, I won't--but I ain't neber like him f'om de fust.
He ain't quality an' he neber kin be. How Miss Kate don' stan' him is
mo'n I kin tell."


Kate drove up to her father's house in state, with Ben as special envoy
to see that she and her belongings were properly cared for. St. George
with Todd and the four dogs--six in all--arrived, despite Kate's
protestations, on foot.

Pawson met him at the door. He had given up his boarding-house and had
transferred his traps and parcels to the floor above--into Harry's
old room, really--in order that the additional rent--(he had now taken
entire charge of Temple's finances)--might help in the payment of the
interest on the mortgage. He had thought this all out while St. George
was at Wesley and had moved in without notifying him, that being the
best way to solve the problem--St. George still retaining his bedroom
and dining-room and the use of the front door. Jemima, too, had gone.
She wanted, so she had told her master the day he left with Kate, to
take a holiday and visit some of her people who lived down by the Marsh
Market in an old rookery near the Falls, and would come back when he
sent for her; but Todd had settled all that the morning of his arrival,
the moment he caught sight of her black face.

"Ain't no use yo' comin' back," the darky blurted out. "I'm gwineter do
de cookin' and de chamber-wo'k. Dere ain't 'nough to eat fo' mo'n two.
When dem white-livered, no-count, onery gemmens dat stole Marse George's
money git in de chain-gang, whar dey b'longs, den may be we'll hab
sumpin' to go to market on, but dat ain't yit; an' don't ye tell Marse
George I tol' yer or I'll ha'nt ye like dat witch I done heared 'bout
down to Wesley--ha'nt ye so ye'll think de debble's got ye." To his
master, his only explanation was that Jemima had gone to look after her
sister, who had been taken "wid a mis'ry in her back."

If St. George knew anything of the common talk going on around him
no one was ever the wiser. He continued the even tenor of his life,
visiting and receiving his friends, entertaining his friends in a simple
and inexpensive way: Once Poe had spent an evening with him, when he
made a manly, straightforward apology for his conduct the night of the
dinner, and on another occasion Mr. Kennedy had made an especial point
of missing a train to Washington to have an hour's chat with him. In the
afternoons he would have a rubber of whist with the archdeacon who
lived across the Square--a broad-minded ecclesiastic, who believed in
relaxation, although, of course, he was never seen at the club; or he
might drop into the Chesapeake for a talk with Richard or sit beside him
in his curious laboratory at the rear of his house where he worked out
many of the problems that absorbed his mind and inspired his hopes. At
night, however late or early--whenever he reached home--there was always
a romp with his dogs. This last he rarely omitted. The click of the
front-door latch, followed by his firm step overhead, was their signal,
and up they would come, tumbling over each other in their eagerness to
reach his cheeks--straight up, their paws scraping his clothes; then a
swoop into the dining-room, when they would be "downed" to the floor,
their eyes following his every movement.

Nor had his own financial situation begun as yet to trouble him. Todd
and Pawson, however, had long since become nervous. More than once had
they put their heads together for some plan by which sufficient money
could be raised for current expenses. In this praiseworthy effort, to
Todd's unbounded astonishment, Pawson had one night developed a plan
in which the greatly feared and much-despised Gadgem was to hold first
place. Indeed on the very morning succeeding the receipt of Pawson's
letter and at an hour when St. George would be absent at the club, there
had come a brisk rat-a-tat on the front door and Gadgem had sidled in.

Todd had not seen the collector since that eventful morning when he
stood by ready to pick up the pieces of that gentleman's dismembered
body when his master was about to throw him into the street for doubting
his word, and he now studied him with the greatest interest. The first
thing that struck him was the collector's clothes. As the summer was
approaching he had changed his winter suit for a combination of brown
linen bound with black--(second hand, of course, its former owner
having gone out of mourning) and at the moment sported a moth-eaten,
crape-encircled white beaver with a floppy, two-inch brim, a rusty black
stock that grabbed him close under the chin, completely submerging his
collar, and a pair of congress gaiters very much run down at the heel.
He was evidently master of himself and the situation, for he stood
looking from Todd to the young lawyer, a furtive, anxious expression
on his face that betokened both a surprise at being sent for and a
curiosity to learn the cause, although no word of inquiry passed his
lips.

Pawson's opening remark calmed the collector's suspicions.

"EXactly," he answered in a relieved tone, when the plot had been fully
developed, dragging a mate of the red bandanna--a blue one--from his
pocket and blowing his nose in an impressive manner. "EXactly--quite
right--quite right--difficult perhaps--ENORmously difficult
but--yes--quite right."

Then there had followed a hurried consultation, during which the
bullet-headed darky absorbed every word, his eyes rolling about in his
head, his breath ending somewhere near his jugular vein.

These details duly agreed upon, Gadgem bowed himself out of the
dining-room, carrying with him a note-book filled with such data as:

    2 fowling pieces made by Purdey, 1838.
    3 heavy duck guns.
    2 English saddles.
    1 silver loving cup.
    2 silver coasters, etc, etc.,

a list which Todd the night before had prompted and which Pawson, in
his clear, round hand, had transferred to a sheet of foolscap ready for
Gadgem in the morning.

On reaching the front door the collector stopped and looked furtively
up the stairs. He was wondering with professional caution whether St.
George had returned and was within hearing distance. If so much as a
hint should reach Temple's ears the whole scheme would come to naught.
Still in doubt, he called out in his sharpest business voice, as if
prolonging a conversation which had been carried on inside:

"Yes, Mr. Pawson, please say to Mr. Temple that it is GADgem, of
GADgem & Coombs--and say that I will be here at ten o'clock
to-morrow--sharp--on the minute; I am ALways on the minute in matters of
this kind. Only five minutes of his time--five minutes, remember--" and
he passed out of hearing.


Todd, now duly installed as co-conspirator, opened the ball the next
morning at breakfast. St. George had slept late, and the hands of the
marble clock marked but a few minutes of the hour of Gadgem's expected
arrival, and not a moment could be lost.

"Dat Gadgem man done come yere yisterday," he began, drawing out his
master's chair with an extra flourish to hide his nervousness, "an' he
say he's commin' ag'in dis mornin' at ten o'clock. Clar to goodness it's
dat now! I done forgot to tell ye."

"What does he want, Todd?" asked St. George, dropping into his seat.

"I dunno, sah--said he was lookin' fo' sumpin' fo' a frien' ob his--I
think it was a gun--an' he wanted to know what kind to buy fur him--Yes,
sah, dem waffles 's jes' off de fire. He 'lowed he didn't know nuffin'
'bout guns--butter, sah?--an' den Mister Pawson spoke up an' said he'd
better ask you. He's tame dis time--leastways he 'peared so."

"A fine gun is rather a difficult thing to get in these days, Todd,"
replied St. George, opening his napkin. "Since old Joe Manton died I
don't know but one good maker--and that's Purdey, of London, and he, I
hear, has orders to last him five years. No, Todd--I'd rather have the
toast."

"Yes, sah--I knowed ye couldn't do nuffln' fur him--Take de top
piece--dat's de brownest--but he seemed so cut up 'bout it dat I tol'
him he might see ye fur a minute if he come 'long 'bout ten o'clock,
when you was fru' yo' bre'kfus', 'fo' ye got tangled up wid yo' letters
an' de papers. Dat's him now, I spec's. Shall I show him in?"

"Yes, show him in, Todd. Gadgem isn't a bad sort of fellow after all.
He only wants his pound of flesh, like the others. Ah, good-morning,
Mr. Gadgem." The front door had been purposely left open, and though
the bill collector had knocked by way of warning, he had paused for no
answer and was already in the room. The little man laid his battered hat
silently on a chair near the door, pulled down his tight linen sleeves
with the funereal binding, adjusted his high black stock, and with
half-creeping, half-cringing movement, advanced to where St. George sat.

"I said good-morning, Mr. Gadgem," repeated St. George in his most
captivating tone of voice. He had been greatly amused at Gadgem's
antics.

"I heard you, sir--I heard you DIStinctly, sir--I was only seeking a
place on which to rest my hat, sir--not a very inSPIRing hat-quite the
contrary--but all I have. Yes, sir--you are quite right--it is a VERY
good morning--a most deLIGHTful morning. I was convinced of that when I
crossed the park, sir. The trees--"

"Never mind the trees, Gadgem. We will take those up later on. Tell me
what I can do for you--what do you want?"

"A GUN, sir--a plain, straightforward GUN--one that can be relied upon.
Not for mySELF, sir--I am not murderously inclined--but for a friend
who has commissioned me--the exact word, sir--although the percentage
is small--comMISsioned me to acquire for him a fowling piece of the
pattern, weight, and build of those belonging to St. George W. Temple,
Esquire, of Kennedy Square-and so I made bold, sir, to--"

"You won't find it, Gadgem," replied St. George, buttering the toast. "I
have two that I have shot with for years that haven't their match in the
State. Todd, bring me one of those small bird guns--there, behind the
door in the rack. Hand it to Mr. Gadgem. Now, can you see by the shape
of--take hold of it, man. But do you know anything about guns?"

"Only enough to keep away from their muzzles, sir." He had it in his
hand now--holding it by the end of the barrel, Todd instinctively
dodging out of the way, although he knew it was not loaded. "No, sir,
I don't know anything--not the very SMALLest thing about guns. There is
nothing, in fact, I know so little about as a gun--that is why I have
come to you."

St. George recovered the piece and laid it as gently on the table beside
his plate as if it had been a newly laid egg.

"No, I don't think you do," he laughed, "or you wouldn't hold it upside
down. Now go on and give me the rest."

Gadgem emitted a chuckle--the nearest he ever came to a laugh: "To have
it go ON, sir, is infinitely preferable than to have it go OFF, sir.
He-he! And you have, I believe you said, two of these highly valuable
implements of death?"

"Yes, five altogether--two of this kind. Here, Todd"--and he picked up
the gun--"put it back behind the door."

Gadgem felt in his inside pocket, produced and consulted a memorandum
with the air of a man who wanted to be entirely sure, and in a bland
voice said:

"I should think at your time of life--if you will permit me, sir--that
one less gun would not seriously inconvenience you. Would you permit me,
sir, to hope that--"

St. George looked up from his plate and a peculiar expression flitted
across his face.

"You mean you want to buy it?"

The bill collector made a little movement forward and scrutinized St.
George's face with the eye of a hawk. For a man of Temple's kidney to be
without a fowling piece was like a king being without a crown. This
was the crucial moment. Gadgem knew Temple's class, and knew just how
delicately he must be handled. If St. George's pride, or his love for
his favorite chattels--things personal to himself--should overcome him,
the whole scheme would fall to the ground. That any gentleman of
his standing had ever seen the inside of a pawn-shop in his life was
unthinkable. This was what Gadgem faced. As for Todd, he had not drawn a
full breath since Gadgem opened his case.

"Not EXactly buy it, sir," purred Gadgem, twisting his body into
an obsequious spiral. "Men of your position do not traffic in such
things--but if you would be persuaded, sir, for a money consideration
which you would fix yourself--say the ORIGinal cost of the gun--to
spare one of your five--you would greatly delight--in fact, you would
overWHELM with gratitude--a friend of mine."

St. George hesitated, looked out of the window and a brand-new thought
forced its way into his mind--as if a closet had been suddenly opened,
revealing a skeleton he had either forgotten or had put permanently
out of sight. There WAS need of this "original cost"--instant
need--something he had entirely forgotten. Jemima would soon need
it--perhaps needed it at that very minute. He had, it was true, often
kept her waiting: but that was when he could pay at his pleasure; now,
perhaps, he couldn't pay at all.

"All right, Gadgem," he said slowly, a far-away, thoughtful look on his
face--"come to think of it I don't need two guns of this calibre, and
I am quite willing to let this one go, if it will oblige your friend."
Here Todd breathed a sigh of relief so loud and deep that his master
turned his head in inquiry. "As to the price--I'll look that up. Come
and see me again in a day or two. Better take the gun with you now."

The fight had been won, but the risk had been great. Even Pawson could
hardly believe his ears when Gadgem, five minutes later, related the
outcome of the interview.

"Well, then, it will be plain sailing so long as the rest of the things
last," said Pawson, handling the piece with a covetous touch. He too
liked a day off when he could get it. "Who will you sell the gun to,
Gadgem?"

"God knows--I don't! I'll borrow the money on it somehow--but I can't
see him suffer--no, sir--can't see him SUFfer. It's a pleasure to serve
him--real gentleman--REAL--do you hear, Pawson? No veneer--no sham--no
lies! Damn few such men, I tell you. Never met one before-never will
meet one again. Gave up everything he had for a rattle-brain young
scamp--BEGgared himself to pay his debts--not a drop of the fellow's
blood in his veins either--incredible--inCREDible! Got to handle him
like gunpowder or he'll blow everything into matchsticks. Find out the
price and I'll bring the money to-morrow. Do you pay it to him; I can't.
I'd feel too damn mean after lying to him the way I have. Feel that way
now. Good-day."

The same scene was practically repeated the following month. It was an
English saddle this time, St. George having two. And it was the same
unknown gentleman who figured as "the much-obliged friend," Pawson
conducting the negotiations and securing the owner's consent. On this
occasion Gadgem sold the saddle outright to the keeper of a livery
stable, whose bills he collected, paying the difference between the
asking and the selling price out of his own pocket.

Gradually, however, St. George awoke to certain unsuspected features of
what was going on around him. The discovery was made one morning when
the go-between was closeted in Pawson's lower office, Pawson conducting
the negotiations in St. George's dining-room. The young attorney,
with Gadgem's assistance, had staved off some accounts until a legal
ultimatum had been reached, and, having but few resources of his
own left, had, with Todd's help, decided that the silver loving-cup
presented to his client's father by the Marquis de Castullux could alone
save the situation--a decision which brought an emphatic refusal from
the owner. This and the discovery of Pawson's and Gadgem's treachery had
greatly incensed him.

"And you tell me, Pawson, that that scoundrel, Gadgem, has--Todd go
down and bring him up here immediately--has had the audacity to run a
pawnshop for my benefit without so much as asking my leave?--peddling
my things?--lying to me straight through?" Here the door opened and
Gadgem's face peered in. He had, as was his custom, crept upstairs so as
to be within instant call when wanted.

"Yes--I am speaking of you, sir. Come inside and shut that door behind
you. You too, Todd. What the devil do you mean, Gadgem, by deceiving me
in this way? Don't you know I would rather have starved to death than--"

Gadgem raised his hand in protest:

"EXactly so, sir. That's what we were afraid of, sir--such an
uncomfortable thing to starve to death, sir--I couldn't permit it,
sir--I'd rather walk my feet off than permit it. I did walk them off--"

"But who asked you to tramp the streets with my things uuder your arm?
And you lied to me about it--you said you wanted to oblige a friend.
There wasn't a word of truth in it, and you know it."

Again Gadgem's hand went out with a pleading "Please-don't" gesture.
"Less than a word, sir--a whole dictionary, less, sir, and UNabridged
at that, if I might be permitted to say it. My friend still has the
implement of death, and not only does he still possess it, but he is
ENORmously obliged. Indeed, I have never SEEN him so happy."

"You mean to tell me, Gadgem," St. George burst out, "that the money you
paid me for the gun really came from a friend of yours?"

"I do, sir." Gadgem's gimlet eye was worming itself into Temple's.

"What's his name?"

"Gadgem, sir--John Gadgem, of Gadgem & Coombs--Gadgem sole survivor,
since Coombs is with the angels; the foreclosure having taken place last
month: hence these weeds." And he lifted the tails of his black coat in
evidence.

"Out of your own money?"

"Yes, sir--some I had laid away."

St. George wheeled suddenly and stood looking first at Gadgem, then at
Pawson, and last at Todd, as if for confirmation. Then a light broke in
upon him--one that played over his face in uncertain flashes.

"And you did this for me?" he asked thoughtfully, fixing his gaze on
Gadgem.

"I did, sir," came the answer in a meek voice, as if he had been
detected in filching an apple from a stand; "and I would do it again--do
it over and over again. And it has been a great pleasure for me to do
it. I might say, sir, that it has been a kind of exTREME bliss to do
it."

"Why?" There was a tremor now in Temple's voice that even Todd had never
noticed before.

Gadgem turned his head away. "I don't know, sir," he replied in a lower
tone. "I couldn't explain it on oath; I don't care to explain it, sir."
No lie could serve him now--better make a clean breast of the villany.

"And you still own the gun?" Todd had never seen his master so gentle
before--not under a provocation such as this.

"I do, sir." Gadgem's voice was barely audible.

"Then it means that you have locked up just that much of your own money
for a thing you can never use yourself and can't sell. Am I right?"

Gadgem lowered his head and for a moment studied the carpet. His
activities, now that the cat was out of the bag, were fair subjects for
discussion, but not his charities.

"I prefer not to answer, sir, and--" the last words died in his throat.

"But it's true, isn't it?" persisted St. George. He had never once taken
his eyes from Gadgem.

"Yes, it's true."

St. George turned on his heel, walked to the mantel, stood for an
instant gazing into the empty fireplace, and then, with that same
straightening of his shoulders and lift of his head which his friends
knew so well when he was deeply stirred, confronted the collector again:

"Gadgem!" He stopped and caught his breath. For a moment it seemed as
if something in his throat choked his utterance. "Gadgem--give me your
hand! Do you know you are a gentleman and a thoroughbred! No--don't
speak--don't explain. We understand each other. Todd, bring three
glasses and hand me what is left of the old Port. And do you join us,
Pawson."

Todd, whose eyes had been popping from his head during the entire
interview, and who was still amazed at the outcome, suddenly woke to
the dangers of the situation: on no account must his master's straits be
further revealed. He raised his hand as a signal to St. George, who
was still looking into Gadgem's eyes, screwed his face into a tangle
of puckers and in a husky whisper muttered, so low that only his master
could hear:

"Dat Port, Marse George"--one eye now went entirely out in a wink--"is
gittin' a leetle mite low" (there hadn't been a drop of it in the house
for six months) "an' if--"

"Well, then, that old Brown Sherry--get a fresh bottle, Todd--" St.
George was quite honest, and so, for that matter, was Todd: the Brown
Sherry had also seen its day.

"Yes, sah--but how would dat fine ol' peach brandy de jedge gin ye do?
It's sp'ilin' to be tasted, sah." Both eyes were now in eclipse in
the effort to apprise his master that with the exception of some badly
corked Madeira, Tom Coston's peach brandy was about the only beverage
left in the cellar.

"Well, the old peach brandy, then--get it at once and serve it in the
large glasses."




CHAPTER XXII



St. George had now reached the last stage of his poverty. The selling or
pawning of the few valuables left him had been consummated and with the
greatest delicacy, so as best to spare his feelings. That he had been
assisted by hitherto unknown friends who had sacrificed their own
balances in his behalf, added temporarily to his comforts but did not
lessen the gravity of the present situation. The fact remained that with
the exception of a few possible assets he was practically penniless.
Every old debt that could be collected--and Gadgem had been a scourge
and a flaming sword as the weeks went on in their gathering--had been
rounded up. Even his minor interests in two small ground rents had,
thanks to Pawson, been cashed some years in advance. His available
resources were now represented by some guns, old books, bridles, another
saddle, his rare Chinese punch-bowl and its teakwood stand, and a few
remaining odds and ends.

He could hope for no payment from the Patapsco--certainly not for some
years; nor could he raise money even on these hopes, the general opinion
being that despite the efforts of John Gorsuch, Rutter, and Harding to
punish the guilty and resuscitate the innocent, the bank would finally
collapse without a cent being paid the depositors. As for that old
family suit, it had been in the courts for forty-odd years and it was
likely to be there forty-odd years more before a penny would be realized
from the settlement.

Had he been differently constructed--he a man with scores and scores of
friends, many of whom would gladly have helped him--he might have made
his wants known; but such was not his make-up. The men to whom he
could apply--men like Horn, the archdeacon, Murdoch, and one or two
others--had no money of their own to spare, and as for wealthier
men--men like Rutter and Harding--starvation itself would be preferable
to an indebtedness of that kind. Then again, he did not want his poverty
known. He had defied Talbot Rutter, and had practically shown him the
door when the colonel doubted his ability to pay Harry's debts and
still live, and no humiliation would be greater than to see Rutter's
satisfaction over his abject surrender. No--if the worst came to the
worst, he would slip back to Wesley, where he was always welcome and
take up the practice of the law, which he had abandoned since his
father's death, and thus earn money enough not to be a burden to Peggy.
In the meantime something might turn up. Perhaps another of Gadgem's
thumb-screws could be fastened on some delinquent and thus extort a
drop or two; or the bank might begin paying ten per cent.; or another
prepayment might be squeezed out of a ground rent. If none of these
things turned out to his advantage, then Gadgem and Pawson must continue
their search for customers who would have the rare opportunity of
purchasing, direct "from the private collection of a gentleman," etc.,
etc., "one first-class English saddle," etc., etc.

"The meantime," however, brought no relief. Indeed so acute had the
financial strain become that another and a greater sacrifice--one that
fairly cut his heart in two--faced him--the parting with his dogs. That
four mouths besides his own and Todd's were too many to feed had of late
become painfully evident. He might send them to Wesley of course, but
then he remembered that no one at Tom Coston's ever had a gun in their
hands, and they would only be a charge and a nuisance to Peggy. Or he
might send them up into Carroll County to a farmer friend, but in that
case he would have to pay their keep, and he needed the money for those
at home. And so he waited and pondered.

A coachman from across the park solved the difficulty a day or two
later with a whispered word in Todd's ear, which set the boy's temper
ablaze--for he dearly loved the dogs himself--until he had talked it
over with Pawson and Gadgem, and had then broken the news to his master
as best he could.

"Dem dogs is eatin' dere haids off," he began, fidgeting about the
table, brushing the crumbs on to a tray only to spill half of them on
the floor--"an' Mister Floyd's coachman done say dat his young marster's
jes' a-dyin' for 'em an' don't cyar what he pay for 'em, dat is if ye--"
but St. George cut him short.

"What did you say, Todd?"

"Why dat young marster dat's jes' come up f'om Ann'rundel--got mo' money
den he kin th'ow 'way I yere."

"And they are eating their heads off, are they?--and he wants to swap
his dirty money for my--Yes--I know. They think they can buy anything
with a banknote. And its Floe and Dandy and Sue and Rupert, is it?
And I'm to sell them--I who have slept with them and ate with them
and hugged them a thousand times. Of course they eat their heads off.
Yes--don't say another word. Send them up one at a time--Floe first!"

The scene that followed always lingered in his mind. For days thereafter
he could not mention their name, even to Todd, without the tears
springing to his eyes.

Up the kitchen flight they tumbled--not one at a time, but all in a
scramble, bounding straight at him, slobbering all over his face and
hands, their paws scraping his clothes--each trying to climb into his
lap--big Gordon setters, all four. He swept them off and ranged them in
a row before his arm-chair with their noses flat to the carpet, their
brown agate eyes following his every movement.

"Todd says you eat too much, you damned rascals!" he cried in enforced
gayety, leaning forward, shaking his finger in their faces. "What the
devil do you mean, coming into a gentleman's private apartments and
eating him out of house and home!--and that's what you're doing.
I'm going to sell you!--do you hear that?--sell you to some stingy
curmudgeon who'll starve you to death, and that's what you deserve!...
Come here, Floe--you dear old doggie, you--nice Floe!... Here,
Dandy--Rupert--Sue!" They were all in his arms, their cold noses
snuggled under his warm chin. But this time he didn't care what they
did to his clothes--nor what he did to them. He was alone; Todd had
gone down to the kitchen--only he and the four companions so dear to his
heart. "Come here, you imp of the devil," he continued, rubbing Floe's
ears--he loved her best--pinching her nose until her teeth showed;
patting her flanks, crooning over her as a woman would over a child,
talking to himself all the time. "I wonder if Floyd will be good to
them! If I thought he wouldn't I'd rather starve than--No--I reckon it's
all right--he's got plenty of room and plenty of people to look
after them." Then he rose from his chair and drew his hand across
his forehead. "Got to sell my dogs, eh? Turned traitor, have you, Mr.
Temple, and gone back on your best friends? By God! I wonder what will
come next?" He strode across the room, rang for Todd, and bending down
loosened a collar from Dandy's neck, on which his own name was engraved,
"St. George Wilmot Temple, Esquire." "Esquire, eh?" he muttered, reading
the plate. "What a damned lie! Property of a pauper living on pawnshops
and a bill collector! Nice piece of business, St. George--fine record
for your blood and breeding! Ah, Todd--that you? Well, take them
downstairs and send word to Mr. Floyd's man to call for them to-night,
and when you come back I'll have a letter ready for you. Come here, you
rascals, and let me hug one or two of you. Good Floe--good doggie."
Then the long-fought choke in his throat strangled him. "Take them away,
Todd," he said in a husky voice, straightening his shoulders as if the
better to get his breath, and with a deep indrawn sigh walked slowly
into his bedroom and shut the door behind him.

Half an hour later there followed a short note, written on one of his
few remaining sheets of English paper, addressed to the new owner, in
which he informed that gentleman that he bespoke for his late companions
the same care and attention which he had always given them himself,
and which they so richly deserved, and which he felt sure they would
continue to receive while in the service of his esteemed and honored
correspondent. This he sealed in wax and stamped with his crest; and
this was duly delivered by Todd--and so the painful incident had come to
an end.

The dogs disposed of, there still remained to him another issue to
meet--the wages he owed Jemima. Although she had not allowed the subject
to pass her lips--not even to Todd--St. George knew that she needed the
money--she being a free woman and her earnings her own--not a master's.
He had twice before determined to set aside enough money from former
cash receipts to liquidate Jemima's debt--once from the proceeds of
Gadgem's gun and again from what Floyd paid him for the dogs--but Todd
had insisted with such vehemence that he needed it for the marketing,
that he had let it go over.

The one remaining object of real value was the famous loving-cup. With
this turned into money he would be able to pay Jemima in full. For days
he debated the matter with himself, putting the question in a dozen
different lights: it was not really HIS cup, but belonged to the family,
he being only its custodian; it would reflect on his personal honor if
he traded so distinguished a gift--one marking the esteem in which his
dead father had been held, etc. Then the round, good-natured face and
bent figure of his old stand-by and comfort--who had worked for him and
for his father almost all her life--rose before him, she bending over
her tubs earning the bread to keep her alive, and with this picture in
his mind all his fine-spun theories vanished into thin air. Todd was
summoned and thus the last connecting link between the past and
present was broken and the precious heirloom turned over to Kirk, the
silversmith, who the next day found a purchaser with one of the French
secretaries in Washington, a descendant of the marquis.

With the whole of the purchase money in his hands and his mind firmly
made up he rang for his servant:

"Come along, Todd--show me where Aunt Jemima lives--it's somewhere down
by the market, I hear--I'm going now."

The darky's face got as near white as his skin would allow: this was the
last thing he had expected.

"Dat ain't no fit place for ye, Marse George," he stammered. "I'll
go an' git her an' bring her up; she tol' me when I carried dat las'
washin' down she wuz a-comin' dis week."

"No, her sister is sick and she is needed where she is. Get your basket
and come along--you can do your marketing down there. Bring me my hat
and cane. What's the matter with her sister, do you know?"

Again the darky hedged: "Dunno, sah--some kin' o' mis'ry in her back
I reckon. Las' time Aunt Jemima was yere she say de doctor 'lowed her
kittens was 'fected." (It was another invalid limping past the front
steps who had put that in his head.)

St. George roared: "Well, whatever she's got, I'm going to pay my
respects to her; I've neglected Aunt Jemima too long. No--my best
hat--don't forget that I'm going to call on a very distinguished colored
lady. Come, out with it. How far does she live from the market?"

"Jes' 'bout's far's from yere to de church. Is you gwine now? I got a
heap o' cleanin' ter do--dem steps is all gormed up, dey's dat dirty.
Maybe we better go when--"

"Not another word out of you! I'm going now." He could feel the money in
his pocket and he could not wait. "Get your basket."

Todd led the way and the two crossed the park and struck out for the
lower part of the city, near Jones Falls, into a district surrounded by
one-and two-story houses inhabited by the poorer class of whites and the
more well-to-do free negroes. Here the streets, especially those which
ran to the wharves, were narrow and ill-paved, their rough cobbles
being often obstructed by idle drays, heavy anchors, and rusting
anchor-chains, all on free storage. Up one of these crooked streets,
screened from the brick sidewalk by a measly wooden fence, stood a
two-story wooden house, its front yard decorated with clothes-lines
running criss-cross from thumbs of fence-posts to fingers of shutters--a
sort of cat's-cradle along whose meshes Aunt Jemima hung her wet
clothes.

On this particular day what was left of St. George Temple's wardrobe and
bed linen, with the exception of what that gentleman had on his back,
was either waving in the cool air of the morning or being clothes-pinned
so that it might wave later on.

Todd's anxious face was the first to thrust itself from around the
corner of a sagging, sloppy sheet. The two had entered the gate in the
fence at the same moment, but St. George had been lost in the maze of
dripping linen.

"Go'way f'om dar, you fool nigger, mussin' up my wash! Keep yo' black
haid off'er dem sheets, I tell ye, 'fo' I smack ye! An' ye needn't come
down yere a-sassin' me 'bout Marse George's clo'es, 'cause dey ain't
done--" (here Temple's head came into view, his face in a broad smile).
"Well, fer de lan's sakes, Marse George. What ye come down yere fer?
Here--lemme git dat basket outer yo' way--No, dem hands ain't fit fer
nobody to shake--My!--but I's mighty glad ter see ye! Don't tell me
ye come fer dat wash--I been so pestered wid de weather--nothin' don't
dry."

He had dodged a wet sheet and had the old woman by the hand now, her
face in a broad grin at sight of him.

"No, aunty--I came down to pay you some money."

"You don't owe me no money--leastwise you don't owe me nothin' till ye
kin pay it," and she darted an annihilating glance at Todd.

"Yes, I do--but let me see where you live. What a fine place--plenty of
room except on wash-days. All those mine?--I didn't know I had that many
clothes left. Pick up that basket, Todd, and bring it in for aunty." The
two made their way between the wet linen and found themselves in front
of the dwelling. "And is this all yours?"

"De fust flo' front an 'back is mine an' de top flo' I rents out. Got a
white man in dere now dat works in de lumber yard. Jes' come up an' see
how I fixed it up."

"And tell me about your sister--is she better?" he continued.

The old woman put her arms akimbo: "Lawd bress ye, Marse George!--who
done tol' ye dat fool lie! I ain't got no sister--not yere!"

"Why, I thought you couldn't come back to me because you had to nurse
some member of your family who had kittens, or some such misery in her
spine--wasn't that it, Todd?" said St. George trying to conceal a smile.

Todd shot a beseeching look at Jemima to confirm his picturesque yarn,
but the old woman would have none of it.

"Dere ain't been nobody to tek care ob but des me. I come yere 'cause
I knowed ye didn't hab no money to keep me, an' I got back de ol'
furniture what I had fo' I come to lib wid ye, an' went to washin', an'
if dat yaller skunk's been tellin' any lies 'bout me I'm gwineter wring
his neck."

"No, let Todd alone," laughed St. George, his heart warming to the old
woman at this further proof of her love for him. "The Lord has already
forgiven him that lie, and so have I. And now what have you got
upstairs?"

They had mounted the steps by this time and St. George was peering into
a clean, simply furnished room. "First rate, aunty--your lumber-yard
man is in luck. And now put that in your pocket," and he handed her the
package.

"What's dis?"

"Nearly half a year's wages."

"I ain't gwineter take it," she snapped back in a positive tone.

St. George laid his hand tenderly on the old woman's shoulder. She had
served him faithfully for many years and he was very fond of her.

"Tuck it in your bosom, aunty--it should have been paid long ago."

She looked at him shrewdly: "Did de bank pay ye yit, Marse George?"

No

"Den I ain't gwineter tech it--I ain't gwineter tech a fip ob it!" she
exploded. "How I know ye ain't a-sufferin' fer it! See dat wash?--an' I
got anudder room to rent if I'm min' ter scrunch up a leetle mo'. I kin
git 'long."

St. George's hand again tightened on her shoulder.

"Take it when you can get it, aunty," he said in a more serious tone,
and turning on his heel joined Todd below, leaving the old woman in
tears at the top of the stairs, the money on her limp outspread fingers.

All the way back to his home--they had stopped to replenish the larder
at the market--St. George kept up his spirits. Absurd as it was--he
a man tottering on the brink of dire poverty--the situation from his
stand-point was far from perilous. He had discharged the one debt that
had caused him the most anxiety--the money due the faithful old cook; he
had a basketful of good things--among them half a dozen quail and three
diamond-back terrapin--the cheapest food in the market--and he had funds
left for his immediate wants.

With this feeling of contentment permeating his mind something of the
old feeling of independence, with its indifference toward the dollar and
what it meant and could bring him, welled up in his heart. For a time at
least the spectre of debt lay hidden. A certain old-time happiness began
to show itself in his face and bearing. So evident was this that before
many days had passed even Todd noticed the return of his old buoyancy,
and so felt privileged to discuss his own feelings, now that the secret
of their mode of earning a common livelihood was no longer a bugbear to
his master.

"Dem taters what we got outer de extry sterrups of dat ridin'-saddle is
mos' gone," he ventured one morning at breakfast, when the remains of
the cup money had reached a low ebb. "Shall I tote de udder saddle down
to dat Gadgem man"--(he never called him anything else, although of late
he had conceived a marked respect for the collector)--"or shall I keep
it fer some mo' sugar?"

"What else is short, Todd?" said St. George, good-naturedly, helping
himself to another piece of corn bread.

"Well, dere's plenty ob dose decanter crackers and de pair ob andirons
is still holdin' out wid de mango pickles an' de cheese, but dat pair
ob ridin'-boots is mos' gone. We got half barrel ob flour an' a bag o'
coffee, ye 'member, wid dem boots. I done seen some smoked herrin' in
de market yisterday mawnin' 'd go mighty good wid de buckwheat cakes an'
sugar-house 'lasses--only we ain't got no 'lasses. I was a-thinkin' dem
two ol' cheers in de garret 'd come in handy; ain't nobody sot in em
since I been yere; de bottoms is outen one o' dem, but de legs an' backs
is good 'nough fer a quart o' 'lasses. I kin take 'em down to de same
place dat Gadgem man tol' me to take de big brass shovel an' tongs--"

"All right, Todd," rejoined St. George, highly amused at the boy's
economic resources. "Anything that Mr. Gadgem recommends I agree to.
Yes--take him the chairs--both of them."

Even the men at the club had noticed the change and congratulated him on
his good spirits. None of them knew of his desperate straits, although
many of them had remarked on the differences in his hospitality, while
some of the younger gallants--men who made a study of the height
and roll of the collars of their coats and the latest cut of
waistcoats--especially the increased width of the frogs on the
lapels--had whispered to each other that Temple's clothes certainly
needed overhauling; more particularly his shirts, which were much
the worse for wear: one critic laying the seeming indifference to the
carelessness of a man who was growing old; another shaking his head with
the remark that it was Poole's bill which was growing old--older by a
good deal than the clothes, and that it would have to be patched and
darned with one of old George Brown's (the banker's) scraps of paper
before the wearer could regain his reputation of being the best-dressed
man in or out of the club.

None of these lapses from his former well-to-do estate made any
difference, however, to St. George's intimates when it came to the
selection of important guests for places at table or to assist in the
success of some unusual function. Almost every one in and around Kennedy
Square had been crippled in their finances by the failure, not only
of the Patapsco, but by kindred institutions, during the preceding few
years. Why, then, they argued, should any one criticise such economies
as Temple was practising? He was still living in his house with his
servants--one or two less, perhaps--but still in comfort, and if he did
not entertain as heretofore, what of it? His old love of sport, as was
shown by his frequent visits to his estates on the Eastern Shore, might
account for some of the changes in his hospitable habits, there not
being money enough to keep up establishments both in country and town.
These changes, of course, could only be temporary. His properties on
the peninsula--(almost everybody had "properties" in those days, whether
imaginary or real)--would come up some day, and then all would be well
again.

The House of Seymour was particularly in the dark. The Honorable Prim,
in his dense ignorance, had even asked St. George to join in one of his
commercial enterprises--the building of a new clipper ship--while Kate,
who had never waited five minutes in all her life for anything that
a dollar could buy, had begged a subscription for a charity she was
managing, and which she received with a kiss and a laugh, and without a
moment's hesitation, from a purse shrinking steadily by the hour.

Only when some idle jest or well-meant inquiry diverted his mind to
the chain of events leading up to Harry's exile was his insistent
cheerfulness under his fast accumulating misfortunes ever checked.

Todd was the cruel disturber on this particular day, with a bit of
information which, by reason of its source, St. George judged must be
true, and which because of its import brought him infinite pain.

"Purty soon we won't hab 'nough spoons to stir a toddy wid," Todd had
begun. "I tell ye, Marse George, dey ain't none o' dem gwine down in
dere pockets till de constable gits 'em. I jes' wish Marse Harry was
yere--he'd fix 'em. 'Fo' dey knowed whar dey wuz he'd hab 'em full o'
holes. Dat red-haided, no-count gemman what's a-makin up to Miss Kate is
gwineter git her fo' sho--"

It was here that St. George had raised his head, his heart in his mouth.

"How do you know, Todd?" he asked in a serious tone. He had long since
ceased correcting Todd for his oustpoken reflections on Kate's suitor as
a useless expenditure of time.

"'Cause Mammy Henny done tol' Aunt Jemima so--an' she purty nigh cried
her eyes out when she said it. Ye ain't heared nothin' 'bout Marse Harry
comin' home, is ye?"

"No--not a word--not for many months, Todd. He's up in the mountains, so
his mother tells me."

Whereupon Todd had gulped down an imprecation expressive of his feelings
and had gone about his duties, while St. George had buried himself
in his easy-chair, his eyes fixed on vacancy, his soul all the more
a-hungered for the boy he loved. He wondered where the lad was--why he
hadn't written. Whether the fever had overtaken him and he laid up
in some filthy hospital. Almost every week his mother had either come
herself or sent in for news, accompanied by messages expressing some new
phase of her anxiety. Or had he grown and broadened out and become big
and strong?--whom had he met, and how had they treated him?--and would
he want to leave home again when once he came back? Then, as always,
there came a feeling of intense relief. He thanked God that Harry WASN'T
at home; a daily witness of the shrinkage of his resources and the
shifts to which he was being put. This would be ten times worse for
him to bear than the loss of the boy's companionship. Harry would then
upbraid him for the sacrifices he had made for him, as if he would
not take every step over again! Take them!--of course he would take
them!--so would any other gentleman. Not to have come to Harry's rescue
in that the most critical hour of his life, when he was disowned by his
father, rejected by his sweetheart, and hounded by creditors, not one of
whom did he justly owe, was unthinkable, absolutely unthinkable, and not
worth a moment's consideration.

And so he would sit and muse, his head in his hand, his well-rounded
legs stretched toward the fire, his white, shapely fingers tapping
the arms of his chair--each click so many telegraphic records of the
workings of his mind.




CHAPTER XXIII



With the closing in of the autumn and the coming of the first winter
cold, the denizens of Kennedy Square gave themselves over to the
season's entertainments. Mrs. Cheston, as was her usual custom, issued
invitations for a ball--this one in honor of the officers who had
distinguished themselves in the Mexican War. Major Clayton, Bowdoin,
the Murdochs, Stirlings, and Howards--all persons of the highest
quality--inaugurated a series of chess tournaments, the several players
and those who came to look on to be thereafter comforted with such
toothsome solids as wild turkey, terrapin, and olio, and such delectable
liquids as were stored in the cellars of their hosts. Old Judge
Pancoast, yielding to the general demand, gave an oyster roast--his
enormous kitchen being the place of all others for such a function. On
this occasion two long wooden tables were scoured to an unprecedented
whiteness--the young girls in white aprons and the young men in white
jackets serving as waiters--and laid with wooden plates, and two big
wooden bowls--one for the hot, sizzling shells just off their bed of
hickory coals banked on the kitchen hearth, and the other for the empty
ones--the fun continuing until the wee sma' hours of the morning.

The Honorable Prim and his charming daughter, not to be outdone by
their neighbors, cleared the front drawing-room of its heavy furniture,
covered every inch of the tufted carpet with linen crash, and with old
black Jones as fiddler and M. Robinette--a French exile--as instructor
in the cutting of pigeon wings and the proper turning out of ankles and
toes, opened the first of a series of morning soirees for the young folk
of the neighborhood, to which were invited not only their mothers, but
their black mammies as well.

Mr. and Mrs. Richard Horn, not having any blithesome daughter, nor any
full-grown son--Oliver being but a child of six--and Richard and his
charming wife having long since given up their dancing-slippers--were
good enough to announce--(and it was astonishing what an excitement it
raised)--that "On the Monday night following Mr. Horn would read aloud,
to such of his friends as would do him the honor of being present, the
latest Christmas story by Mr. Charles Dickens, entitled 'The Cricket on
the Hearth.'" For this occasion Mr. Kennedy had loaned him his own
copy, one of the earliest bound volumes, bearing on its fly-leaf an
inscription in the great master's own handwriting in which he thanked
the distinguished author of "Swallow Barn" for the many kindnesses he
had shown him during his visit to America, and begged his indulgence for
his third attempt to express between covers the sentiment and feeling of
the Christmas season.

Not that this was an unusual form of entertainment, nor one that excited
special comment. Almost every neighborhood had its morning (and often
its evening) "Readings," presided over by some one who read well and
without fatigue--some sweet old maid, perhaps, who knew how to grow old
gracefully. At these times a table would be rolled into the library by
the deferential servant of the house, on which he would place the dear
lady's spectacles and a book, its ivory marker showing where the last
reading had ended--it might be Prescott's "Ferdinand and Isabella," or
Irving's "Granada," or Thackeray's "Vanity Fair," or perhaps, Dickens's
"Martin Chuzzlewit."

At eleven o'clock the girls would begin to arrive, each one bringing her
needle-work of some kind--worsted, or embroidery, or knitting--something
she could manage without discomfort to herself or anybody about her, and
when the last young lady was in her seat, the same noiseless darky would
tiptoe in and take his place behind the old maid's chair. Then he would
slip a stool under her absurdly small slippers and tiptoe out again,
shutting the door behind him as quietly as if he found the dear lady
asleep--and so the reading would begin.

A reading by Richard, however, was always an event of unusual
importance, and an invitation to be present was never declined whether
received by letter or by word of mouth.

St. George had been looking forward eagerly to the night, and when the
shadows began to fall in his now almost bare bedroom, he sent for Todd
to help him dress.

"Have you got a shirt for me, Todd?"

"Got seben oh 'em. Dey wants a li'l' trimmin' roun' de aidges, but I
reckon we kin make 'em do--Aunt Jemima sont 'em home dis mawnin'. She's
been a-workin' on 'em, she says. Looks ter me like a goat had a moufful
outer dis yere sleeve, but I dassent tell er so. Lot o' dem butters
wanderin' roun' dat Marsh market lookin' fer sumpin' to eat; lemme gib
dem boots anudder tech."

Todd skipped downstairs with the boots and St. George continued
dressing; selecting his best and most becoming scarf; pinning down the
lapels of his buff waistcoat; scissoring the points of his high collar,
and with Todd's assistance working his arms between the slits in the
silk lining of the sleeves of his blue cloth, brass-buttoned coat, which
he finally pulled into place across his chest.

And a well-dressed man he was in spite of the frayed edges of his collar
and shirt ruffles and the shiny spots in his trousers and coat where
the nap was worn smooth, nor was there any man of his age who wore his
clothes as well, no matter what their condition, or one who made so
debonair an appearance.

Pawson was of that opinion to-night when St. George, his toilet
complete, joined him at the bottom of the stairs. Indeed he thought he
had never seen his client look better--a discovery which sent a spasm of
satisfaction through his long body, for he had a piece of important news
to tell him, and had been trying all day to make up his mind how best to
break it.

"You look younger, Mr. Temple," he began, "and, if you will allow me to
say so, handsomer, every day. Your trip to the Eastern Shore last spring
did you no end of good," and the young attorney crooked his long neck
and elevated his eyebrows and the corners of his mouth in the effort to
give to his sinuous body a semblance of mirth.

"Thank you, Pawson," bowed St. George, graciously. "You are really
most kind, but that is because you are stone blind. My shirt is full of
holes, and it is quite likely I shall have to stand all the evening
for fear of splitting the knees of my breeches. Come--out with it"--he
laughed--"there is something you have to tell me or you would not be
waiting for me here at this hour in the cold hall."

Pawson smiled faintly, then his eyebrows lost their identity in some
well-defined wrinkles in his forehead.

"I have, sir, a most unpleasant thing to tell you--a very unpleasant
thing. When I tried this morning for a few days' grace on that last
overdue payment, the agent informed me, to my great surprise, that Mr.
John Gorsuch had bought the mortgage and would thereafter collect the
interest in person. I am not sure, of course, but I am afraid Colonel
Rutter is behind the purchase. If he is we must be prepared to face the
worst should he still feel toward you as he did when you and he"--and he
jerked his thumb meaningly in the direction of the dining-room--"had it
out--in there."

St. George compressed his lips. "And so Rutter holds the big end of the
whip after all, does he?" he exclaimed with some heat. "He will find the
skin on my back not a very valuable asset, but he is welcome to it. He
has about everything else."

"But I'd rather pay it somehow if we could," rejoined Pawson in a
furtive way--as if he had something up his sleeve he dare not spring
upon him.

"Yes--of course you would," retorted St. George with a cynical laugh,
slipping on his gloves. "Pay it?--of course pay it. Pay everything and
everybody! What do you think I'd bring at auction, Pawson? I'm white,
you know, and so I can't be sold on the block--but the doctors might
offer you a trifle for cutting-up purposes. Bah! Hand me my coat, Todd."

A deprecatory smile flitted across the long, thin face of the attorney.
He saw that St. George was in no mood for serious things, and yet
something must be done; certainly before the arrival of Gorsuch himself,
who was known to be an exact man of business and who would have his
rights, no matter who suffered.

"I had a little plan, sir--but you might not fall in with it. It would,
perhaps, be only temporary, but it is all I can think of. I had an
applicant this morning--in fact it came within an hour after I had heard
the news. It seemed almost providential, sir."

St. George was facing the door, ready to leave the house, his shoulders
still bent forward so that Todd could adjust his heavy cloak the better,
when for the first time the anxious tone in Pawson's voice caught his
attention. As the words fell from the attorney's lips he straightened,
and Todd stepped back, the garment still in the darky's hands.

"An applicant for what?" he inquired in a graver tone. He was not
surprised--nothing surprised him in these days--he was only curious.

"For the rooms you occupy. I can get enough for them, sir, not only to
clear up the back interest, but to keep the mortgage alive and--"

St. George's face paled as the full meaning of Pawson's proposal dawned
in his mind. That was the last thing he had expected.

"Turn me into the street, eh?" There was a note of pained surprise in
his voice.

"I don't want you to put it that way, sir." His heart really bled for
him--it was all he could do to control himself.

"How the devil else can I put it?"

"Well, I thought you might want to do a little shooting, sir."

"Shooting! What with? One of Gadgem's guns? Hire it of him, eh, and
steal the powder and shot!" he cried savagely.

"Yes--if you saw fit, sir. Gadgem, I am sure, would be most willing, and
you can always get plenty of ammunition. Anyway, you might pass a few
months with your kinsfolk on the Eastern Shore, whether you hunted or
not; it did you so much good before. The winter here is always wearing,
sloppy and wet. I've heard you say so repeatedly." He had not taken his
eyes from his face; he knew this was St. George's final stage, and he
knew too that he would never again enter the home he loved; but this
last he could not tell him outright. He would rather have cut his right
hand off than tell him at all. Being even the humblest instrument in the
exiling of a man like St. George Wilmot Temple was in itself a torture.

"And when do you want me to quit?" he said calmly. "I suppose I can
evacuate like an officer and a gentleman and carry my side-arms with
me--my father's cane, for instance, that I can neither sell nor pawn,
and a case of razors which are past sharpening?" and his smile broadened
as the humor of the thing stole over him.

"Well, sir, it ought to be done," continued Pawson in his most serious
tone, ignoring the sacrifice--(there was nothing funny in the situation
to the attorney)--"well--I should say--right away. To-morrow, perhaps.
This news of Gorsuch has come very sudden, you know. If I can show him
that the new tenant has moved in already he might wait until his first
month's rent was paid. You see that--"

"Oh, yes, Pawson, I see--see it all clear as day," interrupted St.
George--"have been seeing it for some months past, although neither
you nor Gadgem seem to have been aware of that fact." This came with so
grave a tone that Pawson raised his eyes inquiringly. "And who is this
man," Temple went on, "who wants to step into my shoes? Be sure you
tell him they are half-soled," and he held up one boot. He might want
to dance or hunt in them--and his toes would be out the first thing he
knew."

"He is Mr. Gorsuch's attorney, sir, a Mr. Fogbin," Pawson answered,
omitting any reference to the boots and still concerned over the gravity
of the situation. "He did some work once for Colonel Rutter, and that's
how Gorsuch got hold of him. That's why I suspect the colonel. This
would make the interest sure, you see--rather a sly game, is it not,
sir? One I did not expect."

St. George pondered for a moment, and his eye fell on his servant.

"And what will I do with Todd?"

The darky's eyes had been rolling round in his head as the talk
continued, Pawson, knowing how leaky he was, having told him nothing of
the impending calamity for fear he would break it to his master in the
wrong way.

"I should say take him with you," came the positive answer.

"Take him with me! You didn't think I would be separated from him, did
you?" cried St. George, indignantly, the first note of positive anger he
had yet shown.

"I didn't think anything about it, sir," and he looked at Todd
apologetically.

"Well, after this please remember, Mr. Pawson, that where I go Todd
goes."

The darky leaned forward as if to seize St. George's hand; his eyes
filled and his lips began to tremble. He would rather have died than
have left his master.

St. George walked to the door, threw it open, and stood for an instant,
his eyes fixed on the bare trees in the park. He turned and faced the
two again:

"Todd!"

"Yes, Marse George--" Two hot ragged tears still lingered on the darky's
eyelids.

"To-day is Monday, is it not?--and to-morrow is boat day?"

"Yes, Marse George," came the trembling answer.

"All right, Pawson, I'll go. Let Talbot Rutter have the rest--he's
welcome to it. Now for my cloak, Todd--so--and my neckerchief and cane.
Thank you very much, Pawson. You have been very kind about it all, and
I know quite well what it has cost you to tell me this. You can't
help--neither can I--neither, for that matter, can Gorsuch--nor is
it his fault. It is Rutter's, and he will one day get his reckoning.
Good-night--don't sit up too late. I am going to Mr. Horn's to spend
the evening. Walk along with me through the Park, Todd, so I can talk
to you. And, Todd," he continued when they had entered the path and were
bending their steps to the Horn house, "I want you to gather together
to-morrow what are left of my clothes and pack them in one of those
hair trunks upstairs--and your own things in another. Never mind about
waiting for the wash. I'm going down to Aunt Jemima's myself in the
morning and will fix it so she can send the rest to me later on. I owe
her a small balance and must see her once more before I leave. Now go
home and get to bed; you have been losing too much sleep of late."

And yet he was not cast down, nor did his courage fail him. Long before
the darky's obedient figure had disappeared his natural buoyancy had
again asserted itself--or perhaps the philosophy which always sustains a
true gentleman in his hour of need had come to his assistance. He fully
realized what this last cowardly blow meant. One after another his
several belongings had vanished: his priceless family heirlooms; his
dogs; and now the home of his ancestors. He was even denied further
shelter within its walls. But there were no regrets; his conscience
still sustained him; he would live it all over again. In his
determination to keep to his standards he had tried to stop a freshet
with a shovelful of clay; that was all. It was a foolhardy attempt, no
doubt, but he would have been heartily ashamed of himself if he had not
made the effort. Wesley, of course, was not a very exciting place
in which to spend the winter, but it was better than being under
obligations to Talbot Rutter; and then he could doubtless earn enough at
the law to pay his board--at least he would try.

He had reached the end of the walk and had already caught the glow of
the overhead lantern in the hall of the Horn mansion lighting up the
varied costumes of the guests as Malachi swung back the front door,
revealing the girls in their pink and white nubias, the gallants in long
cloaks with scarlet linings, the older men in mufflers, and the mothers
and grandmothers in silk hoods. There was no question of Richard's
popularity.

"Clar to goodness, Marse George, you is a sight for sore eyes," cried
Malachi, unhooking the clasp of the velvet collar and helping him off
with his cloak. "I ain't never seen ye looking spryer! Yes, sah, Marse
Richard's inside and he'll be mighty glad ye come. Yes--jedge--jes's
soon as I--Dat's it, mistis--I'll take dat shawl--No, sah, Marse Richard
ain't begun yit. Dis way, ladies," and so it had gone on since the
opening rat-a-tat-tat on the old brass knocker had announced the arrival
of the first guest.

Nor was there any question that everybody who could by any possibility
have availed themselves of Richard's invitation had put in an
appearance. Most of the men from the club known to these pages were
present, together with their wives and children--those who were old
enough to sit up late; and Nathan Gill, without his flute this time, but
with ears wide open--he was beginning to get gray, was Nathan, although
he wouldn't admit it; and Miss Virginia Clendenning in high waist and
voluminous skirts, fluffy side curls, and a new gold chain for her
eyeglasses--gold rims, too, of course--not to mention the Murdochs,
Stirlings, Gatchells, Captain Warfield and his daughter, Bowdoin, and
Purviance. They were all there; everybody, in fact, who could squeeze
inside the drawing-room; while those who couldn't filled the hall and
even the stairs--wherever Richard's voice could be heard.

St. George edged into the packed room, swept his glance over the throng,
and made his way through the laughing groups, greeting every one right
and left, old and young, as he moved--a kiss here on the upturned cheek
of some pretty girl whom he had carried in his arms when a baby; a
caressing pat of approbation on some young gallant's shoulder; a bend
of the head in respectful homage to those he knew but slightly--the
Baroness de Trobiand, Mrs. Cheston's friend, being one of them; a hearty
hand held out to the men who had been away for the summer--interrupted
now and then by some such sally from a young bride as--"Oh, you mean
Uncle George! No--I'm not going to love you any more! You promised you
would come to my party and you didn't, and my cotillon was all spoiled!"
or a--"Why, Temple, you dear man!-I'm so glad to see you! Don't forget
my dinner on Thursday. The Secretary is coming and I want you to
sit between him and Lord Atherton"--a sort of triumphal procession,
really--until he reached the end of the room and stood at Kate's side.

"Well, sweetheart!" he cried gayly, caressing her soft hand before his
fingers closed over it. Then his face hardened. "Ah, Mr. Willits! So
you, too, must come under the spell of Mr. Horn's voice," and without
waiting for a reply continued as if nothing had interrupted the joy of
his greeting. "You should sit down somewhere, my dear Kate--get as near
to Richard as you can, so you can watch his face--that's the best part
of it. And I should advise you, too, Mr. Willits, to miss none of his
words--it will be something you will remember all your life."

Kate looked up in his face with a satisfied smile. She was more than
glad that her Uncle George was so gracious to her escort, especially
to-night when he was to meet a good many people for the first time.

"I'll take the stool, then, dear Uncle George," she answered with a
merry laugh. "Go get it, please, Mr. Willits--the one under the sofa."
Then, with a toss of her head and a coquettish smile at St. George:
"What a gadabout you are; do you know I've been three times to see
you, and not a soul in your house and the front door wide open, and
everything done up in curl papers as if you were going to move away for
good and all and never coming back? And do you know that you haven't
been near me for a whole week? What do you mean by breaking my heart?
Thank you, Mr. Willits; put the stool right here, so I can look up
into Mr. Horn's eyes as Uncle George wants me to. I've known the
time, sir"--and she arched her brows at St. George--"when you would
be delighted to have me look my prettiest at you, but now before I am
halfway across the park you slip out of the basement door to avoid me
and--No!--no--no apologies--you are just tired of me!"

St. George laughed gayly in return, his palms flattened against each
other and held out in supplication; but he made no defence. He was
studying the couple, his mind on the bearing and manner of the young
man toward the woman he was pursuing so relentlessly. He saw that he had
completely regained his health, his clear eyes and ruddy skin and the
spring with which he moved denoting a man in perfect physical condition.
He discovered, too, that he was extremely well dressed and his costume
all that it should be--especially the plum-colored coat, which fitted
his shoulders to perfection; his linen of the whitest and finest, each
ruffle in flutes; the waist-coat embroidered in silk; the pumps of
the proper shape and the stockings all that could be desired--except
perhaps--and a grim smile crossed his face--that the silk scarf was a
shade out of key with the prevailing color of his make-up, particularly
his hair; but, then, that was to be expected of a man who had a slight
flaw in his ancestry. He wondered if she had noticed it and studied her
face for an answer. No! She had not noticed it. In fact there were very
many things she was overlooking in these last days of his wooing, he
thought to himself.

Suddenly he became occupied with Kate's beauty. He thought he had never
seen her so bewitching or in such good spirits. From his six feet and
an inch of vantage his eyes followed her sloping shoulders and tapering
arms and rested on her laughing, happy face--rose-colored in the soft
light of the candles--a film of lace looped at her elbows, her wonderful
hair caught in a coil at the back: not the prevailing fashion but one
most becoming to her. What had not this admixture of Scotch and Virginia
blood--this intermingling of robust independence with the gentle,
yielding feminine qualities of the Southern-born woman--done for this
girl?

Richard clapped his hands to attract attention, and advancing a step in
front of the big easy-chair which Malachi had just pulled out for him,
raised his fingers to command silence.

All eyes were instantly turned his way. Alert and magnetic, dignified
and charming, he stood in the full glow of the overhead chandelier,
its light falling upon his snuff-brown coat with its brass buttons,
pale-yellow waistcoat, and the fluff of white silk about his throat--his
grave, thoughtful face turned toward Kate as his nearest guest, his
glance sweeping the crowded room as if to be sure that everybody was
at ease; Malachi close behind awaiting his master's orders to further
adjust the chair and reading-lamp.

In the interim of the hush Kate had settled herself at Richard's feet
on the low stool that Willits had brought, the young man standing behind
her, the two making a picture that attracted general attention; some
wondering at her choice, while others were outspoken in their admiration
of the pair who seemed so wonderfully suited to each other.

"I have a rare story," Richard began "to read to you to-night, my good
friends, one you will never forget; one, indeed, which I am sure the
world at large will never forget. I shall read it as best I can, begging
your indulgence especially in rendering the dialect parts, which, if
badly done, often mar both the pathos and humor of the text." Here he
settled himself in his chair and picked up the small volume, Malachi,
now that his service was over, tiptoeing out to his place in the hall so
as to be ready for belated arrivals.

The room grew silent. Even Mrs. Cheston, who rarely ceased talking
when she had anything to say--and she generally did have something to
say--folded her hands in her lap and settled herself in her arm-chair,
her whole attention fastened on the reader. St. George, who had been
talking to her, moved up a chair so he could watch Kate's face the
better.

Again Richard raised his voice:

"The time is of the present, and the scene is laid in one of those small
towns outside London. I shall read the whole story, omitting no word of
the text, for only then will you fully grasp the beauty of the author's
style."

He began in low, clear tones reciting the contest between the hum of
the kettle and the chirp of the cricket; the music of his voice
lending added charm to the dual song. Then there followed in constantly
increasing intensity the happy home life of bewitching Dot Perrybingle
and her matter-of-fact husband, John the Carrier, with sleepy Tilly
Slowboy and the Baby to fill out the picture; the gradual unfolding of
the events that led up to the cruel marriage about to take place between
old Tackleton, the mean toy merchant, and sweet May Fielding, in love
with the sailor boy, Edward, lost at sea; the finding of the mysterious
deaf old man by John the Carrier, and the bringing him home in his cart
to Dot, who kept him all night because his friends had not called for
him; the rapid growth of a love affair between Dot and this old man, who
turned out to be a handsome young fellow; the heart-rending discovery by
John, through the spying of Tackleton, that Dot was untrue to him,
she meeting the man clandestinely and adjusting the disguise for him,
laughing all the while at the ruse she was helping him to play; the
grief of John when he realized the truth, he sitting all night alone by
the fire trying to make up his mind whether he would creep upstairs
and murder the villain who had stolen the heart of his little Dot, or
forgive her because he was so much older than she and it was, therefore,
natural for her to love a younger man; and finally the preparations at
the church, where Tackleton was to wed the beautiful May Fielding, who,
broken-hearted over the death of her sailor boy, had at last succumbed
to her mother's wishes and consented to join Tackleton at the altar.

For an hour Richard's well-modulated, full-toned voice rolled on, the
circle drawing closer and closer with their ears and hearts, as the
characters, one after another, became real and alive under the
reader's magical rendering. Dot Perrybingle's cheery, laughing
accents; Tackleton's sharp, rasping tones; John the Carrier's simple,
straightforward utterances and the soft, timid cadence of old Caleb, the
toy maker--(drowned Edward's father)--and his blind daughter Bertha were
recognized as soon as the reader voiced their speech. So thrilling was
the story of their several joys and sorrows that Kate, unconscious of
her surroundings, had slipped from her low stool, and with the weight of
her body resting on her knees, sat searching Richard's face, the better
to catch every word that fell from his lips.

To heighten the effect of what was the most dramatic part of the
story--the return of the wedding party to the Carrier's house, where
Dot, Caleb, and his blind daughter awaited them--Richard paused for a
moment as if to rest his voice--the room the while deathly still, the
loosening of a pent-up breath now and then showing how tense was the
emotion. Then he went on:

"Are those wheels upon the road, Bertha?", cried Dot. "You've a quick
ear, Bertha--And now you hear them stopping at the garden gate! And now
you hear a step outside the door--the same step, Bertha, is it not--And
now--"

Dot uttered a wild cry of uncontrollable delight, and running up to
Caleb put her hand upon his eyes, as a young man rushed into the room,
and, flinging away his hat into the air, came sweeping down upon them.

"Is it over?" cried Dot.

"Yes!"

"Happily over?"

"Yes!"

"Do you recollect the voice, dear Caleb? Did you ever hear the like of
it before?" cried Dot.

"If my boy Edward in the Golden South Americas was alive--" cried Caleb,
trembling.

"He is alive!" shrieked Dot, removing her hands from his eyes and
clapping them in ecstasy; "look at him! See where he stands before you,
healthy and strong! Your own dear son! Your own dear, living, loving
brother, Bertha!"

All honor to the little creature for her transports! All honor to her
tears and laughter, when the three were locked in one another's
arms! All honor to the heartiness with which she met the sunburnt,
sailor-fellow, with his dark, streaming hair, halfway, and never turned
her rosy little mouth aside, but suffered him to kiss it freely, and to
press her to his bounding heart!

"Now tell him (John) all, Edward," sobbed Dot, "and don't spare me, for
nothing shall make me spare myself in his eyes ever again."

"I was the man," said Edward.

"And you could steal disguised into the home of your old friend,"
rejoined the carrier...

"But I had a passion for her."

"You!"

"I had," rejoined the other, "and she returned it--I heard twenty miles
away that she was false to me--I had no mind to reproach her but to see
for myself."

Once more Richard's voice faltered, and again it rang clear, this time
in Dot's tones:

"But when she knew that Edward was alive, John, and had come back--and
when she--that's me, John--told him all--and how his sweetheart had
believed him to be dead, and how she had been over-persuaded by her
mother into a marriage--and when she--that's me again, John--told him
they were not married, though close upon it--and when he went nearly
mad for joy to hear it--then she--that's me again--said she would go
and sound his sweetheart--and she did--and they were married an hour
ago!--John, an hour ago! And here's the bride! And Gruff and Tackleton
may die a bachelor! And I'm a happy little woman, May, God bless you!"

Little woman, how she sobbed! John Perrybingle would have caught her in
his arms. But no; she wouldn't let him.

"Don't love me yet, please, John! Not for a long time yet! No--keep
there, please, John! When I laugh at you, as I sometimes do, John, and
call you clumsy, and a dear old goose, and names of that sort, it's
because I love you, John, so well. And when I speak of people being
middle-aged and steady, John, and pretend that we are a humdrum couple,
going on in a jog-trot sort of way, it's only because I'm such a silly
little thing, John, that I like, sometimes, to act a kind of play with
Baby, and all that, and make believe."

She saw that he was coming, and stopped him again. But she was very
nearly too late.

"No, don't love me for another minute or two, if you please, John! When
I first came home here I was half afraid I mighn't learn to love you
every bit as well as I hoped and prayed I might--being so very young,
John. But, dear John, every day and hour I love you more and more. And
if I could have loved you better than I do, the noble words I heard you
say this morning would have made me. But I can't. All the affection that
I had (it was a great deal, John) I gave you, as you well deserve, long,
long ago, and I have no more left to give. Now, my dear husband, take
me to your heart again! That's my home, John; and never, never think of
sending me to any other."

Richard Stopped and picking up a glass from the table moistened his
lips. The silence continued. Down more than one face the tears were
trickling, as they have trickled down millions of faces since. Kate had
crept imperceptibly nearer until her hands could have touched Richard's
knees. When Willits bent over her with a whispered comment a slight
shiver ran through her, but she neither answered nor turned her head. It
was only when Richard's voice finally ceased with the loud chirp of the
cricket at the close of the beloved story, and St. George had helped her
to her feet, that she seemed to awake to a sense of where she was. Even
then she looked about her in a dazed way, as if she feared some one had
been probing her heart--hanging back till the others had showered their
congratulations on the reader. Then leaning forward she placed her hands
in Richard's as if to steady herself, and with a sigh that seemed to
come from the depths of her nature bent her head and kissed him softly
on the cheek.

When the eggnog was being served and the guests were broken up into
knots and groups, all discussing the beauty of the reading, she suddenly
left Willits, who had followed her every move as if he had a prior right
to her person, and going up to St. George, led him out of the room to
one of the sofas in Richard's study, her lips quivering, the undried
tears still trembling on her eyelids. She did not release his hand as
they took their seats. Her fingers closed only the tighter, as if she
feared he would slip from her grasp.

"It was all so beautiful and so terrible, Uncle George," she moaned at
last--"and all so true. Such awful mistakes are made and then it is too
late. And nobody understands--nobody--nobody!" She paused, as if the
mere utterance pained her, and then to St. George's amazement asked
abruptly "Is there nothing yet from Harry?"

St. George looked at her keenly, wondering whether he had caught the
words aright. It had been months since Harry's name had crossed her
lips.

"No, nothing," he answered simply, trying to fathom her purpose and
completely at sea as to her real motive--"not for some months. Not since
he left the ship."

"And do you think he is in any danger?" She had released his hand, and
with her fingers resting on the sleeve of his coat sat looking into his
eyes as if to read their meaning.

"I don't know," he replied in a non-committal tone, still trying to
understand her purpose. "He meant then to go to the mountains, so he
wrote his mother. This may account for our not hearing. Why do you ask?
Have you had any news of him yourself?" he added, studying her face for
some solution of her strange attitude.

She sank back on the cushions. "No, he never writes to me." Then, as
if some new train of thought had forced its way into her mind, she
exclaimed suddenly: "What mountains?"

"Some range back of Rio, if I remember rightly. He said he--"

"Rio! But there is yellow fever at Rio!" she cried, with a start as she
sat erect in her seat, the pupils of her eyes grown to twice their size.
"Father lost half of one of his crews at Rio. He heard so to-day. It
would be dreadful for--for--his mother--if anything should happen to
him."

Again St. George scrutinized her face, trying to probe deep down in her
heart. Had she, after all, some affection left for this boy lover--and
her future husband within hearing distance! No! This was not his
Kate--he understood it all now. It was the spell of the story that still
held her. Richard's voice had upset her, as it had done half the room.

"Yes, it is dreadful for everybody," he added. And then, in a
perfunctory manner, as being perhaps the best way to lead the
conversation into other channels, added: "And the suspense will be worse
now--for me at any rate--for I, too, am going away where letters reach
me but seldom."

Her hand closed convulsively over his.

"You going away! YOU!" she cried in a half-frightened tone. "Oh, please
don't, Uncle George! Oh!--I don't want you away from me! Why must you
go? Oh, no! Not now--not now!"

Her distress was so marked and her voice so pleading that he was about
to tell her the whole story, even to that of the shifts he had been put
to to get food for himself and Todd, when he caught sight of Willits
making his way through the throng to where they sat. His lips closed
tight. This man would always be a barrier between him and the girl he
had loved ever since her babyhood.

"Well, my dear Kate," he replied calmly, his eyes still on Willits, who
in approaching from the other room had been detained by a guest, "you
see I must go. Mr. Pawson wants me out of the way while he fixes up some
of my accounts, and so he suggested that I go back to Wesley for a few
months." He paused for an instant and, still keeping his eye on Willets,
added: "And now one thing more, my dear Kate, before your escort claims
you"--here his voice sank to a whisper--"promise me that if Harry writes
to you you will send him a kind, friendly letter in return. It can do
you no harm now, nor would Harry misunderstand it--your wedding is so
near. A letter would greatly cheer him in his loneliness."

"But he won't write!" she exclaimed with some bitterness--she had
not yet noticed Willits's approach--"he'll never write or speak to me
again."

"But you will if he does?" pleaded St. George, the thought of his boy's
loneliness overmastering every other feeling.

"But he won't, I tell you--never--NEVER!"

"But if he should, my child? If--"

He stopped and raised his head. Willits stood gazing down at them,
searching St. George's face, as if to learn the meaning of the
conference: he knew that he did not favor his suit.

Kate looked up and her face flushed.

"Yes--in one minute, Mr. Willits," and without a word of any kind to
St. George she rose from the sofa and with her arm in Willits's left the
room.




CHAPTER XXIV



One winter evening some weeks after St. George's departure, Pawson sat
before a smouldering fire in Temple's front room, reading by the
light of a low lamp. He had rearranged the furniture--what was left of
it--both in this and the adjoining room, in the expectation that Fogbin
(Gorsuch's attorney) would move in, but so far he had not appeared, nor
had any word come from either Gorsuch or Colonel Rutter; nor had any
one either written or called upon him in regard to the overdue payment;
neither had any legal papers been served.

This prolonged and ominous silence disturbed him; so much so that he had
made it a point to be as much in his office as possible should his enemy
spring any unexpected trap.

It was, therefore, with some misgivings that he answered a quick,
impatient rap on his front door at the unusual hour of ten o'clock. If
it were Fogbin he had everything ready for his comfort; if it were any
one else he would meet him as best he could: no legal papers, at any
rate, could be served at that hour.

He swung back the door and a full-bearded, tightly-knit, well-built man
in rough clothes stepped in. In the dim light of the overhead lamp he
caught the flash of a pair of determined eyes set in a strong, forceful
face.

"I want Mr. Temple," said the man, who had now removed his cap and stood
looking about him, as if making an inventory of the scanty furniture.

"He is not here," replied Pawson, rummaging the intruder's face for some
clew to his identity and purpose in calling at so late an hour.

"Are you sure?" There was doubt as well as marked surprise in the man's
tone. He evidently did not believe a word of the statement.

"Very sure," rejoined the attorney in a more positive tone, his eyes
still on the stranger. "He left town some weeks ago."

The intruder turned sharply, and with a brisk inquisitive movement
strode past him and pushed open the dining-room door. There he stood
for a moment, his eyes roaming over the meagre appointments of the
interior--the sideboard, bare of everything but a pitcher and some
tumblers--the old mahogany table littered with law books and papers--the
mantel stripped of its clock and candelabras. Then he stepped inside,
and without explanation of any kind, crossed the room, opened the door
of St. George's bedroom, and swept a comprehensive glance around the
despoiled interior. Once he stopped and peered into the gloom as if
expecting to find the object of his search concealed in its shadows.

"What has happened here?" he demanded in a voice which plainly showed
his disappointment.

"Do you mean what has become of the rest of the furniture?" asked the
attorney in reply, gaining time to decide upon his course.

"Yes, who is responsible for this business?" he exclaimed angrily. "Has
it been done during his absence?"

Pawson hesitated. That the intruder was one of Gorsuch's men, and that
he had been sent in advance on an errand of investigation, was no
longer to be doubted. He, however, did not want to add any fuel to his
increasing heat, so he answered simply:

"Mr. Temple got caught in the Patapsco failure and it went pretty hard
with him, and so what he didn't actually need he sold."

The man gave a start, his features hardening; but whether of surprise or
dissatisfaction Pawson could not tell.

"And when it was all gone he went away--is that what you mean?" This
came in a softened tone.

"Yes--that seems to be the size of it. I suppose you come
about--some"--again he hesitated, not knowing exactly where the man
stood--"about some money due you?--Am I right?"

"No, I came to see Mr. Temple, and I must see him, and at once. How long
will he be gone?"

"All winter--perhaps longer." The attorney had begun to breathe again.
The situation might not be as serious as he had supposed. If he wanted
to see Mr. Temple himself, and no one else would do, there was still
chance of delay in the wiping out of the property.

Again the man's eyes roamed over the room, the bareness of which seemed
still to impress him. Then he asked simply: "Where will a letter reach
him?"

"I can't say exactly. I thought he had gone to Virginia--but he doesn't
answer any of my communications."

A look of suspicion crept into the intruder's eyes.

"You're not trying to deceive me, are you? It is very important that I
should see Mr. Temple, and at once." Then his manner altered. "You've
forgotten me, Mr. Pawson, but I have not forgotten you--my name is
Rutter. I lived here with Mr. Temple before I went to sea, three years
ago. I am just home--I left the ship an hour ago. I'll sit down if you
don't mind--I've still got my sea-legs on and am a little wobbly."

Pawson twisted his thin body and bent his neck, his eyes glued to the
speaker's face. There was not a trace of young Harry in the features.

"Well, you don't look like him," he replied incredulously--"he was
slender--not half your size, and--"

"Yes--I don't blame you. I am a good deal heavier; may be too a beard
makes some change in a man's face. But you don't really doubt me, do
you? Have you forgotten the bills that man Gadgem brought in?--the five
hundred dollars due Slater, and the horse Hampson sold me--the one I
shot?" and one of his old musical laughs rose to his lips.

Pawson sprang forward and seized the intruder's hand. He would recognize
that laugh among a thousand:

"Yes--I know you now! It's all come back to me," he cried joyously.
"But you gave me a terrible start, Mr. Rutter. I thought you had come to
clear up what was left. Oh!--but I AM glad you are back. Your uncle--you
always called him so, I remember--your uncle has had an awful hard time
of it--had to sell most of his things--terrible--terrible! And then,
too, he has grieved so over you--asking me, sometimes two or three times
a day, for letters from you--asking me questions and worrying over your
not coming and not answering. Oh, this is fine. Now may be we can save
the situation. You don't mind my shaking your hand again, do you? It's
so good to know there is somebody who can help. I have been all alone so
far except Gadgem--who has been a treasure. You remember him. Why didn't
you let Mr. Temple know you were coming?"

"I couldn't. I have been up in the mountains of Brazil, and coming home
went ashore--got wrecked. These clothes I bought from a sailor," and he
opened his rough jacket the wider.

"Yes--that's exactly what I heard him say--that's what he thought--that
is, that you were where you couldn't write, although I never heard him
say anything about shipwreck. I remember his telling Mr. Willits and
Miss Seymour that same thing the morning he left--that you couldn't
write. They came to see him off."

Harry edged his chair nearer the fireplace and propped one shoe on the
fender as if to dry it, although the night was fair. The mention of
Kate's and her suitor's names had sent the blood to his head and he was
using the subterfuge in the effort to regain control of himself before
Pawson should read all his secrets.

Shifting his body he rested his head on his hand, the light of the lamp
bringing into clearer relief his fresh, healthy skin, finely modelled
nose, and wide brow, the brown hair, clipped close to his head, still
holding its glossy sheen. For some seconds he did not speak: the low
song of the fire seemed to absorb him. Now and then Pawson, who was
watching him intently, heard him strangle a rebellious sigh, as if
some old memory were troubling him. His hand dropped and with a quick
movement he faced his companion again.

"I have been away a long time, Mr. Pawson," he said in a thoughtful
tone. "For three months--four now--I have had no letters from anybody.
It was my fault partly, but let that go. I want you to answer some
questions, and I want you to tell me the truth--all the truth. I haven't
any use for any other kind of man--do you understand? Is my mother
alive?"

"Yes."

"And Alec? Is he all right?"

Pawson nodded.

"And my uncle? Is he ruined?--so badly ruined that he is suffering? Tell
me." There was a peculiar pathos in his tone--so much so that Pawson,
who had been standing, settled into a chair beside him that his answers
might, if possible, be the more intimate and sympathetic.

"I'm afraid he is. The only hope is the postponement in some way of the
foreclosure of the mortgage on this house until times get better. It
wouldn't bring its face value to-day."

Harry caught his breath: "My God!--you don't tell me so! Poor Uncle
George--so fine and splendid--so good to everybody, and he has come to
this! And about this mortgage--who owns it?"

"Mr. Gorsuch, I understand, owns it now: he bought it of the Tyson
estate."

"You mean John Gorsuch--my father's man of business?"

"Yes."

"And was there nothing left?--no money coming in from anywhere?"

Pawson shook his head: "We collected all that some time ago--it came
from some old ground rents."

"And how has he lived since?" He wanted to hear it all; he could help
better if he knew how far down the ladder to begin.

"From hand to mouth, really." And then there followed his own and
Gadgem's efforts to keep the wolf from the door; the sale of the guns,
saddles, and furniture; the wrench over the Castullux cup--and what
a godsend it was that Kirk got such a good price for it--down to the
parting with the last article that either or both of them could sell or
pawn, including his four splendid setters.

As the sad story fell from the attorney's sympathetic lips Harry would
now and then cover his face with his hands in the effort to hide the
tears. He knew that the ruin was now complete. He knew, too, that he had
been the cause of it. Then his thoughts reverted to the old regime and
its comforts: those which his uncle had shared with him so generously.

"And what has become of my uncle's servants?" he asked--"his cook, Aunt
Jemima, and his body-servant, Todd?"

"I don't know what has become of the cook, but he took Todd with him."

Harry heaved a sigh of relief. If Todd was with him life would still
be made bearable for his uncle. Perhaps, after all, a winter with Tom
Coston was the wisest thing he could have done.

One other question now trembled on his lips. It was one he felt he had
no right to ask--not of Pawson--but it was his only opportunity, and
he must know the truth if he was to carry out the other plans he had
in view the day he dropped everything and came home without warning. At
last he asked casually:

"Do you know whether my father returned to Uncle George the money he
paid out for me?" Not that it was important--more as if he wanted to be
posted on current events.

"He tried, but Mr. Temple wouldn't take it. I had the matter in hand,
and know. This was some three years ago. He has never offered it
since--not to my knowledge."

Harry's face lightened. Some trace of decency was still left in the
Rutter blood! This money was in all honor owed by his father and might
still become an asset if he and his uncle should ever become reconciled.

"And can you tell me how they all are--out at Moorlands? Have you seen
my father lately?"

"Not your father, but I met your old servant, Alec, a few days ago."

"Alec!--dear old Alec! Tell me about him. And my mother--was she all
right? What did Alec say, and how did the old man look?"

"Yes; your mother was well. He said they were all well, except Colonel
Rutter, whose eyes troubled him. Alec seemed pretty much the same--may
be a little older."

Harry's mind began to wander. The room and his companion were forgotten.
He was again at Moorlands, the old negro following him about, his dear
mother sitting by his bed or kissing him goodnight.

For an instant he sat gazing into the smouldering embers absorbed in
his thoughts. Then as if some new vista had opened out before him he
asked suddenly:

"You don't know what he was doing in town, do you? Was my mother with
him?"

"No, he was alone. He had brought some things in for Mr. Seymour--some
game or something, if I remember right. There's to be a wedding there
soon, so I hear. Yes, now I think of it, it WAS game--some partridges,
perhaps, your father had sent in. The old man asked about you--he always
does. And now, Mr. Rutter, tell me about yourself--have you done well?"
He didn't think he had, judging from his general appearance, but he
wanted to be sure in case St. George asked him.

Harry settled in his chair, his broad shoulders filling the back. The
news of Kate's wedding was what he had expected. Perhaps it was already
over. He was glad, however, the information had come to him unsought.
For an instant he made no reply to Pawson's inquiry, then he answered
slowly: "Yes, and no. I have made a little money--not much--but
some--not enough to pay Uncle George everything I owe him--not yet;
another time I shall do better. I was down with fever for a while and
that cost me a good deal of what I had saved. But I HAD to come back.
I met a man who told me Uncle George was ruined; that he had left this
house and that somebody had put a sign on it, I thought at first that
this must refer to you and your old arrangement in the basement, until I
questioned him closer. I knew how careless he had always been about his
money transactions, and was afraid some one had taken advantage of him.
That's why I was so upset when I came in a while ago: I thought they had
stolen his furniture as well. The ship Mohican--one of the old Barkeley
line--was sailing the day I reached the coast and I got aboard and
worked my passage home. I learned to do that on my way out. I learned
to wear a beard too. Not very becoming, is it?"--and a low, forced laugh
escaped his lips. "But shaving is not easy aboard ship or in the mines."

Pawson made no reply. He had been studying his guest the closer while
he was talking, his mind more on the man than on what he was saying.
The old Harry, which the dim light of the hall and room had hidden, was
slowly coming back to him:--the quick turn of the head; the way his lips
quivered when he laughed; the exquisitely modelled nose and brow, and
the way the hair grew on the temples. The tones of his voice, too, had
the old musical ring. It was the same madcap, daredevil boy mellowed and
strengthened by contact with the outside world. Next he scrutinized his
hands, their backs bronzed and roughened by contact with the weather,
and waited eagerly until some gesture opened the delicately turned
fingers, exposing the white palms, and felt relieved and glad when
he saw that they showed no rough usage. His glance rested on his
well-turned thighs, slender waist, and broad, strong shoulders and
arms--and then his eyes--so clear, and his skin so smooth and fresh--a
clean soul in a clean body! What joy would be Temple's when he got his
arms around this young fellow once more!

The wanderer reached for his cap and pushed back his chair. For an
instant he stood gazing into the smouldering coals as if he hated to
leave their warmth, his brow clouded, his shoulders drawn back. He had
all the information he wanted--all he had come in search of, although
it was not exactly what he wished or what he had expected:--his uncle
ruined and an exile; his father half blind and Kate's wedding expected
any week. That was enough at least for one night.

He stepped forward and grasped Pawson's hand, his well-knit, alert body
in contrast to the loosely jointed, long-legged, young attorney.

"I must thank you, Mr. Pawson," he said in his old outspoken, hearty way
"for your frankness, and I must also apologize for my apparent rudeness
when I first entered your door; but, as I told you, I was so astounded
and angry at what I saw that I hardly knew what I was doing. And now
one thing more before I take my leave: if Mr. Temple does not want his
present retreat known--and I gather from the mysterious way in which you
have spoken that he does not--let me tell you that I do not want mine
known either. Please do not say to any one that you have seen me, or
answer any questions--not for a time, at least. Good-night!"

With the closing of the front door behind him the exile came to a
standstill on the top step and looked about him. Across the park--beyond
the trees, close sheltered under the wide protecting roof, lay Kate. All
the weary miles out and back had this picture been fixed in his mind.
She was doubtless asleep as it was now past eleven o'clock: he would
know by the lights. But even the sight of the roof that sheltered her
would, in itself, be a comfort. It had been many long years since he had
breathed the same air with her; slept under the same stars; walked where
her feet had trodden. For some seconds he stood undecided. Should he
return to the Sailors' House where he had left his few belongings and
banish all thoughts of her from his mind now that his worst fears had
been confirmed? or should he yield to the strain on his heart-strings?
If she were asleep the whole house would be dark; if she were at some
neighbor's and Mammy Henny was sitting up for her, the windows in the
bedroom would be dark and the hall lamp still burning--he had watched it
so often before and knew the signs.

Drawing the collar of his rough peajacket close about his throat and
crowding his cap to his ears, he descended the steps and with one of his
quick, decided movements plunged into the park, now silent and deserted.

As he neared the Seymour house he became conscious, from the glow
of lights gleaming between the leafless branches of the trees, that
something out of the common was going on inside. The house was ablaze
from the basement to the roof, with every window-shade illumined.
Outside the steps, and as far out as the curb, lounged groups of
attendants, while in the side street, sheltered by the ghostly trees,
there could be made out the wheels and hoods of carryalls and the glint
of harness. Now and then the door would open and a bevy of muffled
figures--the men in cloaks, the girls in nubias wound about their heads
and shoulders--would pass out. The Seymours were evidently giving a
ball, or was it--and the blood left his face and little chills ran loose
through his hair--was it Kate's wedding night? Pawson had said that
a marriage would soon take place, and in the immediate future. It was
either this or an important function of some kind, and on a much more
lavish scale than had been old Prim's custom in the days when he knew
him. Then the contents of Alec's basket rose in his mind. That was why
his father had sent the pheasants! Perhaps both he and his mother were
inside!

Sick at heart he turned on his heel and with quickened pace retraced his
steps. He would not be a spy, and he could not he an eavesdropper. As
the thought forced itself on his mind, the fear that he might meet some
one whom he would know, or who would know him, overtook him. So great
was his anxiety that it was only when he had left the park far behind
him on his way back to the Sailors' House, that he regained his
composure. He was prepared to face the truth, and all of it whatever it
held in store for him; but he must first confront his father and learn
just how he stood with him; then he would see his mother and Alec, and
then he would find St. George: Kate must come last.

The news that his father had offered to pay his debts--although he
did not intend that that should relieve him in any way of his own
responsibility to his uncle--kindled fresh hopes in his heart and buoyed
him up. Now that his father had tried repeatedly to repair the wrong he
had done it might only be necessary to throw himself on his knees before
him and be taken back into his heart and arms. To see him, then, was his
first duty and this he would begin to carry out in the morning. As to
his meeting his mother and Alec--should he fail with his father--that
must be undertaken with more care, for he could not place himself in the
position of sneaking home and using the joy his return would bring them
as a means to soften his father's heart. Yes, he would find his father
first, then his mother and Alec. If his father received him the others
would follow. If he was repulsed, he must seek out some other way.

This over he would find St. George. He knew exactly where his uncle
was, although he had not said so to Pawson. He was not at Coston's, nor
anywhere in the vicinity of Wesley, but at Craddock, on the bay--a small
country house some miles distant, where he and his dogs had often spent
days and weeks during the ducking season. St. George had settled down
there to rest and get away from his troubles; that was why he had not
answered Pawson's letters.

Striding along with his alert, springing step, he swung through the
deserted and unguarded Marsh Market, picked his way between the piles of
produce and market carts, and plunging down a narrow street leading to
the wharf, halted before a door over which swung a lantern burning a
green light. Here he entered.

Although it was now near midnight, there were still eight or ten
seafaring men in the room--several of them members of his own crew
aboard the Mohican. Two were playing checkers, the others crowded about
a square table where a game of cards was in progress; wavy lines of
tobacco smoke floated beneath the dingy ceiling; at one end was a
small bar where a man in a woollen shirt was filling some short, thick
tumblers from an earthen jug. It was the ordinary sailors' retreat where
the men put up before, between, and after their voyages.

One of them at the card-table looked up from his game as Harry entered,
and called out:

"Man been lookin' for you--comin' back, he says. My trick! Hearts,
wasn't it?" (this to his companions).

"Do I know him?" asked Harry with a slight start, pausing on his way
to his bedroom upstairs, where he had left his bag of clothes two hours
before. Could he have been recognized and shadowed?

"No--don't think so; he's a street vendor. Got some China silks to
sell--carries his pack on his back and looks as if he'd took up a extry
'ole in his belt. Hungry, I wouldn't wonder. Wanted to h'ist 'em fur
a glass o' grog an' a night's lodgin', but Cap wouldn't let him--said
you'd be back and might help him. Wasn't that it, Cap?"--this to the
landlord, who nodded in reply.

"How could _I_ help him?" asked Harry, selecting a tallow dip from a row
on a shelf, but in a tone that implied his own doubt in the query, as
well as his relief, now that the man was really a stranger.

"Well, this is your port, so I 'ear. Some o' them high-flyers up 'round
the park might lend a hand, may be, if you'd tip 'em a wink, or some o'
their women folks might take a shine to 'em."

"Looked hungry, did you say?" Harry asked, lighting the dip at an oil
lamp that swung near the bar.

"Yes--holler's a drum--see straight through him; tired too--beat out.
You'd think so if you see him. My play--clubs."

Harry turned to the landlord: "If this man comes in again give him
food and lodging," and he handed him a bank bill. "If he is here in the
morning let me see him. I'm going to bed now. Good-night, men!"




CHAPTER XXV



Should I lapse into the easy-flowing style of the chroniclers of
the period of which I write--(and how often has the scribe wished he
could)--this chapter would open with the announcement that on this
particularly bleak, wintry afternoon a gentleman in the equestrian
costume of the day, and mounted upon a well-groomed, high-spirited white
horse, might have been seen galloping rapidly up a country lane leading
to an old-fashioned manor house.

Such, however, would not cover the facts. While the afternoon was
certainly wintry, and while the rider was unquestionably a gentleman, he
was by no manner of means attired in velveteen coat and russet-leather
boots with silver spurs, his saddle-bags strapped on behind, but in
a rough and badly worn sailor's suit, his free hand grasping a bundle
carried loose on his pommel. As to the horse neither the immortal James
or any of his school could truthfully picture this animal as either
white or high-spirited. He might, it is true, have been born white and
would in all probability have stayed white but for the many omissions
and commissions of his earlier livery stable training--traces of which
could still be found in his scraped sides and gnawed mane and tail; he
might also have once had a certain commendable spirit had not the ups
and downs of road life--and they were pretty steep outside Kennedy
Square--taken it out of him.

It is, however, when I come to the combination of horse and rider that
I can with entire safety lapse into the flow of the old chroniclers. For
whatever Harry had forgotten in his many experiences since he last threw
his leg over Spitfire, horsemanship was not one of them. He still rode
like a Cherokee and still sat his mount like a prince.

He had had an anxious and busy morning. With the first streak of dawn he
had written a long letter to his Uncle George, in which he told him of
his arrival; of his heart-felt sorrow at what Pawson had imparted and of
his leaving immediately, first for Wesley and then Craddock, as soon as
he found out how the land lay at Moorlands. This epistle he was careful
to enclose in another envelope, which he directed to Justice Coston,
with instructions to forward it with "the least possible delay" to Mr.
Temple, who was doubtless at Craddock, "and who was imperatively needed
at home in connection with some matters which required his immediate
personal attention," and which enclosure, it is just as well to state,
the honorable justice placed inside the mantel clock, that being the
safest place for such precious missives, at least until the right owner
should appear.

This duly mailed, he had returned to the Sailors' House, knocked at the
door of the upstairs room in which, through his generosity, the street
vendor lay sleeping, and after waking him up and becoming assured that
the man was in real distress, had bought at twice their value the China
silks which had caused the disheartened pedler so many weary hours of
tramping. These he had tucked under his arm and carried away.

The act was not alone due to his charitable instincts. A much more
selfish motive influenced him. Indeed the thought came to him in a way
that had determined him to attend to his mail at early dawn and return
at sunrise lest the owner should disappear and take the bundle with him.
The silks were the very things he needed to help him solve one of his
greatest difficulties. He would try, as the sailor-pedler had done, to
sell them in the neighborhood of Moorlands--(a common practice in those
days)--and in this way might gather up the information of which he was
in search. Pawson had not known him--perhaps the others would not: he
might even offer the silks to his father without being detected.

With this plan clearly defined in his mind, he had walked into a livery
stable near the market, but a short distance from his lodgings, with the
silks in a bundle and after looking the stock over had picked out this
unprepossessing beast as best able to take him to Moorlands and back
between sunrise and dark.

As he rode on, leaving the scattered buildings of the town far behind,
mounting the hills and then striking the turnpike--every rod of which he
could have found in the dark--his thoughts, like road-swallows, skimmed
each mile he covered. Here was where he had stopped with Kate when her
stirrup broke; near the branches of that oak close to the ditch marking
the triangle of cross-roads he had saved his own and Spitfire's neck by
a clear jump that had been the talk of the neighborhood for days. On
the crest of this hill--the one he was then ascending--his father always
tightened up the brakes on his four-in-hand, and on the slope beyond
invariably braced himself in his seat, swung his whip, and the flattened
team swept on and down, leaving a cloud of dust in its wake that blurred
the road for minutes thereafter.

When noon came he dismounted at a farmer's out-building beside the
road--he would not trust the public-houses--fed and watered his horse,
rubbed him down himself, and after an hour's rest pushed on toward the
fork in the road to Moorlands. Beyond this was a cross-path that led to
the outbarns and farm stables--a path bordered by thick bushes and which
skirted a fence in the rear of the manor house itself. Here he intended
to tie his steed and there he would mount him again should his mission
fail.

The dull winter sky had already heralded the dusk--it was near four
o'clock in the afternoon--when he passed some hayricks where a group
of negroes were at work. One or two raised their heads and then, as
if reassured, resumed their tasks. This encouraged him to push on the
nearer--he had evidently been mistaken for one of the many tradespeople
seeking his father's overseer, either to sell tools or buy produce.

Tying the horse close to the fence--so close that it could not be seen
from the house--he threw the bundle of silks over his shoulder and
struck out for the small office in the rear. Here the business of the
estate was transacted, and here were almost always to be found either
the overseer or one of his assistants--both of them white. These men
were often changed, and his chance, therefore, of meeting a stranger was
all the more likely.

As he approached the low sill of the door which was level with the
ground, and which now stood wide open, he caught the glow of a fire and
could make out the figure of a man seated at a desk bending over a mass
of papers. The man pushed back a green shade which had protected his
eyes from the glare of a lamp and peered out at him.

It was his father!

The discovery was so unexpected and had come with such suddenness--it
was rarely in these later days that the colonel was to be found here in
the afternoon: he was either riding or receiving visitors--that Harry's
first thought was to shrink back out of sight, or, if discovered, to
make some excuse for his intrusion and retire. Then his mind changed and
he stepped boldly in. This was what he had come for and this was what he
would face.

"I have some China silks to sell," he said in his natural tone of voice,
turning his head so that while his goods were in sight his face would be
in shadow.

"Silks! I don't want any silks! Who allowed you to pass in here? Alec!"
He pushed back his chair and moved to the door. "Alec! Where the devil
is Alec! He's always where I don't want him!"

"I saw no one to ask, sir," Harry replied mechanically. His father's
appearance had sent a chill through him; he would hardly have known him
had he met him on the street. Not only did he look ten years older,
but the injury to his sight caused him to glance sideways at any one he
addressed, completely destroying the old fearless look in his eyes.

"You never waited to ask! You walk into my private office unannounced
and--" here he turned the lamp to see the better. "You're a sailor,
aren't you?" he added fiercely--a closer view of the intruder only
heightening his wrath.

"Yes, sir--I'm a sailor," replied Harry simply, his voice dying in his
throat as he summed up the changes that the years had wrought in the
colonel's once handsome, determined face--thinner, more shrunken, his
mustache and the short temple-whiskers almost white.

For an instant his father crumpled a wisp of paper he was holding
between his fingers and thumb; and then demanded sharply, but with a
tone of curiosity, as if willing the intruder should tarry a moment
while he gathered the information:

"How long have you been a sailor?"

"I am just in from my last voyage." He still kept in the shadow although
he saw his father had so far failed to recognize him. The silks had been
laid on a chair beside him.

"That's not what I asked you. How long have you been a sailor?" He was
scanning his face now as best he could, shifting the green shade that he
might see the better.

"I went to sea three years ago."

"Three years, eh? Where did you go?"

The tone of curiosity had increased. Perhaps the next question would
lead up to some basis on which he could either declare himself or lay
the foundation of a declaration to be made the next day--after he had
seen his mother and Alec.

"To South America. Para was my first port," he answered simply,
wondering why he wanted to know.

"That's not far from Rio?" He was still looking sideways at him, but
there was no wavering in his gaze.

"No, not far--Rio was our next stopping place. We had a hard voyage and
put in to--"

"Do you know a young man by the name of Rutter--slim man with dark hair
and eyes?" interrupted his father in an angry tone.

Harry started forward, his heart in his mouth, his hands upraised, his
fingers opening. It was all he could do to restrain himself. "Don't you
know me, father?" was trembling on his lips. Then something in the
sound of the colonel's voice choked his utterance. Not now, he thought,
mastering his emotion--a moment more and he would tell him.

"I have heard of him, sir," he answered when he recovered his speech,
straining his ears to catch the next word.

"Heard of him, have you? So has everybody else heard of him--a worthless
scoundrel who broke his mother's heart; a man who disgraced his
family--a gentleman turned brigand--a renegade who has gone back on his
blood! Tell him so if you see him! Tell him I said so; I'm his father,
and know! No--I don't want your silks--don't want anything that has to
do with sailormen. I am busy--please go away. Don't stop to bundle them
up--do that outside," and he turned his back and readjusted the shade
over his eyes.

Harry's heart sank, and a cold faintness stole through his frame. He was
not angry nor indignant. He was stunned.

Without a word in reply he gathered up the silks from the chair, tucked
them under his arm, and replacing his cap stepped outside into the fast
approaching twilight. Whatever the morrow might bring forth, nothing
more could be done to-day. To have thrown himself at his father's feet
would only have resulted in his being driven from the grounds by the
overseer, with the servants looking on--a humiliation he could not
stand.

As he stood rolling the fabrics into a smaller compass, a gray-haired
negro in the livery of a house servant passed hurriedly and entered the
door of the office. Instantly his father's voice rang out:

"Where the devil have you been, Alec? How many times must I tell you to
look after me oftener. Don't you know I'm half blind and--No--I don't
want any more wood--I want these vagabonds kept off my grounds. Send Mr.
Grant to me at once, and don't you lose sight of that man until you have
seen him to the main road. He says he is a sailor--and I've had enough
of sailors, and so has everybody else about here."

The negro bowed and backed out of the room. No answer of any kind was
best when the colonel was in one of his "tantrums."

"I reckon I hab to ask ye, sah, to quit de place--de colonel don't 'low
nobody to--" he said politely.

Harry turned his face aside and started for the fence. His first thought
was to drop his bundle and throw his arms around Alec's neck; then he
realized that this would be worse than his declaring himself to his
father--he could then be accused of attempting deception by the trick
of a disguise. So he hurried on to where his horse was tied--his back
to Alec, the bundle shifted to his left shoulder that he might hide his
face the better until he was out of sight of the office, the old man
stumbling on, calling after him:

"No, dat ain't de way. Yer gotter go down de main road; here, man--don't
I tell yer dat ain't de way."

Harry had now gained the fence and had already begun to loosen the reins
when Alec, out of breath and highly indignant over the refusal to carry
out his warning, reached his side.

"You better come right back f'om whar ye started," the old negro puffed;
"ye can't go dat way or dey'll set de dogs on ye." Here his eyes rested
on the reins and forelock. "What! you got a horse an' you--"

Harry turned and laid his hand on the old servant's shoulder. He could
hardly control his voice:

"Don't you know me, Alec? I'm Harry!"

The old man bent down, peered into Harry's eyes, and with a quick spring
forward grabbed him by both shoulders.

"You my Marse Harry!--you!" His breath was gone now, his whole body in a
tremble, his eyes bulging from his head.

"Yes, Alec, Harry! It's only the beard. Look at me! I didn't want my
father to see us--that's why I kept on."

The old servant threw up his hands and caught his young master around
the neck. For some seconds he could not speak.

"And de colonel druv ye out!" he gasped. "Oh, my Gawd! my Gawd! And ye
ain't daid, and ye come back home ag'in." He was sobbing now, his head
on the exile's shoulder, Harry's arms about him--patting his bent back.
"But yer gotter go back, Marse Harry," he moaned. "He ain't 'sponsible
these days. He didn't know ye! Come 'long, son; come back wid ol' Alec;
please come, Marse Harry. Oh, Gawd! ye GOTTER come!"

"No, I'll go home to-night--another day I'll--"

"Ye ain't got no home but dis, I tell ye! Go tell him who ye is--lemme
run tell him. I won't be a minute. Oh! Marse Harry, I can't let ye go! I
been dat mizzable widout ye. I ain't neber got over lovin' ye!"

Here a voice from near the office broke out. In the dusk the two could
just make out the form of the colonel, who was evidently calling to some
of his people. He was bareheaded and without his shade.

"I've sent Alec to see him safe off the grounds. You go yourself, Mr.
Grant, and follow him into the highroad; remember that after this I hold
you responsible for these prowlers."

The two had paused while the colonel was speaking, Harry, gathering the
reins in his hand, ready to vault into the saddle, and Alec, holding on
to his coat-sleeves hoping still to detain him.

"I haven't a minute more--quick, Alec, tell me how my mother is."

"She's middlin' po'ly, same's ever; got great rings under her eyes and
her heart's dat heaby makes abody cry ter look at 'er. But she ain't
sick, jes' griebin' herse'f to death. Ain't yer gwineter stop and see
'er? May be I kin git ye in de back way."

"Not now--not here. Bring her to Uncle George's house to-morrow about
noon, and I will be there. Tell her how I look, but don't tell her what
my father has done. And now tell me about Miss Kate--how long since you
saw her? Is she married?"

Again the colonel's voice was heard; this time much nearer--within
hailing distance. He and the overseer were evidently approaching the
fence; some of the negroes had doubtless apprised them of the course of
Harry's exit.

Alec turned quickly to face his master, and Harry, realizing that his
last moment had come, swung himself into the saddle. If Alec made any
reply to his question it was lost in the clatter of hoofs as both horse
and man swept down the by-path. In another moment they had gained
the main road, the rider never breaking rein until he had reached the
farm-house where he had fed and watered his horse some hours before.


Thirty-odd miles out and back was not a long ride for a hired horse in
these days over a good turnpike with plenty of time for resting--and
he had as many breathing spells as gallops, for Harry's moods really
directed his gait. Once in a while he would give him his head, the reins
lying loose, the horse picking his way in a walk. Then the bitterness
of his father's words and how undeserved they were, and how the house
of cards his hopes had built up had come tumbling down about his ears
at the first point of contact would rush over him, and he would dig his
heels into the horse's flanks and send him at full gallop through the
night along the pale ribbon of a road barely discernible in the ghostly
dark. When, however, Alec's sobs smote his ear, or the white face of his
mother confronted him, the animal would gradually slacken his pace and
drop into a walk.

Dominated by these emotions certain fixed resolutions at last took
possession of him: He would see his mother at once, no matter at what
cost--even if he defied his father--and then he would find his uncle.
Whether he would board the next vessel heaving port and return to his
work in the mountains, or whether he would bring his uncle back from
Craddock and the two, with his own vigorous youth and new experience of
the world, fight it out together as they had once done before, depended
on what St. George advised. Now that Kate's marriage was practically
decided upon, one sorrow--and his greatest--was settled forever. Any
others that were in store for him he would meet as they came.

With his mind still intent on these plans he rode at last into the open
door of the small courtyard of the livery stable and drew rein under a
swinging lantern. It was past ten at night, and the place was deserted,
except by a young negro who advanced to take his horse. Tossing the
bridle aside he slipped to the ground.

"He's wet," Harry said, "but he's all right. Let him cool off gradually,
and don't give him any water until he gets dry. I'll come in to-morrow
and pay your people what I owe them."

The negro curry-combed his fingers down the horse's flanks as if to
assure himself of his condition, and in the movement brought his face
under the glare of the overhead light.

Harry grabbed him by the shoulder and swung him round.

"Todd--you rascal! What are you doing here? Why are you not down on the
Eastern Shore?" His astonishment was so intense that for an instant he
could not realize he had the right man.

The negro drew back. He was no runaway slave, and he didn't intend to be
taken for one--certainly not by a man as rough and suspicious looking as
the one before him.

"How you know my name, man?" He was nervous and scared half out of his
wits. More than one negro had been shanghaied in that way and smuggled
off to sea.

"Know you! I'd know you among a thousand. Have you, too, deserted your
master?" He still held him firmly by the collar of his coat, his voice
rising with his wrath. "Why have you left him? Answer me."

For an instant the negro hesitated, leaned forward, and then with a
burst of joy end out:

"You ain't!--Fo' Gawd it is! Dat beard on ye, Marse Harry, done fool
me--but you is him fo' sho. Gor-a-mighty! ain't I glad ye ain't daid.
Marse George say on'y yisterday you was either daid or sick dat ye
didn't write an'--"

"Said yesterday! Why, is he at home?"

"HOME! Lemme throw a blanket over dis hoss and tie him tell we come
back. Oh, we had a heap o' mis'ry since ye went away--a heap o' trouble.
Nothin' but trouble! You come 'long wid me--'tain't far; des around
de corner. I'll show ye sompin' make ye creep all over. An' it ain't
gettin' no better--gettin' wuss. Dis way, Manse Harry. You been 'cross
de big water, ain't ye? Dat's what I heared. Aunt Jemima been mighty
good, but we can't go on dis way much longer."

Still talking, forging ahead in the darkness through the narrow street
choked with horseless drays, Todd swung into a dingy yard, mounted a
flight of rickety wooden steps, and halted at an unpainted door. Turning
the knob softly he beckoned silently to Harry, and the two stepped
into a small room lighted by a low lamp placed on the hearth, its rays
falling on a cot bed and a few chairs. Beside a cheap pine table sat
Aunt Jemima, rocking noiselessly. The old woman raised her hand in
warning and put her fingers to her lips.

On the bed, with the coverlet drawn close under his chin, lay his Uncle
George!




CHAPTER XXVI



Harry looked about the room in a bewildered way and then tiptoed to
St. George's bed. It had been a day of surprises, but this last had
completely upset him. St. George dependent on the charity of his old
cook and without other attendant than Todd! Why had he been deserted
by everybody who loved him? Why was he not at Wesley or Craddock? Why
should he be here of all places in the world?

All these thoughts surged through his mind as he stood above the patient
and watched his slow, labored breathing. That he had been ill for some
time was evident in his emaciated face and the deep hollows into which
his closed eyes were sunken.

Aunt Jemima rose and handed the intruder her chair. He sat down
noiselessly beside him. Once his uncle coughed, and in the effort drew
the coverlet close about his throat, his eyes still shut; but whether
from weakness or drowsiness, Harry could not tell. Presently he shifted
his body, and moving his head on the pillow, called softly:

"Jemima?"

The old woman bent over him.

"Yes, Marse George."

"Give me a little milk--my throat troubles me."

Harry drew back into the shadow cast over one end of the cot and rear
wall by the low lamp on the hearth. Whether to slip his hand gently over
his uncle's and declare himself, or whether to wait until he dozed again
and return in the morning, when he would be less tired and could better
withstand the shock of the meeting, was the question which disturbed
him. And yet he could not leave until he satisfied himself of just what
ought to be done. If he left him at all it must be for help of some
kind. He leaned over and whispered in Jemima's ear:

"Has he had a doctor?"

Jemima shook her head. "He wouldn't hab none; he ain't been clean beat
out till day befo' yisterday, an' den I got skeered an'--" She stopped,
leaned closer, clapped her hand over her mouth to keep from screaming,
and staggered back to her chair.

St. George raised his head from the pillow and stared into the shadows.

"Who is talking? I heard somebody speak? Jemima--you haven't disobeyed
me, have you?"

Harry stepped noiselessly to the bedside and laid his fingers on the
sick man's wrist:

"Uncle George," he said gently.

Temple lowered his head as if to focus his gaze.

"Yes, there is some one!" he cried in a stronger voice. "Who are you,
sir?--not a doctor, are you? I didn't send for you!--I don't want any
doctor, I told my servant so. Jemima!--Todd!--why do you--"

Harry tightened his grasp on the emaciated wrist. "No, Uncle George,
it's Harry! I'm just back."

"What did he say, Todd? Harry!--Harry! Did he say he was Harry, or am I
losing my mind?"

In his eagerness to understand he lifted himself to a sitting posture,
his eyes wandering uneasily over the speaker's body, resting on his
head--on his shoulders, arms, and hands--as if trying to fix his mind on
something which constantly baffled him.

Harry continued to pat his wrist soothingly.

"Yes, it's Harry, Uncle George," he answered. "But don't talk--lie
down. I'm all right--I got in yesterday and have been looking for
you everywhere. Pawson told me you were at Wesley. I found Todd a few
minutes ago by the merest accident, and he brought me here. No, you must
lie down--let me help--rest yourself on me--so." He was as tender with
him as if he had been his own mother.

The sick man shook himself free--he was stronger than Harry thought. He
was convinced now that there was some trick being played upon him--one
Jemima in her anxiety had devised.

"How dare you, sir, lie to me like that! Who asked you to come here?
Todd--send this fellow from the room!"

Harry drew back out of his uncle's vision and carefully watched the
invalid. St. George's mind was evidently unhinged and it would be better
not to thwart him.

Todd crept up. He had seen his master like this once before and had had
all he could do to keep him in bed.

"Dat ain't no doctor, Marse George," he pleaded, his voice trembling.
"Dat's Marse Harry come back agin alive. It's de hair on his face make
him look dat way; dat fool me too. It's Marse Harry, fo' sho'--I fotch
him yere myse'f. He's jes' come from de big ship."

St. George twisted his head, looked long and earnestly into Harry's
face, and with a sudden cry of joy stretched out his hand and motioned
him nearer. Harry sank to his knees beside the bed. St. George curved
one arm about his neck, drew him tightly to his breast as he would a
woman, and fell back upon the pillow with Harry's head next his own.
There the two lay still, St. George's eyes half closed, thick sobs
stifling his utterance, the tears streaming down his pale cheeks; his
thin white fingers caressing the brown hair of the boy he loved. At
last, with a heavy, indrawn sigh, not of grief, but of joy, he muttered:

"It's true, isn't it, my son?"

Harry hugged him the tighter in answer.

"And you are home for good?"

Again the pressure. "Yes, but don't talk, you must go to sleep. I won't
leave you." His own tears were choking him now.

Then, after a long pause, releasing his grasp: "I did not know how weak
I was.... Maybe I had better not talk.... Don't stay. Come to-morrow and
tell me about it.... There is no bed for you here... I am sorry ... but
you must go away--you couldn't be comfortable.... Todd--"

The darky started forward--both he and Aunt Jemima were crying:

"Yes, Marse George."

"Take the lamp and light Mr. Rutter downstairs. To-morrow--to-morrow,
Harry.... My God--think of it!--Harry home! Harry home! My Harry home!"
and he turned his face to the wall.

On the way back--first to the stable, where he found that the horse
had been properly cared for and his bill ready and then to his
lodgings,--Todd told him the story of what had happened: At first his
master had firmly intended going to the Eastern Shore--and for a
long stay--for he had ordered his own and Todd's trunks packed with
everything they both owned in the way of clothes. On the next day,
however--the day before the boat left--Mr. Temple had made a visit to
Jemima to bid her good-by, where he learned that her white lodger had
decamped between suns, leaving two months board unpaid. In the effort to
find this man, or compel his employer to pay his bill, out of some wages
still due him--in both of which he failed--his master had missed the
boat and they were obliged to wait another week. During this interim,
not wishing to return to Pawson, and being as he said very comfortable
where he was with his two servants to wait upon him, and the place as
clean as a pin--his master had moved his own and Todd's trunk from the
steamboat warehouse where they had been stored and had had them brought
to Jemima's. Two days later--whether from exposure in tramping the
streets in his efforts to collect the old woman's bill, or whether the
change of lodgings had affected him--he was taken down with a chill and
had been in bed ever since. With this situation staring both Jemima
and himself in the face--for neither she nor Mr. Temple had much
money left--Todd had appealed to Gadgem--(he being the only man in his
experience who could always produce a roll of bills when everybody else
failed)--who took him to the stableman whose accounts he collected--and
who had once bought one of St. George's saddles--and who then and there
hired Todd as night attendant. His wages, added to what Jemima could
earn over her tubs, had kept the three alive. All this had taken place
four weeks or more ago.

None of all this, he assured Harry, had he told Gadgem or anybody
else, his master's positive directions being to keep his abode and his
condition a secret from everybody. All the collector knew was that Mr.
Temple being too poor to take Todd with him, had left him behind to
shift for himself until he could send for him. All the neighborhood
knew, to quote Todd's own hilarious chuckle, was that "Miss Jemima
Johnsing had two mo' boa'ders; one a sick man dat had los' his job an'
de udder a yaller nigger who sot up nights watchin' de hosses eat dere
haids off."

Since that time his master had had various ups and downs, but although
he was still weak he was very much stronger than he had been any time
since he had taken to his bed. Only once had he been delirious; then he
talked ramblingly about Miss Kate and Marse Harry. This had so scared
Aunt Jemima that she had determined to go to Mammy Henny and have her
tell Miss Kate, so he could get a doctor--something he had positively
forbidden her to do, but he grew so much better the next day that she
had given it up; since that time his mind had not again given way. All
he wanted now, so Todd concluded, was a good soup and "a drap o' sumpin
warmin'--an' he'd pull thu'. But dere warn't no use tryin' ter git
him to take it 'cause all he would eat was taters an' corn pone an'
milk--an' sich like, 'cause he said dere warn't money 'nough fer de
three--" whereupon Todd turned his head away and caught his breath,
and then tried to pass it off as an unbidden choke--none of which
subterfuges deceived Harry in the least.

When the two arrived off the dimly burning lantern--it was past ten
o'clock--and pushed in the door of the Sailors' House, Todd received
another shock--one that sent his eyes bulging from his head. That Marse
Harry Rutter, who was always a law unto himself, should grow a beard
and wear rough clothes, was to be expected--"Dem Rutters was allus dat
way--do jes's dey mineter--" but that the most elegant young man of
his day "ob de fustest quality," should take up his quarters in a low
sailors' retreat, and be looked upon by the men gathered under
the swinging lamp around a card table--(some of whom greeted Harry
familiarly)--as one of their own kind, completely staggered him.

The pedler was particularly gracious--so much so that when he learned
that Harry was leaving for good, and had come to get his belongings--he
jumped up and insisted on helping--at which Harry laughed and assented,
and as a further mark of his appreciation presented him with the
now useless silks, in addition to the money he gave him--an act of
generosity which formed the sole topic of conversation in the resort for
weeks thereafter.

Board and lodging paid, the procession took up its return march: Harry
in front, Todd, still dazed and still at sea as to the meaning of it
all, following behind; the pedler between with Harry's heavy coat,
blankets, etc.--all purchased since his shipwreck--the party threading
the choked-up street until they reached the dingy yard, where the pedler
dumped his pack and withdrew, while the darky stowed his load in the
basement. This done, the two tiptoed once more up the stairs to where
Aunt Jemima awaited them, St. George having fallen asleep.

Beckoning the old woman away from the bedroom door and into the far
corner of the small hall, Harry unfolded to her as much of his plans
for the next day as he thought she ought to know. Early in the
morning--before his uncle was astir--he would betake himself to Kennedy
Square; ascertain from Pawson whether his uncle's rooms were still
unoccupied, and if such were the case--and St. George be unable to
walk--would pick him up bodily, wrap him in blankets, carry him in
his own arms downstairs, place him in a carriage, and drive him to his
former home where he would again pick him up and lay him in his own bed:
This would be better than a hundred doctors--he had tried it himself
when he was down with fever and knew. Aunt Jemima was to go ahead and
see that these preparations were carried out. Should Alec be able to
bring his mother to Kennedy Square in the morning, as he had instructed
him to do, then there would indeed be somebody on hand who could nurse
him even better than Jemima; should his mother not be there, Jemima
would take her place. Nothing of all this, he charged her, was to be
told St. George until the hour of departure. To dwell upon the intended
move might overexcite him. Then, when everything was ready--his linen,
etc., arranged--(Jemima was also to look after this)--he would whisk him
off and make him comfortable in his own bed. He would, of course, now
that his uncle wished it, keep secret his retreat; although why St.
George Wilmot Temple, Esq., or any other gentleman of his standing,
should object to being taken care of by his own servants was a thing he
could not understand: Pawson, of course, need not know--nor should any
outside person--not even Gadgem if he came nosing around. To these he
would merely say that Mr. Temple had seen fit to leave home and that Mr.
Temple had seen fit to return again: that was quite enough for attorneys
and collectors. To all the others he would keep his counsel, until St.
George himself made confession, which he was pretty sure he would do at
the first opportunity.

This decided upon he bade Jemima good-night, gave her explicit
directions to call him, should his uncle awake (her own room opened out
of St. George's) spread his blanket in the cramped hall outside the sick
man's door--he had not roughed it on shipboard and in the wilderness all
these years without knowing something of the soft side of a plank--and
throwing his heavy ship's coat over him fell fast asleep.




CHAPTER XXVII



When the first glimmer of the gray dawn stole through the small window
at the end of the narrow hall, and laid its chilled fingers on Harry's
upturned face, it found him still asleep. His ride to Moorlands and
back--his muscles unused for months to the exercise--had tired him. The
trials of the day, too, those with his father and his Uncle George,
had tired him the more--and so he had slept on as a child sleeps--as a
perfectly healthy man sleeps--both mind and body drinking in the ozone
of a new courage and a new hope.

With the first ray of the joyous sun riding full tilt across his face,
he opened his eyes, threw off the cloak, and sprang to his feet. For an
instant he looked wonderingly about as if in doubt whether to call the
watch or begin the hunt for his cattle. Then the pine door caught his
eye and the low, measured breathing of his uncle fell upon his ear,
and with a quick lift of his arms, his strong hands thumping his broad
chest, he stretched himself to his full height: he had work to do, and
he must begin at once.

Aunt Jemima was already at her duties. She had tiptoed past his sleeping
body an hour before, and after listening to St. George's breathing had
plunged into her tubs; the cat's cradle in the dingy court-yard being
already gay with various colored fragments, including Harry's red
flannel shirts which Todd had found in a paper parcel, and which the
old woman had pounced upon at sight. She insisted on making him a cup of
coffee, but he had no time for such luxuries. He would keep on, he said,
to Kennedy Square, find Pawson, ascertain if St. George's old rooms were
still unoccupied; notify him of Mr. Temple's return; have his bed made
and fires properly lighted; stop at the livery stable, wake up Todd,
if that darky had overslept himself--quite natural when he had been up
almost all night--engage a carriage to be at Jemima's at four
o'clock, and then return to get everything ready for the
picking-up-and-carrying-downstairs process.

And all this he did do; and all this he told Jemima he had done when
he swung into the court-yard an hour later, a spring to his heels and a
cheery note in his voice that had not been his for years. The reaction
that hope brings to youth had set in. He was alive and at home; his
Uncle George was where he could get his hands on him--in a minute--by
the mounting of the stairs; and Alec and his mother within reach!

And the same glad song was in his heart when he opened his uncle's door
after he had swallowed his coffee--Jemima had it ready for him this
time--and thrusting in his head cried out:

"We are going to get you out of here, Uncle George!" This with a
laugh--one of his old contagious laughs that was music in the sick man's
ears.

"When?" asked the invalid, his face radiant. He had been awake an hour
wondering what it all meant. He had even thought of calling to Jemima
to reassure himself that it was not a dream, until he heard her over her
tubs and refrained from disturbing her.

"Oh, pretty soon! I have just come from Pawson's. Fogbin hasn't put in
an appearance and there's nobody in the rooms and hasn't been anybody
there since you left. He can't understand it, nor can I--and I don't
want to. I have ordered the bed made and a fire started in both the
chamber and the old dining-room, and if anybody objects he has got to
say so to me, and I am a very uncomfortable person to say some kinds
of things to nowadays. So up you get when the time comes; and Todd and
Jemima are to go too. I've got money enough, anyhow, to begin on. Aunt
Jemima says you had a good night and it won't be long now before you are
yourself again."

The radiant smile on the sick man's face blossomed into a laugh:
"Yes--the best night that I have had since I was taken ill, and--Where
did you sleep, my son?"

"Me!--Oh, I had a fine time--long, well-ventilated room with two windows
and private staircase; nice pine bedstead--very comfortable place for
this part of the town."

St. George looked at him and his eyes filled. His mind was neither on
his own questions nor on Harry's answers.

"Get a chair, Harry, and sit by me so I can look at you closer. How
fine and strong you are my son--not like your father--you're like your
mother. And you've broadened out--mentally as well as physically. Pretty
hard I tell you to spoil a gentleman--more difficult still to spoil a
Rutter. But you must get that beard off--it isn't becoming to you, and
then somebody might think you disguised yourself on purpose. I didn't
know you at first, neither did Jemima--and you don't want anybody else
to make that kind of a mistake."

"My father did, yesterday--" Harry rejoined quietly, dropping into
Jemima's chair.

St. George half raised himself from his bed: "You have seen him?"

"Yes--and I wish I hadn't. But I hunted everywhere for you and then got
a horse and rode out home. He didn't know me--that is, I'm pretty sure
he didn't--but he cursed me all the same. My mother and old Alec, I
hope, will come in to-day--but father's chapter is closed forever. I
have been a fool to hope for anything else."

"Drove you out! Oh, no--NO! Harry! Impossible!"

"But he did--" and then followed an account of all the wanderer had
passed through from the time he had set foot on shore to the moment of
meeting Todd and himself.

For some minutes St. George lay staring at the ceiling. It was all a
horrid, nightmare to him. Talbot deserved nothing but contempt and he
would get it so far as he was concerned. He agreed with Harry that all
reconciliation was now a thing of the past; the only solution possible
was that Talbot was out of his senses--the affair having undermined
his reason. He had heard of such cases and had doubted them--he was
convinced now that they could be true. His answer, therefore, to Harry's
next question--one about his lost sweetheart--was given with a certain
hesitation. As long as the memory of Rutter's curses rankled within him
all reference to Kate's affairs--even the little he knew himself--must
be made with some circumspection. There was no hope in that direction
either, but he did not want to tell him so outright; nor did he want to
dwell too long upon the subject.

"And I suppose Kate is married by this time, Uncle George," Harry said
at last in a casual tone, "is she not?" (He had been leading up to it
rather skilfully, but there had been no doubt in his uncle's mind as to
his intention.) "I saw the house lighted up, night before last when I
passed, and a lot of people about, so I thought it might be either the
wedding or the reception." The question had left his lips as one shoots
an arrow in the dark--hit or miss--as if he did not care which. He too
realized that this was no time to open wounds, certainly not in his
uncle's heart; and yet he could wait no longer.

"No--I don't think the wedding has taken place," St. George replied
vaguely. "The servants would know if it had--they know everything--and
Aunt Jemima would be the first to have told me. The house being lighted
up is no evidence. They have been giving a series of entertainments this
winter and there were more to come when I last saw Kate, which was one
night at Richard Horn's. But let us close that chapter too, my boy. You
and I will take a new lease of life from now on. You have already put
fresh blood into my veins--I haven't felt so well for weeks. Now tell
me about yourself. Your last letter reached me six months ago, if
I remember right. You were then in Rio and were going up into the
mountains. Did you go?"

"Yes--up into the Rio Abaste country where they had discovered diamonds
as big as hens' eggs--one had been sold for nearly a quarter of a
million dollars--and everybody was crazy. I didn't find any diamonds nor
anything else but starvation, so I herded cattle, that being the only
thing I knew anything about--how to ride--and slept out on the lowlands
sometimes under a native mat and sometimes under the kindly stars. Then
we had a revolution and cattle raids, and one night I came pretty near
being chewed up by a puma--and so it went. I made a little money in
rawhides after I got to know the natives, and I'm going back to make
some more; and you are going with me when we get things straightened
out. I wouldn't have come home except that I heard you had been turned
out neck and crop from Kennedy Square. One of Mr. Seymour's clerks
stopped in Rio on his way to the River Plate and did some business with
an English agent whom I met afterward at a hacienda, and who told me
about you when he learned I was from Kennedy Square. And when I think
of it all, Uncle George, and what you have suffered on account of
me!"--Here his voice faltered. "No!--I won't talk about it--I can't.
I have spent too many sleepless nights over it: I have been hungry and
half dead, but I have kept on--and I am not through: I'll pull out yet
and put you on your feet once more if I live!"

St. George laid his hand tenderly on the young man's wrist. He knew how
the boy felt about it. That was one of the things he loved him for.

"And so you started home when you heard it," he went on, clearing his
throat. "That was just like you, you dear fellow! And you haven't come
home an hour too soon. I should have been measured for a pine coffin in
another week." The choke was quite in evidence now. "You see, I really
couldn't go to Coston's when I thought it all over. I had made up
my mind to go for a week or so until I saw this place, and then I
determined I would stop with Jemima. I could eke out an existence here
on what I had left and still feel like a gentleman, but I couldn't
settle down on dear Peggy Coston and be anything but a poltroon. As to
my making a living at the law--that was pure moonshine. I haven't
opened a law book for twenty years and now it's too late. People of our
class"--here he looked away from his companion and talked straight
at the foot of the bed--"People of our class my boy," he repeated
slowly--"when they reach the neck and crop period you spoke of, are at
the end of their rope. There are then but two things left--either to
become the inmate of a poorhouse or to become a sponge. I prefer this
bare room as a happy medium, and I am content to stay where I am as long
as we three can keep body and soul together. There is--so Pawson told me
before I left my house--a little money coming in from a ground rent--a
few months off, perhaps, but more than enough to pay Todd back--he gives
Jemima every cent of his wages--and when this does come in and I can get
out once more, I'm going to order my life so I can make a respectable
showing of some kind."

He paused for a moment, fastened his gaze again on Harry, and continued:

"As to my going back to Pawson's, I am not altogether sure that that
is the wisest thing to do. I may have to leave again as soon as I get
comfortably settled in my bed. I turned out at his bidding before and
may have to turn again when he says the word. So don't kindle too many
fires with Pawson's wood--I hadn't a log to my name when I left--or
it may warm somebody's else's shins besides mine," and a merry twinkle
shone in his eyes.

Harry burst out laughing.

"Wood or no wood, Uncle George, I'm going to be landlord now--Pawson can
move out and graze his cattle somewhere else. I'm going to take charge
of the hut and stock and the pack mules and provisions--and with a gun,
if necessary--" and he levelled an imaginary fowling-piece with a boyish
gesture.

"Don't you try to move anybody without an order of the court!" cried
St. George, joining in the merriment. "With that mortgage hanging
over everything and Gorsuch and your father cudgelling their brains to
foreclose it, you won't have a ghost of a chance. Come to think of it,
however, I might help--for a few weeks' expenses, at least. How
would this do?" Here he had all he could do to straighten his face:
"'Attention now--Hats off in the court-room. For sale or hire! Immediate
delivery. One first-class gentleman, in reasonable repair. Could be
made useful in opening and shutting doors, or in dancing attendance upon
children under one year of age, or in keeping flies from bedridden
folk. Apply, and so forth,' Gadgem could fix it. He has done the most
marvellous things in the last year or two--extraordinary, really! Ask
Todd about it some time--he'll tell you."

They were both roaring with laughter, St. George so buoyed up by the
contagious spirit of the young fellow that he insisted on getting out of
bed and sitting in Aunt Jemima's rocking chair with a blanket across his
knees.

All the morning did this happy talk go on:--the joyous unconfined talk
of two men who had hungered and thirsted for each other through weary
bitter days and nights, and whose coming together was like the mingling
of two streams long kept apart, and now one great river flowing to a
common outlet and a common good.

And not only did their talk cover the whole range of Harry's experiences
from the time he left the ship for his sojourn in the hill country and
the mountains beyond, and all of St. George's haps and mishaps, with
every single transaction of Gadgem and Pawson--loving cup, dogs and
all--but when their own personal news was exhausted they both fell back
on their friends, such as Richard Horn and old Judge Pancoast; when he
had seen Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Latrobe--yes, and what of Mr. Poe--had he
written any more?--and were his habits any better?--etc., etc.

"I have seen Mr. Poe several times since that unfortunate dinner, Harry;
the last time when he was good enough to call upon me on his way to
Richmond. He was then particularly himself. You would not have known
him--grave, dignified, perfectly dressed--charming, delightful. He came
in quite late--indeed I was going to bed when I heard his knock and,
Todd being out, I opened the door myself. There was some of that Black
Warrior left, and I brought out the decanter, but he shook his head
courteously and continued his talk. He asked after you. Wonderful man,
Harry--a man you never forget once you know him."

St. George dragged the pine table nearer his chair and moistened his
lips with the glass of milk which Jemima had set beside him. Then he
went on:

"You remember Judge Giles, do you not? Lives here on St. Paul
Street--yes--of course you do--for he is a great friend of your father's
and you must have met him repeatedly at Moorlands. Well, one day at the
club he told me the most extraordinary story about Mr. Poe--this was
some time after you'd gone. It seems that the judge was at work in his
study late one snowy night when his doorbell sounded. Outside stood
a man with his coat buttoned close about his throat--evidently a
gentleman--who asked him politely for a sheet of paper and a pen. You
know the judge, and how kind and considerate he is. Well, of course he
asked him in, drew out a chair at his desk and stepped into the next
room to leave him undisturbed. After a time, not hearing him move, he
looked in and to his surprise the stranger had disappeared. On the desk
lay a sheet of paper on which was written three verses of a poem. It was
his 'Bells.' The judge has had them framed, so I hear. There was enough
snow on the ground to bring out the cutters, and Poe had the rhythm of
the bells ringing in his head and being afraid he would forget it he
pulled the judge's doorbell. I wish he'd rung mine. I must get the poem
for you, Harry--it's as famous now as 'The Raven.' Richard, I hear,
reads it so that you can distinguish the sound of each bell."

"Well, he taught me a lesson," said Harry, tucking the blanket close
around his uncle's knees--"one I have never forgotten, and never will.
He sent me to bed a wreck, I remember, but I got up the next morning
with a new mast in me and all my pumps working."

"You mean--" and St. George smiled meaningly and tossed his hand up as
if emptying a glass.

"Yes--just that--" rejoined Harry with a nod. "It's so hot out where
I have been that a glass of native rum is as bad as a snake bite and
everybody except a native leaves it alone. But if I had gone to the
North Pole instead of the equator I would have done the same. Men like
you and father, and Mr. Richard Horn and Mr. Kennedy, who have been
brought up on moderation, may feel as they choose about it, but I'm
going to let it alone. It's the devil when it gets into your blood and
mine's not made for it. I'd like to thank Mr. Poe if I dared, which
I wouldn't, of course, if I ever saw him, for what he did for me. I
wouldn't be surprised if he would give a good deal himself to do the
same--or has he pulled out?"

"He never has pulled in, Harry--not continuously. Richard has the right
of it. Poe is a man pursued by a devil and lives always on the watch to
prevent the fiend from getting the best of him. Months at a time he
wins and then there comes a day when the devil gets on top. He says
himself--he told me this the last time I saw him--that he really lives
a life devoted to his literary work; that he shuts himself up from
everybody; and that the desire for society only comes upon him when he's
excited by drink. Then, and only then, does he go among his fellows.
There is some truth in that, my son, for as long as I have known him
I have never seen him in his cups except that one night at my house. A
courteous, well-bred gentleman, my boy--most punctilious about all his
obligations and very honest about his failings. All he said to me
the next day when he sobered up--I kept him all that night, you
remember--was: 'I was miserably weak and inexcusably drunk last night,
Mr. Temple. If that was all it would make no difference; I have been
very drunk before, and I will be very drunk again; but in addition to my
being drunk I insulted you and your friends and ruined your dinner. That
makes every difference. Don't let it cause a break between us. Let me
come again. And now please brush it from your mind. If you knew how I
suffer over this fiend who tortures and gloats over me you'd only have
the greatest pity for me, in your heart.' Then he wrung my hand and left
the house."

"Well, that's all any of us could do," sighed Harry, leaning back in his
chair, his eyes on the ceiling. "It makes some difference, however,
of whom you ask forgiveness. I've been willing to say the same kind of
thing to my father ever since my affair with Mr. Willits, but it would
have fallen on deaf ears. I had another trial at it yesterday, and you
know what happened."

"I don't think your father knew you, Harry," protested St. George, with
a negative wave of his hand.

"I hope he didn't--I shouldn't like to think he did. But, by heaven! it
broke my heart to see him, Uncle George. You would hardly know him. Even
his voice has changed and the shade over his eyes and the way he twists
his head when he looks at you really gave me a creepy feeling," and the
young man passed his fingers across his own eyes as if to shut out some
hideous object.

"Was he looking straight at you when he ordered you from the room?"

"Straight as he could."

"Well, let us try and think it was the beard. And that reminds me, son,
that it's got to come off, and right away. When Todd comes in he'll find
my razors and--"

"No--I'll look up a barber."

"Not down in this part of the town," exclaimed St. George with a
suggestive grimace.

"No--I'll go up to Guy's. There used to be an old negro there who looked
after us young fellows when our beards began to sprout. He'll take care
of it all right. While I'm out I'll stop and send Todd back. I'm going
to end his apprenticeship to-day, and so he'll help you dress. Nothing
like getting into your clothes when you're well enough to get out
of bed; I've done it more than once," and with a pat on his uncle's
shoulder and the readjustment of the blanket, he closed the door behind
him and left the room.

"Everything is working fine, auntie," he cried gaily as he passed the
old woman who was hanging out the last of her wash. "I'll be back in
an hour. Don't tell him yet--" and he strode out of the yard on his way
uptown.




CHAPTER XXVIII



Intruders of all kinds had thrust their heads between the dripping,
slightly moist, and wholly dry installments of Aunt Jemima's Monday
wash, and each and every one had been assailed by a vocabulary hurled
at them through the creaky gate, and as far out as the street--peddlers;
beggars; tramps; loose darkies with no visible means of support, who
had smelt the cooking in the air--even goats with an acquired taste for
stocking legs and window curtains--all of whom had either been invited
out, whirled out, or thrown out, dependent upon the damage inflicted,
the size of the favors asked, or the length of space intervening between
Jemima's right arm and their backs. In all of these instances the old
cook had been the broom and the intruders the dust. Being an expert in
its use the intruders had succumbed before they had gotten through their
first sentence. In the case of the goat even that privilege was denied
him; it was the handle and not the brush-part which ended the argument.
To see Aunt Jemima get rid of a goat in one whack and two jumps was
not only a lesson in condensed conversation, but furnished a sight one
rarely forgot--the goat never!

This morning the situation was reversed. It was Aunt Jemima who came
flying upstairs, her eyes popping from her head, her plump hands
flattened against her big, heaving bosom, her breath gone in the effort
to tell her dreadful news before she should drop dead.

"Marse George! who d'ye think's downstairs?" she gasped, bursting in the
door of his bedroom, without even the customary tap. "Oh, bless Gawd!
dat you'se outen dat bed! and dressed and tryin' yo' po' legs about the
room. He's comin' up. Got a man wid him I ain't neber see befo'. Says
he's a-lookin' fer somebody! Git in de closet an' I'll tell him you'se
out an' den I'll run an' watch for Marse Harry at de gate. Oh, I doan'
like dis yere bus'ness," and she began to wring her hands.

St. George, who had been listening to the old woman with mingled
feelings of wonder and curiosity, raised his hand to silence her.
Whether she had gone daft or was more than usually excited he could not
for the moment decide.

"Get your breath, Jemima, and tell me what you're talking about. Who's
downstairs?"

"Ain't I jes' don' tol' yer? Got a look on him make ye shiver all over;
says he's gwineter s'arch de house. He's got a constable wid him--dat
is, he's got a man dat looks like a constable, an'--"

St. George laid his hands on the old woman's shoulders, and turned her
about.

"Hush your racket this instant, and tell me who is downstairs?"

"Marse Talbot Rutter," she wheezed; "come f'om de country--got mud all
ober his boots."

"Mr. Harry's father?"

Aunt Jemima choked and nodded: there was no breath left for more.

"Who did he ask for?" St. George was calm enough now.

"Didn't ask fer nobody; he say, 'I'm lookin' fer a man dat come in yere
las' night.' I see he didn't know me an' I neber let on. Den he say,
'Hab you got any boa'ders yere?' an' I say, 'I got one,' an' den he
'tempted ter pass me an' I say, 'Wait a minute 'til I see ef he's outen
de bed.' Now, what's I gwineter do? He doan' mean no good to Marse Harry
an' he'll dribe him 'way ag'in, an' he jes' come back an' you gittin'
well a-lovin' of him--an'--"

An uncertain step was heard in the hall.

"Dat's him," Jemima whispered hoarsely, behind her hand, "what'll I do?
Doan' let him come in. I'll--"

St. George moved past her and pushed back the door.

Colonel Rutter stood outside.

The two men looked into each other's faces.

"I am in search, sir," the colonel began, shading his eyes with his
fingers, the brighter light of the room weakening his sight, "for a
young sailor whom I am informed stopped here last night, and who... ST.
GEORGE! What in the name of God are you doing in a place like this?"

"Come inside, Talbot," Temple replied calmly, his eyes fixed on Rutter's
drawn face and faltering gaze. "Aunt Jemima, hand Colonel Rutter a
chair. You will excuse me if I sit down--I am just out of bed after
a long illness, and am a little weak," and he settled slowly into his
seat. "My servant tells me that you are looking for a--"

St. George paused. Rutter was paying no more attention to what he said
than if he had been in the next room. He was straining his eyes about
the apartment; taking in the empty bed from which St. George had just
arisen, the cheap chairs and small pine table and the kitchen plates and
cup which still held the remains of St. George's breakfast. He waited
until Jemima had backed out of the door, her scared face still a tangle
of emotions--fear for her master's safety uppermost. His eyes again
veered to St. George.

"What does it all mean, Temple?" he asked in a dazed way.

"I don't think that subject is under discussion, Talbot, and we will,
therefore, pass it. To what do I owe the honor of this visit?"

"Don't be a damned fool, St. George! Don't you see I'm half crazy? Harry
has come back and he is hiding somewhere in this neighborhood."

"How do you know?" he inquired coolly. He did not intend to help Rutter
one iota in his search until he found out why he wanted Harry. No more
cursing of either his son or himself--that was another chapter which was
closed.

"Because I've been hunting for him all day. He rode out to Moorlands
yesterday, and I didn't know him, he's so changed. But think of it! St.
George, I ordered him out of my office. I took him for a road-peddler.
And he's going to sea again--he told Alec as much. I tell you I have got
to get hold of him! Don't sit there and stare at me, man! tell me where
I can find my son!"

"What made you suppose he was here, Talbot?" The same cool, measured
speech and manner, but with a more open mind behind it now. The pathetic
aspect of the man, and the acute suffering shown in every tone of his
voice, had begun to tell upon the invalid.

"Because a man I've got downstairs brought Harry here last night. He is
not positive, as it was quite dark, but he thinks this is the place.
I went first to the Barkeley Line, found they had a ship in--the
Mohican--and saw the captain, who told me of a man who came aboard at
Rio. Then I learned where he had put up for the night--a low sailors'
retreat--and found this peddler who said he had sold Harry the silks
which he offered me. He brought me here."

"Well, I can't help you any. There are only two rooms--I occupy this and
my old cook, Jemima, has the other. I have been here for over a month."

"Here! in this God-forsaken place! Why, we thought you had gone to
Virginia. That's why we have had no answers to our letters, and we've
hunted high and low for you. Certainly you have heard about the Patapsco
and what--"

"I certainly have heard nothing, Talbot, and as I have just told you,
I'd rather you would not discuss my affairs. The last time you saw
fit to encroach upon them brought only bitterness, and I prefer not to
repeat it. Anything you have to say about Harry I will gladly hear. Go
on--I'm listening."

"For God's sake, St. George, don't take that tone with me! If you knew
how wretched I am you'd be sorry for me. I am a broken-down man! If
Harry goes away again without my seeing him I don't want to live another
day. When Alec came running back last night and told me that I had
cursed my son to his face, I nearly went out of my mind. I knew when I
saw Alec's anger that it was true, and I knew, too, what a brute I had
been. I ran to Annie's room, took her in my arms, and asked her pardon.
All night I walked my room; at daylight I rang for Alec, sent for
Matthew, and he hooked up the carryall and we came in here. Annie wanted
to come with me, but I wouldn't let her. I knew Seymour wasn't out
of bed that early, and so I drove straight to the shipping office and
waited until it was open, and I've been hunting for him ever since. You
and I have been boys together, St. George--don't lay up against me all
the insulting things I've said to you--all the harm I've done you! God
knows I've repented of it! Will you forgive me, St. George, for the sake
of the old days--for the sake of my boy to whom you have been a father?
Will you give me your hand? What in the name of common sense should
you and I be enemies for? I, who owe you more than I owe any man in the
world! Will you help me?"

St. George was staring now. He bent forward, gripped the arms of his
chair for a better purchase, and lifted himself to his feet. There he
stood swaying, Rutter's outstretched hand in both of his, his whole
nature stirred--only one thought in his heart--to wipe out the past and
bring father and son together.

"Yes, Talbot--I'll forgive you and I'll help you--I have helped you!
Harry will be here in a few minutes--I sent him out to get his beard
shaved off--that's why you didn't know him."

The colonel reeled and but for St. George's hand would have lost his
balance. All the blood was gone from his cheeks. He tried to speak, but
the lips refused to move. For an instant St. George thought he would
sink to the floor.

"You say--Harry... is here!" he stammered out at last, catching wildly
at Temple's other hand to steady himself.

"Yes, he came across Todd by the merest accident or he would have gone
to the Eastern Shore to look me up. Listen!--that's his step now! Turn
that door knob and hold out your hands to him, and after you've got your
arms around him get down on your knees and thank your God that you've
got such a son! I do, every hour I live!"

The door swung wide and Harry strode in: his eyes glistening, his cheeks
aglow.

"Up, are you, and in your clothes!" he cried joyfully, all the freshness
of the morning in his voice. "Well, that's something like! How do you
like me now?--smooth as a marlinspike and my hair trimmed in the latest
fashion, so old Bones says. He didn't know me either till he got clear
down below my mouth and when my chin began to show he gave a--"

He stopped and stared at his father, who had been hidden from sight by
the swinging door. The surprise was so great that his voice clogged in
his throat. Rutter stood like one who had seen an apparition.

St. George broke the silence:

"It's all right, Harry--give your father your hand."

The colonel made a step forward, threw out one arm as if to regain his
equilibrium and swayed toward a chair, his frame shaking convulsively,
wholly unstrung, sobbing like a child. Harry sprang to catch him and
the two sank down together--no word of comfort--only the mute appeal of
touch--the brown hand wet with his father's tears.

For some seconds neither spoke, then Rutter raised his head and looked
into his son's face.

"I didn't know it was you, Harry. I have been hunting you all day to ask
your pardon." It was the memory of the last indignity he had heaped upon
him that tortured him.

"I knew you didn't, father."

"Don't go away again, Harry, please don't, my son!" he pleaded,
strangling the tears, trying to regain his self-control--tears had often
of late moistened Rutter's lids. "Your mother can't stand it another
year, and I'm breaking up--half blind. You won't go, will you?"

"No--not right away, father--we'll talk of that later." He was still in
the dark as to how it had come about. All he knew was that for the first
time in all his life his father had asked his pardon, and for the first
time in his life the barrier which held them apart had been broken down.

The colonel braced himself in his seat in one supreme effort to get
himself in hand. One of his boasts was that he had never lost his
self-control. Harry rose to his feet and stood beside him. St. George,
trembling from his own weakness, a great throb of thankfulness in his
heart, had kept his place in his chair, his eyes turned away from the
scene. His own mind had also undergone a change. He had always known
that somewhere down in Talbot Rutter's heart--down underneath the
strata of pride and love of power, there could be found the heart of
a father--indeed he had often predicted to himself just such a coming
together. It was the boy's pluck and manliness that had done it; a
manliness free from all truckling or cringing. And then his tenderness
over the man who had of all others in the world wronged him most! He
could hardly keep his glad hands off the boy.

"You will go home with me, of course, won't you, Harry?" He must ask
his consent now--this son of his whom he had driven from his home and
insulted in the presence of his friends at the club, and whom he could
see was now absolutely independent of him--and what was more to the
point absolutely his own master.

"Yes, of course, I'll go home with you, father," came the respectful
answer, "if mother isn't coming in. Did she or Alec say anything to you
about it before you left?"

"No, she isn't coming in to-day--I wouldn't let her. It was too early
when I started. But that's not what I mean," he went on with increasing
excitement. "I want you to go home with me and stay forever; I want to
forget the past; I want St. George to hear me say so! Come and take your
place at the head of the estate--I will have Gorsuch arrange the papers
to-morrow. You and St. George must go back with me to-day. I have the
large carryall--Matthew is with me--he stopped at the corner--he's there
now."

"That's very kind of you, father," Harry rejoined calmly, concealing as
best he could his disappointment at not being able to see his mother.

"Yes! of course you will go with me," his father continued in nervous,
jerky tones. "Please send the servant for Matthew, my coachman, and have
him drive up. As for you, St. George, you can't stay here another hour.
How you ever got here is more than I can understand. Moorlands is the
place for you both--you'll get well there. My carriage is a very easy
one. Perhaps I had better go for Matthew myself."

"No, don't move, Talbot," rejoined St. George in a calm firm voice
wondering at Talbot's manner. He had never seen him like this. All
his old-time measured talk and manner were gone; he was like some
breathless, hunted man pleading for his life. "I'm very grateful to you
but I shall stay here. Harry, will you kindly go for Matthew?"

"Stay here!--for how long?" cried the colonel in astonishment, his
glance following Harry as he left the room in obedience to his uncle's
request.

"Well, perhaps for the balance of the winter."

"In this hole?" His voice had grown stronger.

"Certainly, why not?" replied St. George simply, moving his chair so
that his guest might see him the better. "My servants are taking care of
me. I can pay my way here, and it's about the only place in which I can
pay it, and I want to tell you frankly, Talbot, that I am very happy to
be here--am very glad, really, to get such a place. No one could be more
devoted than my Todd and Jemima--I shall never forget their kindness."

"But you're not a pauper?" cried the colonel in some heat.

"That was what you were once good enough to call me--the last time
we met. The only change is that then I owed Pawson and that now I owe
Todd," he replied, trying to repress a smile, as if the humor of the
situation would overcome him if he was not careful. "Thank you very
much, Talbot--and I mean every word of it--but I'll stay where I am, at
least for the present."

"But the bank is on its legs again," rebounded the colonel, ignoring all
reference to the past, his voice gaining in volume.

"So am I," laughed St. George, tapping his lean thighs with his
transparent fingers--"on a very shaky pair of legs--so shaky that I
shall have to go to bed again pretty soon."

"But you're coming out all right, St. George!" Rutter had squared
himself in his chair and was now looking straight at his host. "Gorsuch
has written you half a dozen letters about it and not a word from you
in reply. Now I see why. But all that will come out in time, I tell you.
You're not going to stay here for an hour longer." His old personality
was beginning to assert itself.

"The future doesn't interest me, Talbot," smiled St. George in perfect
good humor. "In my experience my future has always been worse than my
past."

"But that is no reason why you shouldn't go home with me now and let us
take care of you," Rutter cried in a still more positive tone. "Annie
will be delighted. Stay a month with me--stay a year. After what I owe
you, St. George, there's nothing I wouldn't do for you."

"You have already done it, Talbot--every obligation is wiped out,"
rejoined St. George in a satisfied tone.

"How?"

"By coming here and asking Harry's pardon--that is more to me than all
the things I have ever possessed," and his voice broke as he thought
of the change that had taken place in Harry's fortunes in the last half
hour.

"Then come out to Moorlands and let me prove it!" exclaimed the colonel,
leaning forward in his eagerness and grasping St. George by the sleeve.

"No," replied St. George in appreciative but positive tones--showing his
mind was fully made up. "If I go anywhere I'll go back to my house on
Kennedy Square--that is to the little of it that is still mine. I'll
stay there for a day or two, to please Harry--or until they turn me out
again, and then I'll come back here. Change of air may do me good, and
besides, Jemima and Todd should get a rest."

The colonel rose to his feet: "You shall do no such thing!" he exploded.
The old dominating air was in full swing now. "I tell you you WILL come
with me! Damn you, St. George!--if you don't I'll never speak to you
again, so help me, God!"

St. George threw back his head and burst into a roar of laughter in
which, after a moment of angry hesitation, Rutter joined. Then he
reached down and with his hand on St. George's shoulder, said in a
coaxing tone--"Come along to Moorlands, old fellow--I'd be so glad to
have you, and so will Annie, and we'll live over the old days."

Harry's re-entrance cut short the answer.

"No father," he cried cheerily, taking up the refrain. He had seen the
friendly caress and had heard the last sentence. "Uncle George is still
too ill, and too weak for so long a drive. It's only the excitement over
my return that keeps him up now--and he'll collapse if we don't look
out--but he'll collapse in a better place than this!" he added with
joyous emphasis. "Todd is outside, the hack is at the gate, and Jemima
is now waiting for him in his old room at home. Give me your arm, you
blessed old cripple, and let me help you downstairs. Out of the way,
father, or he'll change his mind and I'll have to pick him up bodily and
carry him."

St. George shot a merry glance at Harry from under his eyebrows, and
with a wave of his hand and a deprecating shake of his head at the
colonel said:

"These rovers and freebooters, Talbot, have so lorded it over their
serfs that they've lost all respect for their betters. Give me your
hand, you vagabond, and if you break my neck I'll make you bury me."

The colonel looked on silently and a sharp pain gripped his throat.
When, in all his life, had he ever been spoken to by his boy in that
spirit, and when in all his life had he ever seen that same tenderness
in Harry's eyes? What had he not missed?

"Harry, may I make a suggestion?" he asked almost apologetically. The
young fellow turned his head in respectful attention: "Put St. George in
my carriage--it is much more comfortable--and let me drive him home--my
eyes are quite good in the daytime, after I get used to the light, and
I am still able to take the road. Then put your servant and mine in the
hack with St. George's and your own luggage."

"Capital idea!" cried Harry enthusiastically "I never thought of it!
Attention company! Eyes to the front, Mr. Temple! You'll now remain on
waiting orders until I give you permission to move, and as this may take
some time--please hold on to him, father, until I get his chair" (they
were already out on the landing--on the very plank where Harry had
passed the night) "you'll go back to your quarters... Here sir, these
are your quarters," and Harry dragged the chair into position with his
foot. "Down with you... that's it... and you will stay here until the
baggage and hospital train arrives, when you'll occupy a front seat in
the van--and there will be no grumbling or lagging behind of any kind,
remember, or you'll get ten days in the calaboose!"


Pawson was on the curbstone, his face shining, his semaphore arms and
legs in action, his eyes searching the distance, when the two vehicles
came in sight. He had heard the day boat was very late, and as there
had been a heavy fog over night, did not worry about the delay in their
arrival.

What troubled him more was the change in Mr. Temple's appearance. He had
gone away ruddy, erect, full of vigor and health, and here he was being
helped out of the carriage, pale, shriveled, his eyes deep set in his
head. His voice, though, was still strong if his legs were shaky, and
there seemed also to be no diminution in the flow of his spirits. Wesley
had kept that part of him intact whatever changes the climate had made.

"Ah, Pawson--glad to see you!" the invalid called gaily extending
his hand as soon as he stood erect on the sidewalk. "Back again, you
see--these old derelicts bob up once in a while when you least expect
them." And he wrung his hand heartily. "So the vultures, it seems, have
not turned up yet and made their roost in my nest. Most kind of you to
stay home and give up your business to meet me! You know Colonel Talbot
Rutter, of Moorlands, I presume, and Mr. Harry Rutter--Of course you do!
Harry has told me all about your midnight meeting when you took him
for a constable, and he took you for a thief. No--please don't laugh,
Pawson--Mr. Rutter is the worst kind of a thief. Not only has he stolen
my heart because of his goodness to me, but he threatens to make off
with my body. Give me your hand, Todd. Now a little lift on that rickety
elbow and I reckon we can make that flight of steps. I have come down
them so many times of late with no expectation of ever mounting them
again that it will be a novelty to be sure of staying over night. Come
in, Talbot, and see the home of my ancestors. I am sorry the Black
Warrior is all gone--I sent Kennedy the last bottle some time ago--pity
that vintage didn't last forever. Do you know, Talbot, if I had my way,
I'd have a special spigot put in the City Spring labelled 'Gift of a
once prominent citizen,' and supply the inhabitants with 1810--something
fit for a gentleman to drink."

They were all laughing now; the colonel carrying the pillows Todd had
tucked behind the invalid's back, Harry a few toilet articles wrapped
in paper, and Matthew his cane--and so the cortege crawled up the steps,
crossed the dismantled dining-room--the colonel aghast at the change
made in its interior since last he saw it--and so on to St. George's
room where Todd and Jemima put him to bed.

His uncle taken care of--(his father had kept on to Moorlands to tell
his mother the good news)--Harry mounted the stairs to his old room,
which Pawson had generously vacated.

The appointments were about the same as when he left; time and poverty
had wrought but few changes. Pawson, had moved in a few books and there
was a night table beside the small bed with a lamp on it, showing that
he read late; but the bureau and shabby arm-chair, and the closet,
stripped now of the young attorney's clothes to make room for the
wanderer's--(a scant, sorry lot)--were pretty much the same as Harry had
found on that eventful night when he had driven in through the rain and
storm beside his Uncle George, his father's anathemas ringing in his
ears.

Unconsciously his mind went back to the events of the day;--more
especially to his uncle's wonderful vitality and the blissful change
his own home-coming had wrought not only in his physique, but in his
spirits. Then his father's shattered form, haggard face, and uncertain
glance rose before him, and with it came the recollection of all that
had happened during the previous hours: his father's brutal outburst
in the small office and the marvellous effect produced upon him when he
learned the truth from Alec's lips; his hurried departure in the gray
dawn for the ship and his tracing him to Jemima's house. More amazing
still was his present bearing toward himself and St. George; his
deference to their wishes and his willingness to follow and not lead.
Was it his ill-health that had brought about this astounding reformation
in a man who brooked no opposition?--or had his heart really softened
toward him so that from this on he could again call him father in the
full meaning of the term? At this a sudden, acute pain wrenched his
heart. Perhaps he had not been glad enough to see him--perhaps in his
anxiety over his uncle he had failed in those little tendernesses which
a returned prodigal should have shown the father who had held out his
arms and asked his forgiveness. Why was he not more affected by the
sight of his suffering. When he first saw his uncle he had not been able
to keep the tears back--and yet his eyes were dry enough when he saw his
father. At this he fell to wondering as to the present condition of the
colonel's mind. What was he thinking of in that lonely drive. He must
be nearing Moorlands by this time and Alec would meet him, and later the
dear mother--and the whole story would be told. He could see her glad
face--her eyes streaming tears, her heart throbbing with the joy of his
return.


And it is a great pity he could not have thus looked in upon the
autocrat of Moorlands as he sat hunched up on the back seat of the
carryall, his head bowed, the only spoken words being Matthew's cheery
hastening of his horses. And it is even a greater pity that the son
could not have searched as well the secret places of the man's heart:
such clearings out of doubts and misgivings make for peace and good
fellowship and righteousness in this world of misunderstanding.

That a certain rest had come into Rutter's soul could be seen in his
face--a peace that had not settled on his features for years--but, if
the truth must be told, he was far from happy. Somehow the joy he had
anticipated at the boy's home-coming had not been realized. With the
warmth of Harry's grasp still lingering in his own and the tones of his
voice still sounding in his ears, try as he might, he yet felt aloof
from him--outside--far off. Something had snapped in the years they had
been apart--something he knew could never be repaired. Where there had
once been boyish love there was now only filial regard. Down in his
secret soul he felt it--down in his secret soul he knew it! Worse than
that--another had replaced him! "Come, you dear old cripple!"--he could
hear the voice and see the love and joy in the boy's eyes as he shouted
it out. Yes, St. George was his father now!

Then his mind reverted to his former treatment of his son and for the
hundredth time he reviewed his side of the case. What else could he have
done and still maintain the standards of his ancestors?--the universal
question around Kennedy Square, when obligations of blood and training
were to be considered. After all it had only been an object lesson;
he had fully intended to forgive him later on. When Harry was a boy he
punished him as boys were punished; when he became a man he punished him
as men were punished. But for St. George the plan would long since have
worked. St. George had balked him twice--once at the club and once at
his home in Kennedy Square, when he practically ordered him from the
house.

And yet he could not but admit--and at this he sat bolt upright in his
seat--that even according to his own high standards both St. George and
Harry had measured up to them! Rather than touch another penny of his
uncle's money Harry had become an exile; rather than accept a penny from
his enemy, St. George had become a pauper. With this view of the case
fermenting in his mind--and he had not realized the extent of both
sacrifices until that moment--a feeling of pride swept through him.
It was HIS BOY and HIS FRIEND, who had measured up!--by suffering, by
bodily weakness--by privation--by starvation! And both had manfully and
cheerfully stood the test! It was the blood of the DeRuyters which had
put courage into the boy; it was the blood of the cavaliers that had
made Temple the man he was. And that old DeRuyter blood! How it had told
in every glance of his son's eyes and every intonation of his voice! If
he had not accumulated a fortune he would--and that before many years
were gone. But!--and here a chill went through him. Would not this
still further separate them, and if it did how could he restore in the
shortest possible time the old dependence and the old confidence? His
efforts so far had met with almost a rebuff, for Harry had shown no
particular pleasure when he told him of his intention to put him in
charge of the estate: he had watched his face closely for a sign of
satisfaction, but none had come. He had really seemed more interested
in getting St. George downstairs than in being the fourth heir of
Moorlands--indeed, it was very evident that he had no thought for
anybody or anything except St. George.

All this the son might have known could he have sat by his father in the
carryall on this way to Moorlands.




CHAPTER XXIX



The sudden halting of two vehicles close to the horse-block of the
Temple Mansion--one an aristocratic carryall driven by a man in livery,
and the other a dilapidated city hack in charge of a negro in patched
overcoat and whitey-brown hat, the discharge of their inmates, one of
whom was Colonel Talbot Rutter of Moorlands carrying two pillows,
and another a strange young man loaded down with blankets--the slow
disembarking of a gentleman in so wretched a state of health that he
was practically carried up the front steps by his body-servant, and the
subsequent arrival of Dr. Teackle on the double quick--was a sight so
unusual in and around peaceful Kennedy Square that it is not surprising
that all sorts of reports--most of them alarming--reached the club long
before St. George had been comfortably tucked away in bed.

Various versions were afloat: "St. George was back from Wesley with a
touch of chills and fever--" "St. George was back from Wesley with
a load of buckshot in his right arm--" "St. George had broken his
collar-bone riding to hounds--" etc.

Richard Horn was the first to spring to his feet--it was the afternoon
hour and the club was full--and cross the Square on the run, followed by
Clayton, Bowman, and two or three others. These, with one accord, banged
away on the knocker, only to be met by Dr. Teackle, who explained that
there was nothing seriously the matter with Mr. Temple, except an attack
of foolhardiness in coming up the bay when he should have stayed in
bed--but even that should cause his friends no uneasiness, as he was
still as tough as a lightwood knot, and bubbling over with good humor;
all he needed was rest, and that he must have--so please everybody come
to-morrow.

By the next morning the widening of ripples caused by the dropping of
a high-grade invalid into the still pool of Kennedy Square, spread
with such force and persistency that one wavelet overflowed Kate's
dressing-room. Indeed, it came in with Mammy Henny and her coffee.

"Marse George home, honey--Ben done see Todd. Got a mis'ry in his back
dat bad it tuk two gemmens to tote him up de steps."

"Uncle George home, and ill!"

That was enough for Kate. She didn't want any coffee--she didn't want
any toast or muffins, or hominy--she wanted her shoes and stockings
and--Yes everything, and quick!--and would Mammy Henny call Ben and send
him right away to Mr. Temple's and find out how her dear Uncle George
had passed the night, and give him her dearest love and tell him she
would come right over to see him the moment she could get into her
clothes; and could she send anything for him to eat; and did the doctor
think it was dangerous--? Yes--and Ben must keep on to Dr. Teackle's and
find out if it was dangerous--and say to him that Miss Seymour wanted
to know IMMEDIATELY, and--(Here the poor child lost her breath, she was
dressing all the time, Mammy Henny's fingers and ears doing their best)
"and tell Mr. Temple, too," she rushed on, "that he must send word by
Ben for ANYTHING and EVERYTHING he needed" (strong accent on the two
words)... all of which was repeated through the crack of the door to
patient Ben when he presented himself, with the additional assurance
that he must tell Mr. Temple it wouldn't be five minutes before she
would be with him--as she was nearly dressed, all but her hair.

She was right about her good intentions, but she was wrong about the
number of minutes necessary to carry them out. There was her morning
gown to button, and her gaiters to lace, and her hair to be braided and
caught up in her neck (she always wore it that way in the morning) and
the dearest of snug bonnets--a "cabriolet" from Paris--a sort of hood,
stiffened with wires, out of which peeped pink rosebuds quite as they
do from a trellis--had to be put on, and the white strings tied "just
so"--the bows flaring out and the long ends smoothed flat; and then the
lace cape and scarf and her parasol;--all these and a dozen other little
niceties had to be adjusted before she could trip down her father's
stairs and out of her father's swinging gate and on through the park to
her dear Uncle George.

But when she did--and it took her all of an hour--nothing that the
morning sun shone on was quite as lovely, and no waft of air so
refreshing or so welcome as our beloved heroine when she burst in upon
him.

"Oh!--you dear, DEAR thing!" she cried, tossing her parasol on Pawson's
table and stretching out her arms toward him sitting in his chair. "Oh,
I am so sorry! Why didn't you let me know you were ill? I would have
gone down to Wesley. Oh!--I KNEW something was the matter with you or
you would have answered my letters."

He had struggled to his feet at the first sound of her footsteps in
the hall, and had her in his arms long before she had finished her
greeting;--indeed her last sentence was addressed to the collar of his
coat against which her cheek was cushioned.

"Who said I was ill?" he asked with one of his bubbling laughs when he
got his breath.

"Todd told Ben--and you ARE!--and it breaks my heart." She was holding
herself off now, scanning his pale face and shrunken frame--"Oh, I am so
sorry you did not let me know!"

"Todd is a chatterer, and Ben no better; I've only had a bad cold--and
you couldn't have done me a bit of good if you had come--and now I am
entirely well, never felt better in my life. Oh--but it's good to get
hold of you, Kate,--and you are still the same bunch of roses. Sit down
now and tell me all about it. I wish I had a better chair for you, my
dear, but the place is quite dismantled, as you see. I expected to stay
the winter when I left."

She had not given a thought to the chair or to the changes--had not even
noticed them. That the room was stripped of its furniture prior to a
long stay was what invariably occurred in her own house every summer:
it was her precious uncle's pale, shrunken face and the blue veins that
showed in the backs of his dear transparent hands which she held between
her own, and the thin, emaciated wrists that absorbed her.

"You poor, dear Uncle George!" she purred--"and nobody to look after
you." He had drawn up Pawson's chair and had placed her in it beside the
one he sat in, and had then dropped slowly into his own, the better to
hide from her his weakness--but it did not deceive her. "I'm going to
have you put back to bed this very minute; you are not strong enough to
sit up. Let me call Aunt Jemima."

St. George shook his head good-naturedly in denial and smoothed her
hands with his fingers.

"Call nobody and do nothing but sit beside me and let me look into your
face and listen to your voice. I have been pretty badly shaken up; had
two weeks of it that couldn't have been much worse--but since then I
have been on the mend and am getting stronger every minute. I haven't
had any medicine and I don't want any now--I just want you and--" he
hesitated, and seeing nothing in her eyes of any future hope for Harry,
finished the sentence, with "and one or two others to sit by me and
cheer me up; that's better than all the doctors in the world. And now,
first about your father and then about yourself."

"Oh, he's very well," she rejoined absently. "He's off somewhere, went
away two days ago. He'll be back in a week. But you must have something
to eat--GOOD things!"--her mind still occupied with his condition. "I'm
going to have some chicken broth made the moment I get home and it will
be sent fresh every day: and you must eat every bit of it!"

Again St. George's laugh rang out. He had let her run on--it was music
to his ears--that he might later on find some clue on which he could
frame a question he had been revolving in his mind ever since he heard
her voice in the hall. He would not tell her about Harry--better wait
until he could read her thoughts the clearer. If he could discover by
some roundabout way that she would still refuse to see him it would be
best not to embarrass her with any such request; especially on this her
first visit.

"Yes--I'll eat anything and everything you send me, you dear Kate--and
many thanks to you, provided you'll come with it--you are the best broth
for me. But you haven't answered my question--not all of it. What have
YOU been doing since I left?"

"Wondering whether you would forgive me for the rude way in which I left
you the last time I saw you,--the night of Mr. Horn's reading, for one
thing. I went off with Mr. Willits and never said a word to you. I wrote
you a letter telling you how sorry I was, but you never answered it, and
that made me more anxious than ever."

"What foolishness, Kate! I never got it, of course, or you would have
heard from me right away. A number of my letters have gone astray of
late. But I don't remember a thing about it, except that you walked off
with your--" again he hesitated--"with Mr. Willits, which, of course,
was the most natural thing for you to do in the world. How is he, by the
way?"

Kate drew back her shoulders with that quick movement common to her when
some antagonism in her mind preceded her spoken word.

"I don't know--I haven't seen him for some weeks."

St. George started in his chair: "You haven't! He isn't ill, is he?"

"No, I think not," she rejoined calmly.

"Oh, then he has gone down to his father's. Yes, I remember he goes
quite often," he ventured.

"No, I think he is still here." Her gaze was on the window as she spoke,
through which could be seen the tops of the trees glistening in the
sunlight.

"And you haven't seen him? Why?" asked St. George wonderingly--he was
not sure he had heard her aright.

"I told him not to come," she replied in a positive tone.

St. George settled back in his chair. Had there been a clock in the room
its faintest tick would have rung out like a trip-hammer.

"Then you have had a quarrel: he has broken his promise to you and got
drunk again."

"No, he has never broken it; he has kept it as faithfully as Harry kept
his."

"You don't mean, Kate, that you have broken off your engagement?"

She reached over and picked up her parasol: "There never was any
engagement. I have always felt sorry for Mr. Willits and tried my best
to love him and couldn't--that is all. He understands it perfectly; we
both do. It was one of the things that couldn't be."

All sorts of possibilities surged one after the other through the old
diplomat's mind. A dim light increasing in intensity began to shine
about him. What it meant he dared not hope. "What does your father say?"
he asked slowly, after a pause in which he had followed every expression
that crossed her face.

"Nothing--and it wouldn't alter the case if he did. I am the best judge
of what is good for me." There was a certain finality in her cadences
that repelled all further discussion. He remembered having heard the
same ring before.

"When did all this happen?--this telling him not to come?" he persisted,
determined to widen the inquiry. His mind was still unable to fully
grasp the situation.

"About five weeks ago. Do you want to know the very night?" She turned
her head as she spoke and looked at him with her full, deep eyes.

"Yes, if you wish me to."

"The night Mr. Horn read 'The Cricket on the Hearth,'" she answered in a
tone of relief--as if some great crisis had marked the hour, the passing
of which had brought her infinite peace. "I told him when I got home,
and I have never seen him since."

For some seconds St. George did not move. He had turned from her and sat
with his head resting on his hand, his eyes intent on the smouldering
fire: he dare not trust himself to speak; wide ranges opened before him;
the light had strengthened until it was blinding. Kate sat motionless,
her hands in her lap, her eyes searching St. George's face for some
indication of the effect of her news. Then finding him still silent and
absorbed in his thoughts, she went on:

"There was nothing else to do, Uncle George. I had done all I could to
please my father and one or two of my friends. There was nothing against
him--he was very kind and very considerate--but somehow I--" She paused
and drew a long breath.

"Somehow what?" demanded St. George raising his head quickly and
studying her the closer. The situation was becoming vital now--too vital
for any further delay.

"Oh, I don't know--I couldn't love him--that's all. He has many
excellent qualities--too many maybe," and she smiled faintly. "You
know I never liked people who were too good--that is, too willing to do
everything you wanted them to do--especially men who ought really to
be masters and--" She stopped and played with the top of her parasol,
smoothing the knob with her palm as if the better to straighten out the
tangle in her mind. "I expect you will think me queer, Uncle George, but
I have come to the conclusion that I will never love anybody again--I
am through with all that. It's very hard, you know, to mend a thing when
it's broken. I used to say to myself that when I grew to be a woman I
supposed I would love as any other woman seemed content to love; that
no romance of a young girl was ever realized and that they could only be
found in love stories. But my theories all went to pieces when I heard
Mr. Horn that night. Dot's love for John the Carrier--I have read it so
often since that I know the whole story by heart--Dot's love for John
was the real thing, but May Fielding's love for Tackleton wasn't. And
it seemed so wonderful when her lover came home and--it's foolish, I
know--very silly--that I should have been so moved by just the reading
of a story--but it's true. It takes only a very little to push you over
when you are on the edge, and I had been on the edge for a long time.
But don't let us talk about it, dear Uncle George," she added with a
forced smile. "I'm going to take care of you now and be a charming old
maid with side curls and spectacles and make flannel things for the
poor--you just wait and see what a comfort I will be." Her lips were
trembling, the tears crowding over the edges of her lids.

St. George stretched out his hand and in his kindest voice said:

"Was it the carrier and his wife, or was it the sailor boy who came back
so fine and strong, that affected you, Kate?--and made you give up Mr.
Willits?" He would go to the bottom now.

"It was everything, Uncle George--the sweetness of it all--her pride in
her husband--his doubts of her--her repentance; and yet she did what she
thought was for the best; and then his forgiveness and the way he wanted
to take her in his arms at last and she would not until she explained.
And there was nothing really to explain--only love, and trust, and
truth--all the time believing in him--loving him. Oh, it is cruel
to part people--it's so mean and despicable! There are so many
Tackletons--and the May Fieldings go to the altar and so on to their
graves--and there is often such a very little difference between the
two. I never gave my promise to Mr. Willits. I would not!--I could not!
He kept hoping and waiting. He was very gentle and patient--he never
coaxed nor pleaded, but just--Oh, Uncle George!--let me talk it all
out--I have nobody else. I missed you so, and there was no one who could
understand, and you wouldn't answer my letters." She was crying softly
to herself, her beautiful head resting on her elbow pillowed on the back
of his chair.

He leaned forward the closer: he loved this girl next best to Harry. Her
sorrows were his own. Was it all coming out as he had hoped and prayed
for? He could hardly restrain himself in his eagerness.

"Did you miss anybody else, Kate?" There was a peculiar tenderness in
his voice.

She did not raise her head nor did she answer. St. George waited and
repeated the question, Slipping his hand over hers, as he spoke.

"It was the loneliness, Uncle George," she replied, evading his
inference. "I tried to forget it all, and I threw open our house and
gave parties and dances--hardly a week but there has been something
going on--but nothing did any good. I have been--yes--wretchedly unhappy
and--No, it will only distress you to hear it--don't let's talk any more
about it. I won't let you go away again. I'll go away with you if you
don't get better soon, anywhere you say. We'll go down to the White
Sulphur--Yes--we'll go there. The air is so bracing--it wouldn't be a
week before all the color would come back to your cheeks and you be as
strong as ever."

He was not listening. His mind was framing a question--one he must
ask without committing himself or her. He was running a parallel,
really--reading her heart by a flank movement.

"Kate, dear?" He had regained his position although he still kept hold
of her hand.

"Yes, Uncle George."

"Did you write to Harry, as I asked you?"

"No, it wouldn't have done any good. I have had troubles enough of my
own without adding any to his."

"Were you afraid he would not answer it?"

She lifted her head and tightened her fingers about his own, her wet
eyes looking into his.

"I was afraid of myself. I have never known my own mind and I don't know
it now. I have played fast and loose with everybody--I can't bind up a
broken arm and then break it again."

"Wouldn't it be better to try?" he said softly.

"No, I don't think so."

St. George released her hand and settled back in his chair; his face
grew grave. What manner of woman was this, and how could he reach the
inner kernel of her heart? Again he raised his head and leaning forward
took both her hands between his own.

"I am going to tell you a story, Kate--one you have never heard--not
all of it. When I was about your age--a little older perhaps, I gave
my heart to a woman who had known me from a boy; with whom I had played
when she was a child. I'm not going into the whole story, such things
are always sad; nor will I tell you anything of the beginning of the
three happy months of our betrothal nor of what caused our separation.
I shall only tell you of the cruelty of the end. There was a
misunderstanding--a quarrel--I begging her forgiveness on my knees. All
the time her heart was breaking. One little word from her would have
healed everything. Some years after that she married and her life still
goes on. I am what you see."

Kate looked at him with swimming eyes. She dimly remembered that she
had heard that her uncle had had a love affair in his youth and that his
sweetheart had jilted him for a richer man, but she had never known that
he had suffered so bitterly over it. Her heart went out to him all the
more.

"Will you tell me who it was?" She had no right to ask; but she might
comfort him the better if she knew.

"Harry's mother."

Kate dropped his hands and drew back in her seat.

"You--loved--Mrs.--Rutter--and she--refused you for--Oh!--what a cruel
thing to do! And what a fool she was. Now I know why you have been so
good to Harry. Oh, you poor, dear Uncle George. Oh, to think that you
of all men! Is there any one whose heart is not bruised and broken?" she
added in a helpless tone.

"Plenty of them, Kate--especially those who have been willing to stoop
a little and so triumph. Harry has waited three years for some word from
you; he has not asked for it, for he believes you have forgotten him;
and then he was too much of a man to encroach upon another's rights.
Does your breaking off with Mr. Willits alter the case in any
way?--does it make any difference? Is this sailor boy always to be a
wanderer--never to come home to his people and the woman he loves?"

"He'll never come back to me, Uncle George," she said with a shudder,
dropping her eyes. "I found that out the day we talked together in the
park, just before he left. And he's not coming home. Father got a letter
from one of his agents who had seen him. He was looking very well and
was going up into the mountains--I wrote you about it. I am sorry you
didn't get the letter--but of course he has written you too."

"Suppose I should tell you that he would come back if he thought you
would be glad to see him--glad in the old way?"

Kate shook her head: "He would never come. He hates me, and I don't
blame him. I hate myself when I think of it all."

"But if he should walk in now?"--he was very much afraid he would, and
he was not quite ready for him yet. What he was trying to find out
was not whether Kate would be glad to see Harry as a relief to her
loneliness, but whether she really LOVED him.

Some tone in his voice caught her ear. She turned her head quickly
and looked at him with wondering gaze, as if she would read his inmost
thoughts.

"You mean that he is coming, Uncle George--that Harry IS coming home!"
she exclaimed excitedly, the color ebbing from her cheeks.

"He is already here, Kate. He slept upstairs in his old room last night.
I expect him in any minute."

"Here!--in this room!" She was on her feet in an instant, her face
deathly pale, her whole frame shaking. Which way should she turn to
escape? To meet him face to face would bring only excruciating pain.
"Oh, why didn't you tell me, Uncle George!" she burst out. "I won't
see him! I can't!--not now--not here! Let me go home--let me think!
No--don't stop me!" and catching up her cape and parasol she was out the
door and down the steps before he could call her back or even realize
that she had gone.

Once on the pavement she looked nervously up and down the street,
gathered her pretty skirts tight in her hand and with the fluttered
flight of a scared bird darted across the park, dashed through her
swinging gate, and so on up to her bedroom.

There she buried her face in Mammy Henny's lap and burst into an agony
of tears.


While all this had been going on upstairs another equally important
conference was taking place in Pawson's office below, where Harry at
Pawson's request had gone to meet Gadgem and talk over certain plans for
his uncle's future welfare. He had missed Kate by one of those trifling
accidents which often determine the destiny of nations and of men. Had
he, after attending to the business of the morning--(he had been down to
Marsh Market with Todd for supplies)--mounted the steps to see his uncle
instead of yielding to a sudden impulse to interview Pawson first and
his uncle afterward, he would have come upon Kate at the very moment she
was pouring out her heart to St. George.

But no such fatality or stroke of good fortune--whatever the gods had in
store for him--took place. On the contrary he proceeded calmly to
carry out the details of a matter of the utmost importance to all
concerned--one in which both Pawson and Gadgem were interested--(indeed
he had come at Pawson's suggestion to discuss its details with the
collector and himself):--all of which the Scribe promises in all honor
to reveal to his readers before the whole of this story is told.

Harry walked straight up to Gadgem:

"I am very glad to see you, Mr. Gadgem," he said in his manly, friendly
way. "You have been very good to my uncle, and I want to thank you both
for him and for myself," and he shook the little man's hand heartily.

Gadgem blushed. St. George's democracy he could understand; but why this
aristocrat--outcast as he had once been, but now again in favor--why
this young prince, the heir to Moorlands and the first young blood of
his time, should treat him as an equal, puzzled him; and yet, somehow,
his heart warmed to him as he read his sincerity in his eyes and voice.

"Thank you, sir--thank you very much, sir," rejoined Gadgem, with a
folding-camp-stool-movement, his back bent at right angles with his
legs. "I really don't deserve it, sir. Mr. Temple is an EXtraordinary
man, sir; the most EXtraordinary man I have ever met, sir. Give you the
shirt off his back, sir, and go NAked himself."

"Yes, he gave it to me," laughed Harry, greatly amused at the
collector's effusive manner: He had never seen this side of Gadgem.
"That, of course, you know all about--you paid the bills, I believe."

"PREcisely so, sir." He had lengthened out now with a spiral-spring,
cork-screw twist in his body, his index finger serving as point. "Paid
every one of them. He never cared, sir--he GLOried in it--GLOried in
being a pauper. UNaccountable, Mr. Rutter--Enormously unaccountable.
Never heard of such a case; never WILL hear of such a case. So what was
to be done, sir? Just what I may state is being done this minute
over our heads UPstairs": and out went the index finger. "Rest and
REcuperation, sir--a slow--a very slow use of AVAILable assets until new
and FURther AVAILable assets could become visible. And they are here,
sir--have arRIVED. You may have heard, of course, of the Patapsco where
Mr. Temple kept the largest part of his fortune."

"No, except that it about ruined everybody who had anything to do with
it."

"Then you have heard nothing of the REsuscitation!" cried Gadgem, all
his fingers opened like a fan, his eyebrows arched to the roots of his
hair. "You surPRISE me! And you are really ignorant of the PHOEnix-like
way in which it has RISen from its ashes? I said RISen, sir, because it
is now but a dim speck in the financial sky. Nor the appointment of Mr.
John Gorsuch as manager, ably backed by your DIStinguished father--the
setting of the bird upon its legs--I'm speaking of the burnt bird, sir,
the PHOEnix. I'm quite sure it was a bird--Nor the payment on the first
of the ensuing month of some eighty per cent of the amounts due
the ORIGinal depositors and another twenty per cent in one year
thereafter--The cancelling of the mortgage which your most BEnevolent
and HONorable father bought, and the sly trick of Gorsuch--letting
Fogbin, who never turned up, become the sham tenant--and the joy--"

"Hold on Mr. Gadgem--I'm not good at figures. Give me that over again
and speak slower. Am I to understand that the bank will pay back to my
uncle, within a day or so, three-quarters of the money they stole from
him?"

"STOLE, sir!" chided Gadgem, his outstretched forefinger wig-wagging
a Fie! Fie! gesture of disapproval--"STOLE is not a pretty
word--actionable, sir--DANgerously actionable--a question of the
watch-house, and, if I might be permitted to say--a bit of COLD
lead--Perhaps you will allow me to suggest the word 'maNIPulated,'
sir--the money the bank maNIPulated from your confiding and
inexperienced uncle--that is safer and it is equally EXpressive. He!
He!"

"Well, will he get the money?" cried Harry, his face lighting up, his
interest in the outcome outweighing his amusement over Gadgem's antics
and expressions.

"He WILL, sir," rejoined Gadgem decisively.

"And you are so sure of it that you would be willing to advance one-half
the amount if the account was turned over to you this minute?" cried
Harry eagerly.

"No sir--not one-half--ALL of it--less a TRIfling commission for my
services of say one per cent. When you say 'this minute,' sir, I must
reply that the brevity of the area of action becomes a trifle ACUTE,
yes, ALARMingly acute. I haven't the money myself, sir--that is, not
about my person--but I can get it in an hour, sir--in less time, if Mr.
Temple is willing. That was my purpose in coming here, sir--that was
why Mr. Pawson sent for me, sir; and it is but fair to say that you can
thank your DIStinguished father for it all, sir--he has worked night and
day to do it. Colonel Rutter has taken over--so I am inFORMED--I'm not
sure, but I am inFORMED--taken over a lot of the securities himself
so that he COULD do it. Another EXtraordinary combination, if you will
permit me to say so--I refer to your father--a man who will show you his
door one minute and open his pocketbook and his best bottle of wine
for you the next," and he plunged himself down in his seat with so
determined a gesture that it left no question on Harry's mind that he
intended sitting it out until daylight should there be the faintest
possibility of his financial proposition being accepted.

Harry walked to the window and gazed out on the trees. There was no
doubt now that Mr. Temple was once more on his feet. "Uncle George will
go now to Moorlands," he said, decisively, in a low tone, speaking to
himself, his heart swelling with pride at this fresh evidence of
his father's high sense of honor--then he wheeled and addressed the
attorney:

"Shall I tell Mr. Temple this news, about the Patapsco Bank, Mr.
Pawson?"

"Yes, if you think best, Mr. Rutter. And I have another piece of good
news. This please do not tell Mr. Temple, not yet--not until it is
definitely settled. That old suit in Chancery has been decided, or will
be, so I learned this morning and decided in favor of the heir. You may
not have heard of it before, Gadgem," and he turned to the collector,
"but it is one of old General Dorsey Temple's left-overs. It has been
in the courts now some forty years. When this decision is made binding,"
here he again faced Harry--"Mr. Temple comes in for a considerable
share."

Gadgem jumped to his feet and snapped his fingers rapidly. Had he sat on
a tack his rebound could not have been more sudden. This last was news
to him.

"SHORN lamb, sir!" he cried gleefully, rubbing his palms together,
his body tied into a double bow-knot. "Gentle breezes; bread upon
the waters! By jiminy, Mr. Rutter, if Mr. Temple could be born
again--figuratively, sir--and I could walk in upon him as I once did,
and find him at breakfast surrounded by all his comforts with Todd
waiting upon him--a very good nigger is Todd, sir--an exCEPtionally
good nigger--I'd--I'd--damn me, Mr. Rutter, I'd--well, sir, there's no
word--but John Gadgem, sir--well, I'll be damned if he wouldn't--" and
he began skipping about the room, both feet in the air, as if he was
a boy of twenty instead of a thin, shambling, badly put together bill
collector in an ill-fitting brown coat, a hat much the worse for wear,
and a red cotton handkerchief addicted to weekly ablutions.

As for Harry the glad news had cleared out wide spaces before him, such
as he had not looked through in years; leafy vistas, with glimpses of
sunlit meadows; shadow-flecked paths leading to manor-houses with summer
skies beyond. He, too, was on his feet, walking restlessly up and down.

Pawson and Gadgem again put their heads together, Harry stopping to
listen. Such expressions as "Certainly," "I think I can": "Yes, of
course it was there when I was last in his place," "Better see him
first," caught his ear.

At last he could stand it no longer. Dr. Teackle or no Dr. Teackle,
he would go upstairs, open the door softly, and if his uncle was awake
whisper the good news in his ear. If anybody had whispered any such
similar good news in his ear on any one of the weary nights he had lain
awake waiting for the dawn, or at any time of the day when he sat his
horse, his rifle across the pommel, it would have made another man of
him.

If his uncle was awake!

He was not only awake, but he was very much alive.

"I've got a great piece of news for you, Uncle George!" Harry shouted
in a rollicking tone, his joy increasing as he noted his uncle's renewed
strength.

"So have I got a great piece of news for you!" was shouted back. "Come
in, you young rascal, and shut that door behind you. She isn't going to
marry Willits. Thrown him over--don't want him--don't love him--can't
love him--never did love him! She's just told me so. Whoop--hurrah! I
Dance, you dog, before I throw this chair at you!!"

There are some moments in a man's life when all language
fails;--pantomime moments, when one stares and tries to speak and stares
again. They were both at it--St. George waiting until Harry should
explode, and Harry trying to get his breath, the earth opening under
him, the skies falling all about his head.

"She told you so! When!" he gasped.

"Two minutes ago--you've just missed her! Where the devil have you been?
Why didn't you come in before?"

"Kate here--two minutes ago--what will I do?" Had he found himself at
sea in an open boat with both oars adrift he could not have been more
helpless.

"DO! Catch her before she gets home! Quick!--just as you are--sailor
clothes and all!"

"But how will I know if--?"

"You don't have to know! Away with you, I tell you!"

And away he went--and if you will believe it, dear reader--without even
a whisper in his uncle's ears of the good news he had come to tell.




CHAPTER XXX



Ben let him in.

He came as an apparition, the old butler balancing the door in his hand,
as if undecided what to do, trying to account for the change in the
young man's appearance--the width of shoulders, the rough clothes, and
the determined glance of his eye.

"Fo' Gawd, it's Marse Harry!" was all he said when he could get his
mouth open.

"Yes, Ben--go and tell your mistress I am here," and he brushed past
him and pushed back the drawing-room door. Once inside he crossed to the
mantel and stood with his back to the hearth, his sailor's cap in his
hand, his eyes fixed on the door he had just closed behind him. Through
it would come the beginning or the end of his life. Ben's noiseless
entrance and exit a moment after, with his mistress's message neither
raised nor depressed his hopes. He had known all along she would not
refuse to see him: what would come after was the wall that loomed up.

She had not hesitated, nor did she keep him waiting. Her eyes were still
red with weeping, her hair partly dishevelled, when Ben found her--but
she did not seem to care. Nor was she frightened--nor eager. She just
lifted her cheek from Mammy Henny's caressing hand--pushed back the
hair from her face with a movement as if she was trying to collect her
thoughts, and without rising from her knees heard Ben's message to the
end. Then she answered calmly:

"Did you say Mr. Harry Rutter, Ben? Tell him I'll be down in a moment."


She entered with that same graceful movement which he loved so well--her
head up, her face turned frankly toward him, one hand extended in
welcome.

"Uncle George told me you were back, Harry. It was very good of you to
come," and sank on the sofa.

It had been but a few steps to him--the space between the open door and
the hearth rug on which he stood--and it had taken her but a few seconds
to cross it, but in that brief interval the heavens had opened above
her. The old Harry was there--the smile--the flash in the eyes--the joy
of seeing her--the quick movement of his hand in gracious salute; then
there had followed a sense of his strength, of the calm poise of his
body, of the clearness of his skin. She saw, too, how much handsomer he
had grown,--and noted the rough sailor's clothes. How well they fitted
his robust frame! And the clear, calm eyes and finely cut features--no
shrinking from responsibility in that face; no faltering--the old ideal
of her early love and the new ideal of her sailor boy--the one Richard's
voice had conjured--welded into one personality!

"I heard you had just been in to see Uncle George, Kate, and I tried to
overtake you."

Not much: nothing in fact. Playwriters tell us that the dramatic
situation is the thing, and that the spoken word is as unimportant
to the play as the foot-lights--except as a means of illuminating the
situation.

"Yes--I have just left him, Harry. Uncle George looks very badly--don't
you think so? Is there anything very serious the matter? I sent Ben to
Dr. Teackle's, but he was not in his office."

He had moved up a chair and sat devouring every vibration of her lips,
every glance of her wondrous eyes--all the little movements of her
beautiful body--her dress--the way the stray strands of hair had escaped
to her shoulders. His Kate!--and yet he dare not touch her!

"No, he is not ill. He took a severe cold and only needs rest and a
little care. I am glad you went and--" then the pent-up flood broke
loose. "Are you glad to see me, Kate?"

"I am always glad to see you, Harry--and you look so well. It has been
nearly three years, hasn't it?" Her calmness was maddening; she spoke as
if she was reciting a part in which she had no personal interest.

"I don't know--I haven't counted--not that way. I have lain awake too
many nights and suffered too much to count by years. I count by--"

She raised her hand in protest: "Don't Harry--please don't. All the
suffering has not been yours!" The impersonal tone was gone--there was a
note of agony in her voice.

His manner softened: "Don't think I blame you, Kate. I love you too much
to blame you--you did right. The suffering has only done me good--I am
a different man from the one you once knew. I see life with a wider
vision. I know what it is to be hungry; I know, too, what it is to
earn the bread that has kept me alive. I came home to look after Uncle
George. When I go back I want to take him with me. I won't count the
years nor all the suffering I have gone through if I can pay him back
what I owe him. He stood by me when everybody else deserted me."

She winced a little at the thrust, as if he had touched some sore spot,
sending a shiver of pain through her frame, but she did not defend
herself.

"You mustn't take him away, Harry--leave Uncle George to me," not as if
she demanded it--more as if she was stating a fact.

"Why not? He will be another man out in Brazil--and he can live there
like a gentleman on what he will have left--so Pawson thinks."

"Because I love him dearly--and when he is gone I have nobody left," she
answered in a hopeless tone.

Harry hesitated, then he asked: "And so what Uncle George told me about
Mr. Willits is true?"

Kate looked at him furtively--as if afraid to read his thoughts and for
reply bowed her head in assent.

"Didn't he love you enough?" There was a certain reproach in his tone,
as if no one could love this woman enough to satisfy her.

"Yes."

"What was the matter then? Was it--" He stopped--his eagerness had
led him onto dangerous, if not discourteous, grounds. "No, you needn't
answer--forgive me for asking--I had no right. I am not myself, Kate--I
didn't mean to--"

"Yes, I'll tell you. I told Uncle George. I didn't like him well
enough--that's all." All this time she was looking him calmly in the
face. If she had done anything to be ashamed of she did not intend to
conceal it from her former lover.

"And will Uncle George take his place now that he's gone? Do you ever
know your own heart, Kate?" There was no bitterness in his question.
Her frankness had disarmed him of that. It was more in the nature of an
inquiry, as if he was probing for something on which he could build a
hope.

For a brief instant she made no answer; then she said slowly and with a
certain positiveness:

"If I had I would have saved myself and you a great deal of misery."

"And Langdon Willits?"

"No, he cannot complain--he does not--I promised him nothing. But I have
been so beaten about, and I have tried so hard to do right; and it has
all crumbled to pieces. As for you and me, Harry, let us both forget
that we have ever had any differences. I can't bear to think that
whenever you come home we must avoid each other. We were friends
once--let us be friends again. It was very kind of you to come. I'm glad
you didn't wait. Don't be bitter in your heart toward me."

Harry left his chair and settled down on the sofa beside her, and in
pleading, tender tones said:

"Kate--When was I ever bitter toward you in my heart? Look at me! Do you
realize how I love you?--Do you know it sets me half crazy to hear you
talk like that? I haven't come here to-day to reproach you--I have come
to do what I can to help you, if you want my help. I told you the last
time we talked in the park that I wouldn't stay in Kennedy Square a day
longer even if you begged me to. That is over now; I'll do now anything
you wish me to do; I'll go or I'll stay. I love you too much to do
anything else."

"No, you don't love me!--you can't love me! I wouldn't let you love me
after all the misery I have caused you! I didn't know how much until I
began to suffer myself and saw Mr. Willits suffer. I am not worthy of
any man's love. I will never trust myself again--I can only try to be to
the men about me as Uncle George is to everyone. Oh, Harry!--Harry!--Why
was I born this way--headstrong wilful--never satisfied? Why am I
different from the other women?"

He tried to take her hand, but she drew it away.

"No!--not that!--not that! Let us be just as we were when--Just as we
used to be. Sit over there where I can see you better and watch your
face as you talk. Tell me all you have done--what you have seen and what
sort of places you have been in. We heard from you through--"

He squared his shoulders and faced her, his voice ringing clear, his
eyes flashing: something of the old Dutch admiral was in his face.

"Kate--I will have none of it! Don't talk such nonsense to me; I won't
listen. If you don't know your own heart I know mine; you've GOT to love
me!--you MUST love me! Look at me. In all the years I have been away
from you I have lived the life you would have me live--every request you
ever made of me I have carried out. I did this knowing you would never
be my wife and you would be Willits's! I did it because you were my
Madonna and my religion and I loved the soul of you and lived for you
as men live to please the God they have never seen. There were days and
nights when I never expected to see you or any one else whom I loved
again--but you never failed--your light never went out in my heart.
Don't you see now why you've got to love me? What was it you loved in
me once that I haven't got now? How am I different? What do I lack?
Look into my eyes--close--deep down--read my heart! Never, as God is my
judge, have I done a thing since I last kissed your forehead, that you
would have been ashamed of. Do you think, now that you are free, that I
am going back without you? I am not that kind of a man."

She half started from her seat: "Harry!" she cried in a helpless
tone--"you do not know what you are saying--you must not--"

He leaned over and took both her hands firmly in his own.

"Look at me! Tell me the truth--as you would to your God! Do you love
me?"

She made an effort to withdraw her hands, then she sank back.

"I--I--don't know--" she murmured.

"YOU DO--search again--way down in your heart. Go over every day we have
lived--when we were children and played together--all that horror at
Moorlands when I shot Willits--the night of Mrs. Cheston's ball when
I was drunk--all the hours I have held you in my arms, my lips to
yours--All of it--every hour of it--balance one against the other. Think
of your loneliness--not mine--yours--and then tell me you do not know!
You DO know! Oh, my God, Kate!--you must love me! What else would you
want a man to do for you that I have not done?"

He stretched out his arms, but she sprang to her feet and put out her
palms as a barrier.

"No. Let me tell you something. We must have no more
misunderstandings--you must be sure--I must be sure. I have no right to
take your heart in my hands again. It is I who have broken my faith with
you, not you with me. I was truly your wife when I promised you here on
the sofa that last time. I knew then that you would, perhaps, lose your
head again, and yet I loved you so much that I could not give you up.
Then came the night of your father's ball and all the misery, and I was
a coward and shut myself up instead of keeping my arms around you and
holding you up to the best that was in you, just as Uncle George begged
me to do. And when your father turned against you and drove you from
your home, all because you had tried to defend me from insult, I saw
only the disgrace and did not see the man behind it; and then you went
away and I stretched out my arms for you to come back to me and only
your words echoed in my ears that you would never come back to me until
you were satisfied with yourself. Then I gave up and argued it out and
said it was all over--"

He had left his seat and at every sentence had tried to take her in his
arms, but she kept her palms toward him.

"No, don't touch me! You SHALL hear me out; I must empty all my heart!
I was lonely and heart-sore and driven half wild with doubts and what
people said, my father worse than all of them. And Mr. Willits was kind
and always at my beck and call--and so thoughtful and attentive--and
I tried and tried--but I couldn't. I always had you before me--and you
haunted me day and night, and sometimes when he would come in that door
I used to start, hoping it might be you."

"It IS me, my darling!" he cried, springing toward her. "I don't want to
hear any more--I must--I will--"

"But you SHALL! There IS something more. It went on and on and I got so
that I did not care, and one day I thought I would give him my promise
and the next day all my soul rebelled against it and it was that way
until one night Mr. Horn read aloud a story--and it all came over me and
I saw everything plain as if it had been on a stage, and myself and you
and Mr. Willits--and what it meant--and what would come of it--and he
walked home with me and I told him frankly, and I have never seen him
since. And now here is the last and you must hear it out. There is not
a word I have said to him which I would recall--not a thing I am ashamed
of. Your lips were the last that touched my own. There, my darling,
it is all told. I love you with my whole heart and soul and mind and
body--I have never loved anybody else--I have tried and tried and
couldn't. I am so tired of thinking for myself,--so tired,--so tired.
Take me and do with me as you will!"

Again the plot is too strong for the dialogue. He had her fast in his
arms before her confession was finished. Then the two sank on the sofa
where she lay sobbing her heart out, he crooning over her--patting her
cheeks, kissing away the tears from her eyelids; smoothing the strands
of her hair with his strong, firm fingers. It was his Kate that lay in
his grasp--close--tightly pressed--her heart beating against his, her
warm, throbbing body next his own, her heart swept of every doubt and
care, all her will gone.

As she grew quiet she stretched up her hand, touching his cheek as if
to reassure herself that it was really her lover. Yes! It was Harry--HER
Harry--Harry who was dead and is alive again--to whom she had stripped
her soul naked--and who still trusted and loved her.

A little later she loosened herself from his embrace and taking his
face in her small, white hands looked long and earnestly into his eyes,
smoothing back the hair from his brow as she used to do; kissing him
on the forehead, on each eyelid, and then on the mouth--one of their
old-time caresses. Still remembering the old days, she threw back his
coat and let her hands wander over his full-corded throat and chest
and arms. How big and strong he had become! and how handsome he had
grown--the boy merged into the man. And that other something! (and
another and stronger thrill shot through her)--that other something
which seemed to flow out of him;--that dominating force that betokened
leadership, compelling her to follow--not the imperiousness of
his father, brooking no opposition no matter at what cost, but the
leadership of experience, courage, and self-reliance.

With this the sense of possession swept over her. He was all her own and
for ever! A man to lean upon; a man to be proud of; one who would listen
and understand: to whom she could surrender her last stronghold--her
will. And the comfort of it all; the rest, the quiet, the assurance of
everlasting peace: she who had been so torn and buffeted and heart-sore.

For many minutes she lay still from sheer happiness, thrilled by the
warmth and pressure of his strong arms. At last, when another thought
could squeeze itself into her mind, she said: "Won't Uncle George be
glad, Harry?"

"Yes," he answered, releasing her just far enough to look into her
eyes. "It will make him well. You made him very happy this morning. His
troubles are over, I hear--he's going to get a lot of his money back."

"Oh, I'm so glad. And will we take him with us?" she asked wonderingly,
smoothing back his hair as she spoke.

"Take him where, darling?" he laughed.

"To where we are going--No, you needn't laugh--I mean it. I don't care
where we go," and she looked at him intently. "I'll go with you anywhere
in the world you say, and I'll start to-morrow."

He caught her again in his arms, kissed her for the hundredth time, and
then suddenly relaxing his hold asked in assumed alarm: "And what about
your father? What do you think he will say? He always thought me a
madcap scapegrace--didn't he?" The memory brought up no regret. He
didn't care a rap what the Honorable Prim thought of him.

"Yes--he thinks so now," she echoed, wondering how anybody could have
formed any such ideas of her Harry.

"Well, he will get over it when I talk with him about his coffee people.
Some of his agents out there want looking after."

"Oh!--how lovely, my precious; talking coffee will be much pleasanter
than talking me!--and yet we have got to do it somehow when he comes
home."

And down went her head again, she nestling the closer as if terrified at
the thought of the impending meeting; then another kiss
followed--dozens of them--neither of them keeping count, and then--and
then--...................................

And then--Ben tapped gently and announced that dinner was served, and
Harry stared at the moon-faced dial and saw that it was long after two
o'clock, and wondered what in the world had become of the four hours
that had passed since he had rushed down from his uncle's and into
Kate's arms.

And so we will leave them--playing housekeeping--Harry pulling out
her chair, she spreading her dainty skirts and saying "Thank you, Mr.
Rutter--" and Ben with his face in so broad a grin that it got set
that way--Aunt Dinah, the cook, having to ask him three times "Was he
gwineter hab a fit" before he could answer by reason of the chuckle
which was suffocating him.


And now as we must close the door for a brief space on the happy
couple--never so happy in all their lives--it will be just as well for
us to find out what the mischief is going on at the club--for there is
something going on--and that of unusual importance.

Everybody is out on the front steps. Old Bowdoin is craning his short
neck, and Judge Pancoast is saying that it is impossible and then
instatly changing his mind, saying: "By jove it is!"--and Richard
Horn and Warfield and Murdoch are leaning over the balcony rail still
unconvinced and old Harding is pounding his fat thigh with his pudgy
hand in ill-concealed delight.

Yes--there is no doubt of it--hasn't been any doubt of it since the
judge shouted out the glad tidings which emptied every chair in the
club: Across the park, beyond the rickety, vine-covered fence and close
beside the Temple Mansion, stands a four-in-hand, the afternoon sun
flashing from the silver mountings of the harness and glinting on the
polished body and wheels of the coach. Then a crack of the whip, a wind
of the horn, and they are off--the leaders stretching the traces, two
men on the box, two grooms in the rear. Hurrah! Well, by thunder, who
would have believed it--that's Temple inside on the back seat! "There
he is waving his hand and Todd is with him. And yes! Why of course it's
Rutter! See him clear that curb! Not a man in this county can drive like
that but Talbot."

Round they come--the colonel straight as a whip--dusty-brown
overcoat, flowers in his buttonhole--bell-crowned hat, brown driving
gloves--perfectly appointed, even if he is a trifle pale and half blind.
More horn--a long joyous note now, as if they were heralding the peace
of the world, the colonel bowing like a grand duke as he passes the
assembled crowd--a gathering of the reins together, a sudden pull-up
at Seymours', everybody on the front porch--Kate peeping over Harry's
shoulder--and last and best of all, St. George's cheery voice ringing
out:

"Where are you two sweethearts!" Not a weak note anywhere; regular
fog-horn of a voice blown to help shipwrecked mariners.

"All aboard for Moorlands, you turtle-doves--never mind your clothes,
Kate--nor you either, Harry. Your father will send for them later. Up
with you."

"All true, Harry," called back the colonel from the top of the coach
(nobody alighted but the grooms--there wasn't time--) "Your mother
wouldn't wait another hour and sent me for you, and Teackle said St.
George could go, and we bundled him up and brought him along and you are
all going to stay a month. No, don't wait a minute, Kate; I want to get
home before dark. One of my men will be in with the carryall and bring
out your mammy and your clothes and whatever you want. Your father is
away I hear, and so nobody will miss you. Get your heavy driving coat,
my dear; I brought one of mine in for Harry--it will be cold before we
get home. Matthew, your eyes are better than mine, get down and see
what the devil is the matter with that horse. No, it's all right--the
check-rein bothered him."

And so ended the day that had been so happily begun, and the night was
no less joyful with the mother's arms about her beloved boy and Kate
on a stool beside her and Talbot and St. George deep in certain
vintages--or perhaps certain vintages deep in Talbot and St.
George--especially that particular and peculiar old Madeira of 1800,
which his friend Mr. Jefferson had sent him from Monticello, and which
was never served except to some such distinguished guest as his highly
esteemed and well-beloved friend of many years, St. George Wilmot Temple
of Kennedy Square.




CHAPTER XXXI



It would be delightful to describe the happy days at Moorlands during
St. George's convalescence, when the love-life of Harry and Kate was
one long, uninterrupted, joyous dream. When mother, father, and son were
again united--what a meeting was that, once she got her arms around
her son's neck and held him close and wept her heart out in
thankfulness!--and the life of the old-time past was revived--a life
softened and made restful and kept glad by the lessons all had learned.
And it would be more delightful still to carry the record of these
charming hours far into the summer had not St. George, eager to be under
his own roof in Kennedy Square, declared he could stay no longer.

Not that his welcome had grown less warm. He and his host had long since
unravelled all their difficulties, the last knot having been cut the
afternoon the colonel, urged on by Harry's mother--his disappointment
over his sons's coldness set at rest by her pleadings--had driven into
town for Harry in his coach, as has been said, and swept the whole
party, including St. George, out to Moorlands.

Various unrelated causes had brought about this much-to-be-desired
result, the most important being the news of the bank's revival, which
Harry, in his mad haste to overtake Kate, had forgotten to tell his
uncle, and which St. George learned half an hour later from Pawson,
together with a full account of what the colonel had done to bring about
the happy result--a bit of information which so affected Temple that,
when the coach with the colonel on the box had whirled up, he, weak
as he was, had struggled to the front door, both hands held out, in
welcome.

"Talbot--old fellow," he had said with a tear in his voice, "I have
misunderstood you and I beg your pardon. You've behaved like a man, and
I thank you from the bottom of my heart!"

At which the stern old aristocrat had replied, as he took St. George's
two hands in his: "Let us forget all about it, St. George. I made a
damned fool of myself. We all get too cocky sometimes."

Then there had followed--the colonel listening with bated breath--St.
George's account of Kate's confession and Harry's sudden exit, Rutter's
face brightening as it had not done for years when he learned that Harry
had not yet returned from the Seymours', the day's joy being capped by
the arrival of Dr. Teackle, who had given his permission with an "All
right--the afternoon is fine and the air will do Mr. Temple a world of
good," and so St. George was bundled up and the reader knows the rest.

Later on--at Moorlands of course--the colonel, whose eyes were getting
better by the day and Gorsuch whose face was now one round
continuous smile, got to work, and had a heart-to-heart--or rather a
pocket-to-pocket talk--which was quite different in those days from what
it would be now--after which both Kate and Harry threw to the winds
all thoughts of Rio and the country contiguous thereto, and determined
instead to settle down at Moorlands. And then a great big iron door sunk
in a brick vault was swung wide and certain leather-bound books were
brought out--and particularly a sum of money which Harry duly handed
over to Pawson the next time he drove to town--(twice a week now)--and
which, when recounted, balanced to a cent the total of the bills which
Pawson had paid three years before, with interest added, a list of
which the attorney still kept in his private drawer with certain other
valuable papers tied with red tape, marked "St. G. W. T." And still
later on--within a week--there had come the news of the final settlement
of the long-disputed lawsuit with St. George as principal residuary
legatee--and so our long-suffering hero was once more placed upon his
financial legs: the only way he could have been placed upon them or
would have been placed upon them--a fact very well known to every one
who had tried to help him, his philosophy being that one dollar borrowed
is two dollars owed--the difference being a man's self-respect.

And it is truly marvellous what this change in his fortunes
accomplished. His slack body rounded out; his sunken cheeks plumped
up until every crease and crack were gone, his color regained its
freshness, his eyes their brilliancy; his legs took on their old-time
spring and lightness--and a wonderful pair of stand-bys, or stand-ups,
or stand-arounds they were as legs go--that is legs of a man of
fifty-five.

And they were never idle, these legs: there was no sitting cross-legged
in a chair for St. George: he was not constructed along those lines.
Hardly a week had passed before he had them across Spitfire's mate; had
ridden to hounds; danced a minuet with Harry and Kate; walked half-way
to Kennedy Square and back--they thought he was going to walk all the
way and headed him off just in time; and best of all--(and this is
worthy of special mention)--had slipped them into the lower section of
a suit of clothes--and these his own, although he had not yet paid for
them--the colonel having liquidated their cost. These trousers, it is
just as well to state, had arrived months before from Poole, along with
a suit of Rutter's and the colonel had forwarded a draft for the
whole amount without examining the contents, until Alec had called his
attention to the absurd width of the legs--and the ridiculous spread of
the seat. My Lord of Moorlands, after the scene in the Temple Mansion,
dared not send them in to St. George, and they had accordingly lain ever
since on top of his wardrobe with Alec as chief of the Moth Department.
St. George, on his arrival, found them folded carefully and placed on
a chair--Todd chief valet. Whereupon there had been a good-natured row
when our man of fashion appeared at breakfast rigged out in all his
finery, everybody clapping their hands and saying how handsome he
looked--St. George in reply denouncing Talbot as a brigand of a Brummel
who had stolen his clothes, tried to wear them, and then when out of
fashion thrown them back on his hands.

All these, and a thousand other delightful things, it would, I say, be
eminently worth while to dilate upon--(including a series of whoops and
hand-springs which Todd threw against the rear wall of the big kitchen
five seconds after Alec had told him of the discomfiture of "dat
red-haided gemman," and of Marse Harry's good fortune)--were it not that
certain mysterious happenings are taking place inside and out of the
Temple house in Kennedy Square--happenings exciting universal comment,
and of such transcendent importance that the Scribe is compelled, much
against his will--for the present installment is entirely too short--to
confine their telling to a special chapter.




CHAPTER XXXII



For some time back, then be it said, various strollers unfamiliar with
the neighbors or the neighborhood of Kennedy Square, poor benighted folk
who knew nothing of the events set down in the preceding chapters, had
nodded knowingly to each other or shaken their pates deprecatingly over
the passing of "another old landmark."

Some of these had gone so far as to say that the cause could be found in
the fact that Lawyer Temple had run through what little money his father
and grandmother had left him; additional wise-acres were of the opinion
that some out-of-town folks had bought the place and were trying to prop
it up so it wouldn't tumble into the street, while one, more facetious
than the others, had claimed that it was no wonder it was falling down,
since the only new thing Temple had put upon it was a heavy mortgage.

The immediate neighbors, however,--the friends of the house--had smiled
and passed on. They had no such forebodings. On the contrary nothing so
diverting--nothing so enchanting--had happened around Kennedy Square
in years. In fact, when one of these humorists began speaking about
it, every listener heard the story in a broad grin. Some of the more
hilarious even nudged each other in the waist-coats and ordered another
round of toddies--for two or three, or even five, if there were that
number of enthusiasts about the club tables. When they were asked what
it was all about they invariably shook their heads, winked, and kept
still--that is, if the question were put by some one outside the magic
circle of Kennedy Square.

All the general public knew was that men with bricks in hods had been
seen staggering up the old staircase with its spindle banisters and
mahogany rail; that additional operatives had been discovered clinging
to the slanting roof long enough to pass up to further experts grouped
about the chimneys small rolls of tin and big bundles of shingles; that
plasterers in white caps and aprons, with mortar-boards in one hand and
trowels in the other, had been seen chinking up cracks; while any number
of painters, carpenters, and locksmiths were working away for dear life
all over the place from Aunt Jemima's kitchen to Todd's bunk under the
roof.

In addition to all this curious wagons had been seen to back up to the
curb, from which had been taken various odd-looking bundles; these were
laid on the dining-room floor, a collection of paint pots, brushes, and
wads of putty being pushed aside to give them room--and with some haste
too, for every one seemed to be working overtime.

As to what went on inside the mansion itself not the most inquisitive
could fathom: no one being permitted to peer even into Pawson's office,
where so large a collection of household goods and gods were sprawled,
heaped, and hung, that it looked as if there had been a fire in the
neighborhood, and this room the only shelter for miles around. Even
Pawson's law books were completely hidden by the overflow and so
were the tables, chairs, and shelves, together with the two wide
window-sills.

Nor did it seem to matter very much to the young attorney as to how or
at what hours of the day or night these several articles arrived. Often
quite late in the evening--and this happened more than once--an old
fellow, pinched and wheezy, would sneak in, uncover a mysterious object
wrapped in a square of stringy calico, fumble in his pocket for a scrap
of paper, put his name at the bottom of it, and sneak out again five,
ten, or twenty dollars better off. Once, as late as eleven o'clock, a
fattish gentleman with a hooked nose and a positive dialect, assisted
another stout member of his race to slide a very large object from out
the tail of a cart. Whereupon there had been an interchange of wisps of
paper between Pawson and the fatter of the two men, the late visitors
bowing and smiling until they reached a street lantern where they
divided a roll of bank-notes between them.

And the delight that Pawson and Gadgem took in it all!--assorting,
verifying, checking off--slapping each other's backs in glee when some
doubtful find was made certain, and growing even more excited on the
days when Harry and Kate would drive or ride in from Moorlands--almost
every day of late--tie the horse and carry-all, or both saddle-horses,
to St. George's tree-boxes, and at once buckle on their armor.

This, rendered into common prose, meant that Harry, after a prolonged
consultation with Pawson and Gadgem, would shed his outer coat, the
spring being now far advanced, blossoms out and the weather warm--and
that Kate would tuck her petticoats clear of her dear little feet and
go pattering round, her sleeves rolled up as far as they would go, her
beautiful arms bare almost to her shoulders--her hair smothered in a
brown barege veil to keep out the dust--the most bewitching parlor-maid
you or anybody else ever laid eyes on. Then would follow such a carrying
up of full baskets and carrying down of empty ones; such a spreading of
carpets and rugs; such an arranging of china and glass; such a placing
of andirons, fenders, shovels, tongs, and bellows; hanging of pictures,
curtains, and mirrors--old and new; moving in of sofas, chairs, and
rockers; making up of beds with fluted frills on the pillows--a silk
patchwork quilt on St. George's bed and cotton counterpanes for Jemima
and Todd!

And the secrecy maintained by everybody! Pawson might have been stone
deaf and entirely blind for all the information you could twist out of
him--and a lot of people tried. And as to Gadgem--the dumbest oyster in
Cherrystone Creek was a veritable magpie when it came to his giving the
precise reason why the Temple Mansion was being restored from
top to bottom and why all its old furniture, fittings, and
trappings--(brand-new ones when they couldn't be found in the pawn shops
or elsewhere)--were being gathered together within its four walls. When
anybody asked Kate--and plenty of people did--she would throw her head
back and laugh so loud and so merrily and so musically, that you would
have thought all the birds in Kennedy Square park were still welcoming
the spring. When you asked Harry he would smile and wink and perhaps
keep on whispering to Pawson or Gadgem whose eyes were glued to a list
which had its abiding place in Pawson's top drawer.

Outside of these four conspirators--yes, six--for both Todd and Jemima
were in it, only a very few were aware of what was really being done.
The colonel of course knew, and so did Harry's mother--and so did old
Alec who had to clap his hand over his mouth to keep from snickering
out loud at the breakfast table when he accidentally overheard what
was going on--an unpardonable offence--(not the listening, but the
laughing). In fact everybody in the big house at Moorlands knew, for
Alec spread it broadcast in the kitchen and cabins--everybody EXCEPT ST.
GEORGE.

Not a word reached St. George--not a syllable. No one of the house
servants would have spoiled the fun, and certainly no one of the great
folks. It was only when his visit to Moorlands was over and he had
driven into town and had walked up his own front steps, that the true
situation in all its glory and brilliancy dawned upon him.

The polished knobs, knocker, and the perfect level and whiteness of the
marble steps first caught his eye; then the door swung open and Jemima
in white apron and bandanna stood bowing to the floor, Todd straight as
a ramrod in a new livery and a grin on his face that cut it in two, with
Kate and Harry hidden behind them, suffocating from suppressed laughter.

"Why, you dear Jemima! Howdy--... Why, who the devil sent that old
table back, Todd, and the hall rack and--What!" Here he entered the
dining-room. Everything was as he remembered it in the old days. "Harry!
Kate!--Why--" then he broke down and dropped into a chair, his eyes
still roaming around the room taking in every object, even the loving
cup, which Mr. Kennedy had made a personal point of buying back from
the French secretary, who was gracious enough to part with it when
he learned the story of its enforced sale--each and every one of
them--ready to spring forward from its place to welcome him!

"So this," he stammered out--"is what you have kept me up at Moorlands
for, is it? You never say a word to me--and--Oh, you children!--you
children! Todd, did you ever see anything like it?--my guns--and the
loving cup--and the clock, and--Come here you two blessed things and
let me get my arms around you! Kiss me, Kate--and Harry, my son--give
me your hand. No, don't say a word--don't mind me--I'm all knocked out
and--"

Down went his face in his hands and he in a heap in the chair; then he
stiffened and gave a little shiver to his elbows in the effort to keep
himself from going completely to pieces, and scrambled to his feet
again, one arm around Kate's neck, his free hand in Harry's.

"Take me everywhere and show me everything. Todd, go and find Mr. Pawson
and see if Mr. Gadgem is anywhere around; they've had something to do
with this"--here his eyes took in Todd--"You damned scoundrel, who the
devil rigged you out in that new suit?"

"Marse Harry done sont me to de tailor. See dem buttons?--but dey
ain't nuthin' to what's on the top shelf--you'll bust yo'self wide open
a-laughin', Marse George, when ye sees what's in dar--you gotter come
wid me--please Mistis an' Marse Harry, you come too. Dis way--"

Todd was full to bursting. Had his grin been half an inch wider his ears
would have dropped off.

"An' fore ye look at dem shelves der's annuder thing I gotter tell
ye;--an' dat is dat the dogs--all fo' oh em is comin' in the mawnin'.
Mister Floyd's coach-man done tole me so," and with a jerk and a whoop,
completely ignoring his master's exclamation of joy over the return
of his beloved setters, the darky threw back the door of the little
cubby-hole of a room where the Black Warrior and his brethren had once
rested in peace, and pointed to a row of erect black bottles backed by
another of recumbent ones.

"Look at dat wine, will ye, Marse George," he shouted, "all racked up on
dern shelves? Dat come f'om Mister Talbot Rutter wid dis yere cyard--"
and he handed it out.

St. George reached over, took it from his hand, and read it aloud:

"With the compliments of an old friend, who sends you herewith a few
bottles of the Jefferson and some Sercial and old Port--and a basket or
two of Royal Brown Sherry--nothing like your own, but the best he could
scare up."

Soon the newly polished and replated knocker began to get in its
liveliest work: "Mrs. Richard Horn's compliments, and would St. George
be pleased to accept a basket of Maryland biscuit and a sallylunn
just out of the oven." Mrs. Bowdoin's compliments with three brace of
ducks--"a little late in the season, my dear St. George, but they
are just up from Currytuck where Mr. Bowdoin has had extremely good
luck--for Mr. Bowdoin." "Mrs. Cheston's congratulations, and would Mr.
Temple do her the honor of placing on his sideboard an old Accomack
County ham which her cook had baked that morning and which should have
all the charm and flavor of the State which had given him birth--"
and last a huge basket of spring roses from Miss Virginia Clendenning,
accompanied by a card bearing the inscription--"You don't deserve them,
you renegade," and signed--"Your deserted and heart-broken sweetheart."
All of which were duly spread out on the sideboard, together with one
lone bottle to which was attached an envelope.

Before the day was over half the club had called--Richard acting master
of ceremonies--Kate and old Prim--(he seemed perfectly contented with
the way everything had turned out)--doing the honors with St. George.
Pawson had also put in an appearance and been publicly thanked--a mark
of St. George's confidence and esteem which doubled his practice before
the year was out, and Gadgem--

No, Gadgem did not put in an appearance. Gadgem got as far as the hall
and looked in, and, seeing all the great people thronging about St.
George, would have sneaked out again to await some more favorable
occasion had not Harry's sharp eyes discovered the top of his scraggly
head over the shoulders of some others, and darted towards him, and when
he couldn't be made to budge, had beckoned to St. George, who came on
a run and shook Gadgem's hand so heartily and thanked him in so loud
a voice--(everybody in the hall heard him)--that he could only
sputter--"Didn't do a thing, sir--no, sir--and if I--" and then,
overwhelmed, shot out of the door and down the steps and into Pawson's
office where he stood panting, saying to himself--"I'll be tuckered if
I ain't happier than I--yes--by Jingo, I am. JIMminy-CRIMminy what a man
he is!"

And so the day passed and the night came and the neighbors took their
leave, and Harry escorted Kate back to Seymours' and the tired knocker
gave out and fell asleep, and at last Todd said good-night and stole
down to Jemima, and St. George found himself once more in his easy
chair, his head in his hand, his eyes fixed on the dead coals of a past
fire.

As the echo of Todd's steps faded away and he began to realize that
he was alone, there crept over him for the first time in years the
comforting sense that he was once more under his own roof--his again and
all that it covered--all that he loved; even his beloved dogs. He left
his chair and with a quick indrawing of his breath, as if he had just
sniffed the air from some open sea, stretched himself to his full
height. There he stood looking about him, his shapely fingers patting
his chest; his eyes wandering over the room, first with a sweeping
glance, and then resting on each separate object as it nodded to him
under the glow of the candles.

He had come into his possessions once more. Not that the very belongings
made so much difference as his sense of pride in their ownership. They
had, too, in a certain way regained for him his freedom--freedom to go
and come and do as he pleased untrammelled by makeshifts and humiliating
exposures and concealments. Best of all, they had given him back
his courage, bracing the inner man, strengthening his beliefs in his
traditions and in the things that his race and blood stood for.

Then as a flash of lightning reveals from out black darkness the
recurrent waves of a troubled sea, there rushed over him the roll and
surge of the events which had led up to his rehabilitation. Suddenly a
feeling of intense humiliation and profound gratitude swept through him.
He raised his arms, covered his face with his hands, and stood swaying;
forcing back his tears; muttering to himself: "How good they have
been--how good, how good! All mine once more--wonderful--wonderful!"
With a resolute bracing of his shoulders and a brave lift of his chin,
he began a tour of the room, stopping before each one of his beloved
heirlooms and treasures--his precious gun that Gadgem had given up--(the
collector coveted it badly as a souvenir, and got it the next day from
St. George, with his compliments)--the famous silver loving cup with
an extra polish Kirk had given it; his punch bowl--scarf rings and
knick-knacks and the furniture and hangings of various kinds. At last he
reached the sideboard, and bending over reread the several cards
affixed to the different donations--Mrs. Cheston's, Mrs. Horn's, Miss
Clendenning's, and the others. His eye now fell on the lone bottle--this
he had not heretofore noticed--and the note bearing Mr. Kennedy's
signature. "I send you back, St. George, that last bottle of old
Madeira, the Black Warrior of 1810--the one you gave me and which we
were to share together. I hadn't the heart to drink my half without
you and so here is the whole and my warmest congratulations on your
home-coming and long life to you!"

Picking up the quaint bottle, he passed his hand tenderly over its
crusted surface, paused for an instant to examine the cork, and held
it closer to the light that he might note its condition. There he stood
musing, his mind far away, his fingers caressing its sides. All
the aroma of the past; all the splendor of the old regime--all its
good-fellowship, hospitality, and courtesy--that which his soul
loved--lay imprisoned under his hand. Suddenly one of his old-time
quizzical smiles irradiated his face: "By Jove!--just the thing!" he
cried joyously, "it will take the place of the one Talbot didn't open!"

With a mighty jerk of the bell cord he awoke the echoes below stairs.

Todd came on the double quick:

"Todd."

"Yes, Marse George."

"Todd, here's the last bottle of the 1810. Lay it flat on the top shelf
with the cork next the wall. We'll open it at Mr. Harry's wedding."

[THE END]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Kennedy Square, by F. Hopkinson Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KENNEDY SQUARE ***

***** This file should be named 4746.txt or 4746.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/4/4746/

Produced by Duncan Harrod

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
