Project Gutenberg's The Spirit of Contradiction, by Charles Riviere Dufresny

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **

Title: The Spirit of Contradiction

Author: Charles Riviere Dufresny

Translator: Frank J. Morlock

Posting Date: August 4, 2012 [EBook #4752]
Release Date: September, 2003
First Posted: March 12, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SPIRIT OF CONTRADICTION ***




Produced by Dagny and Frank J. Morlock










This Etext is for private use only. No republication for profit in
print or other media may be made without the express consent of the
Copyright Holder. The Copyright Holder is especially concerned about
performance rights in any media on stage, cinema, or television, or
audio or any other media, including readings for which an entrance fee
or the like is charge. Permissions should be addressed to: Frank
Morlock, 6006 Greenbelt Rd, #312, Greenbelt, MD 20770, USA or
frankmorlock@msn.com. Other works by this author may be found at
http://www.cadytech.com/dumas/personnage.asp?key=130



                     THE SPIRIT OF CONTRADICTION

                            BY DUFRESNY

                       Translated and adapted
                         By Frank J. Morlock



Characters            French names

Mr. Townly            M. Oronte
Mrs. Townly           Mme. Oronte
Lucas, the gardener   Lucas
Angelica              Angelique
Edward Richly         Valere
Mr. Nelson            M. Thibaudois
Lawyer                Notary
Lackey                Lackey

Six men, two women



The scene is a garden before Mr. Townly's house in London. Lucas, the
gardener enters in a rage.

Lucas:
To hell with that bitch and her contradictory nature!

Townly:
There, there, Lucas, softly.

Lucas:
No, sir. I can no longer put up with your wife's temperament.

Townly:
You have to forgive her, because the spirit of contradiction is
natural to her.

Lucas:
When she contradicts you like crazy,--you, her husband--that's
natural, huh? Well, maybe. But it isn't natural that she should
contradict my garden.

Townly:
Patience, Lucas, patience.

Lucas:
To be perfectly frank I don't like being gardener here--or anywhere
there are women. A woman in a garden causes more damage than a million
hedgehogs.

Townly:
You're right and my wife is in the wrong.

Lucas:
Everything I've planted is torn up. She's replanted all the weeds I
tore out when I was grafting. She said they're wildflowers. Then when
I planted the cabbages she said she now wants lettuces. Nothing is
done by her order that doesn't reverse something I've done. Yesterday
she half buried my prunes under melons. I believe, God pardon me! that
it would be better for me to plant watermelons in the grape arbor.

Townly:
She's unreasonable, but let's forget about that, Lucas. Let's talk
about marrying my daughter. I need your advice about that matter.

Lucas:
I haven't got an idea in my head because I've been fighting with
Madam. That puts me in an uncultivated state--me and my garden. And
besides, she's just discharged me.

Townly:
Don't worry about it. Never mind. I'll take care of you.

Lucas:
How are you going to take care of me against her--when you can't take
care of yourself? Hey! did I ever tell you that you're too easy with
her? As soon as she says yes or no, you say the same.

Townly:
What do you want, Lucas? I love my wife. She has no other pleasure
than to do exactly the opposite of what I want. So I provide her with
that small satisfaction.

Lucas:
You do that if that's what you like. But don't worry, her humour is
too settled for it to give her any satisfaction. So much for that,
sir. As to your daughter, I'll be what help I can--but what do you
intend to do?

Townly:
Well, you see I've got to get my wife to agree--

Lucas:
Well, it's not up to me. I've tried to revive your spirit, but you
won't do anything against her.

Townly:
Look, you're more imagination than I do. And more sense than
philosophers--who haven't any, really.

Lucas:
Wait, sir. There are peasants who are sharp about acquiring money--but
my philosophy is to govern the world like a careful gardener. You for
example, want to marry your daughter but you don't know to whom. But
me, I've seen it all in my garden. As I tell Madam, trees benefit from
the sun; plants from the shade. So you see if your daughter is ready
to benefit from marriage, your wife will put her in a convent.

Townly:
You've said it exactly. If my daughter wishes to get married she'd
better not show it.

Lucas:
Madam has already tried to worm it out of me. "But Lucas," she said to
me, "what do you think of this marriage?" "I think nothing, Madam."
"But my daughter, for her part--" "Nothing." "But my husband, for his
part--" Silence. "And because they know I can't breathe when I'm
contradicted, they hide it from me. But it won't work. And I have
tricks for figuring out when I'm being contradicted. It's a blind
alley." What a woman. Very well. Leave it to me to put everything
right. She's coming.

Townly:
I will wait for you in the arbor.

(Exit Townly)

Lucas:
I'd be very much put out to leave the employ of that bourgeois. His
bourgeois money shines forth more splendidly than the money of
noblemen who have a great deal more.

Mrs. Townly: (entering)
Have you just put yourself under the protection of my husband? He can
tell me to keep you, but I am not going to obey him. Come quickly,
give me the keys and then I will give you your wages.

Lucas: (in a whining tone)
I am very upset about losing my situation with you.

(Then roaring)
Ha! Ha! Ha!

Mrs. Townly:
You are laughing, eh?

Lucas: (crying)
It overwhelms me.

(Roaring)
Ha, ha, ha!

Mrs. Townly:
What are you getting at?

Lucas:
Nothing, nothing, ha, ha, ha.

(Sadly)
Here, Madam, I am giving you the keys.

Mrs. Townly:
I know why you're laughing.

Lucas:
Ha, ha, ha, ha. I can't hold myself in. How nice to be thrown out. I'm
not afraid of you. Ha, ha. I laugh like a merry go round at what you
have done. Ha, ha, ha. Quite frankly, this is something that I
expected for a long time from your difficult temperament and I hope
you are inexorable. I have said to myself, if Madam sees that I want
to take my leave, she won't hear of it. If I ask for my wages, she'll
let me fish for them rather than be of my opinion. Oh, it's much
better if I anger her so she will throw me out.

Mrs. Townly:
What! Who says I'm throwing you out?

Lucas:
I have quarrelled with you, ha, ha, ha. I'm giving you back your keys
willingly enough.

Mrs. Townly:
Oh, I see. To get even you have decided to leave me without a
gardener.

Lucas:
That's precisely what I'm going to do.

Mrs. Townly:
You can go when I have another.

Lucas:
You can have three right away.

Mrs. Townly:
Stay at least until tomorrow.

Lucas:
Tomorrow you'll no longer be in the mood to throw me out. I want to
quit today.

Mrs. Townly:
No! It won't be said that I am your dupe. You wish to leave me and I
do not wish you to leave.

Lucas:
One cannot keep people against their will. And you are of such a
disposition.

Mrs. Townly:
Listen! Is my disposition really so horrible?

Lucas:
More than I care to suffer.

Mrs. Townly:
At bottom, I'm really no good?

Lucas:
To be fair; I know that it isn't from malice that you torment the
whole world--but your will is naturally contrary and never agrees with
the will of any other person.

Mrs. Townly:
You hold a strange opinion of me--for of all the women in the world,
there isn't one who contradicts less than I do.

Lucas:
There's nobody like you, it's true.

Mrs. Townly:
I never contradict except for good reason. But I don't like being
contradicted. For example, I'm angry with you for your obstinacy. Why
do you obstinately hide from me that which I wish to know? Don't I
know that you are the advisor, the oracle of my husband? Without a
doubt he has taken you into his confidence in the plan he has for
Angelica.

Lucas:
Hey! He did speak to me about that.

Mrs. Townly:
Ha! Tell me about it.

Lucas:
I considered the matter of Miss Angelica very thoroughly.

Mrs. Townly:
Yes.

Lucas:
I know what I would tell myself about that matter.

Mrs. Townly:
Well, Lucas?

Lucas:
But my thoughts, your husband's thoughts, your daughter's thoughts--
I'm not going to tell you. Not even if you cry.

Mrs. Townly:
Lucas, I beg you, tell me.

Lucas:
You're not going to find out a thing. I see you coming. You're always
trying to find out the yes and the no. I will marry her. I will not
marry her. What did he say? What did she say? and all that just so you
can see the road others are taking so you can cross them.

Mrs. Townly:
On the contrary, I am always going the right way, and each of you
turns away from me from malice. And in a word I know they have made
some plan contrary to mine. But I see my daughter coming and I must
talk to her again. Halloo, Angelica, halloo. Come here for a minute.

Lucas: (exiting)
I am going to see Mr. Townly in the arbor.

Angelica: (entering)
What do you want me for, mother?

Mrs. Townly:
To speak to you again, daughter.

Angelica:
I'm always ready to listen to you.

Mrs. Townly:
I can complain about you every way because you are a dissimulator,
while I am good, and reasonable. Since I have to dispose of you one
way or another I want to consult your inclinations. Speak sincerely
for once in your life. Do you want to marry or not?

Angelica:
I've already told you mother, I am duty bound not to have any will in
this matter.

Mrs. Townly:
But you do nevertheless--admit it. I have no end other than your
satisfaction. Open your heart to me; speak naturally. You think that
marriage can make a girl happy?

Angelica:
I see some wives who praise their situation.

Mrs. Townly:
Ah, now I begin to understand.

Angelica:
But I see others who complain.

Mrs. Townly:
I don't understand you. Speak to me a little. You've seen this
newlywed who goes from door to door boasting about her good luck. Do
you hear her with pleasure?

Angelica:
Yes, indeed, mother.

Mrs. Townly:
You wish then, to be married?

Angelica:
Not at all. For this same woman the other day afflicted by her
complaints the same assembly that she had recently regaled the day
before with praises of her husband.

Mrs. Townly:
So you mean you're afraid to take the risk of getting married?

Angelica:
I didn't say that, mother.

Mrs. Townly:
What are you saying? Either you think marriage is good or bad--you
long for it or you dread it.

Angelica:
I don't long for it and I don't dread it. I've only voiced some simple
reflections without taking one side or the other. The pros and cons
seem pretty well balanced to me. That's what has suspended my choice
up to now.

Mrs. Townly:
Your indecision begins to make me impatient. You have too much
character to remain in a situation so indolent.

Angelica:
That's the situation a young girl ought to remain in until her mother
can decide for her without difficulty.

Mrs. Townly:
But if I decided to marry you?

Angelica:
My reasons for marrying would become stronger for the reason that my
duty would make me forget all the contrary arguments.

Mrs. Townly:
And if I decide to keep you single.

Angelica:
Then the reasons against marriage would appear to me to be the best.

Mrs. Townly:
What talk, what a tractable spirit. I cannot get it out of you. What?
You won't give me the pleasure of knowing your inclination.

Angelica:
My inclination is to follow yours.

Mrs. Townly:
She won't give up her opinion.

Angelica:
I will obey you to the death.

Mrs. Townly:
What obstinacy, what an opinionated--

Angelica:
It's not obstinacy.

Mrs. Townly:
What, you contradict me without stopping?

Angelica:
To wish what you wish is to contradict you?

Mrs. Townly:
Yes, yes, yes, because I want you to express your will and you won't
do it.

Angelica:
But Mom!

Mrs. Townly:
You make me beside myself. Shut up. They will all say I'm wrong again.
Now it's you--yes, it's your spirit, one can call it that indeed--a
spirit of contradiction. I don't know how I can live with you. A
daughter like this is a real domestic calamity. I want to get rid of
you for sure. Yes, miss--I will marry you off today. The two
candidates are Edward Richly on one side and Mr. Nelson on the other.
I will not give you the honor, I will not give you the choice. You
will take the one I choose. I will speak to your father one more time.
If his ideas are reasonable, I will agree. If not, no.

(Exit Mrs. Townly in a rage)

Angelica: (sighing)
What violence is necessary to turn me into a dissimulator with all the
world. I am naturally sincere. But where my mother is concerned I
don't dare confide in any one if I'm in a situation where I can see
what's happening.

(Enter Mr. Edward Richly)

Edward:
Here I am again young lady, and I've resolved not to return to Oxford
without having first had an explanation with you. I swear to you your
manners make me beside myself. I am furious, worse, I'm no longer in
possession of myself. When I think that since the last time I came
here neither my love, nor my respect, nor my prayers, nor my
reproaches, have succeeded in getting one word out of you. (pause) I
can't make any sense out of it. When I spoke to you of the most
violent passion that ever was, you listened to me with a tranquility,
a languor that was incomprehensible. For women react either with love
or scorn or anger to such emotions. Just Heavens, what am I to think
of a silence so obstinate?

Angelica:
Only that I am prudent and nothing more.

Edward:
Do you approve of my love or forbid it?

Angelica:
I can't say.

Edward:
Always the same indifferent tone.

Angelica:
You haven't been able to tell whether I have any inclination for you,
right?

Edward:
That's what upsets me.

Angelica:
Nor have you seen any aversion?

Edward:
No indeed. But that's not satisfactory.

Angelica:
It satisfies me. For I have need to be impenetrable to your curiosity.
Didn't I tell you that I have formed a project to secure my freedom,
and that to implement this project, it is necessary that my mother be
unable to tell whether I love you or someone else? My father must also
be kept from the truth--and therefore you also must be kept in the
dark--for if you know it, my father, my mother, and any one who sees
you will be well informed.

Edward:
You're trying to tell me I'm indiscreet?

Angelica:
No, but your vivacity takes the place of indiscretion.

Edward:
I know how to control my temperament. For example, from the moment I
saw you I felt possessed to such a degree that you wouldn't think it
possible. And I swear to you that a word of enlightenment--one little
word from you, will make me just as tranquil as you are.

Angelica:
But suppose the word is that I have no intention of marrying you?

Edward:
Ah, so that is what you dare to tell me? How can I listen to such
infamy? Just Heaven!

Angelica:
You're not tranquil: would you feel better if I promised never to
marry anyone but you?

Edward:
If you promised me that--ah! I'd die of delight. Yes, my joy would be
so great--

Angelica:
So that you would publish that, too. See how your transports of joy or
despair give away everything! They would divulge my secret, and from
them my mother would know what I want to do: then she would cross me
furiously. Thus I find that I am wise to keep you ignorant of my true
intentions.

Edward:
I can't be ignorant of them, ingrate. They are so plain. So I tell
you, I've just learned you will be betrothed to Mr. Nelson, today.

Angelica:
That is possibly true.

Edward:
And that's why I came here.

Angelica:
Well go away, then.

Edward:
And that is what has made me understand all your politics. I see
you've managed me up to this point because I am friends with your
mother. You fear that, irritated by your refusal, I will prevent this
marriage.

Angelica:
Prevent this marriage! I believe you are a very gallant man to prevent
me from securing my advantage.

Edward:
No, cruel woman, no. Don't worry. If you are happy with another, I
will die, but I will not prevent you.

Angelica:
You are ruining my plans already. But I do believe that if I had no
inclination for you, you wouldn't try to force my feelings. Do what I
want you to do. Don't see either my father or my mother today. I
forbid you to appear here. So go, I beg you.

Edward:
I obey you blindly, but if you betray me--

Angelica:
I cannot betray you, because I've promised you nothing.

Edward:
If you betray me you are the most cruel, the most--

Angelica:
Oh, if you are going to berate me, wait till I've done something. And
I will do something very soon perhaps. Don't be so impatient.

Edward:
WHAT! You mean--

Angelica:
Here is my father. Leave quickly.

(Exit Edward)

(Enter Mr. Townly from another direction)

Townly:
Rejoice, little girl, rejoice. You will be married according to my
wishes. I have triumphed and put it over on your mother.

Angelica:
Ah, poor papa, I am afraid indeed that--

Townly: (dancing around)
I put it over on her I tell you. She just insisted herself that I do
what I wish. And I had to appear not to like it for fear she'd change
her mind.

Angelica:
Once she gets an idea, action soon follows.

Townly:
Yes, my darling daughter, the great wealth of Mr. Nelson is as
pleasing to my wife as it is to myself. A rich merchant is a treasure
for a girl like you who hasn't a romantic thought in her head. True,
he's a bit rustic and crude, but he's open, honest.

Angelica:
I pardon this crudeness in favor of his honesty.

Townly:
Some say he lacks good qualities, but I find he has many. If only he
could get away from the habit of saying things which have neither rhyme
nor reason. He's a little too familiar, especially with women he's
never met before.

(Enter Mr. Nelson sporting a large gold vest, huge cuffs, a big belly;
his fingers are covered with rings)

Nelson:
Hey, neighbour--well, well, your old lady says that--what didn't she
say, that woman? Ha! There's your daughter. Well, well, when shall we
get married, honey?

Angelica:
I have no idea.

Townly:
Not everything's ready yet.

Nelson:
Ready, ready, I'm ready. Yes, yes, Angie, I give you my word. Take the
biggest ring from my finger--it's yours.

Angelica:
We aren't at the altar yet.

Townly:
We have to consider.

Nelson:
Let's consider, let's consider.

Angelica:
We must take precautions.

Nelson: (grabbing her hand)
Take, take.

Angelica:
While you are deliberating it's better that I stay with my mother.

Townly:
Go quickly. We haven't any time to lose.

Nelson:
Time is pressing, yes. (squeezing her) Wait, wait, I want to see you
again. It makes me feel good. Let's talk about any old thing. Tell me
a story.

Angelica:
What sort of story do you want me to tell you?

Nelson:
Well, tell me, tell me--you're cute, sweety--tell me a little story--

Angelica:
It's time that I should go--

Nelson: (still holding her by the arm)
Ho, I want you to tell me-- Ah, I love you with all my heart--tell me
a little love story.

Angelica:
You love me, and I'm obliged to you for that. Story's over.

Nelson:
Well, the story's over. Why did you tell me that story? Tell me
instead--

Townly: (separating them)
Oh, let her go. It really is important that her mother not see her
with us.

Nelson:
Go then. Go darling. Get ready to be my wife.

(Exit Angelica)

Townly:
Let's discuss a little how we are going to manage my wife. For that's
the difficulty in our little business.

Nelson:
What's the problem?

Townly:
Not really a problem, but--

Nelson:
Because it's not a problem for me--

Townly:
Do you have some expedient to--?

Nelson:
Sure, sure. Leave that to me. Tell me, what are you going to do?

Townly:
That's the problem, I tell you.

Nelson:
You, you, you, are a poor planner. Nothing is so easy.

Townly:
Instruct me then!

Nelson:
Nothing is so easy. Now how do you intend to go about it?

Townly:
That's what puzzles me.

Nelson:
But, but, but, me too-- She's a terrible woman, your wife.

Townly:
I see we're both too clever and cunning to figure out what to do. But,
by luck, I have a gardener who has more clever ideas that anybody in
the world. He should be a statesman. A real good head on his
shoulders.

Nelson:
I've got a good head, too. Have him here and we'll figure it out.

Townly:
Here he is now.

(Enter Lucas)

Townly:
Well, Lucas, have you been thinking about our business--have you
considered what I said to you?

Lucas:
Shh!

Townly:
Shh?

Nelson:
Shh!

Lucas:
This gentleman here wishes to marry Miss Angelica, Angelica also,
Madam does, you do, and so do I. So the matter's settled.

Nelson:
See--it's settled.

Lucas:
I say it's not settled. For from the moment she sees that we want it,
too--she won't stand for it, not her!

Townly:
That's the trouble.

Nelson:
That's the trouble.

Lucas:
Oh, I ask you if--

Townly:
Certainly.

Nelson:
What a question.

Lucas:
I ask you then if she were unaware that we agree--

Nelson:
That's a good idea.

Townly:
Very good, Lucas.

Nelson:
That's my advice.

Lucas:
That's good advice. You must tell everybody so that your opinion's
spread by rumor. For my part, I know that your wife's temper is like a
whirligig that's always turning one way then another in the wind.
Therefore, we must make the wind appear to blow from the West so
she'll blow to the East. Ah, there must be two winds blowing about
Miss Angelica. Nelson on one side, and Young Richly on the other. We
have only to say that it's Richly we want and she will force this
gentleman on us just to cross us. That's my pronouncement.

Townly:
That will tie it up.

Nelson:
That's the trick. Here are a hundred pounds, Lucas.

Lucas:
It's necessary to tie two knots to do the job right. For there remains
the little matter of putting Madam in the mood to cross you.

Townly:
Let's try to do it immediately--our lawyer has been called, the
marriage contract is ready.

Lucas:
Yes, but to finish this properly she must be put into a rage. I know
the secret of irritating her. When she comes to inspect my garden I
will pretend not to say a word. Instead, I will scrape the ground with
my shovel--that will infuriate her. I will shake my head--she'll take
that for opposition and begin to argue; the fire will ignite, and when
her spirit is aflame--she will remember that she is an honest woman
and that she told you and you deceived her. And here she is now. I
will get her going, then you come in and announce you've decided on
Young Richly.

(Exit Nelson and Townly, then enter Mrs. Townly)

Mrs. Townly:
You were there quite a while with my husband. Apparently, he knows the
one he wants for a son-in-law. Is it Mr. Richly or Mr. Nelson, as I
advised him?

Lucas: (turning his hat)
HMMM!

Mrs. Townly:
You turn your hat. That means my husband didn't take my advice.

Lucas: (shaking his head)
PRRR!

Mrs. Townly:
Mr. Nelson, you say is not to my husband's taste--and he prefers
Richly?

Lucas:
Heh, heh, heh.

Mrs. Townly:
Because he is younger? Or because Richly is more pleasing to my
daughter?

Lucas:
Oh, well--

Mrs. Townly:
What! You think that the solid wealth of Mr. Nelson is not
preferable--

Lucas:
Well--

Mrs. Townly:
I get mad when I hear nonsense like this.

Lucas:
But, but, but--

Mrs. Townly:
False reasoning, all of it.

Lucas: (striking the ground with his foot)
The devil!

Mrs. Townly:
And everything you have told me is what my husband told you?

Lucas:
Pah fan goo.

Mrs. Townly:
So you've told me word for word everything he said. Well, let me tell
you, in spite of him--

Lucas:
Han.

Mrs. Townly:
Yes, in spite of him. In his teeth.

Lucas:
Pao.

Mrs. Townly:
Yes. He takes a high handed tone like that with me.

Lucas:
Pa, ta, ta.

Mrs. Townly:
He will see that I am the boss.

Lucas:
Puff.

Mrs. Townly:
Oh, that's too much. Husband, you cross me, you insult me, you outrage
me!

(Lucas signals Townly to come in and places Townly beside his wife;
Lucas exits)

Mrs. Townly: (seeing him after a moment in Lucas' place)
Continue, sir, continue. I really want to know where you get the
things you say to me.

Townly:
I didn't say a word.

Mrs. Townly:
Go ahead, be brave. It takes a lot to get me worked up.

Townly:
It's true that I've come to speak to you.

Mrs. Townly:
To speak to me without reason, without sense, that Mr. Nelson wouldn't
be good for my daughter.

Townly:
Still, Richly--

Mrs. Townly:
Don't say another word--

Townly:
I ask you to consider Richly.

Mrs. Townly:
No, sir. Richly presents nothing worthy of my consideration.

Townly:
Well, for my sake then--

Mrs. Townly:
>From today, I give my daughter to Mr. Nelson.

Townly:
But the reason.

Mrs. Townly:
The reason is that I wish it. And to prove that I am right it's going
to happen as I wish and immediately. Mr. Nelson is here. Get ready to
sign the papers.

(Exit Mrs. Townly to the house, and after a moment enter Lucas)

Townly:
Well--did I play my part well?

Lucas:
Like an expert this time. She is going to do what we want willingly
and for the first time in her life.

Townly:
There--is the lawyer here?

Lucas:
I'll go see. And when I see her, I am going to tell her I like Richly
better. To add a little fuel to the fire.

(Exit Lucas)

(Enter Angelica)

Townly:
We've done wonderfully, daughter.

Angelica:
I've heard. I was under the swing with the lawyer--he's just come.
It's time and he's on schedule.

Townly:
I am going to speak to him. Go quickly and rejoin your mother.

(Exit Townly)

Angelica:
Things are at the point where I wish them. And the measures I have
taken will succeed. Watch and see what happens.

(Exit Angelica; after a moment enter Mrs. Townly and a Lackey)

Mrs. Townly:
Tell me child, where did you get this letter from? Who is your master?

Lackey:
I am forbidden to tell you that--and to prevent you from forcing it
out of me, I am leaving right away.

(Exit Lackey)

Mrs. Townly:
Now what's this mystery?

(Reading low)
Hmm, hmm, hmm. "I advise you that your daughter is in communication
with Mr. Nelson and wants to marry him and to make you sign the
wedding contract, they have a lawyer ready who will appear as if by
chance." Indeed, that's the lawyer I just saw with Angelica. The
warning is obviously true. "In a word your husband pretended not to
want Nelson so you would prefer him." So! Mr. Nelson is the choice of
my husband.

(Enter Lucas and Townly)

Lucas:
Courage, sir. Tell her quickly that I am against Mr. Nelson.

Townly:
Listen, my dear wife--

Lucas:
I tell you that--

Townly:
I want you to know that--

Lucas: (to Mrs. Townly)
That I and your husband--

Townly:
You say that you want Mr. Nelson for a son-in-law, right? I tell you
that my daughter doesn't want him.

Lucas:
The matter is a little delicate.

Mrs. Townly:
It isn't my daughter's will or mine that ought to decide--it's yours
my husband--and in this and in everything else, you are master.

Lucas:
As for me, I think--

Mrs. Townly:
You're a good advisor, Lucas, and I willingly listen to your advice.

Townly:
In a word, my wife, you have proposed Mr. Nelson to me, and I don't
want him.

Mrs. Townly:
Let's speak softly. I love peace and harmony. I will do whatever you
find most agreeable.

Townly: (aloud)
What's agreeable to me is

(low)
not to have such complaisance about this.

Mrs. Townly:
To me it's to have a husband that I love and respect.

Townly:
You're joking, but I tell you Mr. Nelson is not to my taste.

Mrs. Townly:
Your taste determines mine and I tell you I won't give another thought
to Mr. Nelson.

Townly:
Lucas?

Lucas: (low)
Try harder. Her contradictory spirit isn't on fire yet.

Townly:
Tell me, Madam, are you making fun of me?

Mrs. Townly:
But what makes you think that when I give you my word?

Lucas:
Good! Your word comes and goes like the air.

Mrs. Townly: (sweetly)
Wait till you see.

Lucas:
You can't make up your mind.

Mrs. Townly:
To prove my sincerity and my submission, I am going this moment to
forbid Mr. Nelson to set foot in this house.

(Exit Mrs. Townly)

Townly:
I believe she's going to do it. What should have caused this miracle?

Lucas:
Listen, it must be that--

Townly:
It would be, just my luck. The only time in her life she doesn't
contradict me it's to contradict me.

Lucas:
For her to obey you is not natural.

Townly:
I am going to see what's happening. I still don't believe it.

(Exit Townly)

Nelson: (entering)
Well, well, Lucas. We are going to sign the contract. Here's the money
I promised you--

Lucas:
Madam is going to give you your walking papers--she's looking for you
to do just that.

Nelson:
She doesn't want me, you say?

Lucas:
Something has happened, I don't know exactly what. Wait for me here,
I'm going to see for myself.

(Exit Lucas)

Nelson:
I love waiting for this little Angelica--but I'm joking about that. If
I don't marry her, I can marry at least four others.

(Enter Angelica followed by Edward who is determined to fathom her
tricks)

Nelson:
Well, well, poor girl, it's bad for you. You won't get married.

Angelica:
What an irritating thing.

Nelson:
It makes me mad, but I'm easy. You're crying because you love me, and
that's swell. Don't cry, come on, don't cry. You'll make me do it,
too.

Angelica:
Go quickly, join my father, second him, speak together to my mother.
Beg her. Press her.

Nelson:
Shh! Shh! There's your other lover who's listening.

Angelica:
Ha--are you there, Mr. Richly?

Edward:
What I've just heard, what you've just said, has exposed you to me.
The lawyer I've just been with proved sufficiently your betrayal, but
you aren't worthy of my reproaches. I will take the way of scorn and
silence.

(Shouting)
Don't wait for me, nor beg, nor reproach--ingrate! No, faithless one,
no traitress--

Nelson:
Do you call this the way of silence?

Edward:
Just Heaven--

Nelson:
What are you complaining of? That she promised you something?

Edward:
Nothing at all, Mr. Nelson. I would like to know indeed, sir, by what
right you insult me? How, I beg you, can you have any hope? First of
all, my father has as much money as you--and the little merit that you
have--

Nelson: (showing his hand)
Why, do you see this hand? These five fingers alone are worth more
than all your father's wealth.

Angelica:
For me, I prefer Mr. Nelson's good nature to this wild passion which
you never give up--

Nelson:
Fie! He's crazy in love--like in a novel.

Angelica:
His kind words touch me more than your despairing face.

Nelson:
I've heard it said that women don't care for the affected, but I pity
him. Go young man, go--console yourself. I will lend you some money.

Edward:
Why, damn you, sir--

Angelica: (taking Edward by the arm)
You're beside yourself. Go away, I beg you. I don't like to be
bothered like that.

Nelson:
Hey, me either. I'm going to rejoin your father.

(Low to Angelica)
I order you to get rid of him. Give him his walking papers and come
find me.

(Exit Nelson)

Edward:
Your procedure seems to me so outre that I cannot believe that you are
feigning. I don't flatter myself, but if you were pretending because
Nelson was around--now he is gone--justify yourself!

(Enter Mrs. Townly)

Mrs. Townly: (aside)
My daughter alone with Richly!

Edward:
Justify yourself--or admit you have betrayed me. Speak, we are alone.

Angelica:
I will speak to you just as I spoke in the presence of Mr. Nelson. My
father wants me to marry him and I tell you I am delighted.

Edward:
Oh! I give up. No more explanations. I am going to find your mother.

Angelica:
Go, sir, go, you can tell her that I want no part of you.

Edward: (seeing Mrs. Townly)
Have you heard, Madam? I am betrayed, Madam. For it is no longer time
to hide from you my love for this ingrate--you see she has betrayed
me.

Mrs. Townly:
I feel sorry for you, sir. You see father and daughter plotted against
you and me, too. I enter into your feelings because I always
sympathize with the feelings of others.

Edward:
No. After what she's done, I never wish to speak of her again.

Mrs. Townly:
I swear to you I have no objection to your proposing to my daughter.

Edward:
You propose her to me in vain.

Mrs. Townly:
But to prove to you, a reasonable man, that reason alone guides me in
all I do--I wish to offer you--

Edward:
I refuse your offers, Madam. I am not a man to force her inclinations.

Mrs. Townly:
So that I may have the pleasure of avenging you on my husband, on my
daughter--on all those who conspire to contradict me--I beg you, sir.

Edward:
Can't do it.

Mrs. Townly:
What! You contradict me, too? Oh, I will do so much for you, if you
will marry my daughter!

Angelica:
What! Mother! You wouldn't marry me against my will?

Mrs. Townly:
Against your will, daughter? Don't think of it--because you have no
will, remember?

Angelica:
Alas, when I spoke to you thus, I didn't speak sincerely. Why will you
prevent a rich match with Mr. Nelson?

Mrs. Townly:
He's got more wealth than you deserve.

Angelica:
Hey, mother, I beg you--

Mrs. Townly:
Shut up! I know all your tricks. The lawyer told me everything. You
wanted to betray me. To expose me to the will of a husband! To punish
you I will make you sign the contract you drew up against me. Only,
I'm going to fill in the name of Richly.

(Exit Mrs. Townly)

Edward:
No, Madam, I will never sign. I prefer to die rather than marry your
daughter.

Angelica: (imitating him)
I prefer to die rather than marry your daughter-- You say it very
naturally.

Edward:
As I feel it, ingrate.

Angelica:
And as I wished it. For if you had done it to persuade my mother it
wouldn't have worked for it wouldn't have sounded right. You could not
have deceived her if you hadn't been deceived yourself.

Edward:
Explain yourself.

Angelica:
To make my mother agree to what I want it was also necessary to
deceive my father. He tried to trick her naturally enough, and when I
saw how they were working for Mr. Nelson, by pretending the contrary,
I sent her an anonymous letter explaining what they were up to. And it
did the trick. Seeing all the world against you, she has taken your
part--and wishes to make us marry to contradict them--and you, too.

Edward:
Can what I hear be true? Misfortune overwhelms me, and joy confounds
me. But I don't know which.

Angelica:
I don't want you to show it until after the signature. I fear some
indiscreet transport of joy. No, Edward, don't believe yet that I love
you.

Edward: (wildly)
Ah! Darling, Angelica--divine lady--

Angelica:
Someone's coming. Keep pretending.

(Enter Lucas)

Angelica:
No, Edward, no. I will not be married to you against my will.

Lucas:
No, dammit, it will not be against your will--for you'll marry him
with joy. But it may not happen yet for I doubt you can both scheme
together or that you can pretend to be pretending. Your mother's on
her way, but I've warned you so that you may deceive her.

Angelica:
Ah! Heavens.

Edward:
How wretched you are!

Lucas:
For you it will be wretched. For Madam changes her mind quickly if she
suspects for a minute that you want it too. That's too bad cause, Mr.
Nelson promised me a hundred pounds.

Edward:
You rogue. Why didn't you ask for two hundred from me?

Lucas:
There's no time. Madam knows all. Meanwhile, if I take your money it
will be true that Madam knows all--for dammit she knows nothing.

Angelica:
Ah, my poor Lucas.

Edward:
Wait, take my purse.

Lucas:
And here comes Madam returning. I am going to assist you.

(Enter Mrs. Townly, Mr. Townly, Mr. Nelson, and the lawyer)

Lucas:
Come quickly, Madam, see the young folks are fighting. Come quickly,
separate them. They find everything the other one says enraging--so
much so that I would think they are already married.

Mrs. Townly:
Does my daughter revolt against me! Insolent! You here, too, sir.

(To Nelson)
Leave instantly.

Nelson:
Go, go. I am more complacent than you. You kick me out and I'm
leaving.

Mrs. Townly:
You're a brute.

Nelson:
Goodbye old battle cruiser.

Mrs. Townly:
A booby, a simpleton.

Nelson:
I never contradict anyone.

(Exit Nelson)

Townly:
Really, my dear wife--

Mrs. Townly:
Shut up, my dear husband--

Lawyer:
May I dare explain to you, Madam--

Mrs. Townly:
I am delighted that you are all against Young Richly. He lacked only
you. Give me the contract that I may sign-- (signing) Come, Angelica,
sign after me. Obey me.

Angelica: (signing)
I still can't be married, because my father won't sign, so there.

Mrs. Townly: (to Edward)
To oblige you, sir, I have put a gift for you in the contract.

Edward: (signing)
Hey! I didn't do it because of the gift. Go ahead, sir, don't waste a
minute for fear Madam will change her mind.

(Townly pushed by his wife, signs)

Lawyer:
These proceedings are closed. (Folds up the contract, bows and exits)

(Lucas whispers to Mrs. Townly)

Mrs. Townly:
What do you say?

Lucas:
I wish to say simply that they love each other.

Townly:
And I only wanted to marry her. No matter to whom.

Mrs. Townly:
I've been betrayed.

Angelica:
I throw myself at your feet, mama.

Edward:
A thousand pardons, Madam.

Mrs. Townly:
I will never pardon you in my life.

Townly:
You signed.

Mrs. Townly:
Yes, but I will disinherit her. I will never see my son-in-law again.
I will divorce my husband. I will hang Lucas and the lawyer. I am
going crazy.

(Mrs. Townly runs out in a fury)

Edward:
We'd better bring her back before she does something dangerous.

Townly:
So much for the spirit of contradiction.


CURTAIN










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Spirit of Contradiction, by
Charles Riviere Dufresny

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SPIRIT OF CONTRADICTION ***

***** This file should be named 4752.txt or 4752.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/5/4752/

Produced by Dagny and Frank J. Morlock

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
