The Project Gutenberg EBook of The McNaughtens, by Jean-Francois Regnard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **

Title: The McNaughtens

Author: Jean-Francois Regnard

Translator: Frank J. Morlock

Posting Date: October 31, 2014 [EBook #4977]
Release Date: July, 2004
First Posted: November 4, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MCNAUGHTENS ***




Produced by Dagny and Frank J. Morlock









This Etext is for private use only. No republication for profit in
print or other media may be made without the express consent of the
Copyright Holder. The Copyright Holder is especially concerned about
performance rights in any media on stage, cinema, or television, or
audio or any other media, including readings for which an entrance fee
or the like is charged. Permissions should be addressed to: Frank
Morlock, 6006 Greenbelt Rd, #312, Greenbelt, MD 20770, USA or
frankmorlock@msn.com. Other works by this author may be found at
http://www.cadytech.com/dumas/personnage.asp?key=130



                          THE MCNAUGHTENS

             A play based on the Menechemes of Regnard

              Translated and adapted by F. J. Morlock
                       C 1986 by F. J. Morlock



CHARACTERS

McNaughten
Captain McNaughten
Mr. Hastings, Flavella's father
Flavella, his daughter
Urania, Hastings' older sister
Jenny, Urania's maid
Spruce, the Captain's valet
Mr. Torrington, a solicitor
Squire
Mr. Bronlow, a merchant



ACT I.


Scene I. A street in London. Captain McNaughten comes in, looking for
his valet.

Captain
I am quite beside myself. A curse on Spruce! I think he was born for
the sole purpose of enraging me. I am not going to put up with him any
longer. The scoundrel always tries my patience to the limits. He knows
very well that I am waiting for him on tenterhooks-- But now I see him
coming. Where have you been, rogue? Tell me.

(Spruce enters, carrying a heavy trunk which he first puts down and
then sits on, without responding to the Captain.)

Captain
Speak, reply!

Spruce
For the moment, sir, I have nothing to say. Let me get my breath a
moment, please--I'm totally winded.

Captain
Do you always intend to put me in a fury and then play with me? I
don't know what prevents me from giving you a beating. What, you
rogue, just to go off to the custom house to get my trunk, takes you
all day?

Spruce
Oh, sir, customs inspectors are terrible men. All the savages in the
world are less barbarous. They can only talk in monosyllables. "yes,
no, what, sir? I have no time. But, sir-- Would you kindly open up--"
They need maybe a hundred words in their vocabulary. They give me a
headache. Finally, when you need them for something, they're more
proud and stuck up than an archbishop.

Captain
What! Do you mean to pretend you stayed at the customs house until
just now?

Spruce
Oh, no. Seeing the customs inspector was about to take more than an
hour--besides, he had a disagreeable phiz--I preferred to wait at a
tavern.

Captain
Your yen for brew always gets the best of you. Does wine command you
always?

Spruce
Everyone has his weakness, sir.-- As you are well aware. It's the bad
example more than the brew that puts me down the wrong road. I'd
really like to live a clean life--

Captain
Why do you always keep bad company, then?

Spruce
I've made several efforts to avoid it--all in vain. I like you a lot
and I don't want to leave you.

Captain
What's that, scoundrel?

Spruce
Sir, an ancient custom of speaking my mind gives me the right. My case
is like your own. I've seen you drunk more than once in a tavern, and
many's the time I had to help you home to bed. I've never scolded you
much about these little escapades--we ought not to mention other
people's infirmities-- Forget them, since they forget ours.

Captain
I'll forgive you for liking your bottle--if I thought that was your
only vice--but your penchant for one sin carries you on to a thousand
others. You have a strange passion for gambling.

Spruce
Oh, if I gamble a little it's only to spend the time while you are
spending the night in certain black gambling dens. I hear you swearing
right up to the door. I swear, too, when luck is against me. And who
can tell us apart? You swear in your room, and I swear on the stairs.
I imitate you in every respect. You drink, gamble, and love with
extreme passion, and I drink, gamble--and love a little, too. And if I
am a flirt, it's because you are one, too. Consummate in the art, I
might add. You go every day with a vagabond ardor, raffling off all
the ladies--from blond to brunette. Today, Flavella dominates you--you
say you love her--but I don't know why.

Captain
You don't know why! Is it possible you refuse to render homage to her
charms, to her divine eyes? I saw her at her aunt's, where I was quite
enchanted. She wounded me to the heart.

Spruce
Yet you have an attentive soul for her crazy Aunt--Urania. Now I
approve of Urania. Perfect choice. Without her money we'd be in an
awful fix. Meanwhile, I profit, too. You cajole the Aunt, and I
corrupt Jenny, her maid-- Thus, you see--

Captain
Yes, I see--in a word you think you know everything. You are nothing
but a near sighted fool! To prevent yourself from uttering some new
stupidity, shut up, and take my trunk to the hotel.

Spruce (picking up the trunk)
I obey. But if I should want to speak on this vain subject again,
believe me, I can hold forth at some length.

Captain
Oh, be quiet!

Spruce
When I have a mind to, I can speak better than anybody--

Captain
Wait! Whose trunk is this?

Spruce
Huh! By George, it's yours.

Captain
It doesn't in the least look like mine.

Spruce
For a while, I had the same suspicion as you. But it's got your name
and address on it--and that relieved my mind of any doubt. (puts the
trunk down) Here, read the words very plainly written. To McNaughten,
London.

Captain
True, but wait a bit,--what do you say to this? It's not my
handwriting. Therefore, it is not my trunk.

Spruce
You're right. But it resembles your handwriting a great deal.

Captain
You acted impulsively in taking this trunk.

Spruce
But, sir, do you take me for a fool? In returning from Flanders, where
you had an abrupt discharge from your regiment, did I not put the
trunk, at your instruction, on a stage coach bound for London, so that
we might travel more quickly. And didn't I obey you? I've done
everything right in this whole business. No reproaches, please.

Captain
We'll soon see whether this was your fault or not. Open it up and
let's try to get to the bottom of this mystery.

Spruce (taking out a ring of keys)
Sir, in a second, I am going to satisfy you. (trying a key) My
goodness! The key doesn't fit.

Captain
Break it open.

Spruce
If you want me to, I won't object. Let's begin proceedings. (after
some efforts, Spruce manages to open the trunk) (Spruce looks in and
stares)

Captain
What's wrong with you? Look at me.

Spruce (bewildered)
I don't see any of your clothes in here!

Captain
What the--wretch?

Spruce
Sir, there's no need to be testy. The swap we've made may be better
for us. I don't believe you had clothes like these in your trunk.
(displaying some expensive clothing)

Captain
And my letters, scoundrel, my letters from Flavella? The letters in
which she expressed her love for me? Who will give them back to me--
tell me!

Spruce (removing a packet of letters from the trunk)
Wait--perhaps you will find consolation in these.

Captain
Do you know that jokesters and comedians usually waste their time with
me?

(The Captain reads the letters while Spruce inventories the clothes.)

Spruce
My intent was not to put you in a temper--but without losing time we
must make our inventory. This costume for chicanery surely belonged to
some Scotsman, and this is an Irish peasant. (displaying clothes) Now,
this one is rather modish--usable for a hunt, I think.

Captain
Oh, Heavens!

Spruce (startled by the Captain's outburst)
Where will all this thing end?

Captain
This adventure isn't easily believed.

Spruce
Sir, what's wrong with you--are you getting dizzy?

Captain
It's a miracle. You won't believe it when I tell you.

Spruce
Sir, I will, I promise you--if you don't lie.

Captain
As you know, I was born a McNaughten, near Edinburgh. I am of a blood
which ceded valor to no one. You know that having lost father, mother,
and relatives, and penniless, I was left to spend my days in the
highlands. To escape, I joined the army when I was only fifteen. Only
I had a brother, who lived with me in the home of my uncle--a rich old
miser who wouldn't give me a penny. So I ran away, and they haven't
heard of me for many years. And I've heard from many sources that both
my brother and my uncle thought me dead.

Spruce
I know all that. And I know your mother died in giving birth to you
and that same brother. You and your brother are as indistinguishable
as two glasses of milk. In short, you are twins. So what?

Captain
We look so much alike that the finest painters would be easily
deceived. Even our own father considered putting a sign on us to tell
us apart.

Spruce
I've heard the story of your life several times. What has that story
got to do with our present troubles?

Captain
You will be astonished. This trunk belongs to my brother!

Spruce
How about that?

Captain
And I learn from this letter that our uncle is dead--

Spruce
Amazing--

Captain
--and has left all his money to this twin of mine.

Spruce
That is surprising news--no doubt about it. What good does that do?

Captain
Listen attentively. This is worth a good deal of reflection.

Spruce
I'm listening.

Captain (reading the letter)
"I await you, sir, to pay you the sixty thousand pounds which your
uncle has left you by his will, and to marry you to Miss Flavella
Hastings, of whom I have spoken to you several times in my letters.
The lady likes you very much, and her father is very determined on
this marriage. Don't waste time in getting to London. Your very humble
servant, Charles Torrington."

Spruce
Now, I begin to see--

Captain
Torrington is the name of the honest solicitor who worked for my
father. The date, the envelope, and the name, all confirm my
conclusion. My brother is coming to London in response to this letter,
and, just like me, put his trunk on the coach. And, of course, the
name and address caused your error. I conclude, therefor, not very
cleverly, that my brother is, perhaps, already in London.

Spruce
That's probably right. I am stupefied by the surprising effects of
chance. Necessity caused me to make a mistake, and our fortune will
spring from my stupidity. In a single day, we find a decrepit old
uncle buried--who leaves behind him a fortune, which in life, he
prevented you from attaining. We also find a brother who will receive
the fortune, and relieve you of your lady love. Coincidences like
these are capable of overwhelming the cleverest person!

Captain
We've got to put our heads together about this. I have a good feeling
about it.

Spruce
We could really use that sixty thousand pounds.

Captain
To have them, we will have to use all our skill. They belong to me as
much as to my brother. We must prevent my brother from meeting old
Torrington. Go--run--find out--don't lose a minute.

Spruce
You know my zeal and eagerness. If he's in London, I have faithful
friends who will know of it in less than an hour.

Captain
I am going to Urania. Unfortunately, she knows I am back. I must still
pretend to burn with love for her. She has no idea I'm aflame for
Flavella. You know what Urania is like--the old girl loves to break
men's hearts. The airs that old woman puts on are really insufferable.
In fact, she's crazy and loves to be flattered.

Spruce
You're just the man for that, if I may say so, sir.

Captain
What a ray of hope breaks through for my love. While I'm still
uncertain what to do about my brother, I'd best manage her. Go back to
the customs house, to the stage coach.

Spruce
If I'm not mistaken, here comes Urania and Jenny now.

Captain
Go, quickly, where I send you.

(Exit Spruce)

(Enter Urania and Jenny, her maid)

Urania
What a joy. We will see Captain McNaughten again today. I cannot stay
put. Such excitement--agitates me. How do you think I look, Jenny?

Jenny
Charming. Your beauty surprises, ravishes, carries one away, enchants
--. It seems Cupid himself has adjusted your face today.

Urania
This girl always has the best taste. (seeing the Captain) Ah, sir, you
here! What a lucky chance--this is better than I had hoped for--what
hurries your return? What god brings you back to me?

Captain
Cupid.

Urania
Cupid? The poor child!

Captain
Your loveable presence now fully compensates me for the pain of your
prior absence. You, who without art, without aid, appear younger every
day.

Urania
Foh! Banterer! Love sometimes recalls a person who is absent to mind.
Your charming portrait which, which makes all my happiness, consoled
me a little during your frightful absence. Did mine have the same
effect on you?

Captain
Your face preoccupied me like a ghost, and followed me everywhere.
Night could not hide you from my eyes. And even this night, I recall
my dream. In my first sleep, I dreamt I was in a garden at sunrise.
There, Aurora shone with her rosy fingers. There on the border of a
superb canal, where a hundred frothy waves fell in cascades--seemingly
pushed by water nymphs. There, I tell you--reposing on a bed of
roses--

Urania (agitated)
What did you see?

Captain
I saw you, on a chair, floating over the waves. You resembled Venus. A
hundred Cupids pushed a shell, the winds jested about you--

Jenny
Oh, Heaven. What a lovely dream. (aside) He does this better than I
do.

Urania
Finish, finish, I beg you.

Captain
My soul was seized by astonishment.

Jenny (low)
That's not surprising.

Urania (dreamily)
And I was Venus, floating on this canal?

Captain
Yes, Madame, your very self. My mind was taken with the noble
spectacle. I went right up to you with no opposition--

Urania
Did I have a noble air, a divine bearing? Speak sincerely.

Captain
The most noble in the world. You seemed a goddess in the flesh.

Urania
And what was I wearing? The goddess clothes?

Captain
Madame, the goddess does not--

Urania
Ah, ah--

Captain
Unluckily, the goddess suddenly vanished from my sight.

Urania
And were we separated?

Captain
Then, I found myself in a grotto--which art had embellished more than
nature. There, in full repose, crowned by flowers, I perceived you
reclining on a couch of flowers. I persuaded you of my ardent
feelings.

Urania
And--

Captain
You were touched--

Urania
Ah, I was touched--

Captain
By a new goddess. And taking from Venus her natural softness,
languorously, you--

Urania
What did I do?

Captain
I don't know. By an unspeakable misfortune, my valet woke me up.
(aside) Whew! I couldn't go any further.

Jenny (aside)
I should take lessons from him, decidedly.

Urania
I am in despair because of this. Servants are always about when we
don't want them. Horrid valet.

Captain
Actually, Spruce comes in handy sometimes. But my dream was
incomplete. How I wanted to finish it.

Urania
Oh, and I want to finish it, too. To satisfy YOU, so that YOUR
happiness will not be a chimera, to quench YOUR flames--after our
marriage, of course. But I'm afraid that in the times in which we
live, there's a distaste for marriage. Among the men, I mean. But
possession alone takes the salt and taste from love.

Captain
Ah, Madame, my love for you is so extreme, I am sure it must last
until death. And if, by a misfortune which I cannot prevent, your
death should-- Ah, great gods, what a frightful despair I would be in.
The very thought of it possesses my soul with remorse.

Urania
Let's put that lugubrious idea far away from us. To better celebrate
the pleasures of our reunion, I want to dine with you tonight. This
morning, I invited a friend--you'll enjoy good company.

Captain
Madame, this honor is very advantageous to me. A small business matter
tears me away at present, but I will soon return. I'll hurry.

Urania
Go, my darling. I will await you with impatience.

Captain (bowing, kissing her hand)
Here--in a moment I will return.

(Exit the Captain)

Urania
The love he has for me is not to be imagined.

Jenny (archly)
No, m'am.

Urania
In revenge, I will love him like crazy. How do you like him?

Jenny
He's good looking. His valet, Spruce, isn't bad to look at, either. We
are a little bit in love--but, who's coming-- It's Mr. Hastings.

(Enter Hastings)

Hastings
Hello, sis.

Urania
Good day, brother, dear.

Hastings
This is lucky, I was going to your house to speak to you on some
business.

Urania
This place is as good as any. You won't annoy me.

Hastings
I want to marry Flavella off.

Urania
That's not a bad idea. Your daughter is getting big, you know. People
ask me how I can have such a grown up niece.

Hastings
And our solicitor, Mr. Torrington, whose zeal for our family, you
know, has found a good match for her. A young man endowed with wit and
character--who possesses more than sixty thousand pounds which he has
just inherited from an uncle. Torrington is the trustee of the estate,
and has written me that the young heir will arrive today.

Urania
I am truly easy. I think it's a fine idea.

Hastings
This marriage would be a great advantage for our family. So, seeing
that you are no longer interested in remarrying, I thought we might
endow Flavella with your estate--reserving a life estate for you until
your death.

Urania
Until my death! Truly, brother, this project is very appealing to me!
I will do no such thing. My death, indeed!

Hastings
But I already sort of promised--

Urania
You promised, eh? Well, de-promise. I'll have you know, I still think
I'm not past marrying and having children--

Hastings
Having children, sis? You're joking, you're past fifty!

Urania
Me! Fifty years old! Me! Jenny!

Jenny (defensively)
Don't blame me. I've never told him your age! Because Madame has lived
a while, people think she's no longer young. He's a stupid man.

Hastings
Dear sister, I believe I've been quite fair in my calculations. I
reasoned that since you are my elder sister, and I am past fifty
myself--necessarily-- Therefor, how can I be wrong?

Urania
Your necessarily is stupid. I know very well that it--that it cannot
be! My youth is well known. And I can prove it to you, clearly and
precisely. My wealth will never be inherited by you. I'll bury you,
and your children, and the children I am going to have, too. Despite
you and the murderous plots you are hatching. Do you hear, brother
dear?-- I have spoken. Good day! Come Jenny.

(Exit Urania in a fury)

Hastings
Lovely disposition.

Jenny
Sir, another time--or better yet, say nothing. Or read, if you please,
better almanacs. My lady is, still, despite you and your calculations,
young and pretty, and all the connoisseurs will remind you of it.

(Exit Jenny)

Hastings
I can see what my sister is up to. Marry again, at her age? The old
fool. Well, I have taken some measures. Better go see Torrington and
straighten things out. If the man in question is as described, we
shall very soon consummate this marriage.

BLACKOUT


Scene II. The same, a short time later. The Captain and Spruce enter
from different directions. Spruce is out of breath again.

Spruce
I found your brother, but not without trouble. You see how out of
breath I am. I've been around London, from one end to the other--to
the stage, to the post, everywhere. And I swear, every street I went
down, I met a creditor. I even met that Welshman--the Squire to whom
we owe a hundred pounds.

Captain
I am ashamed to owe him for so long. He took me for a gentleman--

Spruce (aside)
Which few do.

Captain
And the first money that I get, I am going to repay him. Nothing will
prevent me.

Spruce (aside)
But a wench or a game of cards.
(Aloud)
Wonderful! Anyway, not knowing where to go first, I went back to the
custom house. And there I saw your brother--actually knew him
instantly from a distance--because of the resemblance. Really, an
incredible resemblance. He was arguing with the inspector about the
tariff. His face, his features, his bearing, even his tone of voice!
If I hadn't known, I would have been deceived completely. But his
temper,--that's where he's different from you. He's brusque, impolite
even--quite unlike you. It's easy to see he isn't a man of the world--
in fact, he's a savage brute!

Captain
One shouldn't be surprised by rudeness in a country bumpkin who was
nourished without politeness. It will take more than the air of London
to get this beastly behaviour out of him.

Spruce
As I was saying, I watched his quarrel from a distance, and when he
finally left, I gave him a taste of my abilities as a porter. My zeal
and flattery worked to such effect that he asked me to be his valet. I
even recommended him this lodging--a place fit for the masterful
projects I am hatching in my head. He ought to be here any minute.

Captain (amused)
What masterful project are you hatching in that charming head of
yours?

Spruce
Fortune herself appeared to me--in total surrender. We can profit by
this resemblance you bear to each other to obtain Flavella, and--
what's more important--your inheritance. Two birds with one stone.

Captain
Yes, yes, we can. We shall, we will. But how?

Spruce
Nothing could be easier. We'll trade off this bumpkin to Aunt Urania,
you will get Miss Flavella, and more important, I will get Jenny.

Captain
And how are we to put this brave plan into action?

Spruce
First, you've got to change clothes, and dress like the heir apparent.
Adopt his mannerisms, and the Devil will provide--

Captain
Dress like an heir? My God, I don't know how. I've never been an heir
before.

Spruce
Act sad on first sight. Impose on the lawyer and get the money.

Captain
I am a little uncomfortable about deceiving my brother.

Spruce
What an idle and ridiculous delicacy! Risk nothing, gain nothing.
Maybe you ought to protect him. With this money, he could do some
good--only you don't give him a good character.

Captain
If I want this inheritance, it's only for the sake of Flavella, whom I
adore.

Spruce
Of course. And if you don't get it, he will have her! Can you bear
thinking of him kissing her?

Captain
Damnation!

Spruce
But he was a fine brother, and you ought not to deceive him.

Captain
He's a son of a bitch. He was always stealing my toys. That's it. I'll
do it.

Spruce
Good. That's the spirit.

Captain
I'll tell you what. Flavella doesn't look on me with indifference. Her
father knows nothing of it, and, by good luck, has never seen me,
because I've never taken the first step to ask for her hand. If I had,
all my hopes would have been dashed, I am sure of it. Still, one thing
holds me back.

Spruce
Good Heavens, what can it be?

Captain
I've promised in writing to marry Urania.

Spruce
Banish all thought of that engagement. If you were to marry all the
women you've promised to marry, you would be a bigamist many times
over. Now to work! You must dress like your brother. He's wearing
mourning, a little frayed. His wig's a little different than yours,
but you really don't need to change much. You must get into mourning,
without wasting any time.

Captain
But, Urania is waiting for me to dine with her!

Spruce
You now have other work to do. Dine tomorrow! I believe I see your
brother coming up that side street. I'm not mistaken. You must go
quick-- Doubletime, Captain.

Captain
But, tell me first--

Spruce
I've nothing to say to you now, except go, quickly.

(Reluctantly, with a questioning expression, the Captain goes, hurried
off by Spruce. After a moment, enter McNaughten dressed in mourning.)

Spruce
Finally, you're here, sir. To keep my word I've been waiting for you
by this hotel, but it's been a long time.

McNaughten
Yes, indeed, here I am. I thought it was all my life was worth to get
here. What a country--what a Hell! I made a thousand false turns. I've
never run so many risks in my life. One cannot take a step without
falling in some trap. Everywhere some pickpocket hemmed me in. A
carriage covered me with mud. What noise, what confusion. I believe
that in this city, the Devil has finally settled on his abode.

Spruce
Oh, London is a tumultuous, noisy place.

McNaughten
Really! I'd much prefer to be at a Black Sabbath. A woods full of
robbers is a hundred times more secure. My trunk was taken by someone
else. I've lost fifteen pounds--and some love letters, too.

Spruce
You have to be on your guard around here.

McNaughten
I believe it, indeed. This loss will make me more alert and exact.
Happily, I kept most of my money in my belt.

Spruce
Did you so? How clever of you. (picking his pocket) I've had a bed
prepared for you in a nice quiet room, in the back, away from the
street. Do you plan to stay in this town long?

McNaughten
The less, the better. I can see nothing to like about it. I'm only here
to get married.

Spruce
You usually can't do that business in a single day.

McNaughten
I'm also here to collect an inheritance of sixty thousand pounds. I
inherited it from an uncle that I had once, but no longer do--by a
singular grace of God.

Spruce
And is it all for you, sir?

McNaughten
Precisely. War took off my brother--opportunely. He was only twenty--
in the flower of his youth. He took a quick trip to the promised land,
and has never returned. God's grace knows no bounds.

Spruce
Heaven give him peace, and give you success in all your plans. If you
have need of my little services, you can employ me, sir, in any way
you please. I know London very well, and I am always willing to serve
my friends devotedly.

McNaughten
Can you tell me how to find a man named George Hastings?

Spruce
Hastings?

McNaughten
Exactly, that's his name.

Spruce
Is there a man in London who knows better than I how to get to his
house? We'll go together. Have you some business with him?

McNaughten
Yes, I do. By chance, might you also know where a solicitor named
Torrington lives?

Spruce
Ah, indeed, I know him. You couldn't have done better than ask me--
he's a particular friend of mine. We'll go to him, too.
(Aside)
But, I see Jenny coming. Good God, I hope she doesn't ruin all my good
work.

(Enter Jenny)

Jenny
What the Devil are you two doing--are you tied to a stake? Dinner's
getting cold, my mistress is annoyed. Ah, there you are, sir. Truly, I
am delighted.

McNaughten
What for?

Jenny
I'm sent to see what prevents you from coming. My lady cannot
understand the reason. But, what is this, sir, why the mourning outfit
and the lugubrious reception? You act as if you didn't know me?

McNaughten
Miss--

Jenny
Why have you gone into mourning so suddenly? Do you think this is the
way to dress for a dinner party? Are you coming from a funeral, sir?

McNaughten
What's it to you? I'll dress as I please.
(Low to Spruce)
The girls around here are well equipped with effrontery and curiosity.

Spruce
It's the custom of the town. They're always friendly with people
they've never met. Beware a trap.

Jenny
My concern in this matter is natural enough. Whatever happens to you
interests me. My lady has an extreme tenderness for you, and I must
imitate her.

McNaughten
Quite unnecessary.

Jenny
Sir!

McNaughten
You pretend your mistress loves me, do you?

Jenny
You pretend you don't know that?

McNaughten
May I be hanged if I ever heard of it before this moment!

Jenny (puzzled)
You've had several proofs already. And if you want more solid proof,
you can bed her and marry her whenever you like.

McNaughten
I can bed her?

Jenny
Easily.

McNaughten
And marry her?

Jenny
Yes, indeed.

McNaughten
Why would I want to do that?

Jenny
You don't have any other object in view, do you?

McNaughten
The proposition is very straightforward, on my word.
(Aside to Spruce)
On my oath, this wench is a procuress.

Spruce (protesting)
I rather like her that way.

Jenny
Before your return thousands came to offer for her hand, but
McNaughten is the only one who ever earned her love.

McNaughten (astounded)
How'd you know my name?

Jenny
How do you know mine?

McNaughten
How do I know YOUR name?

Jenny
Exactly. Same way.

McNaughten
I don't know it at all. Who the Devil are you, anyway?

Jenny
What's the meaning of this joke? My name's Jenny, and I serve Urania.
And I've seen you there more than a thousand times.

McNaughten
You're her servant?

Jenny
Now you've got it.

McNaughten
My word! So much the worse for you. I know nothing about it. But, it's
really a shame to think such a young girl is engaged in such a sinful
school.

Jenny
Quit joking. In one word, my lady is waiting dinner for you. To please
you, she's invited her girl friend, who is pretty and very vivacious.

McNaughten
Your mistress does very good work.

Jenny (to Spruce, giving up on McNaughten)
You talk to me, then? Tell me, what vapor has deranged his mind in so
short a time?

Spruce (aside to Jenny)
For some time he's been subject to distractions--the effect of which
you can see for yourself. Sometimes, he talks idly and without any
sense. He often speaks wildly.

Jenny (to Spruce)
Usually, he seems sensible enough. How can one lose one's memory and
reason in such a short time?
(To McNaughten)
Do you intend to speak sensibly to me?

McNaughten
My dear, I am reasonable enough. It's you who are drunk or crazy. Do
you intend to bother me with your nonsensical stories for an hour? Who
is this Urania who adores me? You talk of dinner, a pretty friend, and
a hundred other things, each one more stupid than the other. And which
I don't comprehend any more than I do Algebra or the Koran.

Jenny
You have no intention of being reasonable or dining with us, as you
promised?

McNaughten
The answer is no. I give myself to the Devil--and your mistress, too,
with her noble plans. Let other birds fall into her snares. And you,
her emissary and honest agent, do you not know it's a villainous thing
to be a bawd? Some evil will befall you. Pray God for forgiveness. Go
--and sin no more. I warn you, quit this line of work. Be guided by my
advice--it's for your own good.

Jenny
Well! I never have been so insulted in my life. Dare to call me a
bawd!

McNaughten
Don't expect to catch me in your traps. I'm no country bumpkin.

Jenny
We will see if you have the nerve to say such stupid things to my
lady. Because, I am going to tell her everything you said, and, I
won't omit one word. Be sure of it!
(To Spruce)
Goodbye, worthy valet of an unworthy master. I hope after a while
we'll know each other better.
(Aside)
I don't understand any of it, and I hardly know where I am at!

(Exit Jenny)

McNaughten
My God! What a town. What a strange place. They told me the London
women were bold, and that to succeed in their secret practices, they
inform themselves about newcomers with great care. But this is
unbelievable.

Spruce
She must have heard your name on the stage coach. She decided to make
use of it when you got here, so that she could get something from you.

McNaughten
Right. That's how she knew. But, I defy their plots!

Spruce (slyly)
If you had gone with her, (he gestures of someone being knocked over
the head) it might have been all over for you. For both of us, in
fact.

McNaughten
Thank God, I know how to protect myself. If they've got it in their
head to trick me-- Well it won't work with such beastly tricks as
these. I wasn't born yesterday.

Spruce
Better not stay in this place too long. The women of London have lures
that force the proudest hearts to succumb.

McNaughten
Your advice is good. Let's go in without lingering.

(Enter Urania and Jenny)

Jenny
You will see if I lie--. Speak to him. There he is!
(Aside)
The lout.

Urania
While I am dying of impatience to see you, you wait here quite
indifferent. Dinner is getting cold. You know I have no pleasure
except when you are by.

McNaughten
In truth, Madame, I must tell you that I am very surprised--

Spruce (aside)
Be careful, sir. One friendly word might--

McNaughten (aside)
Leave it to me.
(Aloud)
In my surprise-- I find it very surprising--your attractions are a
little distracting--and confound me. Besides-- My word, I don't know
what to say.

Urania
The distraction I see you in suggests you've been involved in some bad
business. Why didn't you tell me of this sad event? Tell me, dear
child, have you been badly hurt--beaten up? Don't keep anything from
me.

McNaughten (pulling himself together)
Never. I haven't been fighting.

Urania
Is it money? All my wealth is yours.-- When one loves and when one has
only the purest ends in view, all the good and the bad, the pleasures
and the pains--everything must be shared equally. I want my fortune to
run with yours.

McNaughten (low)
So, that's it. Wants my money.
(Aloud)
I am obliged to you for the sentiment, but I have no need for the
kindness you offer me.

Urania
I don't understand this. This isn't the way you usually talk.

Spruce (low)
He's very rude, the way he talks. The better for us.

Urania
Please, let's go in to dinner.

McNaughten (low)
I'll humor her.
(Aloud)
I cannot now. I have some other business.

Urania'
I don't want to force you, but I'm frightened by your coldness.

McNaughten (furiously)
What the Devil is this! Leave and finish. I am neither hot nor cold
for you.

Jenny
Well! Can he carry this impudence any farther? Stop, sir, you push
your insolence too far. My word, if you come to us again, I'm going to
slam the door in your face.

Urania
But, where've you been? Stop hiding things from me.

McNaughten
You pretend to be ignorant, Madame, but you know very well. Didn't you
see me on the stage coach. So, you know where I've been and where I'm
going. It's your business.

Urania
What a reproach! And what stage are you talking of?

McNaughten
The most vulgar one can go on. I doubt there's another between London
and Bristol that better jolts the passengers.

Urania (helplessly)
Jenny, you're right, he's lost his mind.

Jenny
He hasn't lost a thing. Surely, he's had too much to drink. It's wine
that carries him to these extravagances.

McNaughten
I've had enough of your impertinences. More important business calls
me away, and it's to finish that business that I am here. To get
married, and not to dine with creatures like you who seek adventures.

Urania
Creatures! Adventures! Heavens! What a way to speak to me!

Jenny
Creatures! Ah, Madame, here are two fabulous cheats. If you listen to
me, we'll box their ears and avenge our pride.

McNaughten
Softly, if you please. Moderate your passion.

Jenny
I've never felt so wild. I would have spared the valet--but he does
nothing to separate himself from his master. Why, Spruce?

Spruce
I don't wish to know of your differences. I do not want to fight with
you. If he brutalizes you, why blame me?

Urania
How unhappy I am and how weak to have declared my affection for this
ingrate! Jenny, you know it--I hide nothing from you.

Jenny
Perfidious wretch--isn't your heart touched?

McNaughten
There, there, take it easy. If this extreme love has come on so
swiftly, mark my words, it will soon pass off.

Urania (having made up her mind)
Go!-- Expect nothing more from me, but hate and malice.

McNaughten
Fine. I can easily do without your favors.

Jenny
Ah, cursed renegade. Most wicked man in the world. May Heaven punish
you and Hell confound you. By rights, we should strangle you.
(Aside)
Surely, he's been bewitched--he just isn't himself.

(Exit Urania and Jenny in great wrath)

McNaughten
Go with God, my princess. Choose more wisely where you form your rapid
attachments. But see, what rage, what an outburst of passion. Now I
feel a bit sorry, the Devil's tempting me. The maid had an appetizing
face.

Spruce (aside)
I'd better stop this.
(Aloud)
You've fought very bravely to the end--and one cannot praise your
strength too highly. But beware, they might come back. Who knows what
they will try next? So as not to have any more interruptions, let's go
into the hotel. Then, if you think me worthy of some employment, you
can give me something to do.

McNaughten
I am dying to see the woman I am going to marry. Curiosity, more than
love, pushes me on.

Spruce
After you've inspected your room and freshened up, I will gladly
escort you to her.

McNaughten
Good--wait until I return.

(Exit McNaughten to the hotel)

Spruce
I am going to find my master to find out what state things are in.
He'll look well in mourning. Courage, Spruce, be firm. Steady head,
steady hand. I will need all my skill.

CURTAIN



ACT II. Later that day.


Scene I. The same. Captain McNaughten, dressed in mourning enters, in
conversation with Spruce.

Spruce
Nothing is more surprising! Your resemblance to your twin passes
belief. You and he are really one. With you both dressed in black, no
one can tell the difference. I, your valet, cannot even be sure. So as
not to be deceived myself, let me put a mark on you. Give me your hat.

Captain (giving his hat to Spruce)
What do you intend to do?

Spruce (putting a yellow ribbon on the hat)
To put my mark on you, just like your father did, to better
distinguish you.

Captain
I think you're trying to make me laugh.

Spruce
I'm not joking. I could very easily make a mistake.

Captain
Mr. Torrington is already quite taken in. He met me right away, was
very obliging, and within the hour will pay me my money.

Spruce
What! He's going to pay over the entire inheritance? Sixty thousand
pounds.

Captain (airily)
The whole thing.

Spruce
What an honest man. But, let me tell you what has happened. On this
very spot, others have taken your twin for you. Urania did so, and so
did Jenny. Urania wanted to have him for dinner. He, surprised, not
knowing what to say, and taking it to be a trap for his virtue,
treated her very rudely, and was almost ready to fight with her. If I
hadn't made peace between them, there would have been a mortal battle
between man and woman.

Captain
Haven't they suspected the mistake?

Spruce
How can they suspect you? For twenty years, they've thought you dead,
and never, no matter how hard they try, can they figure the situation
out.

Captain
It's a pleasant adventure, and keeps me in good humor. But look--my
father-in-law's coming. Let's carry on the sport. Accost him
immediately.

(Enter Sir George Hastings)

Spruce
Sir, are you an honest man by the name of Hastings?

Hastings
That's my name.

Spruce
Delighted to meet you. Here is my master, freshly arrived, named
McNaughten, coming from Scotland, just to marry your daughter.

Hastings
Ah, sir, hopefully this unexpected meeting will show you how glad I am
you are here.

Captain
And you, too, sir, witness a parallel joy and respect in your intended
son-in-law.

Hastings
Your figure, your air, your wit--enchant me. My heart would be
completely happy if your late uncle, whom I met with often to conclude
this marriage, was still alive.

Captain
Ah, sir, don't recall his death. An uncle that I loved with a tender
regard. This boy can tell you of my excessive sorrow, and how, at his
death, I was awash in tears.

Spruce
How Heaven made his soul miserable! But to speak of him is to touch a
very tender nerve and might-- But he was very old.

Hastings
Not so very old, same age with me, about fifty.

Spruce
The word old can be understood in many ways. I speak of old with
respect to his health. He was always complaining of some infirmity.

Hastings
Not at all. He was never attacked by a malady in his entire life until
the horrible accident which caused his death.

Captain
He had an iron constitution.

Spruce (aside to Captain)
Now, you're right.

Captain (aside to Spruce)
Shut up, then.

Hastings
This conversation will awaken your grief. Let's talk of something more
lively and gay. You are going to see my daughter, and I flatter myself
you will be very content with her looks and her vivacity.

Captain
I hope that duty will answer for me. I count very little on my own
will.

Hastings
You are quite wrong. Rely on enchanting her at first sight. I know
women, and, take my word, Flavella is a wax tablet which I mould and
form to my pleasure. I'll be very much surprised if you are not to her
taste. I am her father, and to show you how much she defers to my
wishes, just step aside. I am going to call her, and, without her
seeing you, you will see how she responds to you.

(Exit Hastings)

Captain
Leave me here. Go find my brother. The main thing is to prevent him
from meeting Mr. Torrington. Make sure!

Spruce
I agree. But, in the romantic mood he's in, I don't guarantee I'll be
able to prevent him from seeing Miss Flavella. So, press her ardently,
but be quick about it, there's no time to waste.

Captain
Go, quickly. I won't lose any time here. (steps aside)

(Exit Spruce in one direction. From another, enter Hastings and
Flavella.)

Hastings
Now, come along, Flavella.

Flavella
What is it, father?

Hastings
To be brief about it, a man from Scotland has just arrived. He's very
good looking, and he's here to marry you.

Flavella (aside)
What to I hear?

Hastings
It's a perfect match--birth, wealth, family, all to my taste, and, as
to his person--his person will suit you, my dear, suit you perfectly.

Flavella
Father, without, without pushing this conversation any further, permit
me to say, with deference and without showing any lack of obedience--I
HAVE NO INTENTION OF GETTING MARRIED!

Hastings
What? When did you decide that? You never used to talk like this.

Flavella
True, but wisdom comes with age. I know the danger now. Today,
husbands are, for the most part, jealous and unfaithful. They want a
woman to marry their caprices. The best husbands are those with only a
FEW vices.

Hastings
But, he's a very nice, young man. You'll like him when you get to know
him.

Flavella
I ALREADY HATE HIM WITHOUT SEEING HIM! It's enough that he's a
Scotsman and wears kilts. I wouldn't have him if he were a prince.

Captain (appearing)
Madame, it's not necessary to be so passionate against the poor
unfortunate your father wants to give you. If you hate him, he can
find others whose sentiments differ from yours.

Flavella (aside)
Good Heavens, what do I see! How astonishing! It's Captain McNaughten,
dear God, it's my lover.

Hastings
I am in despair that such a distaste has rendered her spirit so
contrary to my wishes. But, I will force her, if you wish me to--

Captain
No, sir, do not force her inclinations. I would rather die than
constrain Madame's heart.

Hastings
Look him over, daughter. He's a husband practically made to order.
He's a young man, well born, and his spirit is the equal of his birth
and wealth.

Captain (plaintively)
I was wrong to set my hopes so high.

Flavella
What--is this the man you propose for me?

Hastings
Yes--if you don't cross me in my choice. If your stupid, crazy ideas
don't ruin all my plans and care.

Flavella
To be honest with you, after seeing him, my heart isn't so set against
marriage as it was before.

Captain
You have such a passionate hate for me--can your eye accustom itself
to look on me?

Flavella
My father's the boss. I will do everything daddy says.

(Enter Urania)

Urania
Ah, you are still here, traitor! With what impudence do you dare to
remain in my presence, after you have treated me with such indignity?
Aren't you afraid of my just anger?

Captain
Madame, I don't know what you are trying to say, and this brusque
conversation bewilders me. You mistake me for someone else, I am sure.
What complaint have you against me?

Urania
Two faced traitor! Do you pretend not to know me? You tricked me with
a pretended passion, and I, in good faith,--I gave you my heart--
(wailing)--without knowing yours and all its darkness!

Captain
You honor me with all my defects, but truly, I don't understand a word
you are talking about.

Hastings
My word, neither do I. But tell me, sister, what are you getting at?
This bizarre humor--

Captain
This lady is your sister?

Hastings
Yes, sir--who infuriates me--my elder sister, but not wiser. What new
caprice, what new demon, I say, makes you come play mischief? To
scandalize this poor gentleman who never saw you before in his life?
How could he have harmed you, a perfect stranger?

Urania
Doesn't know me! A perfect stranger! I believe you're mad. For two
years, this ingrate has been my suitor--my lover. This gigolo has
drawn on my wealth, and I have paid for practically every thing he
wears. If I hadn't taken pity on his misfortunes, he would long ago
have been on the dole.

Hastings
I told you so; she's a little crazy.

Captain
Still, she seems normal. Some sort of mistake.

Hastings
Oh, I give you my word.

Captain
In any event, I don't relish lingering here any longer to listen to
this insulting discourse. I leave the battle field to the lady. I will
return as soon as she leaves.

Hastings
No one can stop her from talking. You have to put up with her
difficult nature.

Captain
For a while, sir, permit me to leave you. I will return to finish my
visit.

(Exit Captain)

Urania (pursuing him part way)
Don't think to escape me. I know your plans. You may try to tear him
from my arms, but I swear I will marry him, in spite of the daughter,
the father, the relations, the whole family--in spite of him, and in
spite of myself, too.

(Exit Urania after the Captain)

Hastings
What vertigo disturbs her and brings her here? As she gets older, her
head seems to get more and more disturbed.

Flavella
It's true. I'm very often ashamed for her.

Hastings
I am afraid that this woman, with her unaccountable temper may come
here and cause some misfortune.

(Enter McNaughten and Spruce)

Spruce (to McNaughten)
Yes, sir, here they are: the father and daughter, together. You can
speak with both of them about your affair.

Hastings
Ah, sir, my daughter and I must beg your pardon for my sister and her
wild delusions. You conceive, sir, that women, like little girls,
sometimes have spirits that go against their family.

McNaughten
Ah,--yes,--sir.

Hastings
You return quickly. I am delighted.

McNaughten
I come to wish you a good day. And, at the same time, to marry a lady
named Flavella, whose father you are,--at least every one says so. In
short, that is what brings me here.

Hastings
I've already told you, and I repeat, how much this pleases me. My
daughter is happy, too. Having seen you, she now submits to love and
duty. At first, she had a slight distaste--but after seeing you, her
heart melted.

McNaughten (puzzled)
We've met before?

Hastings
Just now. You left her here, and appeared content.

McNaughten
Me? I left her here?

Hastings
YOU, without a doubt. Certainly. We were just greeting you, with great
joy, when my sister came with her crazy talk, and interrupted our
conversation. How can you forget so soon?

McNaughten
Someone is dreaming--either you or me! What! You would have me believe
that I have already seen your daughter! When? How? Where?

Hastings
Right here--on this spot--a little while ago.

McNaughten
So, you're crazy. This will make me look like a person having
hallucinations, and I don't like that at all. However that may be, I
see her now. Whether it is the first or second time makes little
difference for our marriage.

Hastings (low)
At first, I thought this man was very intelligent.

McNaughten
Madame, they've boasted to me, in letters, about your attractions. I'm
quite content, seeing you, that all that was true. But, in some cases,
temperament doesn't go together with beauty. It's up to you to cure my
apprehensions on that score. I will give my verdict, after you have
spoken.

Flavella (aside)
I don't understand him. His mind is troubled.

McNaughten
I love men of spirit more than any man in England. I, myself, am
brilliant without study. I find that study is the perfect way to spoil
one's youth--besides being no use, whatever. So, I've never stuck my
nose in a book. When a gentleman knows how to ride and steer his
horse, drink, sign his name,--he is as wise a gentleman as the late
Cicero.

Hastings
Will you take a position at court or in the Army?

McNaughten
My mind is not made up. Court has many powerful attractions--provided
the routine doesn't fatigue me. War also has its attractions. Because
savants versed in astrology have assured me that I will live to be at
least a hundred, necessarily I will not die on the battle field. My
name will be famous throughout Europe. But still, there are so few
wars these days. I really want to fulfill my destiny. If I only knew
what it was. I really love to live.

Spruce
You are very wise.

Flavella
What a speech! What nonsense! Am I really listening to the man I love?

McNaughten
What's wrong? You appear surprised--as if I'd said something crazy.
You look to me (addressing Flavella) --let's speak openly--as if you
have little intention of heeding any lesson from your husband.

Flavella (icily)
I know what my duty is as an engaged woman.

McNaughten
To be sure, I think you are virtuous and prudent. But you've got an
amorous and sly look about you that doesn't augur well for me in the
future. Without being a fortune teller, I predict you are planning
some little trick to play on me in the future. True? What do you say?

Hastings
Sir, fear nothing. My daughter always behaves herself properly.

McNaughten
The sly ones always behave with great propriety.

Flavella
Heavens! Can he say this to my face? Father, let me leave. This
gentleman flatters me too much. His tender compliments allow me to
understand his sentiments only too well.

(Exit Flavella before her father can reply)

Hastings (aside)
I thought at first my son-in-law had beautiful manners.

McNaughten
Women don�t' really like sincerity very much.

Spruce
You don't flatter them.

McNaughten
By God, I am frank. Woman, mistress, friend, are all alike to me. I am
not afraid to say what I think.

Hastings
That's very proper. Everything will be fine. Please stay at my house.

McNaughten
I receive that gracious offer in the proper spirit, but--

Hastings
To let you suffer in a hotel would be an insult.

McNaughten
I beg you to let me stay at liberty a little longer.

Hastings
So be it! I am going to see about this marriage contract.
(Aside)
My would be son-in-law appears a savage. But his wealth redeems all.

(Exit Hastings)

McNaughten (slowly)
I have seen the object I am to marry.

Spruce
Yes, sir. Right here.

McNaughten
Tell me, frankly, what do you think?

Spruce
To be honest with you, I didn't find many perfections.

McNaughten
My word, neither did I.

Spruce (aside)
What an additional embarrassment. One of our creditors is bearing down
on us. It's the old clothes merchant who is paying us a visit.

(Enter Mr. Bronlow)

Bronlow (greeting McNaughten)
My humble duties. I learned this morning of your return, sir. I have
come to be the first to welcome you to England. We were all worried
about you. Extremely worried, I may say. In my establishment,
everybody loves you, me, my daughter, my wife--we all tremble with
fear that something might happen to you.

McNaughten
Such good souls to love me without having seen me! I never would have
believed it.

Bronlow
We owe it to you, sir. And for very good reason. You've been a friend
of our house for a very long time.

McNaughten (to Spruce, low)
Who is this man?

Spruce (low)
He's--he's a visionary. A type of lunatic--with a pleasant character
(making it up as he goes along, and becoming more and more inspired)
--who believes everyone he meets owes him money. It's his folly to
greet everyone he meets and present them with a promissory note--and
to demand payment. I am surprised that he hasn't paid you the
compliment already.
(Aside)
I think I did that rather well.

McNaughten
His madness is novel and rare, assuredly.

Spruce (low, to McNaughten)
It happens all the time in this city. If you stay here long enough, he
may not be the only one you meet.

Bronlow
I am delighted to see you in such good health. More than you can
imagine. Here's a little bill you ran up before you left. I am sure
you won't quibble about paying it.

Spruce (triumphantly)
What did I tell you!

Bronlow
Because you were away so long, I was obliged to sue out a judgement
against you.

McNaughten
A personal judgement against me!

Bronlow
But, kindly creditor that I am--I differ extremely from process
servers whose suits and writs give people headaches--I present the
bill myself--

McNaughten
You're truly very good and honest. What might be your name?

Bronlow
Oh--you know it very well.

McNaughten
Let me be hanged if I know it at all!

Bronlow
Could you possibly forget?

Spruce (aside to Bronlow)
Are you unable to see the illness he's suffering from?

Bronlow
Indeed, I am unable to see it!

Spruce
He's suffering from amnesia and cannot recall a thing. Neither what
he's done nor the people he's seen. Talking to him about the past is
not only useless but crazy. His name itself, his very own name, he
sometimes forgets!

Bronlow
Heavens, what are you telling me? What a sad event. But how could he,
at his young age?

Spruce
How? (puzzled momentarily) How? He lost it in the war--in a battery
with the cannon roaring with such fury that it made a commotion in his
head--which prevents him from remembering anything. In his weak head--
this tender membrane. Oh, you cannot understand the effect of a
cannon.

Bronlow (very decently)
I am terribly sorry for what has befallen you, but I assure you that
you do owe me this money.

McNaughten
I can see very clearly that reason has taken leave of you.

Bronlow
Sir, try to recall those uniforms I supplied you with.

McNaughten
Uniforms to me! Go collect your imaginary bills elsewhere. I haven't
the time to listen to your nonsense. You are an old fool.

Bronlow
I am a clothes merchant. My name is Bronlow incorporated, and I am a
churchwarden. If you've lost your memory, the articles are listed in
the bill of sale, which if you would kindly read, will inform you--
(Presenting a bill of sale to McNaughten)

McNaughten (tearing it up and throwing the pieces in Bronlow's face)
Here, take your foolish bill of sale! I've done with it.

Spruce (to Bronlow, who is horrified)
Oh, sir, against a madman, it is useless to contend.

Bronlow (gathering up the pieces)
To tear up a bill of sale; to throw it in my face. You are a cheater!

McNaughten (ready to attack Bronlow)
Me? A cheater?

Spruce (putting himself between them)
Gentlemen--please--

Bronlow
I will show you.

Spruce (to Bronlow)
Not so much noise. Consider the state to which he has been reduced.

Bronlow
To tear up a receipt!

Spruce
Not such a big thing.

Bronlow
It's a frightful crime--worthy of transportation.

McNaughten
Let me pull his ears!

Spruce
Leave him alone. What would you do to a poor churchwarden?
(To Bronlow)
If you argue any more something terrible may happen.

Bronlow
I want to be paid. I don't give a damn about the rest.

Spruce (to Bronlow)
Leave, sir, leave. Do you want to rekindle the flames in his
overheated mind with your screaming?

Bronlow
Very well--I will leave. But before an hour has passed, I am going to
make him change his tune. Your humble servant.

(Exit Mr. Bronlow)

Spruce
What's the use of getting irritated by a madman?

McNaughten
What? Does he seek me out to be the butt of his impertinences? Let him
take his extravagances down another road. Let's go to Mr. Torrington
without waiting any further.

Spruce
Presently sir, now it would be a wasted effort. He isn't home, but
he'll be back soon. In a little while, I'll return and take you to see
him. A certain pressing duty calls me away suddenly.

McNaughten
I will wait for you. Go, but don't delay. I need to calm down. I begin
to believe everyone in this city is crazy. Of all the people I've met
today, I've only found one. besides myself, who is reasonable, and
that's you.

(Exit McNaughten to the hotel)

Spruce
I intend to inspect everything. Let's see. The fish himself is in our
net. Everything is going according to plan. Today, I serve two gods--
Fortune and Cupid. I hope to make myself useful!

BLACKOUT


Scene II. The same, a short while later. Spruce is standing in front
of the hotel.

Spruce
I've been watching this door, and no one has come out. My master has
had time to get his money and run. And I, diligent accomplice that I
am, wait here to make sure that the brother doesn't spoil things by
running to Torrington and discovering this mystery. Already, a
creditor has embarrassed me. It's laughable to think all that's
happened. I've put things into the hands of a man with an ardent
imagination. God, if McNaughten were a bit less headstrong and
argumentative, he'd have seen through it all by now. Thank Heaven for
passionate people. But I see Jenny coming. My amorous heart ignites
with new flames in her presence.

(Enter Jenny)

Jenny
I am come to look for your master.

Spruce
While waiting for him to come, permit my love to entertain you. Let me
sacrifice my heart at the altar of your matchless charms.

Jenny
Take your sacrifices elsewhere, and never trouble yourself to speak to
me again! Your master has treated me with disrespect, and I am going
to be avenged on you for it. To call me a creature!

Spruce
But, is that my fault?

Jenny (implacably)
You are his valet!

Spruce
Ha, don't pay attention to him. Sometimes, he's like that. Hard and
brutal as a dog.

Jenny
My ears are still ringing from his villainous words, and, my lady is
so scandalized that she is breaking with him, forever, even though it
breaks her poor heart. I am sent to collect her portrait and all her
letters.

Spruce
It's useless to keep the letters, but as to the portrait--the frame is
made of gold and studded with diamonds. It's my considered opinion,
that he should not part with the portrait,--it's too precious to give
back--from sentiment, of course. The two are not the same. We can pawn
it, if the need for money drives us to extremities, my child.

Jenny
Why make such a big fuss over a portrait.

Spruce
Because, we were in big trouble not long ago. Once burned, twice shy.
Fortunately, an uncle--a very honest man, has helped us out, by
voluntarily descending to the underworld quicker than we could say his
name. He has saved us in a very timely fashion, by making us heirs to
sixty thousand pounds.

Jenny
Ah, Heavens, so that's it!

Spruce
I tell you the truth.

Jenny
So--in such a short time, you've become rich.

Spruce
Right! We've received the sad, but happy, news of his death and the
princely bequest, and have got our money in less time than it takes to
tell you of it. My master is devilishly close to success.

Jenny
Oh, I don't doubt it.

Spruce
Judge for yourself. You see, he would have done a very foolish thing
to remain faithful to your lady under the circumstances. One must trim
one's sail to the wind.

Jenny
The world is full of lovers like that.

Spruce
Following his example, I am quitting the shop girls and the scullery
maids. My love wishes to rise to hearts of a higher rank. I will take
proud flight and rise to the peaks. The money will pass through my
trusty hands, and, fortunately, they're sticky. I believe I will throw
myself into business.

Jenny
You are going into business? You!

Spruce
Before two years have passed, watch me go by in a magnificent chaise--
on my way to the country. I'll be burning the paving stones with the
gallop of six Spanish horses. A French barber, numerous valets,
countless attendants, cooks--and pretty chambermaids will fill my
palace. My buffet will be of gold and porcelain. The wine will flow
like water in the Thames. My table will be open, my days, libertine.
When I wish to give a secret little supper, I will have a cozy retreat
prepared, where I will feast the fair ladies. One day, this one; the
next, that one. And I promise you, when your turn comes, and even
before that, to treat you to a feast.

Jenny (sarcastically)
I am overwhelmed!

Spruce
For you, my tenderness knows no bounds. But, look who's coming. It's
McNaughten himself. At your command, sir. You see me prepared to do my
duty.

(Enter McNaughten)

McNaughten
You've waited for me in this place for some time. Meanwhile, I've
found a paper that will expedite our little business with Mr.
Torrington.

Jenny
My mistress has decided to break with you forever. She has sent me
here to collect her portrait, her letters, her jewels, and everything
that belongs to her. She has ordered me to return to you, yours. Here
they are. (giving him a packet of letters and a portrait)

McNaughten (stunned)
All this, here, has been with her for a long time?

Jenny
It's the custom amongst HONEST people, when they quarrel and make a
final break, to return each other's letters and portraits.

McNaughten
Is it so?

Jenny
Yes, sir--without fail. This young man here will tell you so. Those
who live properly pride themselves on it.

McNaughten
Look here, my dear, all of this is a terrible nuisance, and you should
realize that I'm getting tired of putting up with it.

Jenny
Stop playing around! Here's your portrait--now give me hers, and, I'll
be off!

McNaughten
My portrait--what are you talking about?

Jenny
Yes, your portrait, which my mistress exchanged for hers--bad bargain,
though it was.

McNaughten (feebly)
I gave MY portrait to YOUR mistress?

Jenny
Look, are you going to pretend this is all a fable? That it is all
false?

McNaughten
Why, yes, by all the Devils, that is what I say, and what I will
maintain, now and forever.

Jenny
Surely, you wouldn't dare to take your oath on that, sir?

McNaughten
Yes, I swear it. For, I've never had my portrait drawn, which proves
it, beyond question.

Spruce
This is no time to feign. If you have received it, no matter how--you
are going too far.

McNaughten
I don't know anything about it--may the Devil take me if I do!

Jenny
Isn't this your portrait in this locket?

McNaughten
No--unless the Devil, to injure me, painted it with his own hands and
gave it to you.

Jenny
What audacity--what effrontery! But, I will confound you. Look--what
can you say to this witness? (opening the locket) Well--do you know
the face and the features?

McNaughten
How the Devil! It's--me. Who'd ever have thought such a thing
possible? Those are my eyes, my look.

Spruce (taking the portrait from Jenny)
Let's have a look, please. Put the original beside the copy. My word--
it is you, all right. A speaking portrait. Never did a painter draw a
better likeness.

McNaughten
There's some sorcery--or at least some trick. You will see. These two
creatures painted it while I was on the coach--just to play me some
trick. It's all part of their plan.

Jenny
Stop it, please.

McNaughten
Stop it yourself! Go try to meet men some other way, and leave me
alone.

Jenny
Give me back the portrait!

McNaughten
Of whom?

Jenny
Of my mistress, who else?

McNaughten (grabbing her roughly by the shoulders)
I don't know anything about it. Get out and leave me alone.

Jenny
Do you know, sir, that before leaving this place, I am going to
scratch your eyes out?

Spruce
Sir, to avoid any further quarrel--give her her portrait. You know a
woman scorned is a hundred times more vicious than all the Devils in
Hell.

McNaughten
But, were she a thousand times more of a Devil than she is-- I don't
know her or her mistress.

Spruce (to Jenny)
Never mind what he says. He must still be in love with her. Let me
soften him up a bit. Come back soon, and I will have it for you.

Jenny
Oh, all right. I can wait a little. But if he refuses to listen to
reason when I get back, I am going to burn the house down, understand?
(Smiling)

(Exit Jenny)

McNaughten
I don't know which of those harridans is more frightening: the
mistress or the maid. How can perfect strangers be so enthusiastic
about persecuting me--? Like furies from Hell.

Spruce
A man like you--young, loveable, handsome--is subject to these
misfortunes. Between lovers, fights like these are mere bagatelles.
>From today, I promise to make you friends with her.

McNaughten
Lord forbid.

Spruce (aside)
But, who do I see coming this way? It's the Squire. That hundred
pounds is going to spell trouble for us.

(Enter the Squire)

Squire
Hey, dear fellow, what luck--let me embrace you a thousand times to
show you how happy I am to see you. Look at me--I was outre--in
despair. This has been a horrible day, I've had nothing but bad luck
until Lo! I meet you. I've been buffeted on all sides by fate. Just
like a football.

McNaughten
Sir, I am sorry to see you this way, but I have no time to struggle
with you.

Squire
A pistol shot would be good for me. I wish someone would crush me into
the ground.

McNaughten
Who is this Irishman?

Spruce
Evidently, a dear friend of yours---although I think he's Welsh.

McNaughten
I've never seen him before.

Squire
I've just left a house--may the earth swallow it, and nature perish
with it--where I lost my last penny at cards. Outrageous luck. So, I
am obliged to ask you for the hundred pounds I loaned you when you
were in need. Excuse my importuning you, but you will pardon me--you
can see what a state I am in.

McNaughten
I pardon you, entirely, and you will pardon me, too, if I say that
this surprises me, entirely. I don't know you. How could you lend me a
hundred pounds, never having seen me before?

Squire (coldly)
What kind of talk is this? It passes my understanding.

McNaughten
I suppose your talk is easier to comprehend?

Squire
You pretend you don't owe me a hundred pounds?

McNaughten
No--on my oath. You've loaned to someone else, not me.

Squire
Perhaps, you don't recall, that before going to Germany, you needed
money for the campaign--not having enough money to buy a mule, let
alone a horse--

McNaughten
I don't recall a word of all this. I've never been to Germany.

Squire
That's where you said you were going. You came to me for help, and I
opened my purse for you, without any uncalled for remarks.

McNaughten
To me? I'd have to be crazy to borrow money from a Scotsman, or
Irishman, or whatever you are.

Squire (icily)
Sir, I am Welsh. This man here can bear witness; he was with you--I
recall his face. Come here, boy. Speak! Do you dare deny what his evil
heart tries in vain to forget?

Spruce (terrified)
Sir--

Squire
Speak, or my hand, possessed by fury, will--

Spruce
It comes to me in a confused way--

Squire
A confused way. Well, I am certain of it. I see you are no better than
your master. Though I blame you less--perhaps you fear your place or a
beating.
(To McNaughten)
Now, sir, give me my money, or take your sword.

McNaughten
What! Because I refuse to give you a hundred pounds, you compel me to
fight!

Squire
A little. Breaking an oath puts me in temper. Quickly--defend
yourself.

McNaughten
I am in no great rush. Let's discuss it further.

Squire
No discussion. Your choice is clear.

McNaughten
But, sir--

Squire
But, sir-- You must give me satisfaction

McNaughten
Me, give you, satisfaction? But, I swear, I don't owe you a penny. Sue
me--I will respond in court.

Squire
You know, very well, I did not even ask for a receipt! When someone
owes me--I carry my own bailiff. (drawing his sword)

McNaughten
Just Heaven--the brute! How am I to get out of this, without being
maimed or killed? How much do you insist I owe you?

Squire
A hundred pounds. How easily you forget.

McNaughten
But, I can't pay you a hundred pounds. I will give you half.

Squire
May I be pulverized to atoms, you will pay me my hundred pounds, in a
quarter of an hour or I will kill you instantly.

Spruce (low to McNaughten
The villain is prepared to kill us both, I believe. Give it to him--if
you're dead, what good will the sixty thousand pounds do you? Answer
him softly. The man is desperate and has nothing to lose.

McNaughten
But, it's robbery.

Spruce
Exactly. Your money or our lives.

McNaughten
He's very rude and I don't like him.

Spruce
What a time for reflections.

McNaughten
If you are in such a hurry, sir, so much the worse for you. I'll seek
another time to be angry. I haven't got a hundred pounds, but here are
sixty.
(To Spruce)
Give it to him, to calm him.
(Aside)
Ah, if I were not in line for this sixty thousand pounds, I would die
fighting, before I gave him a farthing. He looks formidable, though.
It would be quite a skirmish.

Spruce
Here's more than half your debt, sir. Tomorrow, you will have the
entire amount.

McNaughten
I want it clearly understood, that I protest, I do not owe you a
penny. I am paying you, only because you insist that I do.

Squire (taking the purse)
Goodday, sir, goodday. I see your soul. You spoke of honor to me, but
this proves the contrary. Never come near me again. No more of this
business. My nobility would be degraded in the presence of a coward
like you.

(Exit Squire)

McNaughten
Ha, has he got a nerve, to talk like that? Where am I? In what
country? Can this be England? What a race of perjurers. Men, women,
squires, merchants, customs officers, Welshmen. They all seem united
in an effort to enrage me. I don't know one of them, and they all
pretend to be my best friend come to surprise me. Let's go to
Torrington and get out of this frightful situation.

(McNaughten starts to leave)

Spruce (running after him and catching him)
Don't you want me to escort you to him?

McNaughten
I have no further need of your help. I am obliged to you for the
services you have rendered. (giving him some money) I couldn't praise
them more. But, from now on, I am so extremely suspicious that I am
going to fend for myself. Then, I will have only myself to blame if
something further goes wrong.

(Exit McNaughten)

Spruce
That fellow has got all his wits about him. He must decamp or go mad.
Still, if he stays a bit longer, he'll end up paying off all my
master's creditors.

(Enter the Captain)

Captain
Ah, my beloved Spruce, you see me beside myself. My fortune is so
great that I can hardly believe it. I have got the money--look! It has
force and power. All portable. Bills of Exchange--the best in London.
I will purchase two or three titles--with the best estates in England.

Spruce
What a windfall! Wealth comes to you from all sides. Please, let me
look over the notes. Beautiful engraving, excellent workmanship.
Pretty names. Superb style. Freely negotiable--not like love letters
on cheap paper where love distills itself in faded oaths, and idle
nonsense.

Captain
I know their worth better than you. But, just as the money did little
for me in the past, I hope, in the future, that it will serve me the
same way it does others.

Spruce
You don't know how luck has favored you. Your brother was just here,
and the Squire who loaned you a hundred pounds, suddenly appeared,
asking for the money. Your brother, naturally enough, thought the man
was insane. But the Squire, tiring of excuses drew his sword on the
spot. Your twin didn't care to fight--prudently, in my opinion, for
that Squire is the very Devil when his Welsh blood is up. So, your
brother gave half of it to the Squire, who took it as a reduction,

Captain
I am obliged to him for paying my debts.

Spruce
You don't owe him too much. He's done you a lot of harm with Flavella!

Captain (concerned)
He's seen her?

Spruce
Oh, indeed. He's a little brutal. He satirized her and said some
things that would put any woman's dander up. And, of course, she took
it as coming from you. Flavella left, rather incensed.

Captain
I've got to undeceive her of this error. But I see her coming. Where
are you heading, Madame? Where are you off to?

(Enter Flavella)

Flavella
Someplace you are not.

Spruce
There's tit for tat.

Flavella
I am going to Urania's to tell her she may have you. Love her, I
consent. I give her to you. I vow, henceforth, to flee you like a
monster and never see you more.

Captain
Madame--

Flavella
In return for the most intense love, what do I receive from you?
Injury and invective! It seems I appear to you without honor, wit or
attraction.

Captain
Madame, listen to me--

Flavella
Never. I don't understand how it is possible to be so brutal or to
have the audacity, the cold blood, to say such hard things to my very
face.

Captain
You know that in a public place--

Flavella
I don't know a thing.

Captain
Everything's all right--

Spruce
Listen, without so much passion.

Flavella
Do you intend that I expose myself again to his stupidities?

Spruce
My Lord, no. You jump to conclusions. In one moment, I am going to
dispel all these clouds and prove that you are both wrong (Flavella
and the Captain protest) and both right.

Flavella
Yes, I'm certainly right, as even you, can see.

Captain
And I am not wrong.

Spruce
All this little squabbling excites you. In two words it will be all
over. The gentleman has said certain harsh words to you?

Flavella
Past all belief.

Captain
But I say--

Spruce
Peace--away with petulance. I won't talk to either of you, if you are
always going to interrupt. The man who made this impertinent speech to
you is him--except he's not him. It's only his figure, manner, name,
and face. The one looks like the other. But, they differ, both are not
the same, and, in fact, are two! Thus, the other one is him--dressed
in his skin, the portrait of my Captain--he's the one who spoke so
unfeelingly to you.

Flavella
With what kind of nonsense do you hope to confuse me?

Captain
Don't go off without listening to him speak.

Spruce
Maybe I am not making myself clear. Monsieur has a brother in these
parts, a twin brother--identical in features and clothes. It was his
tongue that lashed you. You took him for this one, who is like him.
The other one is a brutal imposter. Here is the real McNaughten.

Flavella
What a strange story. Strange, I haven't heard it before. But--I
choose to believe it as it flatters my pride. Love renders my scorn
just and pardonable.

Captain
Your anger renders you more adorable in my eyes. Permit my passion--
(Trying to kiss her)

Flavella
Moderate your passions--

Captain
I am at fault. Too transported by pleasure, I push my passion a little
too far. But let us both forget our scorn.

Spruce (showing the Captain's hat)
So as not to be deceived--look for this mark. In a tight spot, it will
serve you like a beacon. Know which is which before you make for the
justice of the peace to be married.

Flavella
My heart will tell me sooner than my eyes.

Captain
May Heaven today complete my fortune. Without you, I want nothing and
renounce everything.

Spruce
Stop the compliments. When you are married, you will have leisure to
do that. Remember, Urania is against you. Let Madame return home in
peace for the moment. We must run to make the marriage contract. For
now we are at the beginning of the end--or is it the end of the
beginning? Anyway, we must finish.

CURTAIN



ACT III.

The street again. Sometime later. Enter Jenny and Urania.

Jenny
I tell you truly, Madame, I don't believe you can find another man
with such an evil heart. When I pressed him to return your portrait,
he wanted to beat me. And, I believe he would have, if his valet, a
man of softer disposition, hadn't diverted his rage. Oh, M'am, arm
yourself with courage--follow your point, and be valiant. Pursue your
rights. You have him in your power. You have his promise in writing.
He'll have to make good on it.

Urania
If I don't make him, let Heaven punish me.

Jenny
Here there is no relying on oaths, on probity. Despite law and honor,
women these days are often trapped. They rely on words, and are
deceived. So, to protect ourselves, we must make them put their fair
words in writing. It's only fair. But, what use will it be to get it
in writing, if we don't enforce the contract? I see very plainly, that
in this ungrateful century, one cannot hope to rely on anything that's
not in writing. But, we prefer to be the sport and dupes of men.

Urania
Say no more, Jenny. My incensed heart is resolved. If I can, I will
avenge our whole sex on this man.

Jenny
What, then? To get the world's attention, does it take more than to
wear a pretty wig? An empty head, a little whipper snapper, who
admires only himself, and chatters pleasantly, because he has good
manners, can plead with us about his love with complete impunity. He
surprises us and makes his ardent declaration--but recoils when it
comes time to make good on it. It's a hideous thing that cries to
heaven for vengeance. Abuse like this is grounds for revoking the
license we give men. Even if you don't want to marry him to avenge
yourself, you must do it to enrage him, and to satisfy the rest of us!

Urania (sighing)
But, if he no longer loves me, what good is it to force him into such
a sad marriage?

Jenny
Who marries only for love nowadays? That was fine, when you were an
adolescent. It's no crime to marry without love, and, even without
respect. What's necessary is to marry! You are at an age when your
attractions will wither and disappear. The advice I'm giving you, in
my zeal, is good. I intend to apply it to myself. To be an old maid is
a frightful evil, far worse than all the unhappiness that marriage can
cause.

(Enter Hastings and Flavella)

Hastings
Chance has led you here and saved me the trouble of finding you.

Urania
Chance has favored us equally, for I have been saved the trouble of
hunting you up.

Hastings
Always preoccupied? Aren't you yet undeceived? Don't you-- Don't you
realize that your passion is a chimera and a hallucination? Give it
up--believe me. You won't profit by crossing my plans. Show yourself
to be wise.

Urania
As usual, you babble without rhyme or reason. But, you know what I
want to talk about. Here is McNaughten's written promise to marry me;
given as a mark of his affection and in his own handwriting.

(Flavella flinches)

Hastings
Where is your credulity leading you, sis?

Urania
He wrote me, I tell you. I've been swindled. Listen, niece--

Flavella
You may be quite sure I'm listening very carefully, auntie.

Urania
Without exaggeration, you are very pleasant to try to steal a heart
like his from me, and to appropriate my treasure so boldly. Such an
action is stupid and not honest.

Flavella
Who could possibly ravish a conquest from your arms? Your eyes
guarantee that when one has been struck by your manifold attraction,
they will never change. They are charming eyes which steal men from
others.

Urania
My eyes are prettier than yours. We will see who succeeds best if we
employ them at the same time!

Hastings
Oh, I am at the end of my patience listening to you both. Happily, I
see my son-in-law coming.
(To McNaughten)
Are you bring the solicitor with you?

(Enter McNaughten)

McNaughten
I've been looking for him for nearly an hour, in vain. I finally came
to ask you to conduct me to him. Something irritating is always
happening to me today.

Hastings
I am waiting for him. I believe he won't be late.

McNaughten
One, after running after me, like one of my most cherished and
faithful friends, asked news of my health. Another, forcefully grabbed
my hand, and wanted to lead me to a tavern for supper. Then, a third,
stopping me in the street, forced me to pay a debt I know nothing
about. All these people confound me to Hell! As if I knew them any
better than Lucifer!

Urania
Traitor! Are you finished? In spite of your promised word, you intend
to marry another? In spite of all your oaths, in spite of your first
choice?

McNaughten
Ah, are we still at that?

Urania
You desert me, ingrate, faithless heart. You take pleasure in the
cruel pain I suffer. You see me dying and giving in to my fate without
shedding one single tear for my death. (collapsing on Jenny)

McNaughten
This woman is a torment; she must have been bewitched. Must I always
have a fury attached to my steps?

Jenny
Can you see my lady expire in my arms? You, who once had so much
tenderness for her? This poor innocent--does she deserve to have her
love repaid by such cruelty?

McNaughten
Let her expire in your arms. Let the Devil take her, and you with her.
Who cares! Already, for my peace and quiet, he might have done that.

Urania (springing back to life)
Perjurer! I will avenge myself for your breach of contract. I have
your promise. There's your signature. I have proof of your imposture.

McNaughten (to Hastings)
She's crazier than it's possible to explain. Try, as soon as you can,
to have her shut up.

Hastings (reading the contract)
But here's your name: McNaughten. Have you been with her in some way?
She is my sister: maybe I can smooth things over.

McNaughten
Me! If I've ever seen those two cheats standing there before today.
Pardon the harsh word, one of them is your sister. Never mind. I swear
before you, that Satan--Lucifer--

Hastings
I believe you without swearing.

McNaughten
This woman has vowed to make me insane. Spirit, demon, mischief making
witch, woman or fury--whatever you are: I beg you, leave me alone.

(Enter Torrington)

Hastings
Ah, Mr. Torrington, you come just in time, and we await you eagerly.

Torrington
I meet the company with pleasure, reunited on a joyful day in one
place. I believe my presence won't displease. The future has great
attractions. Your daughter was only lacking a husband--despite all her
attractions, she was incomplete. But, now, behold the well made man
love has given her. Now, she has nothing to desire.

McNaughten
Except to be a widow, and see me buried. That is the finishing touch
on the happiness of a woman.

Flavella
Such ideas never entered my mind.

Torrington (laughing uneasily)
The gentleman says what he thinks. Your beauty charms him as much as
your wit. I promise you, he's an honest man. I vouch for him.

McNaughten
You're joking, sir.

Torrington
And, in his headstrong character you find frankness of heart.

McNaughten (genially)
I will be even with you. It's you to whom virtues are social
conventions. I would praise you equally, if I had your facility with
words.

Torrington
If, as I believe, we are all agreed, we can proceed.

Urania (sweetly)
No need to hurry. I am opposed, if you please, to this pretty
marriage, and for a very good reason.

Hastings
You can tell us your reasons and your griefs tomorrow, sister. Don't
prevent us from doing our business.

Torrington
Here, then, is the contract.

McNaughten
But, first, sir, there is a little business that must be settled
first.

Torrington
Whatever you like is best. I wouldn't have been in such a hurry if you
hadn't asked me to finish drawing up the contract as soon as possible.

McNaughten
Are you suggesting you've seen me before?

Torrington
At my house.

McNaughten
When?

Torrington
A little while ago.

McNaughten
Who--me? Me?

Torrington
You, yes, you. You paid me the honor of a visit in my home. But I made
it worth your while, for I paid you sixty thousand pounds sterling.

McNaughten
Wait a minute. What did you say?

Torrington
You're trying to make some joke.

McNaughten
This is no laughing matter, I assure you. In fact, I am getting upset.
Isn't your name Torrington?

Torrington
It certainly is.

McNaughten
And are you not a solicitor?

Torrington
I am--and an honest man to boot.

McNaughten
Oh, that's something else again. Don't you have sixty thousand pounds
inheritance for me?

Torrington
I did--but no longer.

McNaughten
Why not?

Torrington
Isn't McNaughten your name?

McNaughten
Without a doubt.

Torrington
Then, I gave the sum to you, in cash and bills of exchange. And,
what's more, I have your receipt for it.

McNaughten
What, sir? You have the effrontery, the insolence--

Torrington
What, sir--have you the audacity, the impudence--

McNaughten
To say that I received sixty thousand pounds for you.

Torrington
The boldness to deny it?

McNaughten
There, I confess it--an abominable man!

Torrington
There, I swear it to you--a detestable cheat.

Hastings
Hey, gentlemen, gentlemen, easy. I am ashamed for you, and I don't
know which of you to believe.

Flavella
Sir, this gentleman might indeed have a heart dark enough to--

Urania
Yes, he's a rogue who glories in crime.

Jenny
Sue him, and if there's a need I will be a witness against him.

(Enter Spruce)

Spruce
Hey, what's going on here? Here's a big squabble.

McNaughten
Let this man judge of our difference. He's hardly left me all day. I
call him as witness. Let him speak.
(To Spruce)
Did I receive money today from this gentleman?

Spruce
Without a doubt. Sixty thousand pounds that your uncle left you in
negotiable instruments.

McNaughten (taking Spruce by the throat)
Ah, false witness, miserable imposter--you must remember--

Spruce
Yes, I remember that the sixty thousand pounds was given to a man
dressed like you, of the same proud bearing, a man who intends to
marry this gentleman's daughter, a man who is called McNaughten, and
is from Scotland. And, if you deny it, it's a lie, and I'll take my
oath--

Torrington
See, if it's possible, to have a blacker heart, to be more of a cheat.
Alas, what are you marrying him for? I've gotten you into a pleasant
business.

Hastings
I took this gentleman for a man of substance-- Now, I don't value him
at all.

Urania
After what he has done to me, there is no crime, no evil, that he
wouldn't perpetrate.

Jenny
Traitor, finally, you're caught, and there's nothing for you to do but
go hang yourself. I'll be happy to supply the rope.

McNaughten
No, I don't believe that Hell itself is capable, in its execrable
rage, so many men, so many evil demons, as you all. Ah, I cannot
speak, I am so enraged.

(Enter the Captain)

Captain
I believe my presence is required to get to the bottom of this
astonishing mystery.

Hastings
What in the world do I see?

Torrington
What prodigy is this?

Urania
Ought I to believe my eyes?

Jenny
Madame, I don't know if my vision is troubled, or if it's some vapor,
that is making me see double.

McNaughten
What object presents itself and makes me see myself, as in a mirror.
Why, it's my walking portrait, or a reflection.

Captain
How dare you take my name and appearance, sir, as your own? I am
Captain McNaughten, and you are injuring my reputation.

McNaughten (aside)
On my oath, this is another cheat.
(Aloud)
By what right, sir, do you steal my name? I don't go around taking
yours.

Captain
I've had no other name from birth.

McNaughten
My father gave me this name.

Captain
Mine has been the same all my life.

McNaughten
In giving birth to me, my mother died.

Captain
Mine died, also--in the same manner.

McNaughten
I am from Scotland.

Captain
I, too, am from Scotland.

McNaughten
I had a certain brother, a bad scapegrace, and I haven't heard news of
him in fifteen years.

Captain
I had a brother, too. A pious, churchgoing hypocrite. I've ignored his
fortunes for fifteen years.

McNaughten
This brother was my identical twin, and resembled me in everything
except piety.

Captain
Mine was my spitten image. Who sees him, sees me. But usually not in
the same places.

McNaughten
Are you not this brother?

Captain
You've said it. There's the explanation of the mystery.

McNaughten
Is it possible? Oh, Heavens.

Captain
May this confession witness my joy and happiness. My brother, it is
indeed me. What a happy encounter. Has fortune brought you to my
sight?

McNaughten
Brother, there has been much to rejoice me this day. But, I rather
counted on your being dead.

Jenny
All this has nothing to do with us, Madame. Be sure of it, we are
going to get one or the other, no matter what happens.

Hastings
What we are witnessing is certainly unusual.
(To Flavella)
You must have one of these two for a husband. Choose the one you like,
dear, and make me happy.

Flavella (recognizing the mark in the Captain's hat)
Rather than pick and choose, I'll have this gentleman, and take my
chances.
(Aside)
I hope they didn't switch hats.

Urania
And me, I'll take this one. (grabbing McNaughten)

McNaughten
To listen to you, you have only to kiss and choose as you please!

Spruce
While each lady takes the one to her taste, by right of windfall,
Jenny belongs to me.

Hastings (to the Captain)
Accept my daughter. Although it is pure fate that puts you in my
family, I wanted a McNaughten in the family and my plans are
unchanged.

Captain
In the excess of happiness my destiny has sent me, my heart is unable
to contain its joy.

Spruce
Jenny, everybody is thinking about marrying-- Let's do it, too--so as
not to be disagreeable by being different.

Jenny
If you hadn't lied so much, I wouldn't mind.

Spruce
I did it for your own good.

Jenny
But I am afraid--

Spruce
What are you afraid of?

Jenny
Of making a crazy mistake.

Spruce
I will be making a mistake a hundred times greater than yours if I let
you escape. (hugging her to him. She fends him off for a minute, then
submits slyly)
(To the spectators)
Ladies and Gentlemen, as you see, I've succeeded in pulling off the
marriage I prepared. I am going to bind my head in victory laurels. If
I have merited your applause, you will complete my happiness. (bowing)

CURTAIN










End of Project Gutenberg's The McNaughtens, by Jean-Francois Regnard

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MCNAUGHTENS ***

***** This file should be named 4977-0.txt or 4977-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/7/4977/

Produced by Dagny and Frank J. Morlock
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

