Project Gutenberg's The Maid of the Whispering Hills, by Vingie E. Roe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Maid of the Whispering Hills

Author: Vingie E. Roe

Release Date: March, 2004 [EBook #5253]
Posting Date: June 12, 2009
Last Updated: March 16, 2018

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAID OF THE WHISPERING HILLS ***




Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer








THE MAID OF THE WHISPERING HILLS


By Vingie E. Roe


Published January, 1912

     To
     My Mother
     Who Has Been My Constant Help

     My Father
     Who Was Proud Of Me

     And
     My Little Brother,
     These Two Long Asleep On The Hill At Carney--

     This Book Is Lovingly Inscribed
     V. E. R.


Contents

   I          The Venturers
   II         The Spring
   III        New Homes
   IV         The Stranger From Civilisation
   V          Nor'westers
   VI         Spring Trade
   VII        Forest News
   VIII       First Dawn
   IX         Gold Fire
   X          The Saskatoon
   XI         Leaven At Work
   XII        The Nakonkirhirinons
   XIII       “A Skin For A Skin”
    XIV        Fellow Captives
   XV         Long Trail
   XVI        Travel
   XVII       The Compelling Power
   XVIII      “I Am A Stone To Your Foot, Ma'amselle”
    XIX        The Hudson's Bay Brigade
   XX         The Wolf And The Caribou
   XXI        Tightened Screws
   XXII       “Choose, White Woman!”
    XXIII      The Painted Post
   XXIV       The Stone To The Foot Of Love
   XXV        Answered Prayers
   XXVI       Sanctuary
   XXVII      Return
   XXVIII     The Old Dream Once More
   XXIX       Bitter Aloes
   XXX        The Land Of The Whispering Hills




CHAPTER I THE VENTURERS

“Mercy!” shrieked little Francette, her red-rose face aghast, “he will
begin before I can bring the help!”

Like a flash of flame the maid in her crimson skirt shot up the main way
of Fort de Seviere to where the factory lay asleep in the warm spring
sun.

On its log step, pipe in mouth, young Anders McElroy leaned against the
jamb and looked smilingly out upon his settlement. Peace lay softly upon
it, from the waters of the small stream to the east where nine canoes
lay bottom up upon the pebbly shore, to the great dark wall of the
forest shouldering near on three sides. To him ran little Francette,
light on her moccasined feet as the wind in the tender pine-tops,
her eloquent small hands outstretched and clutching at his sleeve
audaciously.

None other in all the post would have dared as much, for this smiling
young man with the blue eyes was the Law at Fort de Seviere, factor of
the Company and governor of the handful of humanity lost in the vast
region of the Assiniboine. But to Francette he was Power and Help, and
she thought of naught else, as it is not likely she would have done even
at another time.

“Oh, M'sieu!” she cried, gasping from her run, “come at once beyond the
great gate! Bois DesCaut,--Oh, brute of the world!--whips that great
grey husky leader of his team, because it did but snap at his heel
beneath an idle prod! Hasten, M'sieu! He drags it, glaring, along the
shore to where lie those clubs brought for the kettles!”

In the dark eyes upraised to him there swam a mist of tears and the
heart of the little maid tore at her breast in anguish.

The smile slipped swiftly from the factor's face, leaving it grave.

“Where, little one?” he asked.

“Beyond the palisade. But hurry, M'sieu,--for the love of God!”

At the great gate in the eastern wall he paused and looked either way.
To the southward all was peaceful. An aged Indian of the Assiniboines
squatted at the water's edge mending the broken bottom of a skin canoe,
and two voyageurs, gay in the matter of sash and crimson cap, lay lazily
beneath a drowsing tree.

To the northward there flashed into McElroy's vision one of those
pictures a man sees but few times and never forgets, a picture startling
in its clear-cut strength.

Against the mellow background of the weather-beaten stockade that
surrounded the post there stood two figures, a man and a woman, and
between the two there crouched with snarling lips and flaming eyes a
huge grey dog.

Tall he was, that man, tall and broad of shoulder, but the head of the
woman, shining like blue-black satin in the morning sun, was level with
his brows.

She leaned a trifle forward and her eyes held fast to his
passion-flooded face. It was evident that she had but just reached the
spot from the fact that the club, arrested in its upward swing, still
was poised in the air.

They faced each other and the factor stopped in his tracks.

“Quick, M'sieu!” begged Francette at his side, but he put out a
commanding hand and ceased to breathe.

“Hold!” said the tall young woman at last, and her voice cut cold and
clear in the sun-filled morning. “No more! You have whipped the dog
enough.”

The red face of the trapper flamed into purple and his lips opened for
an oath. Quick as the heat lightning that flutters on the waters of
Winipigoos in the hot summers the cruel club came down. McElroy heard
its dull impact, and the husky crumpled like a broken reed.

With stern face the factor started forward, while the little maid
covered her pretty eyes and whimpered.

But quicker than his stride retribution leaped to meet DesCaut.

He saw the woman's arm shoot out and her strong hand, smooth and tawny
as finest tanned buckskin, double itself hard and leap in where the jaw
turns downward into the curve of the throat.

The stroke of a man it was, clean and sharp and well delivered, and
DesCaut, catching his heel on a buried stone's sharp jut, went backward
with his head in the young grass of the sloping shore.

For a moment she stood as it had left her, leaning forward, and there
was a shine of satisfaction in her eyes.

Then as the man essayed to rise there was a mighty laughter from the two
youths on the river bank and the spell was broken.

McElroy went forward.

“DesCaut,” he said sharply, and his words cut like the lash of the long
dog-whips, “you deserves death but you have been beaten by a woman. Go,
and boast of your strength. It is sufficient.”

DesCaut stood a moment swaying drunkenly with the force of passion
within him, his lips snarling back from his teeth and his eyes measuring
the factor unsteadily then he snatched off the little cap he wore and
hurled it at him.

Turning on his heel he swung down toward the gate and the two voyageurs
now standing and still laughing merrily.

One look at his bloodshot eyes sobered their mirth, and Pierre Garcon
reached involuntarily for the knife in his sash.

But Bois DesCaut, savage to silence, swung past them into the fort.

McElroy watched him until he disappeared, fearing he knew not what.

Then he faced the little scene again.

Down on her knees little Francette had lifted the heavy head with its
dull eyes and pitiful hanging tongue, lifted it to her breast, weeping
and smoothing the short ears deaf to her soft words, and sat rocking to
and fro in an ecstasy of grief. Beyond SHE stood, that tall woman, stood
silent and frowning, looking down upon the two, and the factor saw with
a strange thrill that the hand, yet doubled, was flecked with blood.

“Ma'amselle,” he said, “is of the new people who arrived last night from
Portage la Prairie?”

Then they were lifted for the first time to his face, those dark eyes
smouldering like banked fires, and he saw their marvellous beauty.

“Of a surety,” she said slowly, and there was a subtle tone in her
deep-throated voice that made the blood stir vaguely within the factor's
veins, “does M'sieu have so many strangers passing through his gates
that he is at loss to place each one?”

And with that word she turned deliberately away, walked down toward the
gate, and entered the stockade.

McElroy watched her go, until the last glint of her sober dress, plain
and clinging easily to the magnificent shoulders that swung slightly
with her free walk, had passed from view. And not alone he, for the two
voyageurs alike gazed after her, this new-comer from the farther ways of
civilisation who dared the brute DesCaut and struck like a man.

Then the factor bent above the little Francette.

“Sh!” he said gently, “little one, let go. The dog is dead, poor beast.
Come away.”

But the maid would not give up the battered body, and with the audacity
of her beauty and life-long spoiling, besought the young factor for
help.

“There is yet life, M'sieu. See! The breath lifts in his sides. Is there
naught to be done when one sleeps, so? He is so strong at the sledges
and he did not whimper,--no, not once,--when DesCaut was beating him to
death. Is there nothing, M'sieu?”

Very pretty she was in her pleading, the little Francette, with her
misty eyes and the frank tears on her cheeks; and McElroy went to the
river and filled his cap with water. This he poured into the open
jaws and sopped over the blood-clotted head, wetting the limp feet and
watching for the life she so bravely proclaimed.

And presently it was there, twitching a battered muscle; lifting the
side with its broken ribs, fluttering the lids over the fierce eyes; for
this was Loup, the fiercest husky this side of the Athabasca.

With pity McElroy gathered up the great dog, staggering under the load,
for it was that of a big-framed man, and entered the post, the little
maid at has side. Near the gate a running crowd met them, for the tale
had spread apace and wondering eyes looked on.

Down to the southern wall where lived the family of Francette they went,
and the factor laid Loup in the shade of the cabin.

“If he lives, little one, he shall be yours,” said he, “for he is worth
a tender hand. We'll try its power.”

And as he turned away he caught a glimpse of the tall stranger looking
at them from a distance.

Small it was and crowded, this little trading post of the great Hudson's
Bay Company in that year of 1796, and a goodly stream of beaver found
its way through it to the mighty outside world.

Squatted alone on the shores of the Assiniboine, shouldering back the
wilderness with the spirit of the conqueror, it faced the rising sun
with its square stockade, strong and well built, log by log, its great,
brass-studded gate in the eastern centre, its four bastions rising at
its corners.

Here was a little world of itself, a small community of voyageurs,
trappers, coureurs du bois, and all those that cast their lot in the
wild places.

Adventurers from the Old World often passed through it on their way
to the farther west, lured by the tales of dreamers who spoke of the
Northwest Passage and the world that opened beyond the setting
sun; renegades of the lakes and forest came for and found its ready
hospitality, and into it came at all seasons those Indians whose skill
and cunning accounted for so much of that great fur trade which made for
wealth in the distant cities beyond the eastern sea.

Too small for a council, it gave allegiance wholly to its factor,
young Anders McElroy, at whose right hand for sage advice and honest
friendship stood that most admirable of men, Edmonton Ridgar, chief
trader and anything else from accountant to armourer. Beneath them and
in good command were some thirty able men whose families lived in the
neat log cabins within the stockade.

With its back to the western wall there stood in the centre the factory
itself, a good log building of somewhat spacious size; its big room,
divided by a breast-high solid railing, with a small gate in the middle,
serving as office and general receiving-place. Beyond the railing, in
the smaller space toward the north, there stood the great wooden desk
of the factor, its massive book of accounts always open on its face, its
hand-made drawers filled with the documents of the Company. Here
McElroy was wont to take account of the furs brought in, to distribute
recompense, and to enforce the simple law. Attached to this room on
the south was the great store-room, packed with those articles of
merchandise most likely to seem of worth in savage eyes and brought,
with such infinite labour by canoe and portage, from those favoured
lower points whose waters admitted the yearly ships--namely, rifles and
ammunition, knives of all sorts, bolts of bright cloth and beads of
the colour of the rainbow, great iron kettles such as might hang most
fittingly above an open fire, and bright woven garments made by hands
across seas.

At the back of the big room was the small one where McElroy and Ridgar
had their living, furnished scantily with a bed and table, an open
fireplace and crane, some rude, hand-made chairs, and a shelf of books.

And to this post of De Seviere had come in the dusk of the previous
night a little company of people.

They were tired and travel-stained, with their belongings in packs on
the shoulders of the men, and the joy of the venturer in their eager
faces.

From far down in the country below the Rainy River they had come,
pushing to the west in that hope of gain and desire of travel which
opens the wilderness of every land. They had met the factor at the great
gate and entered in to rest and feast, as is the rule of every fire. By
morning had come the leaders of the party to McElroy, and there had been
talk that ended in an agreement, and the tired venturers had dropped
their burden of progress.

When they had rested, there were to be three new cabins squeezed somehow
into the already overcrowded stockade, and five more men and six women
would belong to Fort de Seviere.

As he walked toward the factory the young man was thinking of all this.
Of a surety the tall girl, had come with the strangers, yet he had not
noticed her until that moment outside the stockade wall, when he had
caught the striking picture in the morning sun.

Name? Most certainly it would be in that list which the leader of the
party had promised him by noon. When he entered the big room the man was
there before him, a picturesque figure of a man, big and graceful and
dark of brow, with long black curls beneath his crimson cap. As McElroy
went forward he straightened up from his lounging position against the
railing and held out the paper he had promised.

“For enrollment, M'sieu,” he said simply.

The factor took the proffered slip and read eagerly down its length,
done neatly in a finished hand.

“Adventurers,” he read, “from Grand Portage on Lake Superior, bound for
the west,--agreed to stop for the length of one year at Fort de Seviere
on the Assiniboine River,--Prix Laroux and wife Ninette, Pierre and Cif
Bordoux and their wives Anon and Micene, Franz LeClede and wife Mora,
Henri Baptiste and wife Marie, and Maren Le Moyne, an unmarried woman
and sister to Marie Baptiste.”

A sudden little light flamed for a moment in the young factor's blue
eyes.

For some unknown reason it had pleased him, that last ingenious
sentence.

“Prix Laroux,” he said, turning to his new acquisition, “we will get to
the work of our contract.”



CHAPTER II THE SPRING

Springtime lay over the vast region of lake and forest. Along the
shores of the little rivers the new grass was springing, and in nook and
sheltered corner of rock and depression shy white flowers lifted their
pretty heads to the coaxing sun. Deep in the budding woods birds in
flocks and bevies called across the wilderness of tender green, while at
the post the youths sang snatches of wild French songs and all the world
felt the thirst of the new life.

A somewhat hard winter it had been, long and cold, with crackling frost
of nights and the snow piled deep around the stockade, and the gracious
release was very welcome.

The somewhat fickle stream of the Assiniboine had loosed its locks of
ice and rolled and gurgled, full to its low banks, as if the late summer
would not see it shrunk to a lazy thread, refusing sometimes even the
shallow canoes and barely licking the parched lips of the land.

In gay attire the maids of De Seviere ventured beyond the gates to stray
a little way into the forest and come back laden with tiny green sprays
of the golden trailer, with wee white blossoms and now and again a great
swelling bud of the gorgeous purple flower of the death plant.

“Bien! It is of a drollness, mes cheries,” laughed Tessa Bibye one day,
stopping at the cabin by the south wall; “how Francette does but sit in
the shade and nurse that half-dead wolf. Is it by chance because of the
owner, or that hand which carried it here, Francette? Look for the man
behind Francette's devotion ever!”

Whereat there was a laugh and crinkling of pretty dark eyes at the
little maid's expense, but she sprang to her feet and faced her mates in
anger.

“Begone, you Tessa Bibye!” she cried hotly; “'tis little you know beyond
the thought of a man truly, and that because you have lacked one from
the cradle!”

Tessa flushed and drew away, vanquished. Merry laughter, turned as
readily upon her, wafted back on the golden wind. Francette, her eyes
flaming with all too great a fire, set a pan of cool water beneath the
fevered muzzle of the husky and glanced, scowling, across her shoulder
toward the factory.

Five days had passed since the episode beside the stockade, and Bois
DesCaut had said no word, of his property. In fact, the great dog was
seemingly scarce worth a thought, much less a word. Helpless, bruised
from tip to tip, one side flat under its broken ribs, he lay sullenly in
the shade; of the cabin where McElroy had put him down, covered at night
from the cool air by Francette's' own blanket of the gorgeous stripes,
fed by her small loving hands bit by bit, submitting for the first time
in his hard and eventful life to the touch of woman, thrilling in his
savage heart to the word of tenderness.

Gently the little maid stroked the rough grey fur and scowled toward the
factory.

So intent was she with her thought that she did not hear the step beside
her, springing quickly up when a voice spoke, cool and amused, behind.
“Well said, little maid,” it praised; “that was a neat turn.”

The tall stranger, Maren Le Moyne, stood smiling down upon her.

Francette, sharpest of tongue in all the settlement, was at sudden
loss before this woman. She looked up into her face and stood silent,
searching it with the gaze of a child.

It was a wondrous face, dark as her own, its cheeks as dusky red, but in
it was a baffling something that held her quick tongue mute, a look as
of great depth, of wondrous strength, and yet of fitful tenderness,--the
one playing through the other as flame about black marble, and with the
rest a smile.

More than little Francette had beheld that baffling expression and
squirmed beneath its strangeness. Francette looked, and the scowl drew
deeper.

She saw again this woman leaning slightly forward, her eyes a-glitter on
the prostrate DesCaut, her strong hand doubled and flecked with blood,
with Loup at her feet,--and quick on the heels of it she saw the look in
the factor's eyes as he had commanded her to silence with a motion.

“So?” she flamed at last, recovering her natural audacity, for the maid
was spoiled to recklessness by reason of her beauty; “I meant it to be
neat.”

At the look which leaped into the eyes of the stranger her own began to
waver, to shift from one to the other, and lastly dropped in confusion.

“But spoiled at the end by foolishness,” said Maren Le Moyne, and all
the pleasure had slipped from her deep voice, leaving it cold as steel.

Abruptly she turned away, her high head shining in the sun, her strong
shoulders swinging slightly as she walked.

Francette looked after her, with small hands clinched and breast heaving
with, anger, and there had the stranger made her second enemy in Fort de
Seviere within the first fortnight.

Along the northern wall there was much bustle and scurry, the noise of
voices and of preparation, for the men were busy with the raising of the
first new cabin. As some whimsical fate would have it, there were the
hewn logs that Bard McLellan had prepared a year back for his own new
house when he should have married the pretty Lila of old McKenzie, who
sickened suddenly in the early autumn when the leaves were dropping in
the forest and fled from his eager arms. No heart had been left in the
breast of the trapper after that and the logs lay where he had felled
them.

Now McElroy, tactful of tongue and gentle, touched the sore spot, and
Bard gave sad consent to their use.

“Take them, M'sieu,” he said wearily; “my pain may save another's need.”

So the first new cabin went up apace.

Anders McElroy looked over his settlement day by day and there was great
satisfaction in his eyes. Fort de Seviere was none so strong that it
could afford to look carelessly on the acquisition of five good men and
hardy trappers, and, beside, somehow there was a pleasanter feeling to
the warm spring air since they had arrived-a new sense of bustle and
accomplishment.

Often he stood in the door of the factory and looked to where the women
sang at their work or carried the shining pails full of water from the
one deep well of the settlement, situated near the gate in the eastern
wall, and the smiles were ever ready in his blue eyes.

A handsome man was this factor of Fort de Seviere, tall and well formed,
with that grace of carriage which speaks of perfect manhood; his head,
covered with a thick growth of sun-coloured hair curling lightly at the
ends, tossed ever back, ready to laugh. Scottish blood, mingled with a
strong Irish strain, ran riot in him, giving him at once both love of
life and honour.

They had known what they were doing, those lords of the H. B. Company,
when they had sent this young adventurer from Fenchurch Street to the
new continent, and, after five years among the hardships of the trade,
he found himself factor of Fort de Seviere,--lord of his little world,
even though that world were but one tiny finger of the great system
spreading itself like a stretching hand outward from the shores of the
Bay to that interior whose fringed skirts alone had been explored.

A high station it was for so young a man, for his twenties were not yet
behind him, and the pride of his heart, its holding.

Therefore, life was a living wine to Anders McElroy, and the small
world of his post a kingdom. And into it, with that travel-tired band of
venturers from Rainy Lake, had passed a princess.

Not yet did he know this,--not for many days, in which he looked from
the factory door among the women, singling out one who wore no brilliant
garment, yet whose shining head drew the eyes of the men like a magnet.

Slowly speech grew among them, very slowly, as if something held back
the usual comment of the trappers, concerning this Maren Le Moyne.

“Look you, Pierre,” ventured Marc Dupre to Pierre Garcon, as they
beached their canoe one dusk after a short trip up the river; “yonder
is the young woman of the strong arm. A high head, and eyes like a
thunderous night,--Eh? Is there love, think you, asleep anywhere within
her?”

Whereat Pierre glanced aside under his cap to where Maren hauled up the
bucket from the well, hand over hand, with the muscles slipping under
her tawny skin like whipcords.

“Nom de Dieu!” ejaculated Pierre under his breath; “if there is, I would
not be the one to awaken it and not be found its master! It would be a
thing of flame and fury.”

“Ah!” laughed the other, “but I would. It would be, past all chance,
a thing to remember, howe'er it went! But it is not like that you or
I will be the one to wake it. Milady, though clad in seeming poverty,
fixes those disdainful eyes upon the clouds.”



CHAPTER III NEW HOMES

The work of raising the new cabins went forward merrily. Every one lent
a hand, and by the end of May the new families were installed and living
happily. In that last house near the northeast corner of the post dwelt
Henri and Marie Baptiste and Maren Le Moyne.

A goodly place it was, divided into two rooms and already the hands of
the two sisters had fashioned of such scant things as they possessed and
dared buy from the factory on the year's debt, a semblance of comfort.

In the other cabins the rest of the party managed to double, each family
taking one of the two rooms in each, and the women at least drew a
sigh of content that the long trail had at last found an end, however
unstable of tenure.

“Ah, Maren,” said Marie Baptiste, sitting on the shining new log step
of her domicile, “what it is to have a home! Does it not clutch at your
heart sometimes, ma cherie, the desire for a home, and that which goes
with it, the love of a man?”

She raised her eyes to the face of Maren leaning above her against the
lintel, and they were full of a puzzled question.

Maren answered the look with a swift smile, toying lightly with a fold
of the faded sleeve rolled above her elbow.

“Home for me, Marie, is the wide blue sky above, the wind in the tossing
trees, the ripple of soft waters on the bow of a canoe. For me,--I
grieve that we have stopped. Not this year do we reach the Land of the
Whispering Hills.”

A swift change had fallen into the depth of her golden voice, a subtle
wistfulness that sang with weird pathos, and the eyes raised toward the
western rim of the forest were suddenly far and sombre.

“Forgive!” said her sister gently; “I had forgot. I know the dream, but
is it not better that we rest and gain new strength for another season?
Here might well be home, here on this pretty river. We have come a
mighty length already. What could be fairer, cherie,--even though we
leave another to win to the untracked West.”

A small spasm drew across the features of Maren, a twitching of the full
lips.

“Faint heart of you,” she said sadly. “Oh, Marie, 'tis your voice has
ever held us back. They would prod faster but for you. Is there no
glory within you, no daring, no dreams of conquest? Bien! But I could go
alone. This dallying stiffles the breath in me!”

She put up a hand and tore open the garment at her throat, taking a deep
breath of the sunlit air.

“But it is poverty that must be reckoned with. By spring again we may be
better equipped than ever.”

So rode up the hope that was ever in her.

“Yes,” sighed Marie, “as the good God wills.”

But she glanced wistfully around the new cabin, to be her own for the
length of the four seasons. And who should say what might not happen in
four seasons?

She wondered fretfully what fate had fashioned the glorious creature
beside her in the form of Love itself to put within the soul of the
restless conqueror. Never had she known Maren, though they two had come
from the same lap.

Presently Maren looked down at her, and the shimmering smile, like light
across dark waters, had again returned.

“Nay,” she said gently, “fret not. It is spring-and you have at last a
home.”

True, it was spring.

Did not each breath of the south wind tell it, each flute-like call
from the budding forest without the post, each burst of song from some
hot-blooded youth with his red cap perched on the back of his head, his
gay sash knotted jauntily?

It stirred the heart in the breast of Maren Le Moyne, but not with the
thought of love. It called to her as she stood at night alone under the
stars, with her head lifted as if to drink the keen, sweet darkness;
called to her from far-distant plains of blowing grass, virgin of man's
foot; from rushing rivers, bare of canoe and raft; from high hills,
smiling, sweet and fair, up to the cloudless sky--and always it called
from the West.

Spring was here and cast its largess at her feet,--fate held back her
eager hand.

A year she must wait, a year in which to win those necessaries of the
long trail, without which all would fail.

Travel, even by so primitive a method as canoe and foot, must demand its
toll of salvage.

At Rainy Lake they had been held by thieving Indians and a great part
of their provisions taken from them, leaving them to make their way in
comparative poverty to the next post of De Seviere.

Further progress that year was impossible. Therefore, the contract of
the trappers with the factor.

And Maren Le Moyne--venturer of the venturers, flame of fire among them,
urger, inspirer, and moral leader, a living pillar before them in her
eagerness--must needs curb her soul in bonds of patience and wait at
Fort de Seviere for another spring.

Close beside her in her visions and her high hope, her courage and her
eagerness, stood that leader of the little band, Prix Laroux. Fed by
her fire, touched by her enthusiasm, the man was the mouth piece for the
woman's force, the masculine expression of that undying hope of conquest
which had drawn the small party together and set it forth on the
perilous venture of pushing toward the unknown West to find for itself
an ideal holding.

Back at Grand Portage the girl had listened from her late childhood
to tales of the wilderness told at her father's cabin by voyageurs
and trappers, by returning wanderers and stray Indians smoking the
peace-pipe at his hearth. Long before she had reached the stature of
woman she had sat on her stool beside that jovial old man, her father,
grimy from his forge, and drunk the tales wide-eyed, to creep away and
watch the stars, to dream of those dashing streams and to clinch her
hands for that she was not born a man.

And then when she was fifteen had come the day when the tales had at
last kindled to flame the parent fire of that wildness in her which
slept unsuspected in the breast of the blacksmith, then old as the way
of life runs, and he had closed his cabin and his forge, given his two
motherless girls to the wife of Jacques Baptiste, joined a party going
into the wilderness, and gone out of their lives.

Eleven years had passed with its varied life, at Grand Portage and he
had never returned,--only vague rumors that had sunk in tears the
head of gentle Marie, the younger of the two sisters, and lifted with
sympathetic understanding that of Maren the elder.

Why not? She had asked herself in the starlit nights of those years, why
not? All their lives he had been a good father to them, taking the place
of the mother dead since she could just remember, speeding with tap and
stroke of his humble craft those luckier ones who streamed through the
stirring headquarters of Grand Portage at the mouth of Pigeon River each
season, going into that untracked region of romance and dreams where the
call of his still sturdy manhood had beckoned him,--how long none might
know. And at last he had heeded, laid down the staid, the sane, and
followed the will-o'-the-wisp of conquest and adventure that took the
current by his door.

Never had Maren chided him,--never for one moment held against him the
desertion of his children. For that, they were well provided for since
he had left with Jacques Baptiste the savings of his life, not much, but
enough to bring both of them to the marriage age.

And well and tenderly had old Jacques and his wife fulfilled the
trust,--Maren's dark eyes were often misty as she recalled the parting
at Grand Portage.

So tenderly had the two maids grown in the love of the family that
Marie had, but at the start of the great journey, married young Henri
Baptiste.

Marie was all for a home and some black-eyed babies, but she clung to
Maren as she had ever done,--and now, in her twenty-sixth year, Maren
had risen to the call as her father had done before her, and lifted her
face, rapt as some pagan Priestess', toward that mystic West,--bound
for the Land of the Whispering Hills, whence had come that old, vague
rumour, lured alike by love of the unknown and shy, unspoken longing for
the father whose heart must be the pattern of her own.

And in her train, swept together by that fire within her, touched into
flame by her ever-mounting hope, her courage, and her magnetism, went
that small band of men and women, all young, all of adventurous blood,
all daring the odds that let reluctantly a woman into the wilderness.

Yet it has been ever women who have conquered the wilderness, for until
they trod the trace the men had cut it still remained a wilderness.

So she leaned in the door of Marie's new home, this taut-strung Maren
Le Moyne, and gazed away above the rim of the budding forest, and her
spirit was as a chaffing steed held into quiet by a hand it knows its
master.

For a year she must endure the strain,--then, as the good God willed,
the leap forward, the wild breath in her nostrils, the forging into the
unknown.

“Ah, yes!” she said again, “it is the spring.”

“Bon jour,” she nodded, unsmiling, as a slim youth swung jauntily up the
hard-beaten way between the cabins.

“Eh!” said Marie, alert, “and who is that lord-high-mighty, with his red
cheeks and his airs, Maren? You know, as it is always, every man in the
post already. It is not so with the women, I'll wager. For instance, who
lives in the tiny house there by the south bastion?”

“I know not,” answered Maren, as though she humoured a child, and taking
the last question first; “as for the youth, 'tis young Marc Dupre, and
one of a sturdy nature. I like his spirit, though all I know of it is
what sparkles from his roguish eyes. A fighter,--one to dare for love of
chance.”

Marie looked quickly up, ever ready to pounce on the first gleam of
aught that might ripen into a love interest, but she saw Maren's eyes,
cool and shining, watching the swaggering figure with a look that
measured its slim strength, its suggestion of reserve, its gay joy of
life, and naught else.

“A pretty fellow,” she said, with a touch of disappointment.

Each and every man went by Maren just so,--eliciting only that interest
which had to do apart from the personal.

But the black eyes of Marc Dupre had softened a bit under their daring
as he approached the factory.

“Holy Mother!” he whispered to himself; “what a woman! No maid, but
a WOMAN--for whose word one would fillip the face of Satan. She is
fire--and, if I am sure, all men are tow.”



CHAPTER IV THE STRANGER FROM CIVILISATION

“How goes it, little one, with Loup?”

The factor stopped a moment in the sunshine before the cabin of old
France Moline.

Clad in a red skirt, brilliant in its adornment of stained quills of the
porcupine got from the Indians, Francette paced daintily here and there
in the clean-swept yard, now snapping her small fingers, now coaxing
with soft noises in her round throat, her sparkling eyes fixed on the
gaunt grey skeleton that stood on its four feet braced wide apart,
wavering dizzily.

For a time she did not answer, as if he who spoke was no more than any
youth of the settlement, so exaggeratedly absorbed was she.

Then, pushing back the curls from her face, a pretty motion that always
wakened a look of admiration in masculine eyes beholding,--

“If he would only try, M'sieu,” she said, frowning, “but he does nothing
save stand and look at me like that. The strength is gone from his
legs.”

It seemed even as the little maid protested. Massive, silent,
contemptuous, his small eyes under the wolfish skull cold and alight
with a look that sent shuddering from him the timid,--thus he had been
in his hard-fought and hard-won supremacy, a great, mysterious beast
brought full-grown from the snowbound wilderness of the forest one
famine-time by old Aquamis and sold to Bois DesCaut for a tie of
tobacco.

Now he stood, a pitiable shadow, and begged mutely of the only tender
hand he had known for understanding of this strange weakness that took
his limbs and sent the heavens whirling.

McElroy looked long upon him.

“'Tis a shame,” he said, his straight brows drawing together, “the dog
is a better brute than Bois.”

“Aye,” flashed Francette, talking as though it were no uncommon thing
for the factor to stop at the cabin of the Molines, “and no more shall
the one brute serve the other. You have said, M'sieu.”

“Yes,” laughed the factor, “I have said and it shall be so. I will buy
the dog from Bois if he speaks of the matter. Take good care of him,
little one,” and McElroy turned down toward the gate. As he moved away,
free of step and straight as an Indian, he filliped away a small budding
twig of the saskatoon which one of the youths had brought in to show
how the woods were answering the call of the warm sun, and which he had
dandled in his fingers as he walked. It fell at the edge of the beaded
skirt and quick as thought the hand of Francette shot out and covered
it. A hot flush mounted under the silken black curls and she dropped her
eyes, peering under their lashes to see if any observed. She drew the
faded sprig toward her and hid it in her breast.

Before the cabin of the Baptistes, Jean Saville touched his cap and
stopped.

“Yes?” said the factor; “what is it, Jean?”

“Assuredly, M'sieu, has the tide of the spring set in. Pierre but now
reports the coming of a band of strangers down the river. They come in
canoes, five of them, well manned and armed as if the country of the
Assiniboine were bristling with dangers instead of being the abode of
God's chosen. Within the hour they will arrive at the landing.”

“Thank you, Jean,” said McElroy; “I will prepare for the meeting.”

The trapper touched his cap and passed.

“Ah,” smiled the factor to himself, “I like this bustle of passage. It
is good after the winter's housing, and who knows? There may be those
among the strangers who bring word from Hudson Bay.”

He turned briskly back and gave word to Jack de Lancy and his wife
Rette to cook a great meal, also to see that the store-room was cleared
sufficiently by the more orderly packing back of the goods to allow of
five canoe-loads of men sleeping upon the floor. Then he passed down
the main way, out of the gate in the warm sun and took his place at
the landing to look eagerly down stream for the first coming of the
strangers. Not far from the enthusiasm of boyhood was this young factor
of Fort de Seviere.

And within the hour, as Jean had said, they came, rounding the distant
bend in an even distanced string, long narrow craft, each bearing
the regular complement of five men, a bowman, a steersman, and three
middlemen whose paddles shone like crystal as they sank and lifted
evenly. Strangers they were in very truth, as McElroy saw at the first
glance.

Never had they been bred in the wilderness, these men, unless it were
the two guides in the first and fourth canoe, picked out readily by
their swarthy skins, their crimson caps, and their rugged litheness.
Fairer, all, were the rest, paler of skin, more loose of muscle, shown
by the very way they bent to their work. Their garments, too, as they
drew nearer brought a smile to the watcher's lips, a smile of memory.
Those coats, brave in their gilt braid, had assuredly come across seas.
Thus might one behold them on the Strand.

Ah! These were, without doubt, part of the fall ship's load of
adventurers come to the new continent filled with the fire of
achievement and excitement that brought so many youths over seas. They
had, most like, come down from the great bay by way of God's Lake and
the house there, traversed the length of Winnipeg, come along the river
at the southern end, and at last turned westward into the Assiniboine.
A long rest they would no doubt take at Fort de Seviere, and there would
be news of the outside world.

McElroy was at the water's very edge as the first canoe of the string
curved gracefully in and cut slimly up to the landing.

“Welcome, M'sieurs,” called the factor of Fort de Seviere, using
unconsciously the speech of the region, which had become his own in five
years, “in to the right a bit,--so! Well done!”

The word was not so sincere as he would have made it, for the bowman,
jumping out into the knee-deep water to keep the boat from touching
bottom, had floundered like an ox, thereby proving his newness at the
business. On the face of the swarthy Canuck guide who sat in the stern
there was a weary contempt.

“Friends, M'sieurs?” called McElroy tardily, scarcely deeming such
precaution necessary, yet giving the hail from force of habit.

They looked for the most part Scottish, these men, save here and there
among them one who might be anything of the motley that came across each
year.

In the first canoe a figure had risen and stood tall and straight among
the bales of goods with which the craft was seen to be close packed
from bow to stern, a figure striking in its lack of kinship to its
surroundings, yet commanding in its beauty. Garments of cloth, of a gay
blue shade and much adorned with trimming of gold braid, fitted close
to the slender form of the man. His limbs from the knee were encased in
leggings made, most evidently, in some leather shop, while tilted on his
splendid head he wore a hat of so wide a brim that no sunlight touched
either face or throat, while from beneath this covering there fell to
his shoulder long curls of hair that shone like silk. This, evidently,
was the leader of the party.

“Friends,” he said, “bound for the west and the country of the
Saskatchewan.”

For all his appearance he spoke with the accent of the French, and for a
moment McElroy looked closely at him.

“Of the Company?” he asked sharply.

“Aye,” said the other, with a little of wonder in voice and look, “of
the Company, M'sieu most assuredly.”

The momentary flicker of uneasiness that had gripped the factor with the
stranger's speech died at his words.

So, of a surety, why not?

Had not he himself, born in the smoke of a London street, accepted with
the ingenious adaptability of the Irish blood within him the very speech
he now wondered at in the other?

As the young man sprang lightly to land he held out his hand, and it was
gripped with a force that showed the spirit behind the beauty of this
new guest.

“Welcome, M'sieu,” said the factor, “to Fort de Seviere and all it
contains.”

“Bien!” laughed the other with a show of fine white teeth, “but it is
good to behold neighbours in so deadly a wilderness as we have passed
through for these many days. Naught but God-forgotten loneliness and
never-ending forest. Yet it is for these that we barter the comforts
of civilisation, eh, M'sieu, and waste ourselves on solitude and the
savage?” He turned and waved his gloved hand over the five canoes, now
curving one by one in to the landing, and shouted a few terse orders and
commands.

“But I had nigh forgot, so unused am I to society and the usages
thereof,”--he said, turning back with an engaging smile, “Alfred de
Courtenay, known in that world across the water; and which my taste, or
that of itself, more properly speaking, has caused me to forswear for
some length of time, as Mad Alfred, I am, M'sieu--?”

“Anders McElroy,” supplied the other, “and factor of Fort de Seviere.”

“Monsieur le facteur, your servant, of French lineage, English nativity,
and adventurous spirit.”

With a motion indescribably graceful he swept off his wide hat and
executed a bow which in itself was proof of his gentleness.

“And now, M'sieu, lead on to those delights of rest and converse which
your hospitality hath so graciously promised.”

Leaving his company to beach and store for the night the canoes
with their loads of merchandise, under the direction of his aide or
lieutenant whom he introduced to the factor as John Ivrey, a young
man of fine presence, Alfred de Courtenay walked beside McElroy up the
gentle slope of the river bank, entered the great eastern gate of the
post, not without an appreciative glance at its massive strength and
at the well-nigh impregnable thickness of the stockade, the well-placed
surveillance of the towering bastions, and thus up the way between the
cabins to the door of the factory, open and inviting.

“Mother of God, M'sieu!” he said with a copious sigh; “what it is to
meet with white faces! For weeks I have beheld along the shores peering
brown countenances that lifted my gorge, and I have well-nigh been
tempted to turn back.”

“It has been a long journey, then, to you?”

McElroy smiled, thinking of the first impressions and effect of the
wilderness on such a man fresh from the ways of civilisation.

“Long? Though it is my initial journey, yet am I veteran frontiersman.”

He turned upon the factor the brilliance of his smile, a combination of
dazzling teeth and eyes that fairly danced with spirit, like bubbling
wine, blue and swift in their changes from laughter to an exaggerated
dolorousness, as when he spoke of these terrible hardships.

And if they were quick after this fashion they were no less so in
roaming keenly over every corner of the enclosed space within the
stockade.

Before they had reached the factory the stranger knew that there were
three rows of cabins in the post, that the factory was a mighty fortress
in its low solidity, and that the small log structure to the right of it
with the barred window was the pot au beurre.

As they neared the factory the figure of a tall woman, young by the
straightness of the back, the gracious yet taut beauty of line and
curve, came from behind the cabin of the Savilles, and on her shoulder
was perched a three-year-old child which laughed and gurgled with
delight, holding tight to her widespread hands. The woman's face was
hidden by the child's body, but her voice, deep-throated and rich with
sliding minor tones, mingled with the high shrillness of the little
one's shrieks.

“Hold fast, ma cherie,” came its laughing caution, smothered by the
flying folds of the baby's little cotton shift. “See! The ship dips so,
in the ocean,--and so,--and so!”

The strong arms, bare and brown and muscular, swayed backward, throwing
up the milky whiteness of the little throat, the tiny feet flew
heavenward and the baby's wee heart choked it, as witness the screams
of irrepressible joy. As the child swayed back there came into view the
face of Maren Le Moyne, flushed all over its rare darkness, glowing with
tenderness, its great beauty transfigured divinely. The black braids,
wrapped smoothly round her head, shone in the evening sun, and the faded
garment, plain and uncompromising, but served to heighten the effect of
her physical perfection.

Alfred de Courtenay stopped in his tracks, the smile fixed on his face,
and drank in the pretty scene like one starved.

So long he looked that McElroy turned toward him and only then did he
shift his glance, remembering himself, while a blush suffused his rather
delicate features.

“Pardon!” he murmured; “truly do I forget myself, M'sieu; but not for a
twelvemonth have I seen aught to match this moment. I pray you, of what
station of life is the glorious young Madonna before you;--wife or widow
or maid? By Saint Agnes, never have I beheld such beauty!”

“Maid,” replied McElroy; “by name Maren Le Moyne, one of a party of
venturers who came but a short while back from Rainy River, and who have
cast in their lot with us for the matter of a year.”

The woman and the child passed on their way, disappearing again behind
the next cabin, unconscious of observation, still lost in their play of
the tossing ship at sea, and the two men entered the great trading-room
of Fort de Seviere, where Edmonton Ridgar, chief trader and accountant,
came forward to meet the stranger.

The young factor went in search of Jack de Lancy and word of the meal he
had ordered, and for some reason there was within him a vague vexation
which had to do with the look he had seen in the merry eyes of Alfred de
Courtenay.

He found the great kettles boiling over the fires and a ten-gallon pot
of coffee Venting the evening air.

As he gave word for the feast to be spread on strips of cloth laid on
the hard-beaten ground before the factory that many might sit round at
once and partake, there came from the direction of the gate the voices
of De Courtenay's men. The stranger and himself, with young Ivrey and
Ridgar should be served in the little room off to the west where were
the small table, the chairs, and the row of books.

Not often did Fort de Seviere have so illustrious a guest as must be
this young adventurer.



CHAPTER V NOR'WESTERS

“Merci, my friend, what extravagance is this! The savour of that pot
does fairly turn my head!”

Alfred de Courtenay settled himself gracefully in one of McElroy's
chairs and smiled across at his host with a twinkle in his laughing
eyes.

A dozen candles, lit in his honour, where three were wont to suffice,
shone mellowly in the little room, and Rette de Lancy, still comely
despite her forty years and a certain lavishness in the matter of
avoirdupois, set down in the midst of the table a steaming dish with a
cover. There were a white cloth of bleached linen and cups of blue
ware that had come with her and Jack from across seas, also a silver
coffee-urn that had been her great-grandmother's. When the factor gave
word for a meal to these two he knew well that all dignity would be
observed. As for himself, his living of every day was scant and plain as
regarded the manner of its serving.

“What is it, M'sieu, that so assails the nostrils with delicious aroma,
if I may so far forget politeness? 'Tis not beef, assuredly,--there is
too much of the scent of the wild about it.”

“Moose,” replied McElroy, and by this time the vague vexation had blown
out of his heart as all ill-feelings were wont to do, “moose, killed in
the snows and hung in the smoke of a little fire until the very heart
of the wood is in the meat. And now, M'sieu, fall to. I would I had
something better than Rette's strong coffee in which to pledge you, but,
as you see, Fort de Seviere has no cantine salope. It is not the policy
of the Great Company, as you doubtless know, to abet its trade with the
Indians by the use of liquor.”

De Courtenay looked quickly up.

“Why, I thought,--but then I have much to learn, in fact, all to learn,
since I am but raw in the wilderness.”

Like men hungry and athirst from the hardships of the trail and the
stream, the camp and the portage, the guests did justice to the savoury
viands, and at last leaned back in repletion, while Rette took off the
plates and cups; the spoons and forks, and set in their stead a huge pot
of crumbled tobacco with a tin box containing pipes.

“And now,” said the factor, smiling, “let us have talk of that world of
which I am hungering for news. You are of the fall ship's load of new
arrivals, I take it?”

“No,” said De Courtenay, “it was last spring, about this time, that I
first saw the shores of the New World. Five of my men came with me from
across seas and the rest I picked on starting into the wilderness. They
are mostly Canadians of Scottish blood. I have a fancy that the strong
blond peoples are best for the rigours of what one may find in this
country. Though,” he laughed as at some reminiscence, “I have found so
far that my two swarthy guides are worth any three of the rest.”

“You have found the way hard?”

“Mother of God! If the rest is like the first of it, I think you may
find my bones bleaching beside some portage where I have given up the
ghost. Truly do we pay for our whims of caprice, M'sieu.”

“Whims?”

“Aye, what save a whim of the moment could have induced me to undertake
so great a hardship as this winning to the Saskatchewan? What save the
love of excitement sent me to be, like yourself, the head of a lost
trading-post in this far north country?”

The merry blue eyes were full of gaiety and light.

“Truly,--and I pay.”

A whim it might be, yet there was in the spirited face of Alfred de
Courtenay that which told plainly that it would be followed to its end,
be that what it might, as faithfully as though it were a deeper thing.

For a moment a little line appeared between the straight brows of the
factor.

The word of so grave an office mentioned as a “whim,” “a caprice,” went
down hard with him. There was nowhere in the heavens above nor the earth
below so serious a thing as that same office, and he served it with his
whole heart. Therefore he could not quite understand the other. Yet he
thought in a moment of De Courtenay's newness and the frown cleared. Of
a very wide tolerance was McElroy.

“And you came, I suppose, from York Factory, down by way of God's Lake
and the house there. What is the word of Anderson who presides there? A
fine fellow,--I met him once at Churchill.”

“York Factory? God's Lake?”

De Courtenay lowered his pipe and looked through the smoke.

“Nay,” he said, “I know nothing of those places, M'sieu.”

He turned to young Ivrey.

“It might be that these locations answer to different names. Heard you
aught from the guides of these two posts?”

“We did not pass them, Sir Alfred,” answered the young man soberly.

“Then, in Heaven's name, which way have you journeyed?” asked McElroy
amazed.

“Why, by way of Lake Nipissing, across the straits below the Falls of
St. Mary, by canoe along the shores of Lake Superior, into Pigeon River,
and so on up the various streams to your own Assiniboine--from Montreal.
How else, M'sieu?”

But the factor of Fort de Seviere had risen in his place, his face gone
blank with consternation.

“From Montreal!” he cried, “but did you not answer to me as friends and
of the Company?”

“Aye,” answered De Courtenay, also rising, the gaiety fading from his
face and his eyes beginning to sparkle bodefully, “of the North-west
Company, trading from Montreal into the fur country. I am sent of my
uncle Elsworth McTavish, who is a shareholder and a most responsible
man, to take charge of the post De Brisac on the south branch of the
Saskatchewan. But I like not this sudden gravity, M'sieu. Wherein have I
offended?”

“In naught, De Courtenay,” said McElroy quite simply, “save that you are
in the heart of the country belonging to the Hudson's Bay Company, as
does this fort and all therein.”

“Nom de Dieu!” cried the other, springing back and tossing up his head;
“I knew it not! How is it, then, that at midday of this day we met on
the river one who told us of this post of De Seviere, and that it
served the Montreal merchants? That we should here find hospitality and
friends?”

“Eh?” shot out McElroy sharply. “Of what like was such a person?”

“A big man, swarthy and dark, with sullen eyes, clad in garments of
tanned hides and wearing a red cap and a knife in his belt. He bore on
his left temple a pure white lock amid his black hair.”

“Bois DesCaut!” said Edmonton Ridgar; “he has been these two days gone
in his canoe.”

“A traitorous trapper, M'sieu,” said the factor, “one who has umbrage at
me for a rebuke administered some time back and hopes by this sorry
joke to win revenge. But what is done cannot be helped. We have met
as friends,--the unfortunate fact that we find ourselves rivals,--that
almost speaks the word 'foes,' I must inform you, M'sieu, since the
strife between our companies has become so sharp,--should not cause us
to forget the bread we have broken between us personally. I still offer
you a night's rest.”

But De Courtenay had drawn himself to his slender height, his hand at
his hip, where, in other times, had dangled a sword.

“Nay, M'sieu,” he said quickly, “a blunder found and unremedied
becomes two. If I ay gather my men we will sleep outside an unfriendly
fort,--and in the name of De Courtenay allow me to repay the cost of
their entertainment.”

Reckless, indeed, was this young cavalier, else he would not have made
that speech.

Anders McElroy turned white beneath his tan and his fingers tapped the
table.

“Not ungrateful am I, M'sieu, but I stick by the colours I choose. If
our companies are rivals, then we are such, and I follow my master's
lead. It is at present the North-west organisation. I am pledged in
Montreal--and--I prove faithful.”

The young man's face was fired with that spirit which ever lay so near
the surface and he looked at his whilom host with a mighty hauteur.

“I thank you for your kindness, M'sieu, but I must decline it further.
Come, Ivrey,” and turning he picked up his wide hat, bowed first to
McElroy and then to Ridgar, and strode toward the outer door. As he
passed the lintel the not insignificant form of Rette blocked his exit,
en route for a cup she had left behind. With an instant flourish the hat
in his hand swept the logs of the floor, he seized the woman's toil-hard
fingers and bore them to his lips.

“Excellent, Madame, was that meal,” he murmured, “and never to be forgot
so long as one unused to hardship faces privation. I thank you.”

Comely Rette flushed to her sleek hair and some flicker of a girlhood
that had its modicum of grace, flared up in the swift curtsy with which
she acknowledged the compliment.

And with a last flash of his blue coat Alfred de Courtenay was gone.

McElroy ran his fingers helplessly through his tousled light hair and
faced his friend.

“Now, by all the Saints!” he said with a strange mixture of regret and
relief, “what an unhappy ending!”

But at that moment he was thinking of the wondrous beauty of the man and
of the picture of Maren Le Moyne's brown arms spread wide apart with the
laughing child between, and again that little feeling of vexation crept
into his wholesome heart.

Without in the soft night the late guest was striding, a graceful
figure, hurriedly down toward the gate he had entered so short a time
ago, and his slender hand played restlessly at his hip. His heart was
seething with swift-roused emotions. So had its quick stirrings brought
him into many a scrape in his eventful life. That word of his host,
“which speaks almost of foes,” sang in his ears.

And yet it had been given only in the spirit of enlightenment.

Behind, John Ivrey gathered up the men idling about the fire and talking
with the men of the post, where question and answer had begun to stir
uneasiness.

In a ragged, uneven line they strung out, fading into the darkness, and
presently from down the river some forty rods there rose up the columns
of their fires.

Fort de Seviere closed its gates and settled into the night with a
feeling of something gone awry.

By morning all was early astir, those within to witness the departure of
the strangers, and, those without for that same departure.

The canoes were floated, the men embarked, and all in readiness with the
first flame of the sun above the eastern forest when Alfred de Courtenay
presented himself at the gate and called for McElroy.

Gladly the factor responded, hoping somewhat to soften the awkwardness
of the situation by a godspeed, to be met by the Frenchman high-headed
and most carefully polite. A servant beside him held a wickered jug.

“With your leave, M'sieu,” said De Courtenay, “I wish to leave some
earnest of my gratefulness for what we have received at your hands.
Therefore accept with my compliments this small gift, which, as you
say you have no cantine salope, must come most happily. Once more,
farewell.”

The man set down the jug at McElroy's feet and strode toward the
landing. The master was turning more leisurely away with his uncovered
curls shining in the first level beams of morning, when he stopped and
looked past the portal within the stockade.

With a small brass kettle in her hand, Maren Le Moyne was coming down
the open way toward the well.

With a colossal coolness he forgot the presence of the factor and the
ready light began to sparkle in his blue eyes with every step of the
approaching girl. Swiftly he glanced to right and left, as if in search
of something, and meeting only the green slope of the shore, a growing
excitement flushed his face.

Suddenly he snatched from a crevice of the stockade a tiny crimson
flower which nodded, frail and fragrant, from its precarious foothold,
and sprang forward as she set her vessel on the well's stone wall.

Unsurpassed was the bow he swept her, this daring soldier of fortune,
to whose delicate nostrils the taking of chances was the breath of life,
and his smile was brilliant as the spring morning itself.

“A chance is a chance, Ma'amselle,” he said winningly, “and who would
not risk its turning? For me,--I looked upon your face but now, and
behold! I must give you something, and this was all the moment offered.”

With hand on heart he held forth the little flower.

“In memory of a passing stranger far from all beauty, wear it, I pray
you, this day in the dusk of that braid, just there above the temple.
Have I permission?”

He stepped near and lifted the crimson star, smiling down into the
astonished eyes of Maren Le Moyne, to whom no man in all her life had
ever spoken thus.

For a moment she stared at him, and her face was a field of fleeting
sensations. And then, slowly, the sparkle in his eyes lit her own, the
smile on his lips curled up the corners of her full red mouth, and the
charm of the moment, fresh and sweet as the new day, swept over her.

“A venturer,-you!” she said; “some kin we must surely be, M'sieu! 'Tis
granted.”

She rested her hands on the kettle's rim, and bent forward her head,
wrapped round and round with its heavy braids, and with fingers deft as
a woman's Alfred de Courtenay placed the flower in a shining fold.

Somewhat lengthy was the process, for the braid was tight and the green
stem very fragile, but at last it was accomplished, and Maren lifted her
face flushed and laughing.

“Thank you, M'sieu,” she said demurely; “God speed your journey.”

De Courtenay took the kettle from her, filled it himself, and when he
gave it back the smile was gone; from his face, but the light remained.

“Some day, Ma'amselle,” he said gravely, “I shall come back to Fort de
Seviere.”

The tall girl turned away with her morning's kettle of fresh water, and
the man stood by the well watching her swinging easily to its weight,
forgetful of the canoes, manned and waiting on the river's breast for
their leader, forgetful of the factor of the post, waiting in the shadow
of the wall, on whose face there sat a deeper shade.

Then he turned and ran lightly down the bank, leaped into the canoe held
ready, once more bowed, and as the little craft swept out to midstream,
he shook back his curls and lifted his face toward the country of the
Saskatchewan.



CHAPTER VI SPRING TRADE

So passed out of Fort de Seviere one who was destined to be interwoven
with its fortunes.

Anders McElroy watched him go until the shadow of the great trees on the
eastern shore, long in the level sun, quenched the light on his silken
head and the men of the five canoes had taken up a song of the boats,
their voices lifting clear and fresh on the wings of the new day, until
the first canoe turned with the curve of the river above and was lost,
the second and the third, and even until the last had passed from view
and only the song came back.

Then he turned back into the gate and the tender mouth that was all
Irish above the square Scottish jaw was set tight together.

His foot touched the wickered jug and he called Jean Saville.

“Take this, Jean,” he said, “and give each of the men a cup. 'Tis a
shame to waste it.”

But for himself he had no taste for the stranger's gift of payment.

He was thinking of the red flower in Maren Le Moyne's black hair and a
vexation, past all reason held him.

But the spring was open and there was soon more to occupy his mind than
a maid and a posy and a reckless blade from Montreal.

At dusk of a day within that week a trapper brought word of a hundred
canoes on the river a day's journey up-country, laden with packs of
winter beaver, and bound for the post.

The Indians were coming down to trade.

Picturesque they were, in their fringed buckskin cunningly tanned and
beaded, their feathers and their ornaments of elk teeth and claws of the
huge, thick-coated bears. At day-dawn they came, having camped for the
night a short distance above the fort, to the letter display of their
arrival, and they swept down in a flotilla of graceful craft made of the
birch bark and light as clouds upon the water.

All was in readiness for them, for the factor had been expecting them
for a fortnight back; and, when the crackling shots of the braves
announced their coming, McElroy gave orders that the three small cannon
mounted on a half-moon of narrow breastwork to the south of the main
gate, and just before a small opening in the stockade for use in case of
attack, should be fired in salute.

These were the quiet and friendly Assiniboines, and the first of the
tribes, being the nearest, to reach the factory that year.

De Seviere was early awake and all was astir within its walls, for
this was the great time of the four seasons. Eagerly the maids and
the younger matrons flocked down to the great gate to peer out at the
gathering craft, afloat like the leaves of autumn upon the breast of the
little river,--two braves to a canoe, the gallant front of the young
men flanking and preceding that which held the leader of the expedition,
chief of the tribe, distinguished by its flag fluttering in the morning
wind upon a pole at the stern,--at the bedizened figure of the chief
himself, and lastly those canoes which held the women, the few children,
and even a dog or two.

Thus they came, those simple children of the forest and the lakes,
the open ways and the fastnesses, of the untrammelled summers, and the
snow-hindered winters, to the doors of the white man, dependent at last
upon him for the implements of life,--the gun, the trap, the knife, the
kettle, and the blanket.

Presently Edmonton Ridgar, chief trader of Fort de Seviere, came down
the main way between the cabins, passing alone between the rows of the
populace, and went forward to the lading to receive the guests.

The canoes had by this time swept swiftly and with utmost skill into two
half-moons, their points cutting to the landing; and down the reach of
water between them, slightly ruffled into little waves and sparkling
ripples by the soft wind and the deftly dipping paddles, there came the
larger craft of Quamenoka the leader.

“Welcome, my brothers!” called Ridgar, in their own tongue, for this man
had been born on the shores of Hudson Bay and knew the speech of every
tribe, from the almost extinct Nepisingues, of the Nepigon, to the
far-away Ouinebigonnolinis on the sea coast. His hair was thickly
silvered from the years he had spent in the service of the H. B. C., and
his heart was full of knowledge gathered from the four winds. Therefore,
his worth was above price and he would have been factor of a post of his
own, instead of chief trader for young Anders McElroy.

“We greet our brother,” gravely replied Quamenoka as he stepped from his
canoe, gathering his blanket around his body with a practised sweep.

Swiftly four headmen disembarked from the first four canoes of the
half-moon which closed in with scarce a paddle dip, so deft were the
braves with their slender, shining blades of white ash, and stood
behind.

Side by side, conversing in a few sentences, the trader and the chief
entered the post, followed by the headmen and proceeded to the factory,
where McElroy stood to welcome them in the open door.

They entered, to the ceremony of the pipe, the speech, and the bargain,
while those without made a great camp two hundred strong all along the
bank of the stream, beached the canoes, stacked the beaver packs, set up
the tepees of the seventeen sticks, and built the little fires without
which no camp is a camp.

In a little space the quiet shore was all a-bustle and activity reigned
where the silence of the spring morning had lain, dew-heavy.

Among those most eager who peered at the gate, and who presently
ventured forth to the better view the bustling concourse of braves and
squaws, was Maren Le Moyne, her dark eyes wide, soft lips apart, and
face all a-quiver with keen enjoyment of the scene.

These were the first she had ever seen of those Indians who came from
the west. Who knew? Perhaps those moccasined feet had trod the virgin
forest of her dreams, those sombre eyes looked upon the Whispering
Hills, those grave faces been lifted to the sweet wind that sang from
the west and whose caress she felt even now upon her cheeks.

Perhaps,--perhaps, even, some swift forest-runner among them, far on his
quest of the home of the caribou or with news of some friendly tribe,
had come upon a man, an old man rugged of frame and face, with blue eyes
like lakes in his swarthy darkness, and muscles that bespoke the forge
and hammer.

Who knew?

Maren's strongly modelled chin twitched a bit while the little flame of
tenderness that flickered ever behind the graveness of her eyes leaped
up. She longed for their speech that she might go among them and ask.

A little way along the stockade wall to the north there lay a great
rock, flat and smooth of surface, and here the girl drew apart from the
women and sat herself down thereon, hands clasping her knees and the
level sun in her eyes. Her thoughts were soon faraway on the misty trail
they had worn for themselves in the many years they had traversed the
wilderness in search of what it held, and the eyes between the narrowed
lids became blank with introspection. And as she sat thus, a little way
withdrawn from the scurrying activity of the scene, there came a step
on the soft green sod and a slim form in buckskins halted beside her.

It was young Marc Dupre, and his devil-may-care face was alert and
smiling.

“Is that seat big enough for two, Ma'amselle?” he asked impertinently,
though the heart in him was thumping a bit. This was a woman, he
recalled having thought, for whom one would fillip the face of Satan,
and he was uncertain whether or no he had made a right beginning.

Maren started and looked swiftly up at him.

“It is, M'sieu,” she said quietly, “if those two are in simple, sensible
accord. Not if one of the two coquettes.”

Over the handsome features of the youth there spread a deep red flush.

“Forgive me, Ma'amselle,” he said, “my speech was foolish as my heart.
They are both sobered.”

“Then,” said the girl, drawing aside the folds of her dress, “you may
sit beside me.”

With a sudden diffidence he sank upon the stone, this handsome boy whose
tongue was ever ready and whose heart of a light o' love had taken toll
from every maid in the settlement, and for the first time in his life he
had no sprightly word, no quip for his careless tongue.

They sat in silence, and presently he saw that her eyes were again
half-closed and the dreaming look had settled back in them. She had
forgotten his presence.

Never before in his experience had a woman sat thus unmoved beside him
when he longed to make her speak, and it stilled him with silent wonder.

He thought of the words of Pierre Garcon that day on the river bank when
this maid was new to the post, “if there is, I would not be the one to
waken it and not be found its master,” and they sent a thrill to his
inmost being.

Who would awaken her; he wondered, as he watched the cheek beside him
from the tail of his eye, a round womanly cheek, sweet and full and rich
as a damask rose with the thick lashes above shining like jet.

Obedient to her silence, he sat still while she dreamed her dream out to
its conclusion, and presently she straightened with a little breath like
a sigh, unclasped her hands from her knees and turned her glance upon
him as if she saw him for the first time.

His head whirled suddenly and he sought for some common word to cover
his rare confusion.

“See, Ma'amselle,” he said, pointing, “the well-lashed packs of the fat
winter beaver. Truly they come well laden, these Assiniboines, and
we may well thank le bon Dieu for the wealth of skins. Is it not a
heartening sight?”

The eyes of Maren Le Moyne left his face and swept swiftly down the
gentle slope to where the Indians had piled their bales of furs. At the
sight they darkened like the waters of a lake when a little wind runs
over its surface.

“A heartening sight? Nay, M'sieu,” she said, shaking her head, “I can
find no joy in it.”

“What?”

The trapper was aghast.

“No pleasure in the fruits of a fat season?”

“See the packs of marten, the dark streaks showing a bit at the edges
where the fur rounds over the dried skin. How were those pelts taken,
M'sieu?”

“How? Why, most cunningly, Ma'amselle,--in traps of the H. B. Company,
set with utmost skill, perhaps on a stump above the line of the heavy
snows, or balanced nicely at the far end of a slender pole set leaning
in the ground. The delicate hand of a seasoned player must match itself
with the forest instinct of these small creatures. The little pole holds
little snow and the scent of the bait calls the marten up, when,
snap! it is fast and waiting for the trapper and the lodge of the
Assiniboines, the women and the drying.”

“Yes. And those hundreds of beaver, M'sieu?”

Marc Dupre's eyes were shining and the red in his cheeks flushing with
pleasure.

What more to a man's liking than the exploitation of knowledge gained
first-hand in the pursuit of his life's work?

“Again the trap,” he said, “set this time at the edge of a stream where
the beaver huts peek through the ice, or lift their tops above the open
water. Neatly they are set, cunning as an Indian himself; hidden in the
soft slime at the margin if the water runs, waiting with open jaws in
the small runway above the dam where the creatures come out from the
swim. A sleek head lifting above the ripples a scrambling foot or
two,--snap! again the price of a pound and a half of powder, a tie of
tobacco. No footmark must the hunter leave, Ma'amselle, unsplashed with
water, no tainting touch of a hand ungloved on chain or stake or trap
itself. Ah! one must know the woods and the stream, the cold and the
snow and the winds.”

“You know them, M'sieu, I have no doubt,” said Maren, “for you follow
the trapping trail. And those beautiful silver fox, frosty and fine as
the sparkle of a winter morning? The heavy hides of the bear, soft and
glossy and thick as a folded blanket?”

“All the trap,--unless the latter drops through the flimsy roof of some
well-hidden dead-fall, covered with brush.”

The girl was not looking at him, her glance being still on the bustling
camp below. The fingers on her knee were laced tight together.

Now she began to speak in a low voice, deep and even.

“Aye! All you have said is true. Wealth, indeed, is in those packs, and
patience and cunning and utmost skill, defiance of the snows and the
crackling cold, long miles on snowshoes and the hardships of the trail,
the nights in the bough-tied huts, the pack galling the shoulders. But
what is all this beside that which waits the runner of the trail at
every 'set' in those many miles? Here he finds his leaning-pole. There
have been little tracks up its slim roadway, but those were covered by
the fall of three days back and the little creature who made them hangs
there at the end, three small feet beating the cold air feebly, a
tiny head squirming from side to side, two dull black eyes set at the
distorted world. He has caught his marten. It has not frozen, for the
snow was light and the forest still and thick, and three days have
passed, M'sieu. Three days! Mon Dieu! How much were those three days
worth? The trapper taps the squirming head and puts the bit of fur in
his pack-bag. On to the next. The beaver? Dead, M'sieu, thanks to the
good God, drowned in its own sweet water. The pack is heavy with small
bodies ere the Assiniboine reaches the place where he has laid his trap
for the silver fox. And what greets him here? Only a foot gnawed off in
the silence of the day and the night, and some beauty gone staggering
away to lie and suffer with starvation in the cold.”

The youth was staring at the averted face beside him, mouth open and
utter amazement on his features.

Maren went on.

“And lastly, M'sieu, far at the end of the trail,--at the outer, rim of
the circle traced by his traps,--he comes eagerly, to peep and peer for
what might have happened at the head of the little dip leading down to
the stream where the firs bend heavily under their weight of snow.

“Here he had laid his cunningest instrument, a thing of giant jaws, of
sharp ragged points, each inlocking with the other, the whole unholy
thing hung to a chain at whose other end there lay a ball of iron,
weighing, M'sieu, some eighty pounds. That was for the great shy bear,
rocking along ire his quest of berries or some tree that should ring
hollow under his scratching claws, bespeaking the hive of the wild bees.
The oiled and fur-wrapped Indian stoops down and looks along the dip.
Ah! There he sees that which brings a glint to his small eyes. No bear,
M'sieu, nor yet the trap he had left, but a thrashed and broken space
where the snow went flying in clouds and the bushes were torn from their
roots, where the very tree-trunks bore marks of the conflict and a wide
and terrible trail led wildly off to the deeper forest.

“He takes it up.

“All day he follows it. At night he camps and sleeps by his fire in
comfort. By daybreak again he is swinging along on that trail. Its word
is plain to him. At first it raged, that great shaggy creature, tall
as an ox and slow, raged and fought and broke its teeth on the strange
thing that bit to the bone with its relentless jaws, and tore along the
white silence dragging its hindering ball, that, catching on bush and
root, skinned down the flesh from the shining bone. And presently the
wild trail narrowed to undisturbed snow, with naught save two great
footprints, one after the other. With the cunning of a man, M'sieu, the
tortured animal has gathered in its arms that chain and ball, and is
walking upright. For another day and night the trapper follows this
trail of tragedy and at their end he comes upon it.

“Beside a boulder, where the snow is pushed away there lies a round heap
of anguish, curled up, pinched nose flat on the snow and two ears laid
lop to a vanquished head. It is still breathing, though the dull eyes
open not at sound of the trapper, bold in his safety, who lifts his gun
and ends it all.

“A fine pelt,--save that the right foreleg is somewhat spoiled.

“It lies there in that pile, M'sieu, and makes for wealth,--but to me it
is no heartening sight. I have followed that trail to the deeper woods.”

The eyes of the woman were deep as wells, flickering with light, and the
dark brows frowned down the slope. She had drawn her hands tight
around her knees, so tight that each knuckle stood out white from the
surrounding tan.

The young man shut his open lips and drew in a breath that quivered.

“Ma'amselle,” he said huskily, “nowhere in the wide world is there
another woman so deep of heart, so strong in tenderness. Never before
have I seen that side of the trapping. To a man that is shut. It needs
the soul of a woman to see behind those things. And, oh, Ma'amselle!”
 his voice fell low and trembling, “I have seen more,--the divinity
within your spirit. May the good God make me worthy that you may speak
so to me again. I would I might serve you,--with my life I would serve
you, Ma'amselle, for I have seen no woman like you.” He was on his feet,
this young Marc Dupre, and the hot blood was coursing fast in his veins.
The awakening was coming, though not for Maren Le Moyne.

“May the time come when I may be a stone for your foot,” he said
swiftly. “I ask no better fate.”

Maren looked up at him and a wonderful tenderness spread on her face.

“I think the time will come, M'sieu,--and, when it does, it will be
worth while. I think it would be a lifting sight to see you in some
great crisis, before some heavy test.”

“You do?” he said slowly; “you do, Ma'amselle? Then, by Heaven, it
would!”

“And some day I shall see it.”

They little knew, these two in their glowing youth, how true was that
word, nor how tragic that sight would be.

“And till then,” said this wild youth of the forest, “until then may we
be friends?” The head under the crimson cap was whirling.

“Friends?” smiled Maken, and her voice was very gentle; “assuredly,
M'sieu--I had destined you for that some time ago.”

As she turned away, her glance once more fell upon the long camp of the
Assiniboines, and Marc Dupre faded from her mind.

Not so with him, left sitting on the flat stone, the blood hot in his
face and a sudden mist before his eyes.

Her last words sang in his ears like the voice of many waters.

He did not look after her,--there was something within that held him
silent, staring at the waters of the river, now sparkling like a
stream of diamonds in the risen sun, the lightness gone from him and a
trembling loosed in his bosom.

Within the big trading-room at the factory, seats had been placed, the
chief and his headmen sat in a solemn circle, and McElroy, holding
in his two hands the long calumet, stood in the centre of the small
conclave.

Very gravely he pointed the stem, clinking with its dangling ornaments,
to east and west, to the heavens and to the earth, and then with a deft
motion swung it around his head.

“My brothers,” he said, glancing around at the solemn visages of these
his friends and people, “may the sun smile all day upon us together in
peace.”

Wherewith he smoked a moment at the carven mouthpiece and handed the
pipe to Quamenoka.

With the utmost gravity Ridgar took it from the chief, passed it to
the savage on his right, who likewise smoked and passed, it on, and
presently the ceremony was done and the visit had begun.

“My brothers are late this year at the trading,” said the factor. “For a
fortnight has the ox waited in the pen, the bread of the feast been set.
So do we love our brothers of the forest. What is the word of the west?
What tribes come in to the factory with peltry? We would hear Quamenoka
speak.”

He fell silent, sat down in his chair, and waited.

In the hush of that moment a shadow falling in the open door of the
factory caught his eye and he looked up to see the form of Maren Le
Moyne leaning against the lintel, her face filled with eagerness, her
eyes, clear as a child's and as far-seeing, fixed on the Indians. He
glanced swiftly to that tight braid just above the temple, where he had
last seen a small red flower nodding impishly, and was conscious of a
feeling of relief to find it gone.

It was irregular, the intrusion of an outsider in the ceremony of the
opening of the trade; but for his life the young factor of De Seviere
could not have said so to this girl who went fearlessly where she listed
and whose eyes held such mystery of strength and wistfulness.

Moreover, Quamenoka was speaking and the council harkened.



CHAPTER VII FOREST NEWS

He was an old man, this chief of the Assiniboines, and his face was
wrinkled like the dried bed of a stream` where the last little ripples
have cast up the sand in a thousand ridges. His black eyes were mild,
for these Indians were a peaceful people, relying on the trapping and
the hunting and the friendship of the white men at the posts which they
had held for three generations.

Fear of their more warlike kin had kept them near the factories and
driven them into the ways of civilisation.

Now he sat with quiet glance upon the floor looking back into the past
year, his feathered head-dress quivering a bit and the blue smoke rising
from the pipe.

“The wind in the woods aisles is full of words, my brothers,” he said,
in his own tongue, “and tales flit down the lakes like the leaves in
autumn. From the Saskatchewan come the French, who tell the Assiniboines
that at their posts will be given four axes for one beaver, eight pounds
of shot and four of powder. Yet thy brothers come down from their lodges
to Fort de Seviere because of the love they bear to you, and for the
fairness in trade that never varies. Many beavers are in the packs, much
marten and fox and ermine. We will do good trade. Guns that are light
and neat shaped to the hand, with good locks. Also much tobacco and
sweet fruits. Of these things we are sure,--also are we sure of the
next year and the next. Therefore do we come down the rivers to the
Assiniboine.

“The tales that flit in the forest, my brothers, tell of a new fort of
the French far, far to the northwest on the shores of the Slave Lake,
whose factor is of the name Living Stone. Also there are whispers that
fly like the wintering birds of new people, fair-skinned and red in the
cheeks, who come into the upper country from the west where lies the Big
Water. These are strange people, like none that trade with the Indians,
who are neither friends to the English, nor yet the French, but strive
for barter with those tribes that come up from the Blackfeet Hills and
down from the frozen regions of the North with bearskins, the one, and
seal and sea-otter, the other.

“A runner of the Saulteurs, resting in the lodges of the Assiniboines,
has told Quamenoka of their strange customs, their hardness, and their
shut forts guarded with suspicion and sentinelled with fear.”

He ceased a moment and smoked in silence.

No breath of sound broke the stillness, for this was ceremony and of
great dignity.

Only McElroy was acutely conscious of the figure in the doorway and the
peering face of the girl, so full of hushed intensity.

“Also do we bring word of a great tribe, the Nakonkirhirinons, living
far beyond the River Oujuragatchousibi, who this year journey down to
Fort de Seviere with many furs,--more than all that will come from
the Assiniboines, the Crees, the Ojibways, and the Migichihilinons put
together.

“Past York and Churchill on the Great Bay they come, because of unfair
dealings which met them at those places last year and the year before,
down to the country of the Assiniboines, in whose lodges they will eat
the great feast of the Peace Dance. Not long have the Nakonkirhirinons
traded their furs, living to themselves in their hills, and much credit
is due Quamenoka by whose word they come this year to his brothers on
the Assiniboine.”

The chief paused impressively and raised his glance to the factor's
face.

McElroy nodded.

“Greatly does the heart of thy brother rejoice at such word, and a
present over and above that meant for him shall be given Quamenoka. Let
the talk go on. We listen.”

But before the chief could speak again, Edmonton Ridgar had broken
silence:

“Negansahima is chief of that tribe and my Indian father, he having
adopted me with all ceremony once when I sojourned a year among them.
The sight of him will gladden my spirit.”

Swift surprise spread on the factor's face, but he did not speak. There
was much in the checkered life of his friend that had not been set
before him, and each revelation was full to the brim of romance,
of daring, and of that excitement which attends a life spent in the
wilderness.

The Indian nodded and went on:

“And last of the news of forest and lake and river is word of the
meeting of canoes, the half of one-ten, laden with goods and going up
the river, which passed but few suns back. A sun-man sat in the first,
beautiful of face and with hair like light, who strove to barter. But
the Assiniboines come to their brothers. They heeded not his words,
though they were sweet with promise. I have spoken.”

The chief fell silent, for the year had been told, and McElroy
spoke presently of his joy at their presence, their words, and their
friendship, as was the custom of the H. B. Company's factors on such
occasions; and Ridgar rose from the council to bid a young clerk, one
Gifford, bring forth the presents for the guests,--a coat with coarse
white lace and lining of vermilion, a hat of felt and a sash of many
colours for Quamenoka, and lesser glories for his four headmen. These
presented with due formality, and actually donned by the recipients
without loss of time, the ceremony of the opening council was over, save
for the triumphal march of the potentate, accompanied by McElroy and
Ridgar, back to the camp on the river bank.

As they passed out the factory door, they brushed by Maren Le Moyne,
where she had drawn aside, still wistfully watching the comers from the
wilderness.

The young factor's eyes went to her face and for a moment held her
glance.

Instantly, with that deep look, the girl's hand shot forth and touched
his arm, a light touch with the deftness of strength held in abeyance,
and McElroy felt his flesh tingle beneath it.

“M'sieu,” she said, “where do they come from, how far in the west?”

“Not far, Ma'amselle,--only from the Lower Saskatchewan. The
Assiniboines are our nearest tribe, living along the country from the
Hare Hills to the parting of the twin rivers above the Qui Appelle. Hold
they interest for you?”

“Nay,” she said, shaking her black head, “not if they come not far,
other than that excited by their strangeness. I thank you.”

She drew back, and McElroy, perforce, followed his way to the
encampment, but he thought not this time of the red flower.

Only within him was roused that same desire which had prompted De
Courtenay to snatch the bloom from the stockade wall,--a longing to
give her something, to offer homage to this tall young woman with the
wondrous face of beauty and wistful strength. Since she was but a child
had men who looked upon her felt this same longing, this stirring of the
worshipper within. But few had dared the wall of quietness about her;
therefore, she had remained apart. Only Prix Laroux of all those who had
seen her grow into her magnificent womanhood at Grand Portage had come
to her with his gift of faith and tied himself to hand for life, and he
came not with the love of man but rather as one who follows a goddess.
Yet it was that aching desire to serve her which sent him.

And now it gripped the young factor of Fort de Seviere and he looked
among the Assiniboines for a gift.

Here a squaw held forth to him a garment that took his eye at once.

Of doeskin it was, soft and white as a lady's hand, and cut after the
fashion of the Indian woman's dress, in a single piece from throat to
ankle, the sleeves straight from the shoulder, and at edge and seam,
sewed with thorn and sinew, rippled and fluttered a heavy fringe the
length of a man's hand.

Across the breast there gleamed and glittered a solid plastron of the
beadwork so justly famed for its beauty of colour and design, which
came from the hands of none save the women of this tribe, and at hem and
elbow, above the dangling fringe, there ran a heavy band of it. Above
the hips there hung a belt made of the brilliant stained quills of the
porcupine.

The factor took the beautiful thing in his hands, and the purpose in his
mind crystallised.

In a swift moment he had bargained with the silent woman for a price
that astonished her and was back within the post, walking hurriedly
toward the cabin of the Baptistes.

At the door Marie met him, her bright eyes sparkling with the honour of
this visit of him who was the Law, the Head of De Seviere, and at her
eager greeting the first abating of the flush within took hold upon him.

He stood like a boy, the gorgeous garment hanging in his hand and the
word on his lips forgotten.

“Madame,” he stammered, “I would--” and got no further.

Sudden embarrassment took him and he grew angry with himself.

What could he say, how dared he do what he had done?

He could have thrown the white garment into the river in his sudden
vexation. Factor of the post, he had made of himself a stammering youth,
all for sake of the compelling beauty of a woman's eyes.

But at that moment, while Marie stood blankly on the sill holding to the
doorside and the silence grew unbearable, there was a step within the
cabin and Maren Le Moyne came from the inner room.

In one moment, so keen was the perception of her, she had seen the red
blood in McElroy's face, the wonder on Marie's, and she, too, stood in
the open door.

“Ah, M'sieu!” she said quickly, “do some of them, by chance, come from
the west?”

The tone of her deep voice broke the spell, so subtly natural was it,
and McElroy found his tongue.

“No, Ma'amselle,” he smiled, the ease coming back to his blue eyes, “but
I have found something very beautiful among them which I wish you to
have. It is more beautiful than a red flower.”

He held up to her the doeskin garment and his eyes were very anxious.

For a moment Maren stared as she had stared at De Courtenay and a
curious expression of perplexity spread on her face.

Truly men were different here in this wilderness from those who lived at
the Grand Portage, and for a moment she drew herself up and the straight
brows began to frown. But as she had felt the whimsical charm of De
Courtenay, so now she felt the eagerness, the taut anxiety of this man,
and she noticed that there was no smile on his face as she hesitated.

Moreover, Marie was watching, sharp as a little hawk.

“Why, M'sieu,” she said, and there was a baffling note to the voice this
time, “why,--you wish me to have this?”

“Yes, Ma'amselle,” said McElroy simply.

The girl stooped and took it from him, and for a moment her hand lay
against his palm, a smooth warm hand.

“And you wish me to wear it?” she asked.

“If it shall please you.”

“Then it shall please me,” she said quite easily, “and I thank you.”

McElroy turned away and walked back to the factory, and all the way he
did not know what he had done. It had been an impulse, and he had rushed
to its fulfilling without a thought. Had he bungled in giving her a
garment where De Courtenay had played on a wind-harp in giving her a
little red flower?

He was hot and cold alternately, and the memory of that momentary frown
came turn and turn with that of the gentle manner in which she had
reached down for the lifted gift.

And Maren Le Moyne?

Within the cabin she had turned to that portion which was her own, the
while Marie's sharp eyes followed her with questions that were ripe on
her tongue.

“Maren,” she cried, as the girl passed the inner door, unable to longer
hold herself, “know you the factor well?”

But Maren only shook her head and closed the slab door between.

Once alone she laid the gift on the bed, covered with a patchwork quilt
made from the worn garments that had seen the long trail, and stood
bending above, looking closely at each beauty of colour, of softness and
design.

She spread the straight sleeves apart, smoothing out the dangling
fringe, and her hand lingered with a strange gentleness a-down the
glowing plastron of bright beads.

This was the first gift a man had ever given her, other than De
Courtenay's red flower, and somehow it pleased her vastly.

She fell to thinking of the factor, of his open face, his light head
forever tilted back with the square chin lifted, of the mouth above and
of the eyes, clear as the new day and anxious as a child's the while she
halted above his offering, and unconsciously she began within her mind
to compare him with all other men she had ever known.

There was Prix Laroux. Not like. Also Jean Folliere and Anthon Brisbee
of Grand Portage, who came to the wilderness each year. Neither were
they like this man, nor Cif and Pierre Bordoux, nor Franz LeClede,
nor yet her brother Henri. These she knew and they were of a different
pattern.

Also there was that venturer of the great beauty and the silken curls
who had spoken so prettily. With all his grace, he was unlike this
strong young man whose tongue faltered and whose eyes were anxious.

Verily, for the first time; this maid of the wilderness was thinking of
men.

And it was because he had seemed so ill-beset that she had taken the
gift so readily.

She would not have him stumble longer under the sharp eyes of Marie.

And then thought of him faded from her mind and she fell to
contemplation of the doeskin garment again. Things of its like she had
seen at Grand Portage, but nothing of its great beauty, and for the
first time she gave thought to self-adornment. She was strong, this
woman, and given to serious dreams, and the small things of womanhood
had left her wide apart in a land of her own wherein there were only
visions of afar country, of travel and of conquest, and perhaps of a
man, old and rugged and kindly, who had followed the long trail, and
this small new thought lodged wonderingly in her mind.

For the first time she was conscious of the plainness of the garment
that folded her form, and she held up her arms and looked at them, brown
beneath the up-rolled sleeves.

Yes, some day she would put it on, this gorgeous thing of white fringe
and sparkling colour, because she had told that man she would.

Unlike most women, she did not hold it up to her, pointing a foot
beneath its pretty edge, gathering it into her waist, trying its effect.
She was content to run a hand along its length, to feel the caress of
its softness.

Yet even as she touched it she thought of the pretty creature which had
worn it first, the slim-legged doe bounding in the forest depth, and a
little sigh lifted her breast.

But this had been the quick and merciful death of the bullet, the
legitimate death. That she could understand.

More quick and merciful than that which would come in the natural life
of the forest. Therefore this pelt held no such repugnance as those
stacked on the river bank.

Suddenly, as she bent above the bed, she felt the presence of another,
the peculiar power of eyes, upon her, and, turning quickly, she saw a
black head, black as her own and running with curls, that dipped from
the window.

There was no little head in all the post like that save one, and
it belonged to little Francette, the pretty maid who had run by the
factor's side that day of the meeting of Bois DesCaut by the river. With
the drop of that head from the sill there passed over Maren a strange
feeling, a prescience of evil, a thrill of fear in a heart that had
never known fear.

She left the tiny room with the gift of the factor still outspread, and
joined Marie in the outer space, where yawned a wide fireplace with its
dogs on the hearth, its swinging crane made from a rod of iron, its bed
and its hand-made table.

Here had come Anon Bordoux and Mora Le-Clede, drawn by the sight of the
factor at the Baptistes' door, their tongues flying in eager question.

“--of such gorgeousness,” Marie was saying, “such softness of white
doeskin, such wealth of the beading--”

“Marie,” said Maren sharply, “is there naught to do save gossip?”

Anon and Mora fell into confused silence, the habit of the trail where
this girl's word had been the law falling upon them, but Marie, saucy
and not to be daunted, was not so easily hushed.

“Is it not true,” she cried, “that the factor brought it but now to the
door in plain sight of all?”

Whereon Maren passed, out the open door and the tongues began again,
more carefully.

In the distance there flashed a crimson skirt at whose beaded edge there
hung a great grey dog, his heavy head waist-high to the little maid who
wore it.



CHAPTER VIII FIRST DAWN

Throughout the week that followed Fort de Seviere was gay with the
bustle of trading. Packs of furs went up the main way and loads of
merchandise went down, carried on the backs of the braves, guns and
blankets and many a foot of Spencer's Twist at one beaver a foot, powder
and balls in buckskin bags, and all the things of heart's desire that
had brought the Assiniboines from the forks of the Saskatchewan.

Kept close to the factory by the bartering, McElroy and Ridgar and the
two clerks hardly saw the blue spring sky, nor caught a breath of the
scented air of the spring. Within the forest the Saskatoon was blooming
and the blueberry bushes were tossing soft heads of foam, while many a
tree of the big woods gave forth a breath of spice. It came in at the
door and the young factor raised his head many times a day to drink
its sweetness in a sort of wistfulness. At dusk he stood on the sill,
released from the trade, and looked over his settlement as was his
habit, and ever his eyes strayed to that new cabin at the far end, of
the northern row.

What was she thinking, that dark-browed girl with the deep eyes that
changed as the waters of a lake with each breath of wind, of him and the
blundering gift he had carried to her door? What had she done with it,
and would he ever see it clinging to those splendid shoulders, falling
over the rounded breast?

A feeling of warmth grew at his heart each day with thought of her, and
when he saw her swinging down toward the well he felt the blood leap in
his veins. The very shine of the sun was different when it struck the
tight black braids wrapped round her head.

Verily the little kingdom had brought forth its Princess.

And with her coming there was one heart that burned hot with passion,
that fashioned itself after the form of hatred, for little Francette had
seen, first a glow in a man's eyes and then a gift in his hand, and she
fingered a small, flat blade that hung in her sash with one hand, the
while the other strayed on the head of Loup. Dark was the fire that
played in her pretty eyes, heavy the anguish that rode her breast.

She hated the memory of that white garment spread out on Maren Le
Moyne's bed.

“Tessa,” she said one day, sidling up to that Tessa Bibye who had cast a
taunt in her teeth, “know you the charm which that doctress of the Crees
gave to Marci Varendree when she sickened for love of that half-breed,
Tohi Stannard?”

“Oho!” cried Tessa gleefully, “a man again! Who lacks one now,
Francette?”

“Nay,” said Francette, “but I know of one who sickens inwardly and I
would give her the charm.”

“Go into the flats of the Beaver House after Marci and her Indian,
whither they went,” Tessa laughed. “I know not the charm. But it was
good, for she got him, and went to the wilds with him. Follow and learn,
Francette.”

But Francette, with a gesture of disgust, turned away.

The warm spring days passed in a riot of song from the depths outside
the post, the Assiniboine rippled and whispered along its shores and
over the illimitable stretches of the wilderness there hung the very
spirit of the mating-time.

Within the stockade, mothers sat in the doors crooning to the babes that
clutched at the sunbeams, dogs slept in the cool shadows of the cabins,
and here and there a youth sang a snatch of a love song.

“Verily, Marie, it is good to be here,” sighed Micene Bordoux, sitting
on her sill with her capable arms folded on her knees, and her eyes,
cool and sane and tolerant, roving over the settlement lolling so
quietly in the sun. “After the trail the rest is good, and yet I will
be eager long before the year has passed to follow Maren,--may Mary give
her grace!--into that wilderness which so draws at her heartstrings.”

“Oh, Micene!” cried Marie, a trifle vexed, “if only she might forget her
dreams! What is it like, the heart of a maid, that turns from thought of
love to that of these wild lands, to the mystery of the Whispering Hills
that lie, the good God knows where, in that dim and untracked West! I
would that Maren might love! Then would we have peace and stop forever
at this pleasant place.”

Good Micene, with her brave heart and her whole-souled sense, smiled at
Marie.

“Love,” she said,--“and think you THAT could turn that exalted spirit
from its quest? Still the stir of conquest within her bosom, hush the
call of that glorious country which we know from rumor, and plain
hearsay lies at the heart of the Athabasca?

“Little do you know Maren, Marie, though the same mother gave you birth.
There is naught that could turn the maid, and I love her for it. It is
that undaunted faith, that steadfast purpose, that white fire in her
face which holds at her heels the whole of us, that turns to her the
faces of our men, as those legions of France turned to the Holy Maid.
Love? She would turn not for it if she could not take it with her.”

Micene looked off across the cabins, and there was a warm light in her
eyes.

“Nay, Marie,” she said, “make ready for the trail the coming spring, for
we will surely go.”

It was this day, golden and sweet with little winds that wafted from
the blossom-laden woods, that Maren Le Moyne, drawn by the dusky depths,
passed, out the stockade gate, traversed slowly the length of the
Indian camp, stopping here and there to hold out a hand to a frightened
pappoose peeking from behind its mother's fringed leggings, to watch
a moment at the cooking fires, to smile at a slim young boy brave in a
checkered shirt, and entered the forest.

From the door of the factory McElroy saw her go and the call of the
spring suddenly became unbearable.

With a word to Ridgar he stepped off the long log step and deliberately
followed.

The Irish blood within him lifted his head and sent his heart
a-bounding, while the half-holy mysticism that came from the Scottish
hills drew his glance upward to the blue sky arching above.

A tumult surged in his breast and every pulse in his body leaped at
thought of speech with her, and yet again a diffidence fell upon him
that set him trembling.

As the conqueror he went, pushing toward victory, yet humble in his
ambition.

He felt a mist in his eyes as he entered the high arched aisles, cool
beneath their canopy of young green, and he looked eagerly here and
there for sight of a tall form, upright, easy, plain in its dark garb.

Along the river bank he went where he saw a footprint in the soft loam,
and presently it turned deeper into the great woods and he swung forward
into those depths whose sweetness had called him subtly for these many
days.

She was a strong traveller, that straight young creature of the open
ways, and a full hour went swiftly before he caught the sight he wanted.

At sight of her he halted and stood a moment in hushed joy, looking with
eyes that knew their glory, for with every passing second Anders McElroy
was learning that nowhere in all the world, as had said that flaming
youth Marc Dupre, was there another woman like this Maren Le Moyne.

She stood in a little glade, cool, high-canopied, where the sunlight
came in little spots to play over the soft carpet of the pale forest
grass thick-starred with frail white flowers, and her back was to a tree
that towered to heaven in its height. At her sides her brown arms hung,
palms out in an utter abandon of pleasure, while her lifted face, with
its closed eyes, communed with the very Spirit of the Wild. Like some
priestess she was, and McElroy felt an odd sensation of unworthiness
sweep over him as he stood silent, his sober blue eyes on the beauty of
her face. He cast swiftly back across his life. Was there anything there
which might forbid him now, when he would go forward to so pure a thing
as this maid, dreaming her dreams of prowess in the wilderness?

Nay, he saw no unworthy deed, nothing to spoil the page of a commonplace
life spent at his old father's side across the sea, nothing of the so
common evils of the settlement. Within him there was that which thanked
its Maker unashamed that he had kept himself from one or two temptations
which had beset him in these stirring years of service on the fringes of
the great country spreading from the bay.

With that thought he went forward, and Maren did not hear his step on
the soft grass, so far was she on her well-worn trail of dreams, until
he stood near and the feeling of a presence finally brought back the
wandering soul.

Then she opened her eyes and they fell full upon the factor, his light
head bared to the dancing sun-spots, his blue eyes sober and touched
again with that anxiety which had compelled her to take his gift.

There was no sudden start of fear, no little startled breath, for this
woman was calm as the dreaming woods and as serene.

“Bon jour, M'sieu,” she said, and at sound of her voice, so deep and
full of those sliding minors, McElroy felt her power sweep over him in a
tumultuous flood.

“Ma'amselle,” he said, “Ma'amselle!”

And in the next moment stopped, for the words of love were on his tongue
and the wide dark eyes were looking at him wonderingly.

“No longer could I withstand the call of the springtime and the woods,”
 he finished falteringly; “the trading-room and the bargain were grown
hateful to me in these warm days with the scent of flower and leaf and
heated mould coming in at the door and bidding me come. I left my post,
a traitor, Ma'amselle, betrayed by the forest. Too weak am I for courage
when the big woods call.”

Maren looked at him and the light grew up in her eyes, that little flame
that flickered and leaped and gave so baffling a charm to her beauty.

“Ah!” she said softly; “you love it too, the great wilderness?”

“Aye, most truly.”

“And you can hear the whisper of the far countries, the ripple of
distant streams, the wind in the pines that have never sheltered a white
man? You know these things, M'sieu?”

She leaned forward from the great smooth-barked tree and looked at him
eagerly.

“They are what brought me over seas,” he said quietly, “what sent me to
De Seviere, what hold me to the tribes that come each year to my doors.”

Maren's lips were parted, the fire of her passion in her flaming face.
“Then you know why I come to the woods, why I grieve that the spring
is passing, why I can scarcely hold my soul in patience through this
delay!”

With the suddenness of her words her breath had leaped to a heaving
tumult, the wide eyes, so calm, so cool, had filled first with fire and
then with a mist. That clouded them like tears.

“Oh, M'sieu!” she cried tensely; “know you of that country which lies
far to the west and which the Indians call the Land of the Whispering
Hills?”

“Aye. It lies circling a great lake, blue as the summer skies, its
waters forever rippled by the winds of the west which sing in the grassy
vales and over the rounded knolls that stud the region,--a land of
waving trees, of high coolness, or rich valleys thick with rank grasses
and abounding with the pelt animals. It is the country of the Athabasca
and from it came last year a band of the Chippewas heavily laden with
furs. They told fine tales of its beauty. It is for that land you are
bound?”

“For that land, M'sieu,” said Maren Le Moyne, and her lips trembled;
“for that virgin goddess of the dreams of years! I have seen its hills,
its waving grass, wind-blown, its leaping streams,--I have breathed
the sweet air of its forests and gazed on its beauties since my early
childhood, in dreams, always in dreams, M'sieu, until I could bear the
strain no longer. And now, when it beckons almost within my reach, when
its very breath seems in my nostrils, I must stop for a year's space!
You know, M'sieu,--you comprehend?”

She leaned forward looking earnestly into McElroy's eyes, and a surge
of painful ecstasy shot to the man's heart, so near she seemed in the
suddenly created sympathy of the moment, so near and gracious, so strong
in her pure passion, so infinitely sweet.

“I know,” he said, and his voice sounded strange in his ears; “I know
every pulse of your heart, Ma'amselle, every longing of your spirit,
every pure thought of your mind,--for these many days I have trembled to
every vibration that has touched or thrilled you. Oh, Ma'amselle!”

With the surge of that overwhelming thing within him the young man had
forgot all things,--that this girl was near a stranger, that he had
quaked at his temerity of the gift, forgot all but that she leaned
toward him with the mist in her wide eyes, and he strode forward the
step between them, his arms reaching out instinctively to enfold her.

With the swiftness of the impulse he swept her into them until the eager
face lay on his breast, the smooth black braids pressing his lips with
their satiny folds.

For one intoxicating moment he held her, as the primal man takes and
holds his woman, tightly against his beating heart as though he would
defy the world, lost in a sea of strange new emotions that rolled in
golden billows high above his head.

Then from the depths there came a cry that cleared his whirling brain,
a very embodiment of startled amaze, of indefinable horror, of mixed
intonations.

“M'sieu!”

Maren Le Moyne wrenched herself free and lifted her face to look at him.

It was a warring field.

Upon it lay a great astonishment, a wonder, and a newness. Behind these
there came, creeping swiftly with each moment of her startled gaze, an
odd excitement that mounted with each panting breath that left his lips,
for it was from him that it took its life. Her red mouth dropped apart,
showing the gleam of the white teeth between. She looked like a child
rudely shaken from its sleep, startled, perhaps vaguely frightened at
the strange shapes of familiar things distorted by the vision not yet
adjusted.

“M'sieu!” she stammered; “M'sieu!”

And with her voice McElroy felt the arrested blood rush back to his
heart again, for it held no anger. Instead it was full of that startled
wonder, and it was as gold to him.

“Maren,” he said, the emotion choking him; “Maren--” and with that new
courage he put both hands on her shoulders and drew her near, looking
down into the eyes so near on a level with his own.

Deliberately, slowly, that she might fully catch the meaning of what he
was about to do, he drooped his lips until they rested square on the red
mouth.

This was the thing he had left the factory for, this was what had drawn
him, unconsciously perhaps, to the path along the river's bank, that had
made him follow deliberately the light trail of the girl into the woods.

“Maren,” he said, so thrilled that his words shook, “from this day forth
you are mine. Mine only and against the whole world. I have taken you
and you are mine.”

He was full of his glory, dominating the dark eyes that had never left
his own, and his soul was big within him. He was still very much a boy,
this young factor, and the crowning moment of life had him in his grip.

He knew no fear, no thought of her next word or action touched him until
she, as deliberately as he had acted, reached up and took both his hands
from her shoulders.

“Adieu, M'sieu,” said Maren Le Moyne quietly, the excitement of that
breathed “M'sieu! M'sieu!” quite lost in the calmness that was her usual
characteristic, and turning she walked away down the glen toward the
river bank, the little spots of sun dancing on her black head like a
leopard's gold as she passed in the checkered shade, and not once did
she turn her head to see the factor of De Seviere standing where she had
left him beside the forest giant.



CHAPTER IX GOLD FIRE

If that time in the tuneful spring was crowded full to the brim of
emotions scarce bearable to McElroy, how much more wonderful was it
to Maren Le Moyne, for the first time in her life trembling in all her
being from the touch of a man's lips?

To the outward world there was no sign of the tumult within her as she
came and went about the business of the new cabin by the stockade wall,
but in her virgin heart there stirred strange new things that filled her
calm eyes with wonder.

In the seclusion of the little room to the east she spread out on the
patchwork quilt the Indian garment and looked at it with a new meaning.

Never before in her life had she thought of a man's eyes as she thought
of McElroy's, thrilling to the very tips of her fingers at memory of the
blue fire in them, and never before had she been conscious of anything
as she was conscious of the flesh on her shoulders where his hands had
rested, her lips sealed under the warm caress of his. Verily, there was
nowhere another such man as this one who knew the longing of the wild as
did she, whose heart responded to the same call of the great wilderness.

Night and day she thought of him, and the memory of that day in the
forest glade haunted her like a golden melody newly heard.

Yet something within her held her back from his sight, kept her eyes
from that part of the small settlement where stood the factory with its
wide doorway. She could not bear to look upon him yet in the newness of
this awakening.

And McElroy, deep in the work of the trading, was eaten by a thousand
qualms and torments. All those doubts that beset lovers tore at his
heart and made of his days a nightmare.

With the cooling of his exalted intoxication what time the touch of the
girl's young body had fired him with all confidence, came a thousand
condemnations for his blundering haste, his stupid boasting of conquest.

To what depths of scorn might he not now be fallen in the mind of such
a girl as Maren Le Moyne with her calm judgment; how far might he not be
from the object of his longing!

And the fact that he could catch no sight of her, no matter how often he
stepped near the door nor how diligently he sought for a glimpse of the
shining braids and plain garment among the women at the well, but added
fuel to the fire that scorched him.

But the times were getting very busy at Fort de Seviere. Before the
Assiniboines were ready to depart back up the waterways down which they
had come, their canoes laden with the wealth of the coming season, other
flotillas were on the little waves of the river, other chiefs made their
entrance up the main way of the post, and the goods of the Hudson's Bay
Company went out in a stream as the priceless pelts came in.

“Lad,” said Edmonton Ridgar with that easy probing of the well-known
friend, “there is something eating at your mind these days. The trade
goes differently from that of last year. It is not so all-absorbing. I
fear me that the Nor'westers, with their plundering and their tales of
deportation, have entered a wedge of worry.”

“'Tis not of the Nor'westers I give a thought, Ridgar,” he smiled,
accepting the veiled raillery, “for you well know that we of the Company
are above them, though it was but yesterday that an Indian brought word
of a trapper at Isle a La Crosse being maltreated in the woods by a
couple of their sneaking cutthroats and two packs of beaver taken from
him for which they laughingly offered him in payment a bundle of mangy
skins cast out from the summer's pickings. 'Twas Peter Brins and I'll
wager that those two are marked for a long reckoning when the tables
turn. And by the same Indian I hear that the young blade from Montreal
with his light-haired brigade who stumbled upon us a while back, has
reached his post on the Saskatchewan and has taken hold with a high
hand, doing his utmost to intercept our Indians and turn the tide of
the Company's furs into the trading-rooms of the Nor'westers. I think
it will be a bootless process, for we hold our people with the hand of
surety.”

“Aye, but what of the Nakonkirhirinons, making their initial trip by
way of Rapid River and Deer Lake, coming through the country of the
Saskatchewan and held by no bond of loyalty? I see trouble ahead if this
young De Courtenay gets wind of their coming, for they will be rich in
peltry and they are a warlike tribe.”

“But they are to celebrate the Peace Dance in the lodges of the
Assiniboines. Surely they will come straight to their friends before
trusting their trade to any.”

Edmonton Ridgar shook his head.

“Hey fear nothing, these Nakonkirhirinons, and would as soon enter trade
with one as another, having come for trade, if the values were above
those at York and Churchill. I hope they swing eastward to Winipigoos
and thus miss that young hot-brain on the Saskatchewan.”

“By the way, Ridgar, Pierre Garcon says that Bois DesCaut is at Seven
Isles on the Qui Appelle with Henderson. Since telling that wanton lie
to the Nor'wester he has not had enough to show his face here. A bad lot
Bois, and one to be watched for tricks.”

“Aye, a bad lot, but salted with a prudence that savours of cowardice.
His tricks are all turncoats that slip danger like an old garment.”

But for all Ridgar's hope, at that very moment the great tribe from the
far north country, even twelve leagues beyond the Oujuragatchousibi,
was swinging down through the wilderness bound for the lodges of the
Assiniboines, burdened with a wealth of peltry to make a trader's eyes
stand out and clad in all the glory of the visiting tribes, and it was
heading straight for the country of the Saskatchewan.

Towering head-dresses swept above their moving columns, pomp and
ceremony showed in the panoply of carved spear-heads, feathered shafts,
and slung bows of the white ash which decked them on their peaceful
mission, while underneath fringed garments of buckskin, stained and
beaded with porcupine quills, were bands and stripes of war-paint. They
were ready for anything that might happen in this unknown country into
which they journeyed at the word of their friends the Assiniboines,
given at the buffalo hunt the fall before, above the Great Slave Lake.

Never before had the Nakonkirhirinons been so far in the south.

And long before they reached Deer Lake word had been brought to that new
venturer in his post on the Saskatchewan, Alfred de Courtenay, and he
was keenly alert.

About the same time a half-breed trapper came into Fort de Seviere, loud
in his lamentations, and sought McElroy.

From the flats south of the Capot River, where he had wintered amid a
band of Blackfoot Indians, a rare thing for a white man, he had come
laden with rich furs from that unopened country, bound for De Seviere,
and on the banks of the Qui Appelle three men had come upon him who had
shared his lonely campfire. Rollicking fellows they were, brawny of form
and light of head, and they had carried much liquor in flasks in their
leg-straps, which liquor flowed freely amid songs and fireglow.

In the morning when he awoke late with, Mon Dieu! such a head! there
were no three men, who had vanished like dreams of the liquor, likewise
there was no well-strapped pack of fat winter beaver!

The man, a French half-breed, whimpered and cursed in impotent wrath,
and showed McElroy one of the flasks that had been in the leg-straps of
his visitors. It was covered with a fine light wicker weave, of the same
pattern as that jug which De Courtenay had left at the post gate that
morning in early spring.

“Ridgar,” said the factor, showing the thing to him, “our friend from
Montreal is taking a high hand with the country. The freedom of the wild
has gone to his head.”

Indeed it seemed as though that were true, for the tales of the reckless
doings of that post of the Nor'westers on the Saskatchewan over which
De Courtenay presided became more frequent and always they were
characterised by a wildness and folly that were only exceeded by their
daring.

The young adventurer had already made a headlong sally into the fringes
of that country which came too near his Tom-Thumb garrison, and along
which roving bands of the sullen Blackfeet trailed with a watching eye
on the white men at the forts, and returned without two of those long
curls of which he was so proud, a spear-head pinning them in the trunk
of a tree which happened to form a convenient background.

To add to the small resentment against him which began to rankle in
McElroy's heart, and which had never really left it since that evening
in De Seviere when Maren Le Moyne had passed behind the cabin of the
Savilles with some voyageur's tot on her shoulder and the handsome
gallant from Montreal had lost his manners staring, one day in this same
week a Bois-Brules came to the post gates and asked for one Maren Le
Moyne.

He stood without and stubbornly refused to give his message, and at last
McElroy himself went to the cabin of the Baptistes.

He had not seen the girl since that day in the forest, and his heart
beat to suffocation as he neared the open door and caught the sound of
her voice singing a French love song. He stopped on the step, and for
a moment his glance took in the interior: By a window to the north she
stood at a table, its wooden surface soft and white as doeskin from
water and stone, and prepared the meal for ash-cakes, her sleeves, as
usual, rolled to her shoulder and the collar of her dress open at the
throat.

To the young factor's eyes she was a sight that weakened the knees
beneath him and set him quaking with a new fear. He dared not speak and
bring her gaze upon him, the memory of his boastful words in the forest
was too poignant.

But it needed not speech. Had he but known the wonder that had lived
within her all these days he would have understood the force that
presently stopped the song on her lips, as if her soul listened
unconsciously for tangible knowledge of the presence it already felt
near, that slowed her nimble brown fingers in the pan, that presently
lifted her head and turned her face to him.

Instantly a warm flush leaped up to the dark cheeks, and McElroy felt
its answer in his own.

“Ma'amselle,” he stammered, far from that glib “Maren” of the glade,
“there is one at the gate who demands speech of you.”

The words were commonplace enough and the girl did not get their import
for the intensity of her gaze into the eyes whose blue fire had set her
first wondering and then a-thrill with these strange emotions.

“Eh, M'sieu?” she smiled, and McElroy, revived through all his being
with that smile, repeated his message.

She took her hands from the yellow meal and dusted them on a hempen
towel, and was ready to go forth beside him.

That short walk to the stockade gate was silent with the silence of
shy new joy, and once the factor glanced sidewise at the drooped lashes
above the dusky cheeks.

“Had you expected any messenger, Ma'amselle?” he asked indifferently as
they neared the portal with its fringe of peeping women and saw beyond
them the tall figure of the Bois-Brule, his lank hair banded back by a
red kerchief.

“Nay, M'sieu,” replied the girl, and went forward to stand in the gate.

The messenger from the woods asked in good French if she were Maren Le
Moyne, and being answered in the affirmative, he took from his hunting
shirt a package wrapped in broad green leaves and placed it in her
hands.

The leaves were wilted with the heat of the man's body and came easily
off in her fingers, disclosing a small square box cunningly made from
birchbark and stained after the Indian fashion in brilliant colours. A
tiny lid was fastened with a thong of braided grass.

Wonderingly she slipped the little catch and lifted the cover.

Inside upon a bed of dampened moss there lay a wee red flower, the exact
counterpart of that one which Alfred de Courtenay had fastened in her
hair that morning by the well.

McElroy, at her shoulder, looked down upon it, and instantly the warmth
in his heart cooled.

When Maren looked up it was to find his eyes fixed on the messenger
whose tall figure swung away up the river's bank toward the north
forest, and they were coolly impersonal.

She was unversed in the ways of men where a maid is concerned, this
woman of the trail and portage, and she only knew vaguely that something
had gone wrong with sight of the little flower.

She stood, holding the box in her hand, among the women craning their
necks for a glimpse of the contents, and looked in open perplexity
at McElroy until a light laugh from the fringe behind her broke the
silence.

“A gift!” cried the little Francette, her childish voice full of a
concealed delight; “a gift from the forest; and where do such trinkets
come from save the lower branch of the Saskatchewan! It savours of our
pretty man of the long gold curls! Mon Dieu! The cavalier has made good
time!”

Whereat there was a stirring at the gate, and the peeping fringe drew
back while the factor turned on his heel and strode away toward the
factory, leaving the tall girl alone at the portal, holding her gift.

There was a devilish light in the dancing eyes of Francette as she
flirted away.

But Maren Le Moyne walked slowly back to the cabin, wondering.



CHAPTER X THE SASKATOON

It was at dusk of that same day that McElroy, as near sullen anger
as one of his temperament could be, sat alone on the log step of the
factory, his pipe unlighted in his lips and his moody eyes on the beaten
ground worn hard by the passing feet of moccasined Indians from the four
winds.

Edmonton Ridgar, with that keenness which gave him such tact, had shut
himself in the living-room, and the two clerks were off among the maids
at the cabins.

Once again McElroy had made himself ridiculous by that abrupt turning
away because of a small red flower sent a maid by a man he now knew to
be his foe and rival in all things of a man's life.

Down by the southern wall an old fiddle squeaked dolefully, and from
beyond the stockade came the drowsy call of a bird deep in the forest
depths.

On the river bank young Marc Dupre sang as he fumbled at a canoe
awaiting the morn when he was to set off up-stream for any word that he
might pick up of the coming of the Nakonkirhirinons. There was no moon
and the twilight had deepened softly, covering the post with a soft
mantle of dreams, when there was a step on the hard earth and the factor
turned sharply to behold a little figure in a red kirtle, its curly head
hanging a bit as if in shame, and at its side the shadowy form of the
great dog Loup.

“M'sieu,” said Francette timidly, and the tone was new to that audacious
slip of impudence; “M'sieu.”

“What is it, little one?” said McElroy gently, his own disgust of his
morning's quickness softening his voice that he might not again play the
hasty fool, and Francette crept nearer until she stood close to the log
step.

The small hands were twisting nervously and the little breast lifting
swiftly with an agitation entirely new to her.

Presently she seemed to find the voice that eluded her.

“Oh, M'sieu!” she cried at last, breaking out as if the words were thick
crowded in her throat; “a heavy burden has fallen upon me! Is it right,
M'sieu, for a maid to die for love of a man, waiting, waiting, waiting
for the look, the word that shall crown her bondage? Love lives all
round in the post save in the heart that is all the world to Francette!
Why should there be happiness everywhere but here?”

With a gesture pathetically dramatic the little maid threw her hands
across her heaving breast and gazed at McElroy with big eyes, starry in
the dusk.

Her emotion was genuine he could not help but see, even through his
astonishment, and he stared at her with awaking sympathy.

“Is there some one who is so much to you, little one?” he asked. “I
thought there wasn't a youth in the post--no, nor in any other this side
the Red River-who did not pay homage to France Moline's little daughter.
Who is of such poor taste? Tell me, and what I can do I will do to
remedy the evil.”

He was smiling at the little maid's pretty daring in coming straight to
the very head of De Seviere with her trouble, and he reached out a hand
to draw her down on the step beside him. There was never a woman in
distress who did not pull at the strings of his heart, and he longed to
soothe her, even while he smiled to himself at her childishness.

But Francette was not so childish, and he was one day to marvel at her
artless skill.

At the touch of his hand she came down, not upon the step beside him as
he meant, but upon her knees before him, with her two little hands upon
his knees and her face of elfin beauty upheld to him in the starlight.

“Oh, M'sieu, there is one who is so much,--oui, even more than all the
world, more than life itself,--more than heaven or hell, for whose sake
I would die a thousand deaths! One at whose feet I worship, scorning all
those youths of the settlement and the posts. See, M'sieu,” she leaned
forward so close that the fragrance of her curls blew into the man's
nostrils and he could see that the little face was pale with a passion
that caused him wonder; “see! Today came one from the forest bringing
love's message to that tall woman of Grand Portage,--the little red
flower in the birchbark case. It spoke its tale and she knew,”--subtle
Francette!--“she knew its meaning by the eye of love itself. So would I,
who have no words and am a woman, send my message by a flower.”

The hands on the factor's knees were trembling with a rigour that shook
the whole small form before him.

“See, M'sieu!” she cried, with the sudden sound of tears in the low
voice; “read the heart of the little Francette!”

She took from her bosom a fragile object and laid it in his palm, then
clasped her hands over her face and bowed until the little head with its
running curls was low to the log step.

McElroy strained his eyes to see what he held.

It was a dried spray of the blossoms of the saskatoon.

For a moment he sat in stupid wonder. Then swiftly, more by intuition
and that strange sense which recalls a previous happening by a touch, or
a smell, than by actual memory, he saw that golden morning when he had
stopped by the Molines' cabin and watched the great husky balance on his
shaky legs. He had twirled in his fingers the first little spray of
the saskatoon, brought in by Henri Corlier to show how the woods were
answering the call of the spring.

“Why,” he said, astounded beyond measure, “why, Francette,--little one,
what does this mean?”

But Francette had lost her tongue and there was no answer from the bowed
figure at his knees.

He put out a hand and laid it on her shoulder and it was shaken with
sobs,--the sobs of a woman who has cast her all on the throw of the die
and in a panic would have it back.

Off in the forest a night bird called to its mate and the squeaky fiddle
whined dolorously and a profound pity began to well in the factor's
heart. She was such a little maid, such a childish thing, a veritable
creature of the sunlight, like those great golden butterflies that
danced in the flowered glades of the woods, and she had brought her one
great gift to him unasked.

Some thought of Maren Le Moyne and of that reckless cavalier with his
curls and his red flowers crept into his voice and made it wondrously
tender with sympathy.

“Sh, little one,” he comforted, as he had comforted that day on the
river bank when she had wept over Loup; “come up and let us talk of
this.” He lifted her as one would lift a child and strove to raise the
weeping eyes from the shelter of her hands, but the small head drooped
toward him so near that it was but a step until it lay in the shelter
of his shoulder, and he was rocking a bit, unconsciously, as the sobbing
grew less pitiful.

“Sh-sh-little one,” he said gently; “sh--sh.”

Meanwhile Maren Le Moyne sat in the doorway of her sister's cabin with
her chin on her hands and stared into the night. Marie and Henri were at
the cabin of the Bordoux, laughing and chattering in the gay abandon of
youth. She could hear their snatches of songs, their quips and laughter
rising now and again in shrill gusts. Also the wailing fiddle seemed a
part of the warm night, and the bird that called in the forest.

All the little homely things of the post and the woods crept into her
heart, that seemed to her to be opening to a vague knowledge, to be
looking down sweet vistas of which she had never dreamed among her other
dreams of forest and lake and plain, and, at each distant focus where
appeared a new glory of light, there was always the figure of the young
factor with his anxious eyes. Strange new thrills raced hotly through
her heart and dyed her cheeks in the darkness. She tingled from head to
foot at the memory of that day in the glade, and for the first time in
her life she read the love-signs in a man. That change in his eyes when
he had looked upon De Courtenay's red flower was jealousy. With the
thought came a greater fulness of the unexplainable joy that had
flooded her all these days. Aye, verily, that red flower had caused him
pain,--him,--with his laughing blue eyes and his fair head tilted back
ever ready for mirth, with his tender mouth and his strong hands. The
very thought of that killed the joy of the other. If love was jealousy,
and jealousy was pain, the one must be healed for sake of the other.
With this girl to think was to do, and with that last discovery she was
upon her feet, straight and lithe as a young animal beside the door.
She would go to this man and tell him that the red flower was less than
nothing to her, its giver less than it.

At that moment a figure came out of the dusk and stopped before her.

It was her leader, Prix Laroux, silent, a shadow of the shadows.

“Maren,” he said, in that deep confidence of trusted friends, “Maren, is
all well with you?”

“All is well, Prix,” said the girl, her voice tremulous with pleasure,
“most assuredly. Thought you aught was wrong?”

“Nay,--only I felt the desire to know.”

“Friend,” said Maren, reaching out a hand which the man took strongly in
both his own; “good, good friend! Ever you are at my back.”

“Where you may easily reach me when you will.”

“I know. 'Tis you alone have made possible the long trail. Ah! how long
until another spring?”

But, when Prix had lounged away into the dusk and the girl had stepped
into the soft dust of the roadway, she fell to wondering how it was that
mention of the year's wait brought no longer its impatience, its old
dissatisfaction.

She was thinking of this as she neared the factory, her light tread
muffled in the dust.

“Foolish Francette! What should I do with a gay little girl like you?
Play in the sunshine years yet, little one, and think not of the bonds
and cares of marriage. How could these little hands lift the heavy
kettles, wash the blankets, and do the thousand tasks of a household?
You are mistaken, child. It is not love you feel, but the changing
fancies of maidenhood. Play in the sun with Loup and wait for the real
prince. He will come some day with great beauty and you will give no
more thought to me. He must be young, little one, a youth of twenty; not
one like me, nearer the mark of another decade. It would not be fitting.
Youth to youth, and those of a riper age to each other.” He was thinking
of a tall form, full and round with womanhood, whose eyes held knowledge
of the earth, and yet, had he been able to define their charm, were
younger even than Francette's.

The little maid had ceased her weeping long since and the face on
McElroy's shoulder, turned out toward the night, was drawn and hard.
The black eyes were no longer starry with passion, but glittering with
failure. And the man, stupid and good of heart as are all men of his
type, congratulated himself that he had talked the nonsense out of her
little head.

Suddenly he felt the slender figure shiver in his arms and the curly
head brushed his cheek as she raised her face.

“Aye, M'sieu,” she whispered, “it is as you say, but only one thing
remains. Kiss me, M'sieu, and I go to--forget.”

The factor hesitated.

He felt again his one passionate avowal on the lips of his one woman.

This was against the grain.

“Please, M'sieu,” begged the childish voice, with a world of coaxing;
and, thinking to finish his gentle cure, he bent his head and kissed her
lightly on the cheek.

“And now--” he started to admonish, when she threw her arms about his
neck, stiffling the words in her garments.

At the corner of the factory Maren Le Moyne stood looking through the
twilight at the scene.

When Francette released him there were only they two and he had heard no
step nor seen the silent beholder.

When the little French maid slipped away with the husky she fingered the
carved toy of a knife in her sash and tossed her short curls in triumph.

Her failure had taken on a hue of victory.



CHAPTER XI LEAVEN AT WORK

“M'sieu,” said Marc Dupre, coming up the slope from the river, his
buckskins much tattered, showing a swift cross-country run, “I have news
of the great tribe. Like the forest leaves in fall in point of numbers
they are, and they wear a wealth of wampum and elk teeth, so much that
they are rich beyond any other tribe. Their young men are tall and heavy
of stature and wonderful in the casting of their great carven spears.
Also do they excel in the use of the bow. Warlike and suspicious,
scouting every inch of country before them, they come down by way of
Dear Lake,--and the young Nor'wester at Fort Brisac has already sent
forth his messengers to meet them.”

McElroy frowned.

Double anger swelled suddenly within him. In two ways had De Courtenay
crossed his plane at opposing angles. It was evidently war that the
adventurer wanted, the hot war of the two fur companies coupled to that
of man and man for a maid. He stood a while and thought. Then he turned
to Dupre.

“You have done well, Dupre,” he said shortly. “Get you to your cabin
and rest, for I may want your wit again. Only, on the way, send Pierre
Garqon to me.”

The young man touched his red toque, symbol of safety to all trappers
in a land where the universal law is “kill,” for no wild animal of the
woods bears a crimson head save that animal man who is the greatest
killer of all, and turned away. He was draggled and stained from a
forced march through forest and up-stream, over portage and rapid,
carrying his tiny birchbark craft on his head, snatching a short
sleep on a bed of moss, hurrying on that he might learn of the
Nakonkirhirinons travelling slowly down from that unknown land to the
far north, even many leagues beyond York factory on the shores of the
great bay.

As he went toward his own cabin he glanced swiftly at the open door of
the Baptistes. Always these days he glanced that way with a sick feeling
in the region of his heart. Who was he, Marc Dupre, trapper of the
big woods, that he should dare think so often of that woman from Grand
Portage, with her wondrous beauty and her tongue that could be like a
cold knife-blade or the petal of a lily for softness? And yet he was
conscious of a mighty change that had come over him with that day on the
flat rock by the stockade when she had talked to him of the trapping,--a
change like that which comes to one when he is so fortunate as to be in
distant Montreal and sits in the dusk of the great church there among
the saints and the incense.

There was no longer pleasure in flipping jests and love words with the
red-cheeked maids, and something had happened to the dashing spirit of
the youth. All through those long days in the forest, those short blue
nights under the velvet sky, one image had stood before him, calm,
smiling, quivering with that illusive light which held men's hearts.
Never a day that he could win forgetfulness of the face of Maren Le
Moyne, and now he glanced toward her doorway. It lay in the sunlight
without a foot upon its sill, and Marc sighed unconsciously. He was not
to see her, perhaps, to-day.

But suddenly, as he rounded a corner among the cabins, he came full
upon her, and his flippant tongue clove to the roof of his mouth without
speech.

She came toward him with a bread-pan in her hands and her eyes were cast
down. The heart in him ran to water at sight of her, and he stopped.

Once more thought of his unworthiness abased him.

Then she felt his presence and raised her eyes, and the young trapper
looked deep into them with that helplessness which draws the look of a
child. Deep he looked and long, and the woman looked back, and in that
moment there sprang into life the first thrill of that thing which was
to lead to the great crisis which she had predicted that day by the
stockade.

With it Marc Dupre found his tongue.

“Ma'amselle!” he cried sharply, “what is it? Mon Dieu! What is it?”
 For the dark eyes, with their light-behind-black-marble splendour, were
quenched and dazed and all knowledge seemed stricken from them. The look
of them cut to his very soul, quick and sensitive from the working
of the great change, made ready as a wind-harp by the silent days of
dreams, the nights of visions. To him alone was the devastation within
them apparent. He stretched out a timid hand and touched her sleeve.

“What is it, Ma'amselle?” he begged abjectly. “I would heal it with my
blood!”

Extravagant, impulsive, the boy was in deadly earnest, and Maren Le
Moyne was conscious of it as simply as that she lived.

Just as simply she acknowledged to him what she would have to none other
in De Seviere, that something had fallen from a clear sky.

“Nay,” she said, and the deep voice was lifeless, “I am beyond help.”

Dupre's fingers slipped, trembling, around her arm.

“But I am a stone to your foot, Ma'amselle,--always remember that. When
the way becomes too hard there shall be a stone to your foot. I ask no
better fate and you have said.”

The miserable eyes were not dead to everything. At his swift words they
glowed a moment.

“Aye,--I have said, and I thank God, M'sieu, for such friendship. I am
rich, indeed.”

“Oho! Marc Dupre does better at the lovemaking than at the trapping! His
account at the factory suffers from les amours!”

A childish voice broke in upon them, and Francette's impish face peeped
round the corner of the nearest cabin.

“Let it be, Marc Dupre,” as the youth dropped his and from Maren's arm.
“Ma'amselle does not object,--a trapper or a cavalier, all are fish to
Ma'amselle's net. Mon Dieu! If all were so attractive as Ma'amselle!”

The little maid sighed in exaggerated dolour.

Dupre flashed round on his moccasined heel and reached her in a stride.

“Aha! It is you, by all the saints!” he said beneath his breath, as he
took her none too gently by the shoulder. “I know your tricks.”

Aloud he said, “Francette, children should keep from where they are not
wanted. Get you back to your mother.”

“Children, you say, M'sieu Dupre? Is eighteen so far behind twenty-two?
Grow a beard on your cheek before you give yourself the airs of a
man. And, anyway, grown men of twice eighteen have been known to love
children of that age.”

It was a dagger thrust, and it found its mark even as the girl glanced
slily at her victim. Maren's full mouth twitched and she looked dully
away to the fort gate. Dupre gave Francette an ungallant push. “Begone!”
 he cried angrily; “you little cat!”

With a ringing laugh the maid danced away in the sunshine, and Dupre
faced Maren.

“It is that imp of le diable, Francette?” he asked. “What has she done
to you, Ma'amselle?”

But Maren shook her head.

“The maid is not to blame. She is but a child in spirit and what le bon
Dieu has seen fit to give her has gone to her head. That is all, save as
your quick eye has detected, M'sieu, I have received a heavy hurt.”

Suddenly, with that whimsical youthfulness of soul which glimmered at
times through her apparent strength, she looked at Dupre with a sort of
fright.

“Merci, M'sieu! For what reason does the good God let some things
befall?... But I have still a stone. Throughout I will remember that.”

In a moment she was gone, walking toward the cabin of Micene Bordoux,
and Marc Dupre went on his quest of Pierre, wondering and all a-tremble
with pity and thought of that promise.

Where Marc, with the revelation of adoration, had seen sharply, Micene
with her good sense felt vaguely that something was wrong with the
intrepid leader of the long trail.

“Maren,” she said this day, as she took the bread pan which had been
borrowed, “I fear there is something troubling you. Is there bad news
from Athabasca?”

Always there lay behind Maren's eagerness a fear, sleeping like a
hidden fawn but ever ready to quiver into life, a fear of news from
the Whispering Hills, news that should make the promise of the trail a
sudden void.

“Nay, Micene,” smiled Maren, “these latest Indians come from the south.”

“And all is well with the plans?”

The vague uneasiness was not stilled in Micene.

“All is well with the plans. There is not a year now.”

The girl looked straight in her friend's eyes without a trace of the
dazed misery which Marc Dupre had surprised in her own.

Micene smiled back, but that night she lay far into the dark hours
thinking of the subtle change in the maid of the trail. With a woman's
intuition she knew that the girl had lied, that all was not well with
her.

And one other there was of that small party of venturers housed in
the new cabins of De Seviere who knew vaguely that something had gone
wrong-Prix Laroux, the sturdy prow of that little vessel of progress of
which the girl was the beating heart, the unresting engine.

He had felt its coming even before it fell, that mighty shadow which
blotted out the heavens and the earth, for to Maren, once given, there
was no recalling the gift, and with that day in the glade she had lost
possession of her soul and body forever.

Dazed in all the regions of her being, enshadowed in every vista of hope
and scarce-tasted joy, she went quietly about the cabin, her mind a dark
space in which there flashed sudden, reiterated visions,--now McElroy's
blue eyes, anxious and eager as he held up the doeskin dress at the
door-sill, burning with fire and truth and passion in the glade in the
forest, again tender and diffident what time they walked together to the
gate to meet De Courtenay's messenger, and again it was that scene
at the factory steps that haunted her,--McElroy with his arms about
Francette Moline, the grey husky crouching in the twilight. Throughout
the whole sick tangle there went a twisting thread of wonder, of
striving for understanding. What was this thing which had come clutching
sweetly at her heart, which had stilled the very life in her with holy
mystery, and whose swift passing had left her benumbed within as some
old woman mumbling in the sun on a door-sill? Where was the glory of the
spring? What had come upon the face of the waters, that the light had
gone from them? What was this thing that the good God wished her to
learn, where was the lesson?

Given to reason and plain judgment of all things, the girl tried to
think out her problem, to fathom the meaning of this which had befallen
her, and to find if there was any good in it. But everywhere she looked
there was the laughing face of the factor with his sunburnt hair and his
blue eyes. The spring days were heavy as those steel-grey stretches that
pass for the days in winter.

Too dull for sharp pain, she went about in a sort of apathy.

For several days McElroy watched uneasily for her, hoping for a chance
meeting. He was anxious to speak about his boyish jealousy, to beg
forgiveness for that abrupt leaving at the gate. So close did she stay
at the cabin, however, that at last he was forced to go to her. It was
twilight again, soft, filled with the breath of the forest, vibrant with
the call of birds off in some marshy land to the south, and he found her
alone, sitting upon the step, staring into the gathering dusk, listening
to the laughter of the young married folk from the cabin next where
Marie and Henri were loudest.

A lump rose in his throat as he caught the outline of the braided head
bowed lower than he had ever seen it, saw the whole attitude of the
strong figure, every line relaxed as if in a great weariness.

“Maren,” he said, with the wonder of love in his voice, “Maren--my
maid!”

And he strode forward swiftly, stooped, and laid his hand on her
shoulder.

With a jerk the drooped head came up. She drew from his touch as if it
burned her.

“If you please, M'sieu,” she said coldly, “go away.”

McElroy sprang back.

“What? Go away! You wish that,--Ma'amselle?”

The tone more than the words drove out of him all daring of her sweet
name, took away in a flash all the personal.

“Of a surety,--go away.”

The factor stood a moment in amazed silence. Did the red flower mean so
much to her, then? Had she accepted its message? And yet he knew in his
heart that the look in her eyes, the smile on her lips had told their
own tale of awakening to his touch. What but the red flower in its
birchbark case had wrought the change?

He thought swiftly of De Courtenay's beauty, of his sparkling grace, his
braided blue coat, his wide hat, and the long golden curls sweeping his
shoulder. Truly a figure to turn a woman's head. But within him there
rose a tide of rage, blind vent of the hurt of love, that boded ill for
the dashing Nor'wester on the Saskatchewan.

Sick to the very bottom of his heart, he bowed ever so slightly to the
tense figure on the step and strode away in the shadows.

So! Thus ended his one love.

For this he had kept himself from the common lot of the factors in their
lonely posts; for this he had never looked with aught save friendly
compassion upon the maids of the settlements, the half breed girls of
the wilderness, the wild daughters of the forest.

Waiting for this one princess in his small kingdom, he had thrown
himself on the out-bearing tide of love only to be stranded on some
barren beach, to see her taken from him by some reckless courtier not
fit to touch a woman's hand!

Thus they turned apart, these two meant for each other from the
beginning, and in each love worked its will of pain.

Maren on the step stared dry-eyed into the night, uncomprehending,
unrebelling, and McElroy strode ahead, blind with sudden anguish, scarce
knowing which way his steps tended.

And, like a ghoul behind a stone, a small dark face peeped keenly from a
corner.

Francette was watching her leaven work.



CHAPTER XII THE NAKONKIRHIRINONS

In the week that followed the waters of the Assiniboine grew black with
myriads of canoes. Like the leaves in fall, truly, they came drifting
out of the forest, long slim craft, made with a wondrous cunning of
birchbark peeled from the tree in one piece, fitted to frames of ash
fragile as cockleshell and strong as steel under the practised hand, and
smeared in every crinkle and crease and crevasse with the resinous gum
of the pine tree. By scores and hundreds and battalions, it seemed to
the traders at De Seviere, they poured out of the wilderness, choking
the river with their numbers, spilling their contents on the slope under
the bastioned walls until a camp was made so vast that it stretched into
the forest on each side the clearing of the post and even extended to
the marsh at the south.

Half-naked braves stalked in countless numbers among the tepees that
went rapidly up, tall fellows, mighty of build and fearless of carriage
and of eagle eye, aloof, suspicious, watching the fort, guarding the
rich piles of peltry and exchanging a word with none.

These were the great Nakonkirhirinons from that limitless region of the
Pays Ten d'en Haut.

If McElroy's heart had not been so full of his own trouble he would have
exulted mightily in their coming, for did it not prove one failure for
that reckless Nor'wester on the Saskatchewan? They had come, past all
his blandishments of trade, to Fort de Seviere, and their coming spelled
a number of furs this season far in advance of any other for that small
post. If he wondered at first how they had held out against De
Courtenay it was all made plain when among the strangers he espied many
Assiniboines and saw in the great canoe of the chief Negansahima, old
Quamenoka, who had boasted of the coming of this tribe to De Seviere as
his work.

He had spoken truly and had evidently made his word good by meeting the
approaching columns and returning with them.

To him alone was due the failure of De Courtenay, McElroy felt at once,
and determined in his mind on that present which he had promised for
this zeal.

With the coming of the strangers Fort de Seviere was put under military
rule. The half-moon to the right of the gate, with its small cannon,
received a quota of men who strayed carelessly all day within reach of
the low rampart; a guard lounged in the great gate, ready at a moment's
notice to clang it shut, and seemingly matter-of-course precautions were
taken throughout, for these Indians were as uncertain as the flickering
north lights crackling in a frosty sky.

There was a scene not to be likened to any other outside the region of
the Hudson Bay country, where strange relations existed between white
trader and savage, when Edmonton Ridgar met the canoe of the chief at
the landing.

Savage delight overspread the eagle features of Negansahima as he beheld
the white man.

Towering mightily in the prow of his canoe, the sweeping head-dress of
feathers crowning him with a certain majesty, he fixed his keen glance
on Ridgar and came gliding toward him across the rippled water.

As the canoe cut cleanly up and stopped just short of scraping on the
stones at the edge, obeying the paddles like a thoroughbred the bit, the
chief trader of De Seviere stepped forward and held out his arms.

“Who art thou?” he called.

Deep and guttural as thunder from the broad chest, naked under the lines
of elk teeth, came the reply,

“Thy father,”

“And master of my goods. The heart of thy son melts as the snow in
spring. Wiskendjac has sent thee.”

McElroy, standing near, saw the face of his friend illumined with a
real affection as the savage landed and, contrary to the custom of the
Indians in the lower country, embraced with every sign of joy the lean
white man whose skin was nearly as dark as his own and whose greying
temples bespoke almost a as many years as the chief's black locks could
boast.

In the eyes of both, as they regarded each other, were memories known
to no one else. McElroy wondered what they were and what that year, of
which Ridgar had spoken only once, had held.

The trader spoke their tongue as easily as he spoke any other that came
to the post, naturally and with quiet fluency.

So deep was the apparent pleasure of the meeting that, when the
interpreting was done and the ceremonies over, Ridgar went with the
Indian among the tepees and no more did McElroy see him until he came to
the factory at dusk.

“Mother of Heaven!” he ejaculated, flinging himself down at the table in
the living-room where Rette's strong coffee tempted the nostril; “such
furs! Beaver in countless packs, all the fat winter skins, no Bordeaux,
no Mittain. Fox, also of the best only,--black fox, fine and shining,
fox of those far-north regions where they hunt beyond the sun, white as
the snow it runs on, and Mon Dieu, McElroy! Seven silvers as I hope for
salvation! Verily are they a prize beyond price, these Indians that have
come in to us, and I fancy that young Nor'wester is swearing at his luck
in losing them. Old Quamenoka struts as if their wealth belonged to his
meek Assiniboines.... But the furs! Ermine and nekik and sakwasew and
wapistan, all the little fellows that, taken from those virgin north
lands, are worth their weight in gold! Nowhere have I seen a common
pelt. They are connoisseurs, these wild Nakonkirhirinons, and they carry
a king's ransom in their long canoes. White bear and brown arctic wolf
and everywhere the best of its kind! To-morrow's trade will be worth
while--but keep the guns in evidence and quiet above all things.”

“Ah!” said McElroy, “what is there to fear, think you? Is not the chief
bound to you by all ties of ceremony and regard?”

“Most assuredly,” returned Ridgar quietly, “but those young braves
are strung like a singing wire and swift as a girl to take suspicious
fright; and there are somewhere near five hundred of them, as near as I
can make out from the numbers seething among the lodges. They are in a
strange country and watching every leaf and shadow.”

Thus the sun went down on De Seviere, with the eager maids and women
passing and repassing near the gate to peep out at the rustling throng,
at the tepees with their fine skin coverings painted with all the
wonders of battle and the chase, at the comely squaws and maidens, the
chubby brown children, the dogs snarling and savage, for they had full
complement of the grey northern huskies.

To a woman they peeped at the gate from all the cabins of the post,
save only that one who had been most eager before when the Indians came,
Maren Le Moyne, sitting in idle apathy on her sister's doorstep.

“Ma'amselle,” said Marc Dupre, stopping hesitant before her, “have you
seen the Nakonkirhirinons?”

“Nay,” she said listlessly, “I care not, M'sieu.”

And the youth went gloomily away.

“Something there is which preys on her like the blood-sucker on the
rabbit's throat. But what? Holy Mother, what?”

His handsome eyes were troubled.

By dawn on the following day the trading had begun. Up the main way
passed a line of braves, each laden with his winter's catch of furs,
to barter at the trading-room, haggle with the clerks by sign and
pantomime, and pass down again with gun and hatchet and axe, kettle and
bright blanket, beads, and, most eagerly sought of all, yards of crimson
cloth.

There was babble of chatter among the squaws, shrill laughter, and
comparison of purchases.

In the trading-room sat the chief with his headmen and old Quamenoka
of the Assiniboines, smoking gravely many pipes and listening to the
trading. Like some wild eagle of the peaks brought down to earth he
seemed, ever alert and watchful behind his stately silence.

For two days the trading progressed finely, and McElroy had so far laid
aside his doubts as to take delight in the quality of the rare furs.

Never before had such pelts stacked themselves in the sorting-room.

It was a sight for eyes tired by many springs of common trade.

Then, like a bomb in a peaceful city, came a running word of excitement.

The Nor'wester from the Saskatchewan was among the Nakonkirhirinons! Was
at the very gates of De Seviere! When Pierre Garcon brought the news,
McElroy flushed darkly to his fair hair and went on with his work.

This was unbearable insolence.

“An', M'sieu,” pursued Pierre, “not only the man from Montreal, but,
like the treacherous dog he is, among the Nor'westers is that vagabond
Bois DesCaut.”

“Turncoat?” said the factor.

“Aye.”

True enough. When McElroy, after trading hours, strolled down to the
gate between the bastions, whom should he behold but the hulking figure
of his erstwhile trapper, sulky of appearance, shifty eyes flitting
everywhere but toward his old factor. And farther down the bank, among
a group of warriors, a brown baby on his shoulder and his long curls
shining in the sunset, was that incomparable adventurer, Alfred de
Courtenay.

Apparently he had not come for barter, nor for anything save the love of
the unusual, the thirst for adventure that had brought him primarily to
the wilderness.

“A fine fit of apoplexy would he have, that peppery old uncle at
Montreal, Elsworth McTavish, could he see his precious nephew following
his whims up and down the land, leaving his post in the hands of his
chief trader,” thought McElroy, as he looked at the scene before him.

While he stood so, there was a rustle of women behind him and voices
that bespoke more eager eyes for the Indians, and he glanced over his
shoulder.

Micene Bordoux and Mora LeClede approached, and between them walked
Maren Le Moyne. McElroy's heart pounded hard with a quick excitement as
he saw the listless droop of the face under the black braids and
stopped with a prescience of disaster. His glance went swiftly to
the long-haired gallant in the braided coat. Surely were the elements
brought together.

It seemed as if Fate was weaving these little threads of destiny, for
no sooner did Maren Le Moyne step through the gate among the lodges than
her very nearness drew round upon his heel De Courtenay.

His eyes lighted upon her and the sparkling smile lit up his features.
With inimitable grace he swung the child from his shoulder, tossed it
to a timid squaw watching like a hawk, and, shaking back his curls, came
forward.

“Ah, Ma'amselle!” he said, bending before her with his courtly manner,
“you see, as I said in the early spring,--I have come back to Fort de
Seviere.”

“So I see, M'sieu,” smiled Maren, with a touch of whimsical amusement
at the memory of that morning, and his venturesome spirit. “Have you by
chance brought me a red flower?”

“Why else should I come?” he returned, and, with a flourish, brought
from his bosom a second birchbark box which he held out to the girl.

Over her face there spread a crimson flood at this swift, literal
proving of a secret pact and she stood hesitating, at loss.

The stretch of beach was alive with spectators. Near the wall a group of
girls hugged together, with Francette Moline in the centre; down by the
canoes Pierre Garcon and Marc Dupre stood, the dark eyes of the latter
watching every move, while at the door of the chief's lodge, directly
before the fort and between it and the river, Edmonton Ridgar talked
in low tones with Negansahima. Indeed, like father and son seemed this
strangely assorted pair. Maren remembered afterward how near together
they had stood, the wild savage in his elk teeth and scant buckskin
garments, an indiscreet band of yellow paint showing a corner above his
blanket, and the dark, wiry trader with the grey eyes. Scattered, here
and there among the braves were many Bois-Brules, lean Runners of the
Burnt Woods, belonging she knew to the North-west Company. Also in that
moment she saw the frowning face and ugly eyes of Bois DesCaut beneath
the white lock on his temple. Long afterward was the girl to recall that
evening scene.

For another moment she hesitated, and then, from sheer loss of poise,
reached out her hand. The dancing eyes of the cavalier lit with all the
daring of conquest.

“My heart, Ma'amselle,” he said gallantly, as he pressed the fragile
thing in her palm; and in another second he had stooped and kissed her,
as he had kissed many another woman, lightly, delicately, in the face of
the populace, joying to the depths of his careless nature in the dare of
the thing.

With a cry the girl sprang back, crushing the birchbark case with its
red flower into shapeless ruin. There was a muffled word, the flash of a
figure, and McElroy the factor had flung himself before her. She caught
the thud of a blow upon flesh and in a moment there were two men locked
in deadly combat before the post gate. In less time than the telling, a
circle of faces drew round, dark faces of Indians and Bois-Brules, light
faces of De Courtenay's men, and in all there leaped swift excitement as
they saw the combatants. White with passion, his brilliant eyes flaming
and dancing with fury, De Courtenay fought like a madman to avenge that
blow in the face, while McElroy, flushed and calmer, took with his hands
payment for all things,--slighted kindliness, Company thefts, and, above
all else, the stolen heart of his one woman.

How it would have ended there is no telling, for these two were evenly
matched--what De Courtenay lacked in weight he made up in swiftness and
agility,--had it not been for the side arm that hung at his hip, one
of those small pistols in use across the water where gentlemen fight at
given paces and not across a frozen river or through a mile of brush.

Once, twice, he tried to reach it, and twice did McElroy snatch the
groping hand away. Three times he passed swiftly for the inlaid handle
and, as if there lay luck in the number, the weapon flashed in the red
light.

Swift as was the draw, McElroy was swifter.

With an upward stroke he flung up the hand that held it. There was a
shot, ringing down the Assiniboine and echoing in the woods, and little
Francette by the stockade wall screamed. With the first flash of metal
Maren Le Moyne had gripped her hands until the nails cut raw, standing
where she had sprung at the stranger's kiss.

She could no more move than the bastioned wall behind her.

For a moment there was deathly silence after that shot. Then pandemonium
broke loose as Negansahima, chief of the Nakonkirhirinons, flung up his
arms, the dull metal bands with their inset stones catching the crimson
light, and fell into the outstretched arms of Edmonton Ridgar.

A long cry broke from his lips, the death-cry of a warrior.



CHAPTER XIII “A SKIN FOR A SKIN”

For a moment the whole evening scene, red with the late light, was set
in the mould of immobility. The two fighting men at sound of that cry
following hard upon the shot stopped rigidly, still clasped in the grip
of rage, the women staring wide-eyed from the wall, the Bois-Brules, the
leaning eager faces of the wild Nakonkirhirinons, the figure of the
girl in the foreground, all, all were stricken into stillness by that
dirge-like cry. For only the fraction of a second it held, that tense
waiting.

Then from nine hundred throats there shot up to the sky, turquoise
and pink and calm, such a sound as all the northland knew,--the wild
blood-cry of the savage.

It filled the arching aisles of the shouldering forest, rolled down the
breast of the river, and echoed in the cabins of the post, and with it
there broke loose the leashed wildness of the Indians. There was one
vast surging around the lodge where Ridgar knelt with the figure of the
chief in his arms, another where a tumbling horde fought to get to the
factor and De Courtenay.

At the stockade gate Prix Laroux, swift of foot and strong as twenty men
in the exigency of the moment, swept the women into his arms and rushed
them within the post. Above the hideous turmoil his voice rose in
carrying command,

“Into the post! Into the post,--every man inside! Man the rampart!”

It fell on ears startled into apathy by the suddenness of the tragic
happening, and there was a wild confusion of white people pulling out
of the mass like threads, all headed for the open gate. Swift as light
those guards of the guns on the rampart sprang to place, the watcher of
the portal swung the great studded gate ready for the clanging close,
and, in a twinkling, so alert to peril do they become who pierce the
wilderness, there were without only that howling mass of savages, De
Courtenay, McElroy, and Edmonton Ridgar gazing with dimmed vision into
the fast glazing eyes of the dying chief.

Only they? Standing where she had leaped at the cavalier's kiss, her
eyes wide, her lips apart, was Maren Le Moyne. In the hurrying rush of
frantic people she had been forgotten and she was utterly helpless.

As in a dream she saw the leaping forms close in upon the two men who
fought for her, knew that those of De Seviere were pouring past her to
safety, heard the boom of the great gate as it swung into place, and for
her life she could move neither hand nor foot. Her body stood frozen
as in those horrid dreams of night when one is conscious, yet held, in a
clutch of steel.

Over the heaving heads with their waving eagle feathers she saw the head
and shoulders of De Courtenay rise, tipped sidewise so that his long
curls swung clear, shining in the light, and already he was bound with
thongs of hide.

She saw his handsome face again sparkling with that smile that was so
brilliant and that bore such infinite shades of meaning.

Now it was full of devil-may-care, as if he shrugged his shoulders at a
loss at cards, and in that second it fell upon her standing in horror.

“Ah, Ma'amselle!” he called, across the surging feathers; “the tune
changes! But you have my heart, and I,--I have one kiss! Adieu, my Maid
of the Long Trail! The chance was worth its turning.”

Then the shining head sank into the mass and she heard no more.

She was conscious only of a giant form lurching, red-eyed and yelling,
out of the turmoil, of brown hands that clutched her arms, and of
another form which shot past her. For the second time in a few moments
one man had reached for her and another flung himself to her rescue. She
saw the Indian reel back with a red line spurting across his eyes,
felt herself lifted and flung across a shoulder, and knew that the gate
behind was swinging open. The next instant she slid down to her feet
with her face in the buckskin shirt of Marc Dupre, who leaned shaking
against the stockade wall and held her in a grip like steel, while Henri
Corlier shot the bolts into place.

Huddled in white groups were the women, some of them already raising
their voices in weeping, others silent with the training of the women
of the wilderness. The men faced each other with lips drawn tight and
breath that came swiftly. Prix Laroux, his dark eyes cool and sharp,
looked swiftly over the populace as they stood, for with that first shot
every man in Fort de Seviere had rushed to the gate, and in that first
moment of getting breath he calculated their strength and their ability.

A leader born himself, he was looking for a leader among McElroy's men;
but, with that intrepid factor himself gone and Edmonton Ridgar also,
there was nowhere a man with the signs of leadership upon him.

Through Prix's mind this went while they stood listening to the
death-wail that was beginning to rise from the tepees without.

Then he quietly took command, knowing himself to be best fitted.

“Corlier,” he said quietly, “leave the gate to Cif Bordoux. Take one man
and get to the southwest bastion. You, Gifford,” turning to that young
clerk who worked in the sorting-room, “man the northwest. Garcon and
Dupre will take the forward two. The rest will stand ready with guns and
ammunition along the four walls and at the gates. We know not what will
transpire.”

As if their factor spoke, the men of De Seviere turned to obey, feeling
that strange compelling which causes men to follow one man to death on
the field of battle, and which is surely the gift of God.

Out of his shaking arms Marc Dupre loosed Maren, the trembling lessening
as the danger passed. That sight of the defenceless girl among the
Indians had shaken him like a leaf in the wind, had nerved his arms with
iron, had worked in him both with strength and weakness.

Now he looked into her eyes and said never a word, for once again he saw
that they were dazed and void of knowledge.

As he set her upon her own strength, she swayed. Her eyes went round the
hushed groups of faces with wild searching. At last they found the face
of her leader, and clung there, dark and dull.

“Prix!” she cried. “Prix! Open the gate!”

“I cannot, Maren,” he said quietly; “'twould be but madness.”

“But they are without!”

All horror was in the cry.

“They are among the Indians!”

“Aye,--and may the good God have mercy on them!”

Laroux hastily made the sign of the cross.

“We must guard the post, Maren.”

“But--” She turned her eyes slowly around from face to face and not a
woman there but read her secret plain, the open script of love,--but for
which man?

“But-they-will--be--” She did not finish the sentence, staring at
Laroux. Once she moistened her lips.

“They will--Prix,--as I am your leader, open that gate!”

With sudden reviving the daze went out of her features and the old light
came back to her eyes, the far-seeing, undaunted light that had beaconed
the long way from Grand Portage. She was every inch the leader again,
tall, straight against the logs, her brown arm pointing imperiously to
the closed gate.

“Open, I say!”

For a moment Laroux faced her squarely, the man who had tied himself to
her hand, pledged himself to forge the way to the Whispering Hills, who
followed her compelling leadership as these lesser men had turned to
follow his but now. Then he set his will to hers.

“I will not,” he said quietly.

With no more words she flung herself upon the gate and tore at the
chains, her strong hands able as a man's. As the sight of her in peril
had worked for both weakness and strength in Dupre, so had McElroy's
plight affected her. That helpless moment was the one defection of her
dauntless life.

Now again she was herself, reaching for the thing of the moment, and the
roar outside the palisade, constantly rising in volume, in menace and
savagery, brushed out of her brain every cloud of shock. Laroux caught
her from behind, pinioning her arms.

“Maren,” he said quietly, “hear me. Out there are five hundred warriors
wild as the heart of the Pays d'en Haut, howling over the body of their
dying chief. What would be the opening of the gate but the massacre of
all within? Could forty men take the factor from them? There would be
but as many more scalps on their belts as there are heads within the
post. See you not, Maren?”

In his iron grip the girl stood still, breathing heavily. As he ceased
speaking a great sigh came from her lips, a sigh like a sob.

“Aye,” she said brokenly, “I see,--I see! Mary Mother! Let me go, Prix.
I see.”

Laroux loosed her, knowing that the moment was past, and went at once
about his duties of throwing the post into a state of defence.

Once more strong and quiet, Maren went to the cabin by the gate. Here
Marie knelt at her bed with a crucifix grasped in her shaking hands, her
face white as milk and prayers on her trembling lips.

“Maren!” she gasped, with the child's appeal to the stronger nature.
“Oh, Maren, what will befall? For love of God, what will befall?”

“Hush, Marie,” answered Maren; “'tis but a tragedy of the wild. Naught
will befall us of the post.”

“But those without? What is that roaring of many throats? Little Jean
Bleaureau but now ran past crying that the Nakonkirhirinons were killing
the factor”

“No!” Marie jumped at the word like one shot, so wild and sudden it was.
“No! No! Not yet!”

Even in the stress of the moment Marie stared open-mouthed at her
sister.

“Holy Mother! It is love,--that cry! You love the factor!”

“Hush!” whispered Maren, dry-lipped.

The roar from the river bank had sharpened itself into one point of
utterance which pierced the calm heavens in a mingling of native speech,
French and broken English from Nakonkirhirinon and halfbreed, and, worse
than both, dissolute “white Indian,” and its burden was,

“A skin for a skin!”



CHAPTER XIV FELLOW CAPTIVES

After that tense moment of hush following the shot, McElroy had no
distinct recollection of what occurred. He was conscious of a sickening
knowledge of Negansahima with his banded brown arms stretching into
the evening light, of the tepees, of the river beyond, of the face of
Edmonton Ridgar, and of all these etched distinctly in that effect of
sun and shade which picks out each smallest detail sometimes of a rare
evening in early summer. Then the whole scene went out in a smother
as an avalanche of bodies descended upon him. He could smell the heavy
odour of flesh half-naked, the scent of the hidden paint, he felt arms
that fought to grip him and fingers that clutched like talons. Under
it all he went down in the grass of the slope, fighting with all his
strength, but powerless as a gnat in a pond. Above the turmoil of cries
and guttural yells, even while he felt himself crushed at the bottom
of that boiling mass, he heard the light voice of De Courtenay ringing
clear in his whimsical farewell to Maren Le Moyne. Then he was wrenched
up through the mass, something struck him on the head with a sharp blow,
a shower of stars fell like a cataract, and the sickening scents in his
nostrils faded away.

When he again opened his eyes it was to behold real stars shining down
from a velvet sky, to hear the river lapping gently at the landing,
and the night birds calling in the forest. From the prairie beyond the
fringe of woods to the east there came the yapping of the coyotes, and
far to the north a wolf howled.

At first a sense of bewilderment held him. Then in a rush came back the
memory of what had happened. He listened intently. Back and forth, back
and forth somewhere near went a soft footstep, the swish and glide of
a moccasin. He strained his eyes, which smarted terribly, into the
darkness, and presently descried a tall form pacing slowly up against
the skyline of his vision and back again into the shadows. A single
feather slanted against the stars. A guard pacing the place of captives.

With a slight movement McElroy tried to lift a hand.

It was immovable. He tried the other. It likewise refused his will.

So with both feet when he attempted, ever so cautiously, to move them.

He was bound hand and foot, and with cruel tightness, for with that tiny
slipping of his muscles there set up all through him such a tingling and
aching as was almost unbearable.

His head seemed a lump of lead, glued to whatever it lay upon, and big
as a buttertub.

Turning his eyes far as he could to the right, he looked long in that
direction. Faintly, after a while, he picked out the straight line of
the stockade top, the rising tower at the corner. The line of the wall
faded out in darkness the other way, strain as he might. To the left
were the ragged tops of the tepees, their two longer sticks pointing
above the others.

From the sound of the river, he must be between it and the stockade
gate.

Presently his numbed hearing became conscious of a sound somewhere near,
a sound that had rung so ceaselessly since his waking that it had seemed
the background for the lesser noise of the sentry's slipping moccasin.
It was the weird, unending, unbeginning wail of the women, the
death-song of the tribe mourning the passing of a chief, the voices of
some four hundred squaws blending indescribably.

McElroy listened.

With consciousness of that his mind grew clearer and he began to think.

What a fool he had been!

Once more had he played like an unbalanced boy at the game of love.

What right had he to strike De Courtenay for kissing the woman whom he
had won with his red flowers and his curls before the populace? That he
himself had fancied for a brief space that she was his was no excuse for
plunging like a boy at his rival's throat. If he had held his peace, all
would be well now and the old chief would not be lying stiff and stark
somewhere in the shadowed camp, the women wailing without fires.

It was no balm to his sore heart that he in his blundering wrath had
wrought this fresh disaster. And his post, De Seviere, which he had won
by daring service and loyalty to the H. B. C., what would become of it?

Who after him would rule on the Assiniboine?

For well he knew that death, and death thrice,--aye, a million times
refined,--awaited so luckless a victim as he whose hand had killed the
great chief. But he had not killed Negansahima. It was the gun in De
Courtenay's hand. Ah, De Courtenay! Where was De Courtenay? A captive
assuredly, if he was one. They had both gone down together under the
foam of that angry human sea. And, if he was here, his antagonist must
be somewhere near. With exquisite torture, McElroy slowly turned his
head to right and left. At the second motion his face brushed something
close against his shoulder. It was cloth, a rough surface corrugated
and encrusted with ridges,--what but the braid on the blue coat of the
Montreal gallant!

There was no start, no answering movement at his touch. The rough
surface seemed strangely set and still.

He lay silent and thought a moment with strange feelings of new horror
surging through him.

Was De Courtenay dead?

Or was it by chance a stone under the braided coat, a hillock where it
had been thrown? That strange feeling of starkness never belonged to a
human body soft with the pulse of life.

For hours McElroy lay staring into the night sky with its frosting of
great northern stars, and passed again over every week, every day,--nay,
almost every hour,--since that morning in early spring when she had
stepped off the factory-sill to accompany little Francette to the river
bank where Bois DesCaut stood facing a tall young woman against the
stockade wall.

With dreary insistence his sore heart brought up each sweet memory, each
thrill of joy of those warm days. He saw every flush on her open face,
every droop of her eyes. Again he saw the white fire in her features
that day in the forest glade when she spoke of the Land of the
Whispering Hills. He pondered for the first time, lying bound and
helpless among savages, of that unbending thing within her which drove
her into the wilderness with such resistless force. Granted that she had
loved him as he thought during that delirious short space of time,
would love have been stronger than that force, or would it have been
sacrificed? She was so strong, this strange girl of the long trail, so
strong for all things gentle, so unmoving from the way of tenderness.
Proving that came the picture of the tot on her shoulder, “dipping as
the ships at sea, ma cherie,” and the look of her face transfigured. And
yet home for her was “the blue sky above, the wind in the pine-tops, the
sound of water lapping at the prow of a canoe.” So she had said on that
last day they spoke together in happiness, passing in diffident joy to
the gate to meet De Courtenay's fateful messenger.

Of all women in the vast world she was the one woman. There was never
another face with that strange allurement, that baffling light of
strength and tenderness.

Sore, sore, indeed, was the heart of the young factor of Fort de Seviere
as he lay under the stars and listened to the death-wail in the darkened
camp.

Nowhere was there a fire.

Desolation sat upon the Nakonkirhirinons.

Along toward dawn, presaged by the westward wheeling of the big stars,
tom-toms began to beat throughout the maze of lodges. They beat oddly
into the air, cold with the chill of the coming day.

McElroy's thoughts had left the great country of the Hudson Bay and
travelled back along the winding waterways, across the lakes, and at
last out on that heaving sea which bore away from his homeland. Once
more he had been in the smoke of London town, had looked into the loving
eyes of his mother and gripped the hand of his tradesman father. Once
more he had wondered what the future held.

The sudden striking up of the tom-toms answered him.

This.

This was to be the end of his eager advance in the Company's favour,
the end of that good glass of life whose red draught he had drunk with
wholesome joy, the end of love that had but dawned for him to sink into
aching darkness.

He sighed wearily. So poignant was his sense of loss and the pain of it
that the end was a weariness rather than a new pain.

The thing that hurt was the fact that he himself had juggled the cards
of fate to this sorry dealing.

The sudden rage concerning De Courtenay had spent itself. There remained
only the deep anger of the man who has lost in the game of love. And
yet, what right had he to cherish even this wholesome anger against his
rival when the maid had chosen of her own free will? As well hold
grudge to the great Power whose wisdom had given the man such marvellous
beauty. As he lay in the darkness listening to the unearthly noises he
worked it all out with justice.

He alone was to blame for the sorry state of things.

De Courtenay was but a man, and what man, looking upon Maren Le Moyne,
could fail to love her?

Therefore, he freed his rival of all blame.

And Maren,--oh, blameless as the winds of heaven was Maren!

What had she given him that he could construe as love?

Only a look, a blush to her cheek, the touch of a warm hand.

In his folly he had hailed himself king of her affections when perchance
it was but the kindliness of her womanly heart.

And what maid could be blind to De Courtenay's sparkling
grace,--compared to which he was himself a blundering yokel?

Thus in bound darkness he reasoned it all out and strove to wash away
the anger from his heart.

And presently there came dawn. First a cold air blowing out of the
forest, and then a deeper darkness that presently gave way to faint,
shadowy light.

Here and there tall figures came looming, ghostly-fashion, out of chaos,
to take slow shape and form, to resolve themselves into tapering lodges,
into hunched and huddled groups.

And with light came action.

McElroy saw that around the central lodge before the gate there was a
solid pack of prostrate Indians covering the ground like a cloth, and
from this centre came the tom-toms and the wailing.

It was the lodge of the chief and within lay the stark body of the
murdered Negansahima.

As the faint light grew, one by one the warriors rose out of the mass
like smoke spirals, drawing away to disappear among the tepees. Soon
there came the sound of falling poles and McElroy knew that they were
striking the camp.

For what?

Why, surely, for one thing.

A chief must go to the great Hunting Ground from his own country; in his
own country must his bones seek rest.

They would journey back up the long and difficult trail down which they
had just come to that vague region from which they hailed.

But what of him, and of De Courtenay, if he was yet alive?

He wondered why they had been reserved.

The light came quickly and he looked eagerly around on the moving camp.

With quickness and precision the whole long village was reduced in a few
minutes to rolled coverings, gathered and tied utensils, stacked packs
of furs, and ranged canoes already in the water lining the shore.

He could not help a feeling of regret for this wild people, coming but
few suns back with their rich peltry, their pomp, and their hopes of
gain, as they prepared for the back trail, the whole tribe in deepest
mourning.

Of all the tents, that one before the post gate alone stood, silent
reproach to the white man's ways.

Around it still knelt a solid pack, wailing and beating the drums.

As the grey light turned whiter, he turned his stiffened neck for a
glance at the thing against his shoulder.

He looked into the smiling eyes of Alfred de Courtenay.

“Bonjour, M'sieu,” whispered that ardent venturer; “you nuzzled my
arm all night. Apparently we are fellows in captivity, as we have been
opposed in war,--and love.”

“Aye, M'sieu,” whispered back McElroy, not relishing the turn of the
sentence but passing it by; “and a sorry man am I for this state of
events. I owe you my regrets,--not for what I did, mark you,--but
for the way and the time and place. Had I waited and proceeded as a
gentleman, we should not be in this devilish plight, nor that fine old
chief a victim to our blunder.”

“Tish!” said De Courtenay lightly; “'tis all in a day's march. And,
besides, I have,--memories,--to shorten the way.”

The pacing guard came back and the two men fell silent.

At that moment a stentorian call pealed above the dismantled camp, and
there began a vast surge of the mass of Nakonkirhirinons toward the
waiting canoes, a dragging of goods and chattels, a hurry of crying
children, a scurrying of squaws. In the midst of it the flaps of the
big lodge were opened and, amid redoubled wailing, a stark wedge of the
length of a tall man came headforemost out, carried on the shoulders of
six gigantic warriors; and walking beside it, bareheaded in the new day,
was Edmonton Ridgar, his face pale and downcast. He paid no heed to the
two men on the ground, though one was his factor and his friend.



CHAPTER XV LONG TRAIL

The women changed their wail as the procession started for the waiting
canoes, and from all the long camp there drew in a horde of savages,
their eagle feathers slanting in the light, bare shoulders shining under
unhidden paint, skin garments and gaudy shirts alike cast to the winds.

They surged along chanting their unearthly song, and the mass of them
swept by where lay the two men.

Not a glance was given them, no taunts, no jeers with which the tribes
of the North-west were wont to torment their captives.

The swish of the moccasined feet was as the sound of many waters.

“No time for play,” thought McElroy; “that will come later,--when we
have reached the Pays d'en Haut.”

For he knew now that he and De Courtenay were to be taken along.

The body of Negansahima was placed in the first canoe, covered with
a priceless robe of six silver foxskins laced together; the six big
warriors, their halfnaked bodies painted black, manned the paddles, and
at the prow there stood the sad figure of Edmonton Ridgar.

At one side had drawn out old Quamenoka and his Assiniboines, their way
lying to the west. They raised a chant as the first canoe circled
out and headed down the stream. Behind it fell in five canoe-loads of
Bois-Brules, their attachment a mystery, and the river became alive with
the great flotilla.

Not until the death-boat had passed the far bend did the pacing Indian
give way to a dozen naked giants, who lifted the captives with ceremony
and carried them down the slope.

As he swung between his captors McElroy looked back at the closed gates
of De Seviere and a sharp pain struck at his heart, a childish hurt that
the post he had loved should watch his exit from the light of life with
unmoved front. It seemed almost that the bastioned wall was sensate, as
if the small portholes here and there were living eyes, cold and hard
with indifference, nay, even a-glitter with selfishness.

But quick on the sense of hurt came the knowledge which is part of every
man in the wilderness; and he knew well that every face in the little
fort was drawn with the tragedy, that from those blank portholes looked
human eyes, sick with the thing they could not avert, that whoever had
taken charge within was only working for the safety of the greatest
number, and with the thought his weakness passed.

Only one more pang assailed him.

He gave one swift thought to Maren Le Moyne. Where in Fort de Seviere
was she, and what was in her heart?

Then he was swung, still bound, into the bottom of a canoe, saw
De Courtenay tossed into another, felt the careless feet of
Nakonkirhirinons as the paddlemen stepped in, and existence became a
thing of gliding motion, the lapping of water on birchbark, and the
passing of a long strip of cloud-flecked sky, pink and blue and gold
with the new day.

Lulled by the rocking of the fragile craft that shot forward like a
thing of life beneath the paddles dipping in perfect unison, McElroy lay
its a sort of apathy for hours, watching the sliding strip of sky and
the bending bodies of the Indians. He knew that the end awaited him
somewhere ahead, but it was far ahead, very far, even many leagues
beyond York factory, and his mind, again dropping into the dulness of
his early awakening, refused to concern itself with aught save the blue
sky and the sound of water lapping on birchbark. That sound was sweet to
his befuddled brain, suggesting something vaguely pleasant.

Ah, yes, it was the deep voice of the maid of the long trail speaking
of the streams and the waving grass of that visionary Land of the
Whispering Hills.

He fell to wondering at broken intervals if she would ever reach it, to
see drowsy visions of the tall form leading its band of venturers into
the wilderness beyond Lac a la Croix, penetrating that country which
tried the hearts of men, and with the visions came a sadness.

She would go without love, mourning her cavalier of the curls, and who
would be responsible for the desolation of the heart he would fain have
made happy but himself?

McElroy sighed, and the visions faded.

When he again awakened it was evening and camp had been made. Fires
danced and crackled all up and down the reach of shore set like a
half-moon of pearl in a sea of emerald, where the forest shouldered down
to the stream, and the smell of cooking meat was poignantly sweet. Women
were busy at the work of the camp, carrying wood, mending the fires,
tending the kettles swung from forked sticks, and scolding the
scrambling children.

Here and there a half-naked Indian stalked silently, his long feather
slanting in the light, but for the most part the warriors were gathered
in a silent mass a little way apart where the big tepee had been set up.

The clouds were gone from his brain, and he was keenly conscious of
hunger.

He was still bound, though not so tightly, some of the thongs having
been taken off entirely, and he found that he could sit up with
comparative ease, though his hands were still fast behind him and his
ankles tied.

There was no pacing guard this time, distance and possession making such
precaution needless, for well the Nakonkirhirinons knew that none from
the little post on the Assiniboine would attempt rescue in face of so
great a horde as an entire tribe.

McElroy sat up and looked around.

One of the first things he encountered was the face of the cavalier,
still smiling and looking very much as it had looked in the dawn.

Like that encounter, too, De Courtenay was the first to speak in this.

“Aha, my fighter of the H. B. C.,” he laughed from his seat against a
towering maple, “have your laggard wits come in from wool-gathering?”

He, too, was more comfortably bound, and McElroy noticed that there
were little rubbed creases in the sleeves of the gay blue coat where the
numbing bonds had cut. The sparkling spirit was as high in his handsome
face as it had been that long past morning morning by the well. The
factor wondered if there was in heaven or earth anything with power to
dim it.

He was to see, and marvel at, the test.

“Aye,” he answered the cheerful query; “it has been a weary day, M'sieu,
it would seem, with my senses drifting out and in at ragged intervals of
which I have only vague impressions. How has it fared with you?”

“Much as another day. There has been plenty to see and enjoy, even from
under the feet of our hasty friends of the paddles.”

“Enjoy! Holy Mother! Have you not been thinking over your sins, M'sieu?”

“Sins? I have none. Who thinks of sins while the red blood runs? Rather
have I dreamed dreams of,--memories. Ah, no, M'sieu, it has not been
a weary day to me, but one of swift emotions, of riots of colour in
a strip of racing sky when the sun turned his palette for a gorgeous
spread. The sunset was stupendous at its beginning. Now the darker greys
come with so much forest.”

McElroy fell silent, biting his lip.

Sorry as he felt for the plight of his rival, the old anger was close to
his heart, and it seemed that the rascal knew it and probed for a weak
spot with his smiling allusions to his memories. Memories of what but of
the red lips of a girl?

The young factor, too, had memories of those red lips, though they gave
him only a pain so bitter as not to be borne.

Almost it forced from his heart the gentle justice he had striven so
hard to keep in sight.

As he sat thinking and staring at the twilight river rippling below, a
man came from the forest at the back of the camp and passed near on his
way to the fires.

It was Bois DesCaut, and he did not lift his evil eyes.

The white lack on his temple gleamed with a sinister distinctness amid
his black hair.

“Double foe,” thought McElroy; “I am to pay for my own words and Maren's
blow.”

As the trapper passed he sidled swiftly near the Nor'wester and
something dropped from a legstrap. It was a small knife, and it tumbled
with seeming carelessness close to De Courtenay's knee.

“So,” thought McElroy again; “by all rights that should have been for
me.”

DesCaut went on into the heart of the camp among the women, and De
Courtenay began moving ever so cautiously toward the priceless bit of
steel.

With that hidden in one's garments what not of hope might rise within a
daring heart?

What not, indeed! Life and liberty and escape and a home-coming to a
rival's very hearthstone, and more,--soft lips and arms of a woman.

The cavalier was smiling still as he edged inch by inch along the little
way, his back against the maple.

“See you, M'sieu,” he whispered; “how loyal are the servants of the
North-west Company?”

McElroy did not answer. Bitterness was rife within him. Even his one
friend in the wilderness, Edmonton Ridgar, on whose sound heart he would
have risked his soul, had passed him by without a look.

Verily, life had suddenly been stripped, as the hapless birch, of all
its possessions.

He was thinking grimly of these things when a young squaw came lightly
up from somewhere and stopped for a second beside De Courtenay. She
looked keenly at him, and stooping, picked up the knife.

“Another turn to the wheel, M'sieu,” said that intrepid venturer; “what
next?”

As if his thought had reached out among the shadows of the wood where
stood the death tepee and touched its object, Edmonton Ridgar appeared
among the lodges. He was bare-headed, and McElroy saw that his face
was deep-lined and anxious, filled with a sadness at which he could but
marvel and he passed within a stone's throw without so much as a glance
at his superior.

No captive was this man, passing where he listed, but McElroy noticed
the keen eyes watching his every move.

What was he among this silent tribe with their war-paint and their
distrust of white men?

It was a hopeless puzzle, and the factor laid it grimly aside. Next to
the closed and impregnable front of his own post what time he passed
from its sight, this cold aloofness of his chief trader cut to inmost
soul.

But these things were that life of the great North-west whose
unspeakable lure thralled men's souls to the death, and he was content.

It was chance and daring and danger which drew him in the beginning to
the country, love of the wild and breath of the vast reaches, something
within which pushed him forward among these savage peoples, even as the
same thing pushed Maren Le Moyne toward the Whispering Hills, sent De
Courtenay to the Saskatchewan.

At any rate he was very hungry, and when a bent and withered crone of a
squaw brought food and loosed his right hand, the young factor tossed
up his head to get the falling hair out of his eyes and fell to with a
relish.

“Faugh!” said De Courtenay with the first mouthful; “I wonder, M'sieu,
is there nothing we can do to hasten the end? Many meals of this would
equal the stake.”

Whereat the gallant smilingly tossed the meat and its birchbark platter
at the woman's feet.

“If you would not prefer starvation, I would suggest that you crawl for
that, M'sieu,” said McElroy gravely; but the wrinkled hag gathered it
up, and left them to the night that was fast settling over the forest.

Thus began the long trail up to the waters of Churchill and beyond into
that unknown region where few white men had yet penetrated, and fewer
still returned.



CHAPTER XVI TRAVEL

Day followed day. Summer was upon the land, early summer, with the sweet
winds stirring upon the waters, with gauze-winged creatures flitting
above the shallows where willow and vine-maple fringed the edges and
silver fish leaped to their undoing, with fleecy clouds floating in a
sapphire sky, and birds straining their little throats in the forest.

McElroy and De Courtenay were loosed of their bonds and given paddles in
the canoes, a change which was welcomed gladly.

At night a guard paced their sleeping-place and the strictest
surveillance was kept over them.

Down the Assiniboine, into Red River, and across Portage la Prairie went
the great flotilla, green shores winding past in an endless pageant of
foliage, all hands falling to at the portages and trailing silently for
many pipes, one behind the other, all laden with provisions and packs of
furs, the canoes upturned and carried on heads and shoulders.

Of unfailing spirits was Alfred de Courteray.

“'Od's blood, M'sieu,” he would laugh, oddly mixing his dialect, “but
this is seeing the wilderness with a vengeance! Though there is no lack
of variety to speed the days, yet I would I were back in my post of
Brisac on the Saskatchewan, with a keg of good-liquor on the table
and my hearty voyaguers shouting their chansons outside, my clerks and
traders making merry within. Eh, M'sieu, is it not a better picture?”

“For you, no doubt. For me, I had rather contemplate a prayer-book and
recall my mother's teaching in these days,” answered McElroy simply.

“What it is to have sins upon one's conscience!” sighed the venturer.
“Verily, it must preclude all pleasant thoughts.” And he fell to humming
a gay French air.

Presently the foaming river, growing swifter as it neared the great
lake, leaped and plunged into the wide surface of Winnipeg, shooting its
burdens out upon the glassy breast of the lake like a spreading fan.

Here the blue sky was mirrored faithfully below with its lazy clouds,
the green shores rimmed away to right and left, and the swarming canoes,
with their gleaming paddles, made a picture well worth looking at.

The Nakonkirhirinons were going back to the Pays d'en Haut by another
way than that by which they had come.

Hugging the western shore, the flotilla strung out into the formation of
a wedge, with the canoe of the dead chief at the apex, and went on, day
after day, in comparative silence.

With the passing of the sleeping green shores, the ceaseless slide of
the quiet waters, a tender peace began to come into McElroy's soul.

With the gliding days he could think of Maren without the poignant pain
which had been unbearable at the beginning, could linger in thought
over each detail of her wondrous beauty, the clear dark eyes, sane and
earnest and full of the hope of the dreamer, the full red mouth with
its sweetness of curled corners, the black hair banded above the smooth
brow, the rounded figure under the faded garment, the shoulders swinging
with the free walk after the fashion of a man.

Verily, the wilderness held healing as well as hurt.

So followed each other the dawns and the summer noons and the marvellous
twilights, with pageantry of light and colour and soft winds attuned to
the songs of birds, and the two men neared the mystery of Fate.



CHAPTER XVII THE COMPELLING POWER

Back in De Seviere the gloom of the forest in bleak winter sat heavily
on every cabin.

Women went about with misty eyes and men were oddly silent.

Not one of all his people who did not love the whole-hearted factor with
his ready laugh, his sympathy in all the little life of the post, his
unfailing justice; not one who did not strive to keep away the haunting
visions of leaping flames above fagots, and all the ugly scenes that
imagination, abetted by grim reality, could conjure up.

On that fateful morning when the rising sun saw the slim canoes of the
Nakonkirhirinons trailing around the lower bend, Maren Le Moyne stood
by the little window in the small room to the east of the Baptiste cabin
and covered her face with her hands.

Great breaths lifted her breast, breaths that fluttered her open lips
and could not fill the gasping lungs beneath, that sounded in the little
room like tearless tearing sobs.

“Heavenly Mother!” she gasped between them; “Thou who art
woman...Mary...”

But the prayer hung aborted between the shuddering sighs.... Who shall
say that it is not such a cry, torn from the depths of the spirit
by instinct groping for its god, which reaches swiftest the Eternal
Infinite?

Until the last sound had faded into the morning, until the last little
ripple had widened to the shores and died among the willows, until the
screaming birds, startled from the edges of the river, had settled into
quiet, she stood so, fainting in her Gethsemane. She alone of all
the post had remained away from the great gate where was gathered the
populace at the nearest vantage point.

Silence of the young day hung in the palisade, a silence that cut the
soul with its tragic portent.

Even little Francette Moline, weeping openly, pressed close in the mass
and jerked with unconscious savagery of spirit the short ears of the
husky at her heels,--that Loup whom no man dared to touch save only the
master his fierce spirit must needs acknowledge. It had been DesCaut by
brutality. Now it was the little maid by love.

Strange cat of the woods, Francette could be as riotous in her
tenderness as in her enmity.

In the bastions Dupre and Garcon and Gifford watched the scene with the
grim quiet of men born in the wilderness, while at the portholes trapper
and voyageur and the venturers from Grand Portage handled their guns and
waited.

None knew what might happen, for these Indians were not to be judged by
any standard they knew.

Henri Baptiste held the trembling Marie in his arm, while Mora and Anon
and Ninette clung together in a white-faced group. A little way aside
Micene Bordoux comforted a frightened woman and held a child by the
hand.

Big Bard McLellan stood by a porthole, his eyes always pensive with his
own sadness, gazing with grave sorrow to where McElroy swung down the
slope between his captors.

Thus they watched his going, and he had been spared that sick pain had
he known.

When it was over, Prix Laroux turned back to the deserted factory and
stood hesitating on its step.

This was one of the crises which so commonly confronted the fur industry
in the North-west.

What had he a right to do?

The simple man considered carefully. What right but the right of
humanity to do the best for the many could send a servant into the seat
of power?

And yet who among them all was fitted?

Not the clerks, youths from the Bay, not the traders nor the trappers.

With a daring heart the venturer from Grand Portage went in across the
sill.

To a man the men of De Seviere rallied to him and council was held.

Everywhere in the trading-room, the living-room behind, were evidences
of the factor and Ridgar. It seemed as if the two men had but just
stepped out-were not in hostile hands drifting down the river toward an
unspeakable fate.

In the midst of the grave-faced council another step sounded on the
sill and once again Maren Le Moyne stood looking in at the factory door,
though this time there was no eager interest on her face, only a drawn
tenseness which cut to the heart of her leader like a knife.

“Come in, Maren,” he said in aching sympathy.

“Men,” she said straightly, “is there none among you who will turn a
hand to save his factor?”

Over every face her eyes travelled slowly, hot and burning.

In every face she read the same thing,--a pitying wonder at the folly of
her words.

“Aye,” spoke up Henri Corlier, grizzled and weathered by his years of
loyal service to the Great Company, “not a man among us, Ma'amselle, but
would give his life if it would serve. It would not serve.”

“And you?” her gaze shifted feverishly to Laroux; “you, Prix?”

“'Tis useless, Maren. What would you have us do?”

“Do?”

She straightened by the door, and the hand on the lintel gripped until
the nails went white.

“Do? Anything save sit with closed gates in safety while savages burn
your factor at the stake! The Hudson's Bay brigade comes from York this
very month. What easier than to meet it and get help of men and guns?”

“Nay,” said Laroux gently; “you do but dream, Maren.”

Whereat the girl turned abruptly from the doorway and went down among
the cabins.

Here and there in the doorways groups of women stood together, their
voices hushed and trouble in their eyes.

As Maren passed, seeing nothing to right or left, they looked in pity
upon her.

The heart of this woman was drifting with the canoes,--but with which
man?

“'Tis the gay Nor'wester with his golden curls,” whispered Tessa Bibye
sympathetically.

“The Nor'wester? 'Tis little you know, truly, Tessa,” said the young
wife of old Corlier. “What maid in her senses would look twice at yonder
be-laced dandy when a man like Anders McElroy stood near?”

“Aye, an' may the Good God have mercy on our factor!” whimpered a
withered old woman, wife of a trapper, making the sign of the cross;
“nor hold back His mercy from the other!”

Night seemed to fall early on Fort de Seviere, waiting sadly for its
healing touch on fevered hearts.

Throughout the long day a waiting hush had lain upon the post, an
expectancy of ill.

Over the dark forest the stars came out on a velvet sky, and a little
wind came out of the south, nightbirds called from the depths, and peace
spread over the Northland like a blanket.

While the twilight lasted with its gorgeous phantasmagoria there were
none of the accustomed sounds of pleasure in the post,--no fiddle
squeaked by the stockade wall, no happy laughter wafted from the cabins.
Even the sleepy children seemed to feel the strangeness and hushed their
peevish crying.

Night and darkness and loneliness held sway, and in one heart the
shadows of the world were gathered.

What was the meaning of this Life whose gift was Pain, where was the
glory of existence?

By the window to the east Maren Le Moyne stood in the darkness, with her
hands upon her breast and her face set after the manner of the dreamer
who follows his visions in simpleness of soul.

Once again a great call was sounding from the wilderness, as that which
lured her to the Whispering Hills had sounded since she could remember,
once more the Long Trail beckoned, and once more she answered, simply
and without fear.

She waited for the depth of night.

Long she stood at the little window, facing the east like some
worshipper, even until the wheeling stars spelled the mid hour.

To Marie she gave one thought,--child-like Marie with her dependence and
her loving heart. But Marie, to whom she had been all things, was safe
in the care of Henri. There remained only the dream of the Whispering
Hills and the illusive figure of a man,--an old man, sturdy of form and
with blue eyes set in swarthy darkness.

Poignant was the pain that assailed her at that memory. Would she ever
reach that shadowy country, ever fulfil the quest that was hers from the
beginning? Did she not wrong that ghostly figure which seemed to gaze
with reproach across the years? Her own blood called, and she turned
aside to follow the way of a stranger, an alien whose kiss had brought
her all sorrow.

And yet she was helpless as the water flowing to the sea. The primal
quest must wait. Her being turned to this younger man as the needle to
the pole, even though his words were false, his kiss a betrayal.

When the mid hour hung in silence over the wilderness a figure came out
of the darkness and stood at the gate beside that watcher, Cif Bordoux,
who paced its length with noiseless tread.

A strange figure it was, clad in garments that shone misty white in
the shadow, whose fringes fluttered in the warm wind and whose glowing
plastron glittered in the starlight.

“Cif Bordoux,” said the figure, “I would go without.”

Wondering and startled, Bordoux would have refused if he dared; but this
was the leader of the Long Trail and her word had been his law for many
moons, nor had he ever questioned her wisdom.

Therefore he drew the bolts and opened the gate the width of a man's
body, and Maren Le Moyne slipped outside the palisade into the night.

A rifle hung in her arm and a pouch of bullets dangled at her knee.

Swiftly and silently she pushed a canoe into the water at the landing,
stepped in, and with one deep dip of a paddle sent the frail craft out
to midstream. She did not turn her head for a farewell glance toward the
post, but set her face toward the way that led to the Pays d'en Haut and
the man who journeyed thither.

Deep and even her paddle took the sweet waters and the current shot her
forward like a racer. The dark shores flowed by in a long black ribbon
of soft shadow, their leaning grasses and foliage playing with the
ripples in endless dip and lift. No fear was in her, scarce any thought
of what she did, only an obeying of the call which simplified all
things.

McElroy was in danger, and she followed him.

That was all she knew, save the mighty sorrow of his falseness which
never left her day or night.

He had taught her love in that one passionate embrace in the forest, and
it was for all time.

What mattered it that he had turned from her for another? That was the
sorry tangle of the threads of Fate,--she had naught to do with it.

Love was born in her and it set a new law unto her being, the law of
service.

Every fibre in her revolted at thought of his death. If it was to be
done beneath the pitying Heaven, he should be saved. He must be helped
to escape. The other was insupportable. Nothing mattered in all the
world save that. Therefore she set herself, alone and fearless, to
follow the tribe of the Nakonkirhirinons to the far North if need be, to
hang on their flank like a wolverine, to take every chance the good
God might send. Chief of these was her hope of the Hudson's Bay brigade
which should be coming into the wilderness at this time of year.
Somewhere she must meet them and demand their help.

There was no rebellion in her, no hope of gain in what she did. Love was
of her own soul alone, since that evening by the factory when she had
seen the factor bend his head and kiss the little Francette.

No more did she think of his words in the forest, no more did she dream
of the wondrous glory of that first kiss.

Far apart and impersonal was McElroy now,--only she loved him with that
vast idolatry which seeks naught but the good of its idol.

Even if he loved Francette he must be saved for that happiness.

Therefore she knelt in a cockleshell alone on a rushing river and sped
through, a wilderness into appalling danger.

Such was the compelling power of that love which had come tardily to
her.



CHAPTER XVIII “I AM A STONE TO YOUR FOOT, MA'AMSELLE”

At dawn Maren shot her craft into a little cove, opal and pearl in
the pageantry of breaking light, and drawing it high on shore, went
gathering little sticks for a micmac fire.

The bullet pouch held small allowance of food. She would eat and sleep
for a few hours.

Deep and ghostly with white mist-wraiths was the forest, shouldering
close to the living water, pierced with pine, shadowy with trembling
maple, waist-high with ferns. She looked about with the old love of the
wild stirring dumbly under the greater feeling that weighted her soul
with iron and wondered vaguely what had come over the woods and the
waters that their familiar faces were changed.

With her arms full of dead sticks she came back to the canoe,--and face
to face with Marc Dupre. His canoe lay at the cove's edge and his eyes
were anguished in a white face.

“Ma'amselle,” he said simply, “I came.”

No word was ready on the maid's lips. She stood and looked at him, with
the little sticks in her arms, and suddenly she saw what was in his
eyes, what made his lips ashen under the weathered tan.

It was the same thing that had changed for her the face of the waters
and the wood. She had learned in that moment to read a man better than
she had read aught in her life beside the sign of leaf and wind.

“Oh, M'sieu!” she cried out sharply; “God forbid!”

The youth came forward and took the sticks from her, dropping them on
the ground and holding both her hands in a trembling clasp.

“Forbid?” he said and his voice quivered; “Ma'amselle, I love you.
Though my heart is full of dread, I am at your feet. By the voice of
my own soul I hear the cry of yours. We are both past help, it seems,
Ma'amselle,-yet am I that stone to your foot which we pledged yonder by
the stockade wall. You will let me go the long trail with you? You will
give me to be your stay in this? You will let me do all a man can do to
help you take the factor from the Nakonkirhirinons?”

The infinite sadness in Dupre's voice was as a wind across a harp of
gold, and it struck to Maren's heart with unbearable pain.

Her eyes, looking straight into his, filled slowly with tears, and his
white face danced grotesquely before her vision.

“M'sieu,” she said quite simply, “I would to God it had been given me
to love you. We have ever seen eye to eye save in that wherein we should
have. And I know of nothing dearer than this love you have given me. If
you would risk your life and more, M'sieu, I shall count your going one
of the gifts of God.”

“I cannot ask you to return, Ma'amselle,--too well do I know you,--nor
to consider all you must risk for, this,--life and death and the certain
slander of the settlement,--though by all the standards of manhood I
should do so. The heart in me is faithful echo of your own. This
trail must be travelled,--therefore we travel it together. And, oh,
Ma'amselle! Think not of my love as that of a man! Rather do I adore the
ground beneath your foot, worship at the shrine of your pure and gentle
spirit! See!”

With all the prodigal fire of his wild French blood, the youth dropped
on his knee and, catching the fringe on the buckskin garment, pressed it
to his lips.

For once Maren, unused to tears, could speak no word.

She only drew him up, her grip like a man's upon his wrists, and turned
to the making of the fire.

Dupre drew up his canoe and took a snared wild hen from the bow.

      *       *       *       *      *      *      *      *      *

“I think, Ma'amselle,” said the youth when Maren awaked some hours later
from a heavy sleep, during which Dupre had killed the little smoke of
the fire and kept silent watch from the shore, “that we had best leave
your canoe here and take mine. It is much the better craft.”

“So I see. Mine was but the first I could put my hands upon in the
darkness.”

“'Tis that of old Corlier, and sadly lacking in repair. If you will
steer, Ma'amselle?”

Thus set forth as forlorn a hope as ever lost itself in that vast region
of hard living and daily tragedy, with the strength of the man set
behind the woman's wisdom in as delicate a compliment as ever breathed
itself in silken halls, and the blind courage of the dreamer urged it
on..

At the forks of Red River they passed the signs of a landing.

Here had the Indians summarily sent ashore all of the Nor'westers who
had been with De Courtenay and who had followed in the uncertainty of
fear, not daring to desert lest they be overtaken and massacred.

All, that is, save Bois DesCaut and the lean, hawk-faced Runners of the
Burnt Woods.

Thanking their gods, the North-west servants had lost no time in taking
advantage of the fact that they were not wanted, leaving their Montreal
master to whatever fate might befall him.

Dupre went ashore and examined the reach of land, the trampled grass, a
broken bush or two.

“Ten men, I think,” he said, returning, “and all in tremendous haste.
The Nor'westers escaping, I have no doubt. Would our captives were among
them.”

“No such fortune, M'sieu,” said Maren calmly, “Heard you not the cry
before the gate in that unhallowed scramble what time they took the
factor and the venturer? 'Twas 'a skin for a skin.' There are many
guards.”

The summer day dreamed by in drowsy beauty, like a woman or a rose
full-blown, and Maren, who would at another time have seen each smallest
detail of its perfection through the eye of love, saw only the rushing
water ahead and counted time and distance.

Dupre, kneeling in the bow, his lithe brown arms bare to the shoulder,
where the muscles lifted and fell like waves, was silent. Sadness sat
upon him like a garment, yet lightened by a holy joy.

Odd servers of Love, these two, who knew only its pain without its
pleasure, yet who were standing on the threshold of its Holy of Holies.

Of nights they sat together at the tiny fire of a few laid sticks and
talked at intervals in a strange companionship.

Never again did they speak of love, nor even so much as skirt its
fringes, though the young trapper read with wistful eyes its working
in the woman's face. Out of her eyes had gone a certain light to be
replaced by another, as if a star had passed near a smouldering world
and gone on, changed by the contact, its radiance darkened by a deeper
glow.

The firm cheeks, dusky as sunset, had lost something of their contour.

Like comrades, too, they shared the work and the watches, the girl
standing guard with rifle and ball while Dupre snatched heavy sleep,
herself dropping down like the veriest old wolf of the North on mossy
bank or green grass for the rest they sternly shortened.

“'Tis near the time of the Hudson's Bay brigade, is it not, M'sieu?” she
would ask sometimes. “Think you we shall meet them surely if we skirt
the eastern shore of Winnipeg?”

And Dupre would always answer, “Assuredly. By the third week in July
they will be at the upper bend where the river comes down from York. The
Nakonkirhirinons will hold to the west, going up Nelson River and west
through the chain of little lakes that lie to the south of Winnipeg,
thence gaining Deer River and that Reindeer Lake which sends them forth
into their unknown region beyond the Oujuragatchousibi. We, then, will
make straight for the eastern shore, skirting upward to the interception
of the ways, and we will surely meet the brigade.”

“And they will surely lend help, think you, to a factor of the Company
in such grave plight?”

“Surely, Ma'amselle.”

So the hours of day and darkness slipped by with dip of paddle and with
portage, with snatched rest and fare of the wild.

In a plentiful forest and on an abundant stream Dupre was at no loss for
food. Trout, sparkling and fresh from the icy water, roasted on forked
sticks stuck in the ground beside a bed of coals, made fare for an
epicure, and the young trapper, watching Maren as she knelt to tend
them, shielding her face with her hand, thought wistfully of a cabin
where the fire leaped on the hearth and where this woman passed back and
forth at the tasks of home.

“'Tis too great a thing to ask of le bon Dieu,” he said in his heart;
“'tis not permitted even that one dream of such joy,--'twould be heaven
robbed of its glory.”

So he fished and hunted for her, as the primal man has hunted and fished
for his woman since time began, tended her fires and guarded her sleep,
and the wistful sadness within him grew with the passing days.

Down that northbound river the lone canoe with its two people hurried
after the great flotilla, silent and determined, like a starved wolf on
the flanks of a caribou herd.

Out on the breast of the great blue lake it, too, was shot by the
rushing waters, lone little cockleshell, to head its prow to the
eastward, where the green shore curved away, to take its infinitesimal
chance of victory against all odds.

When the sun came out of the eastern forest, a golden ball in a cloud
of fire, it saw the light craft already cutting the cool waters of
Winnipeg. When it sank into the western woods the bobbing dot was still
shooting forward.

Child of the wilderness by birth was Dupre, child of the wilderness by
dream and desire was Maren, and its simple courage was inborn in both.

The Indians were a day and night ahead, hurrying by dawn and dusk to the
north, that the body of the dead chief, cured like a mummy by the
smoke curling from the big tepee at every stop, might have burial, the
earth-bound spirit begin its journey to the shadowy hunting-grounds.

When McElroy took his last look backward at the blue lake from the
northern end, Maren and Dupre were making their last camp before the Big
Bend on the eastern shore.

“How soon, think you, M'sieu?” she asked that night, standing beside the
little fire; “how soon will they come,--the H. B. C.'s from York?”

“To-morrow, most like, or in a few days at most.”

This evening luck had deserted his fishing, so the trapper took a rifle
and went into the woods after a fool-hen. Thoughts kept him company;
thoughts of love and its strangeness, of the odd decrees of Fate and the
helplessness of man. How all the world had changed with its coming,
this love which hail been born in an hour what time he had listened to a
woman's voice beside the stockade wall, and how the very soul within him
had changed also.

Where had been lightness and the recklessness of youth there was now a
wistful tenderness so vast that it covered his life as the pearly mist
covered the world at dawn.

Where he had taken all of joy that post and settlement, friend and foe
could give, lived for naught but his sparkling pleasures, he was now
possessed of a great yearning to give to this woman, this goddess of the
black braids; to give, only to give to her; to give of his strength, of
his overwhelming love; aye, of even his heart's blood itself as he had
told her in the beginning.

He was long in finding a fat grouse this evening, and when he returned
night was thick on forest and shore.

Light of tread in his moccasins, Dupre came quietly out not far from the
blaze of the small fire, and stopped among the shoulder-high brush that
fringed the forest.

In the glow of the fire Maren knelt before a green stake set upright in
the earth, from a fork of which there hung a black iron crucifix, its
ivory Christ gleaming in the light. On either side of this pitiful altar
there flamed, in lieu of candles, a fagot taken from the pine.

On her knees, her hanging hands clasped and her face, raised to the
Symbol, she spoke, and the deep voice was sweet with its sliding minors.

“Jesu mia,” she said softly, “forgive Thou our sins--Ours. Teach me Thy
lesson,--me with pain that will not cease. For him,--Oh, Thou Lord of
Heaven, comfort him living,--shrive him Thyself in dying! Let not
the unspeakable happen! Send, send Thou that help without which I am
helpless, and failing that, send me the strength of him who wrestled
with the Angel, the wisdom of Solomon! Not for my love, O Christ,
but for him, grant that I may find help to save him from death! And
more,--deliver also that venturer who, but for my thoughtless words of
the red flower, would be now safe on the Saskatchewan. These I
implore, in mercy. And for this last I beg in humbleness of spirit
complete,--Grant Thou peace to the friend whose eyes eat into my heart
with pity! Peace, peace, Jesu of the Seven Scars, have mercy on him,
for he is good to his foundations! I beg for him peace and forgetting
of unhappy me! Reward him in some better fate, this youth of the tender
heart, of the great regard! Save us, Thou Lamb Jesus--”

In the dark eyes there was a shine of tears, the lips, with their curled
corners, were trembling. The face upturned in the fitful light was all
tenderness. The calm brown hands clasped before her were all strength.

Marc Dupre, in the forest's edge, felt his breast heave with an emotion
beyond control as he stood so, looking upon the scene, listening to the
sliding voice. Darkness hid the wilderness, out on the face of the lake
a fish leaped with a slap, and a nightbird called shrilly off to the
south. With aching throat the trapper turned softly back into the woods.
When he came later along the shore, with heavier step than was his wont,
the fagot and the forked stake were gone, there was no black crucifix,
and Maren waited by the fire, water brought from the lake in Dupre's
small pail, the little sticks ready for the roasting.

“Let me have the grouse, M'sieu,” she said; “the hunt was long?”

But Dupre did not answer.



CHAPTER XIX THE HUDSON'S BAY BRIGADE

The two days that followed were heavy ones to Maren.

No farther did they dare venture lest they pass to the west and miss
the brigade coming down from the north and entering the lake at the
northeast extremity.

So they waited on the shore in anxiety of spirit, watching the bright
waters with eyes that ached with the intensity of the vigil, and Dupre
hunted in the forest and over the sand dunes, among the high meadows
that broke the heavy woods in this region, and down along the reaches of
the water.

“Farther with each day!” thought Maren to herself. “Holy Mother, send
the brigade!”

And Dupre echoed the thought in sadness of soul.

“More pain for her heart in each hour's delay. Would the trial were
done!”

About three of the clock on the first day of waiting there came sounds
of singing and a string of canoes rounded a bend of the shore at the
south.

“M'sieu!” cried Maren swiftly; “who comes?”

Dupre, tinkering at the canoe overturned on the pebbly beach,
straightened and looked in the direction she indicated.

He looked long with hand to eye, and presently turned quietly.

“Nor'westers, I think, Ma'amselle. They come from Fort William to the
Wilderness.”

Fort William!

Back along the trail went memory with mention of the post on the distant
shore of Lake Superior. How oft had she peeped with fascinated eyes from
behind her father's forge at sturdy men in buckskins who spoke with the
blacksmith about the wonders of the country of the Red River, and they
had come from Fort William. She saw again the bustle and activity of
Grand Portage, the comfortable house of the Baptistes. Once more she
felt the old yearning for the unknown.

And this was it,--this gleaming stretch of inland sea, one man who stood
by her and another who betrayed her with a kiss, yet who drew her after
him as the helpless leaf, fallen to the stream, is whirled into the
white destruction of the rapids.

Aye, verily, this was the unknown.

She was looking down the lake with the sun on her uncovered head, on the
soft whiteness of the doeskin garment, and to young Dupre she had never
seemed so near the divine, so far and unattainable.

“Ma'amselle,” he said presently, “if these newcomers speak us, heed you
not what I may say. There are times in the open ways when a man must lie
for the good of himself--or others.”

The girl turned her eyes from the canoes, some twenty of them, to his
face. It was grave and quiet.

“Assuredly,” she said after a moment's scrutiny. “Had I best hide in the
bushes, M'sieu?”

“No, they have seen us.”

Sweeping forward, the brigade of the Nor'westers, for such it proved to
be, headed near in a circle and the head canoe turned in to shore.

“Friend?” called a man in the prow; whom Dupre knew for a wintering
partner by the name of McIntosh of none too savoury report.

“Hudson's Bay trapper, M'sieu,” he said politely, going a step nearer
the water. “I wait, with Madame my wife, the coming of our brigade from
York, now one day overdue.”

“Ah,--my mistake. I had thought the H. B. C.'s this fortnight gone down.
As ever, they are a trifle behind.”

While he addressed Dupre his bold eyes were fastened on Maren, where she
hung a dressed fish on a split prong.

“Not behind, M'sieu,” said the young man gently. “They but take the time
of certainty. A Saulteur passing this way at daylight reported them as
at McMillan's Landing.”

“Then your waiting is short. I am glad,--for Madame. So lone a camp must
be hard for a woman.”

With the words the Nor'wester scanned the girl's face with a glance that
pierced her consciousness, though her eyes were fixed on her task. Not a
tinge of deeper colour came to her cheeks. There was no betrayal of the
part Dupre had assigned her, and with a word of parting the canoe swung
out to its place, though McIntosh's eyes clung boldly to her beauty so
long as he could see her.

“Ah-h,--a close shave!” thought the trapper as he picked up a splinter
and once more fell to upon the boat.

Twenty-four hours later there came out of the north the thrice blessed
brigade of the H. B. C., bound down the lake to Grand Rapids, where the
canoes would separate into two parties, one going up the Saskatchewan to
Cumberland House, the other down to the country of the Assiniboine.

Eager as a hound for the quarry Maren stood forth beside Dupre to hail
them.

Head of the brigade was Mr. Thomas Mowbray, a gentleman of fine presence
and of gentle manners.

In answer to the hail from shore he came to, and presently he stood in
the prow of his boat listening to an appeal that lightened his grave
eyes.

“Men we must have, M'sieu,” Maren was saying passionately; “men of the
Hudson's Bay. Against all odds we go of a truth, but strategy and wit
accomplish much, and the Nakonkirhirinons have no thought of rescue.
Besides, the farther north they get the less keen will be their
vigilance. With men, M'sieu, we may retake, by strategy alone of course,
the factor of Fort de Seviere. Therefore have we come across your way,
In the Name of Mary, M'sieu, I beg that you refuse me not!”

She was like some young priestess as she stood in the westering light on
the green-fringed shore, one hand caught in the buckskin fringe at her
throat and her eyes on Mr. Mowbray's upright face.

“Upon my word, Madame--?” he said when she had finished.

“Ma'amselle, M'sieu,” she corrected simply.

“Ma'amselle,--your pardon,--upon my word, have I never seen such
appalling courage! Do you not know that you go upon a quest as hopeless
as death? This tribe,--I have heard a deal too much about them, and
once they came to York two seasons back,--are unlike any others of the
Indians of the country. Ruled by a peculiar justice which takes 'a
skin for a skin'--not ten or an hundred as do the Blackfeet or the
Sioux,--they yet surpass all others in the cruelty of that taking. Have
you not heard tales of this surpassing cruelty, Ma'amselle?”

“Aye, we have heard. It hastens our going. M'sieu the factor awaits
that cruelty in its extremest manner with the reaching of the Pays d'en
Haut.”

“Mother of God!” said Mr. Mowbray wonderingly. “And yet,--I see!”

“And he is Hudson's Bay, M'sieu,” said the girl sharply; “a good factor.
Would the Company not make an effort to save such, think you?”

Mr. Mowbray stood a moment, many moments, thinking with a line drawn
deep between his eyes. Out on the burnished water the canoes lay idly,
the red kerchiefs of the trappers making bright points of colour against
the blue background.

Presently he said slowly

“What you ask is against all precedent, Ma'amselle, and I may lose my
head for tampering with my orders,--but I will see what can be done.”

The brigade drew in, and when dusk fell upon the wilderness a dozen
fires kept company with the lone little spiral from Dupre's camp.

Sitting upon the shingle with her hands clasped hard on her knees,
Maren shook her head when the young trapper brought her the breast of a
grouse, roasted brown, along with tea and pemmican from the packs of the
H. B. men.

“I thank you, my friend,” she said uncertainly; “but I cannot--not now.
Not until I know, M'sieu. Without many hands at the paddles how can we
overtake the Nakonkirhirinons?”

Thus she sat, alone among men, staring into the fire, and it seemed as
if the heart in her breast would burst with its anxiety. A woman was at
all times a thing of overwhelming interest in the wilderness, and such
a woman as this drew every eye in the brigade to feast upon her
beauty, each according to the nature of the man, either furtively, with
tentative admiration, or openly, with boldness of daring.

And presently, after the meal was over, she saw Mr. Mowbray gather his
men in a group. For a few moments he spoke to them, and a ripple of
words, of ejaculations and exclamations, went across the assemblage like
a wave.

“Nom de Dieu! Not alone?”

“To the Pay d'en Haut,--those two?”

“A woman? Mother of God!”

Wondering eyes turned to the figure in the glow of the fire, to the
brown hands hard clasped, the face with its flame-lit eyes.

“Five men and a good canoe I send with them,” said Mowbray quietly; “who
goes? Know you it is a quest of death.”

“Who goes, M'sieu?” cried a French trader. “I! 'Tis worth a year of the
fur trade!”

“And I!”

“And I!”

“And I!”

Once more she had made her appeal to man, man in the abstract, and once
more he had come to her, this maid of dreams.

Mr. Mowbray had lost half his brigade had he not fixed on those who were
the strongest among the volunteers, the best canoe-men, the best shots.

Such were these men of the wilderness, excitable, ready for any hazard,
drawn by the longest odds, and to serve a woman gave the last zest to
danger.

Seldom enough did a woman appeal to them in such romantic wise.

“Brilliers,--Alloybeau,--Wilson,” picked out Mr Mowbray, with a finger
pointing his words; “McDonald,--Frith,--make ready the fourth canoe,
Take store of pemmican and all things necessary for light travel and
quick. From to-morrow you will answer to Ma'amselle. When she is through
with you report to me, either at Cumberland or York, according to the
time.”

And he left his men to walk over and seat himself beside Maren Le Moyne
on the shingle.

It was dark of the moon and the night was thick with stars and forest
sounds. Out on the lake beyond the ranged canoes at the water's edge,
the fish were slapping.

“Ma'amselle,” said Mr. Mowbray gravely, “I have detailed you five men, a
canoe, and stores. May God grant that they may serve your purpose.”

A long sigh escaped the girl's lips.

“And may He forever hold you in His grace, M'sieu!” she said
tremulously; “and bless you at the hour of death!”

“And now, Ma'amselle,” he said gently, “tell me more of this strange
adventure. How comes it that a young maid, alone but for a youthful
trapper, goes to the Pays d'en Haut after a factor, of the Company? Why
did this duty not fall to the men of the post?”

“They said, as you, M'sieu, but an hour back, that it was a quest of
death. They love life. I love the factor.”

She made her explanation simply, in all innocence, looking gravely into
the fire, and Mr. Mowbray gasped inwardly.

“I see. So Anders McElroy is your lover. A fine man, worthy of the love
of such a woman, and blessed above men in its possessing if I may make
so bold, Ma'amselle.”

“Nay,--you mistake.”

Maren shook her head.

“Not my lover. I but said that I love the factor He does not love me,
M'sieu.”

“What? Heaven above us! What was that? Does not love you! And yet you go
into the Pays d'en Haut after the North Indians? You speak in riddles.”

“Why, what plainer? Life would die in me, M'sieu, did I leave him to
death by torture. I can do no less.”

Mr. Mowbray sat in silence, amazed beyond speech.

When he rose an hour later to go to his camp he laid a hand on the
beaded shoulder wet with the night dew.

“Ma'amselle,” he said, “I have seen a glimpse of God through the blind
eyes of a woman. May Destiny reward you.”

Thus it came that before the dawn reddened the east the camp of the
brigade broke up for the start to the south and west, and one big canoe
with six men waited at the shore for one woman, who held both the hands
of Mr. Mowbray in her own and thanked him without words.

As the lone craft shot forth upon the steel-blue waters the leader of
the Hudson's Bay brigade looked after the figure in the bow, glimmering
whitely in the mists, and an unaccustomed tightness gripped his throat.

He had two daughters of his own, sheltered safe in London,--two maids as
far from this woman of the wild as darkness from the light, soft, gentle
creatures, and yet he wondered if either were half so gentle, so truly
tender.

Ere the paddles dipped, the men in the canoes with one accord, touched
off by some quick-blooded French adventurer, set up a chanson,--a
beating rhythmic song of Love going into Battle,--and every throat took
it up.

It flowed across the lightening face of the waters, circled around the
lone canoe and the woman therein, and seemed to waft her forward with
the God-speed of the wilderness.

She lifted her hand above her without turning her head, and it shone
pale in the mist, an eerie beacon, and thus the boat passed from view in
the greyness, though as the paddles dipped for the start the song still
rung forth, beating along the shore.

     *      *     *      *     *      *     *      *     *      *     *

“Men,” said Maren Le Moyne at the first stop, “this is a trail of great
hazard. There is in it neither gift nor gain, only a mighty risk. Yet
I have asked you forth upon it as men of the H. B. C. because the man I
would save is a factor of the Great Company.”

“Ma'amselle,” said Bitte Alloybeau, a splendid black-browed fellow, “it
is enough.”

“Aye,--and more.” So was bound their simple allegiance.



CHAPTER XX THE WOLF AND THE CARIBOU

Northward along Nelson River went the concourse of the Nakonkirhirinons,
turning westward into the chain of little lakes above Winnipeg of which
Dupre had spoken, sweeping forward over portage and dalle, and after
them came the lone canoe, leaping the leagues like a loup-garou, for it
never rested.

Day and night it shot forward, pulled by sturdy arms, half its people
sleeping curled between thwarts, the other half manning the paddles,
stopping for snatched rations, reading the signs of passing. So it crept
forward upon the thing it sought, untiring, eager, absurd in its daring
and its hope.

Like an embodiment of that very absurdity of courage so dear to the
hearts of these men, the girl sat in the prow, taking a hand in the
work with the best of them, beaconing the way as she had done before her
venturers of Grand Portage, firing them with her calm certainty, binding
them to her more firmly with each day.

To each bit of courtesy done eagerly to her there was her grave “I thank
you,”--at each portage and line her hand to the rope, her shoulder to
the pack, and all in the simple unconsciousness of her womanhood that
made her what she was,--a leader.

Before forty-eight hours had passed they would have followed her to the
brink of death,--to the Pays d'en Haut, to the heart of an hostile camp.

They fixed their eyes on her shining braids, bare to the sun, and
anticipated her commands, obeyed her few words implicitly, and who shall
say that many a dream did not weave itself around her in the summer
days, for every man in the boat was young.

Who knew?

Perhaps the Nakonkirhirinons had already yielded to the savage wrath
that takes a “skin for a skin,”--perhaps they had passed somewhere
in the forest, hidden from view from the water, the too well-known
blackened stake, the trodden circle. Perhaps there was no factor of Fort
de Seviere.

Only Marc Dupre, nearest Maren in every change and arrangement, had no
such thoughts. Dreams enough he wove in all surety, but they had to
do with the blinding heights of sacrifice, the wistful valleys of
renunciation.

His heart was full to overflowing with idolatry. From shadow and
fireglow his dark eyes looked upon her with a love that had passed far
beyond the need of word or touch, that buoyed her up and supported her
in strength and purity, like the silver cloud beneath the feet of the
Madonna.

And Maren, too, dreamed her dreams, for she had dreamed since the days
of the forge in Grand Portage, and they were sad as death. No more
did she list the sound of a western wind in the bending grass of a far
country, the rush of virgin rivers, the whisper of pine-clad hills.
The joy of the great quest was dead within her, the love of forest
and stream, the lure of trail and trace. Sadness sat upon her like a
garment. She only knew the pain that had birth that night in De Seviere
when she sought McElroy to disclaim the giver of the red flower and
found him kissing the red-rose cheek of the little Francette.

So went forth this little barque o' dreams.

Meanwhile what of the two men who journeyed ahead?

With each day they lost a little of the love of life, for with the
cunning which gave them their hazy fame the Nakonkirhirinons were
tightening the screws of cruelty.

Work beyond a man's strength was meted out to them. Alone in a long
canoe heavily laden, McElroy and De Courtenay were forced to keep the
pace set by the boats, each of which carried five men. Blisters came
in their hands, broke and rose again, sweat poured from their straining
bodies, and if they fell slow a spear-prod from the boat behind sent
them forward.

How much more exquisite could be made the torture of a victim already
worn to the ragged edge, how much sooner the scream be wrung from his
throat. With each passing league that brought them nearer the end of the
journey could be seen the fiendish eagerness rearing in the glittering
eyes.

Turn and turn they took, these two, of the hindmost seat in the canoe,
for the back of each was unspeakable from the spear-prods. Without a
word McElroy took his punishment as the lagging became more pronounced
from arms overtaxed at the paddles, but the long-haired adventurer from
the Saskatchewan taunted them to their faces.

Taunt and fling were unavailing. Of an unearthly poise were these
savages from the distant north. With grinning good humour they withheld
their anger, knowing full well that time would doubly repay.

Here and there among them appeared those worst monsters of the wilds,
INDIANS WITH BLUE EYES AND SQUARED-OUT TOES.

Far up ahead went forward the canoe of the dead chief, with Edmonton
Ridgar sitting in silence among the blackened warriors.

Never once did he glance backward, never once at the night camps did he
come near his factor.

Throughout the long days McElroy pondered this in his heart and turned
it over and over without satisfaction. Unable to form any conclusion
he fell to thinking of their friendship and of the gentle nature of the
man, the unbending faith of him.

It was all a sorry riddle.

“Brace up, M'sieu,” De Courtenay would laugh, even in the midst of
exhaustion; “sing,--smile,--perhaps it will be only the stake, not
something worse. Console yourself, as do I, with--memories.”

And McElroy would say nothing, trying in his heart to hold back his
wrath against this man for whose death he was to be responsible.

So went the uneven chase. Day's march of the savages and night's rest on
the green shores, mummying fires in the big tepee and the captives
lying in the sleep of exhaustion with one guard pacing the lodge
opening,--day's pursuit of the lone canoe, brief landings for tea
made at a micmac fire, scanning of lake and river and forest, night's
unceasing forging ahead with Maren asleep in the prow, her head on
Dupre's blanket.

When the last hard portage was made which carried them into Deer River,
the girl looked to the west with a sudden fire of the old passion in her
eyes.

“So, M'sieu?” she said to Dupre, “it lies yonder, the Land of the
Whispering Hills? Would God our course lay there!”

And Dupre, wondering, answered, “Aye, at the Athabasca,” for it was
to McElroy alone that she had uncovered her soul concerning the great
quest.

In Deer River the signs began to be plainer and fresher, showing the
passing of the Indians,--here a camp but two days deserted, there scraps
of refuse not yet cleared away by forest scavengers, and the pursuers
knew they drew close to danger and excitement.

All day the men of Mowbray's brigade bent to the paddles in growing
eagerness, and at the evening's stop Maren spoke to them, gathered
around with cold rations in their hands, for no fire was lighted now.

“To-morrow we will overtake the Nakonkirhirinons,” she said simply, as
if that meant no more than speaking a brother brigade of Hudson's Bays,
“and then will come the time of action. At night-camp we will make our
effort of deliverance. You, Alloybeau, and you, McDonald, will keep
within my call whatever happens, while Frith and Brilliers and Wilson
will stay with the canoe, ready for instant flight. M'sieu,” she laid a
hand on Dupre's arm and her voice deepened softly, “is scout and captain
and he goes at my side. More I cannot say until we know the lie of land
to-morrow.”

So they again took boat, this little band of venturers than whom there
were no more daring threaders of the wilderness in all the vast unknown
country; and Maren sat in the prow, her hands idle in her lap, for she
had paddled since four by the sun.

Beside her, huddled half under the feet of Wilson on the foremost
thwart, Dupre watched the stars as they came out in a turquoise sky, for
the sleep that was due him would not come. He thought of the morrow
and what it would bring, and the sadness in his heart grew with the
deepening shades.

The fringed garment of white doeskin lay under his elbow and a fold of
it brushed his cheek, and, boy that he was, its touch brought the quick
tears to his eyes.

“Ma'amselle,” he said presently, when the turquoise had faded to purple
and the purple to velvet black, with the stars like a dowager's diamonds
thickset upon it, “Ma'amselle, what think you is behind the stars?”

Maren turned her face to him like a sweet young moon, pale in the night.

“Behind the stars? Why, Heaven, M'sieu, where all is glory; Heaven
assuredly.”

“Aye. Where all is glory. Yes, for those who keep the holy mandates,
whose hearts are pure as that heaven itself. For such as you. Oh, Holy
Mother!--” his voice fell to a whisper; “there is no heaven, Ma'amselle,
so pure as the white heart of you! But for him whose days have gone like
the butterfly's flight from one prodigal joy to the next, whose heart
has known neither love of God nor love of a good woman, save for a
little space, whose tongue has boasted and blasphemed, and whose life
has been worth no jot of good,--what, think you, a waits so lost a man
as this?”

The light “whoosh,--sst--whoosh” of the dipping paddles, the occasional
rattle of a handle on a gunwale, formed a blending background against
which his low words were distinguishable only to the girl beside him.

She looked long into his upturned face. The wistfulness sat heavy
upon it. The youthfulness of this dashing trapper of the posts and
settlements came out plain in the starlight. She saw again the
pliant strength beneath the slender grace, caught the suggestion of
contradicting forces that she had felt one day in Marie's doorway when
young Dupre swung up the main way of Fort de Seviere, and beneath it all
she saw that which had caused her to say on that first morning of the
long trail when he faced her in the hidden cove, “Would it had been
given me to love you, M'sieu!”

All this passed through her aching heart, and presently she said with a
little catch in her deep voice,

“What awaits a man like this? A man who has done all these things and
who speaks of their folly, who thinks of God in the nighttimes,
whose heart turns with longing to that land behind the stars, and who
gives,”--she paused a moment,--“I cannot say the rest,--But--but--Oh,
there awaits this man the smile of that Christ of the Seven Scars, the
loving tears of Our Lady of Sorrows, the very grace of the Good God!”

“Truly,--Ma'amselle?” asked Marc Dupre wistfully, “in your heart--not
out of its goodness?”

“In my heart of hearts I think this, M'sieu.”

They fell silent for a long time, while the stars travelled with them in
the broken water and the ripples lapped and sucked at the shores and the
swift stream hurried to the bay.

At length the trapper tentatively raised his hand and touched the bare
arm of Maren where it shone brown beneath the white of the fringed
sleeve.

“I thank you for those words, Ma'amselle,” he said simply; “they are
healing as the Confessional to my ragged soul.”



CHAPTER XXI TIGHTENED SCREWS

“M'sieu,” said De Courtenay, “what think you? It would seem that
something stirs in this camp of squaws and old men. Gaiety and festive
garb appear. Behold yonder brave with a double allowance of painted
feathers and more animation than seems warrantable. What's to do?”

The man was worn to the bone with the day's work, yet the old brilliance
played whimsically in his eyes. This day a wearing burden of skin packs
had been added to the canoe, ladening it to the water's lip, and the
vicious prodding from behind had been in consequence of redoubled
vigour.

McElroy, reclining beside him on his face,--to lie on his back was
unbearable,--to one side of the camp, looked at the scene before them.

Surely it seemed as if something was toward.

Here and there among the Indians appeared strangers. More Bois-Brules,
lean half-breeds more to be feared than any Indian from the Mandane
country to the polar regions, decked half after the manner of white man
and savage, all more animated than was the wont of these sullen Runners
of the Burnt Woods, they passed back and forth among the fires, and
presently McElroy caught the gleam of liquid that shone like rubies or
topaz in the evening light.

“Aha!” he said, “these Bois-Brules that have joined our captors appear
to have had dealings with the whites. Yonder is the source of your
discovered animation. Whiskey, as I live, and circling fast among the
braves. It bodes ill for us, my friend.”

“So? Why so?”

“Because never was redskin yet who could hold fire-water and himself
at the same time. No matter how determined they are to reach
their stamping-ground before the ceremonies of our despatch, their
determination will evaporate like morning mists before the sun in
the warmth of the spirit, or I know not Indian nature. Prepare for
something, M'sieu.”

As the evening fell and the fires leaped against the darkness, sounds
increased in the camp. Groups of warriors gathered and broke, voices
rose; and shrill yells began to cut above the melee of the noise.

From time to time a brave would come running out of the bustle and,
stopping near, glare ferociously at the captives. Twice a hatchet
came flittering through the firelight, its bright blade flashing as
it circled, to fall perilously close, and several times a squaw or two
prodded one or the other with a moccasined toe.

Once a young brave, his black eyes alight with devilishness, sprang out
from the bushes behind and caught McElroy's face in a pinching clasp
of fingers. With one bound the factor was on his feet and had dealt
the stripling a blow which sent him sprawling with his oiled head in
a squaw's fire. Instantly his long feather was ablaze and his yelp of
dismay brought forth a storm of derisive yells of laughter.

McElroy sat quietly down again.

“It has begun, M'sieu,” he said grimly.

All night the liquor circled among the savages, as the spirit fired the
brains in their narrow skulls the uproar became worse. A huge fire was
built in the centre of the camp, tom-toms placed beside it in the hands
of old men, and, forming in a giant circle, the braves began a dance.

At first it was the stamp-dance*, harmless enough, with bending forms
and palms extended to the central fire and the ceaseless “Ah-a,
ah-a-a, ah-a,” capable of a thousand intonations and the whole gamut of
suggestion and portent, blood-chilling in its slow excitement.

*I have witnessed this.--V. R.


Without the circle the squaws fought and quarrelled over the portion
of liquor doled out to them by their lords, and their clamour was worse
than the rest.

No sleep came to the two white men lying at the foot of a tree to the
west of the camp, with a guard pacing slowly between them and liberty.

Instead, thoughts were seething like dalle's foam in the mind of each.

If only this giant guard might drink deep enough of the libations of the
others,--who knew?--there might be the faint chance of escape for which
they had watched ceaselessly since leaving Red River.

But, with the irony of fate, this one Indian became the model warrior
of the tribe. As the confusion and uproar grew in intensity, one after
another joined the dancing circle, until it seemed that every brave in
the camp was leaping around the fire. Blue-eyed Indians, Bois-Brules,
Nakonkirhirinons, they circled and uttered the monotonous “Ah-a, ah-a,”
 and in the light could be seen the white lock on the temple of Bois
DesCaut.

“I should have killed him long ago,” thought McElroy simply, “as one
kills a wolf,--for the good of the settlement.”

As they lay watching the unearthly orgy at the fire a plan slowly took
shape in McElroy's mind. They were unbound as they had been for many
days, the silent guard proving sufficient surety for their retention,
and they were two to one in the wild confusion of the growing
excitement. What easier than a swift grapple in the dusk, one man locked
in combat with the sentinel and one lost in the forest and the night? It
was a desperate chance, but they were desperate men with the post, the
hatchet, and the matete before them. As the thought grew it took on
proportions of possibility and the factor threw up his head with the old
motion, shaking out of his eyes the falling sun-burnt hair.

“M'sieu,” he said, in a low voice, carefully modulated to the careless
tone of weary speech which was their habit of nights; “M'sieu, I have a
plan.”

The cavalier looked up quickly.

“Ah!” he said; “a plan? Of what,--conduct at the stake? The etiquette of
the ceremony of the Feast of Flame?”

“Peace!” replied McElroy sternly; “you jest, M'sieu. We are in sore
straits and a drowning man snatches at straws. It is this. The fire of
liquor is rising out there. Hear it in the rising note of the blended
voices. How long, think you, will they be content with the dance and
the chanting, the tom-toms and the empty fire? How long before we are
dragged in, to be the centre of affairs? In this plan of mine there is
room for one of us, a bare chance of escape. This guard behind,--he is a
powerful man, but, with every warrior wild in the circling mass yonder,
he might be engaged for the moment needed for one to dart into the
darkness and take to the river. Once there, the mercy of night and
bending bushes might aid him. What think you?”

“Truly 'tis worth the try. My blood answers the risk. At the most it
would but hasten things. But give the word and we'll at it.”

“Nay,--we must understand each other, lest we bungle. As the plan was
mine, I take the choice of parts. There is a stain upon my conscience,
M'sieu.” McElroy spoke simply from his heart, as was his wont.
“Throughout this long journey it has lain heavy. Though I hold against
you one grave offence, yet I grieve deeply that it was through my hasty
anger you were brought to such sorry plight. As I am at fault, so would
I heal that fault. This the way I find given me. When I spring for our
friend of the painted feather, do you, M'sieu, waiting for nothing, take
to the bush with all the speed there is in you. And before we part know
that, were we free, I would punish you as man to man for that moment
before the gate of De Seviere with all pleasure.”

“Ah! You refer to Ma'amselle Le Moyne? By what right?”

“By the right of love, whose advances were more than half-reciprocated
before the advent of your accursed red flowers,--the right of man to
fight for his woman.”

“Nom de Dieu!” De Courtenay threw back his head and laughed, the flecks
of light from the fire flittering across his handsome features. “You
speak a lost cause, my friend! She was mine since that first morning by
your well when the high head bent to my hand. What a woman she is,--Maid
of the Long Trail, Spirit of the Woods and Lakes! A lioness with a
dove's heart! I have seen the Queen of the World in this God-forsaken
wilderness; therefore is it worth while.”

“Stop!” cried McElroy sharply; “let the old wound be. Only make ready to
act at once.”

“Aye,--I am ready now.”

“Then rise with me,--swiftly as possible,--when I count to three. One--”

The two men strained their bodies, leaning forward, for both had risen
to sit facing the fire when the dance began.

“Two,--” breathed McElroy, “ready, M'sieu,--three!”

With one accord they leaped to their feet, and the factor in a flash
was upon the Indian just passing behind him. He had leaped high, for
the Nakonkirhirinon was taller than a common man, and he clutched the
muscled neck in a grasp of steel, pressing his shoulder against his
adversary's face, to still the outcry he knew would come.

The orgy at the fire was lifting its tone of riot into one of savagery
and menace, the tom-toms beat more swiftly with gaining excitement, and
the yapping yells were growing more frequent.

It was an auspicious moment and the heart of McElroy throbbed with a
savage pleasure, but suddenly he felt other hands disputing his grip on
the astonished Indian, who was raining blows upon him having dropped his
gun in the first shock. Over the bare shoulder of the warrior, shining
like bronze in a gleam of light, he saw the face of De Courtenay, its
blue eyes alight.

In a flash his grip was torn from behind, and, as the Indian reared his
head and threw back his great shoulders, lifting him clear of the earth,
he heard the joyous voice of the cavalier.

“Run!” it cried, as he fell clear; “run! And tell Maren Le Moyne that
her name is last upon my lips,--her face last before--”

Out above the words there rang the shrill cry of the guard, his mouth
uncovered by McElroy's shaking off.

The Indian had whirled and grappled with De Courtenay, and, before
McElroy could tear him loose, fighting like a madman, out from the
yelling circle there poured an avalanche of lunatics, jerked from
Gehenna by that ringing cry.

Foremost was Bois DesCaut, his evil eyes glinting like a witch's omen.

Yelling, jumping, flaming with the liquor of the Bois-Brules, they fell
upon the two men and dragged them, half-falling, half-running, toward
the circle, into it, and up to the fire.

“Ho-ho! ho-ho-o! Ha-ha! ha-ha-a! ha-ha!”

Faces wild as the devil's dreams pushed close, hands plucked at them,
and suddenly a dozen painted braves caught up handfuls of live coals and
flung them upon them.

In the midst of it McElroy looked stupidly at De Courtenay.

“For the love of God!” he said, “why did you not run?”

“Why didn't you?”

The cavalier was laughing.

“I could not, M'sieu,” he added; “the charm of the hazard was too
great.”

And that was the last word he offered the man who would have delivered
him, turning to face the savages.

“Dogs!” he cried in French; “dogs and sons of dogs!”

Stooping suddenly, he snatched a horned headdress from the crown of an
aged medicine man, scooped it full of glowing brands, and tossed its
contents straight into the wild faces before him.

Then he straightened, crossed his arms, and smiled upon them in
contempt.

Pandemonium was loose.

In breathless swiftness the captives were stripped to the skin, tied
hand and foot, and fastened to stakes set hastily up on either side the
fire.

“It begins to look, M'sieu,” called De Courtenay, across the space and
the roaring flames, “as if the Nor'westers and the Hudson's Bays must
scratch up a new wintering partner and a fresh factor,--though, 'ods
blood! this one is fresh enough! Will they cure us as as they have
Negansahima?”

At mention of the dead chief a dozen missiles cut the night air and
struck the speaker. One, a lighted torch, landed full in his face, and
McElroy groaned aloud.

If De Courtenay hoped by his taunts and his jeers to reach a swifter
end, he was mistaken in that hope. No fire was kindled at their stakes,
no sudden stroke of death maul or tomahawk followed his words. The
Nakonkirhirinons had keener tortures, torments of a finer fibre than
mere physical suffering, and the Bois-Brules' liquor had stirred the
hidden resources.

Again the dancing commenced, but this time it was not the harmless
measure of the stamp-dance. Instead of the bending bodies, the rhythmic
stamping of soft-shod feet, the extended palms, there were unspeakable
leapings, writhings, and grimaces revolting in their horror, brandishing
of knives, and yelling that was incessant.

McElroy closed his eyes and forced his mind to the Petition for Mercy.

Through the tenor of the beautiful words there cut from time to time De
Courtenay's voice, cool, contemptuous, a running fire of invective, now
in French, now in English, and again in the Assiniboine tongue, which
was familiar to the Nakonkirhirinons, they being friends with that
tribe.

As the hubbub rose with the liquor two slabs were brought, rough
sections of trees hastily smoothed with axe and hatchet, of the height
of a man and the thickness thereof, with a slight margin at top and
sides. These were set up behind the stakes that held them, thus forming
a background, and the two naked forms stood out in the firelight like
pictures in white frames.

A wise old sachem, hideously painted, drew a line on the ground at
thirty feet, facing the central fire, and with a bony finger picked out
a certain number of warriors.

Full fifty there seemed to McElroy when he opened his eyes to see them
ranged before the line, all armed with knives that shone in the glow,
and (grim irony of fate!) in the blades of some there was a familiar
stamp--H. B. C.!

“Ah! Yuagh!” called the sachem, and two young men stepped forward, toe
on the line, glanced each at a framed picture, drew up an arm, and,
“Whut-t-t t-e-e-p,” whined two knives that flittered through the light
and struck quivering, one with its cool kiss on McElroy's cheek, the
other just in the edge of the slab at De Courtenay's shoulder.

A shout of derision greeted this throw, and two more took the place of
the retiring braves, this time a Runner of the Burnt Woods, wearing the
garments of the white man, but smeared with bars of red and yellow paint
across the cheeks, and a white renegade.

“A Nor'wester's man once,” thought McElroy; “another DesCaut.”

Again the “whut-t” of the whimpering blades, again the little impact
in the wood behind, this time with more indifferent aim; for never was
white man yet who sank or rose to Indian level in the matter of spear or
tomahawk.

They were brave men, these two, and they faced the singing knives
without a quiver of muscle, a droop of eye, while the joy of the
savages, at last turned loose, rose and rose in its wildness.

For an hour the mob at the line threw and shifted, the vast circle
sitting or standing in every attitude of keenest enjoyment. The slabs
bristled with steel, to be cleaned and decorated anew, while the fire in
the centre leaped and crackled with an hundred voices.

A stone's-throw away the grim tepee of the dead chief glimmered now out
of the shadow, now in, and to the east behind a rocky bluff, through
which led a narrow gorge, the river hurried to the north.

Blood-painted brilliant splotches here and there against the white
pictures, but neither man was limp in his bonds, neither fair head
drooped, neither pair of blue eyes flinched. De Courtenay's long curls
hung like cords of gold against his bare shoulder, enhancing the
great beauty of him, while his brilliant smile flashed with uncanny
steadiness. McElroy's face was grave, lips tight, eyes narrow, and
forehead furrowed with the thought he strove in vain to make connected.

Suddenly every shade of colour drained out of his countenance, leaving
it white as the virgin slab behind.

On the outskirts of the concourse, just at the edge of shadow and light,
Edmonton Ridgar stood apart and the look on his face was of mortal
agony. As his eyes met those of his factor all doubt was swept away.
This was his friend, McElroy knew in that one swift moment, even as he
watched his torture, his friend on whose faith and goodness he would
stake his soul anew. It was strange what a keen joy surged through him
with that subtle knowledge, what smart of tear-mist stung his eyes.

Long their gaze clung, filled with unspeakable things, things that were
high as Heaven itself, that pass only between men clean of heart on the
Calvaries of earth.

Then, as gleaming eyes began to follow the fixed look of McElroy, heads
to turn with waving of feathers on scalp-locks, the factor with an
effort took his eyes from Ridgar's.

“Dog-eaters!” De Courtenay was laughing. “Birds of carrion! Old men!
Squaws of the North!”

And above the hubbub the ritual chanting in his brain turned into an Act
of Thanksgiving.



CHAPTER XXII “CHOOSE, WHITE WOMAN!”

Another day had gone into the great back country of time, from which the
hand of God alone can pluck them and their secrets. Soft haze of blue
and gold hung over forest and stream, sweet breath of summer fondled the
high carpet of interlaced tree-tops, blew down the waters and wimpled
the bending grasses, and the wolf had sighted the caribou herd.

In a shelter of spruce within sight of the Indian smoke the lone canoe
and its people lay hidden, awaiting the coming of night.

“Now, Ma'amselle,” said Dupre earnestly, “do you remain close here with
Frith and Wilson and Alloybeau while Brilliers and McDonald go with me
to reconnoitre.”

Maren knelt beside a fallen log binding up the heavy ropes of her
hair. Before her were spread the meagre adjuncts of her toilet, in all
conscience slim enough for any masculine runner of the forest,--a dozen
little pegs hand-whittled from hard wood and polished to finest gloss by
contact with the shining braids.

She looked up at him with eyes that were unreadable to his simple
understanding.

“Remain?” she said; “and send you into my danger alone? You know me not,
M'sieu.”

Purple dusk was thick upon the underworld of lesser growth beneath the
towering woods. In its half-light the trapper saw that her face, usually
of so sad a calm, was glowing with excitement.

“Brilliers,” she said, rising and fastening the last strand, “bring me
the brown no-wak-wa berries from the pail yonder.”

She stood crushing the ripe fruit in her hands and looked into the faces
of her little band. In every countenance she read what she had read in
men's faces all of her life, the dumb longing to serve, and it lifted
her heart with tenderness.

“My men,” she said presently, “remember we are Hudson's Bays, and that
we have behind us the Great Company which punishes guilt and upholds
loyalty, and that we go to rescue a factor of the Company. Alloybeau and
McDonald go with me, flanking either side. You, Frith, take up position
a hundred yards inland to cover what retreat may happen. Wilson and
Brilliers stand at the canoe, and, M'sieus, keep hand at prow ready for
instant action. We know not what may happen. I, who am most concerned,
go first. You, Marc Dupre, go with me.”

Her voice dropped as it ever did of late when she spoke to this good
friend.

“And now we wait only for full darkness.”

“You must go, Ma'amselle?” said Alloybeau miserably. “Cannot another
make the first scouting? Send me.”

“And me!” Frith pushed softly forward. “At the last, Ma'amselle, we are
old women. We cannot let you go.”

“Cannot?” said Maren sharply. “Do Mr. Mowbray's men so soon forget his
orders? I am good as a man, M'sieus. See!”

She held up her right arm, with the fringed sleeve falling loose. The
muscle sprang up magnificently.

“Fear not for me,--and yet,--I thank you! Now we wait.”

One hour,--two,--passed and the last light crept, afraid, out of the
forest to linger a trembling moment on the waters and be drawn up to the
darkening sky.

At last the maid arose, tall and quiet, save for the excitement in her
eyes, and one by one her chosen followers stepped noiselessly after.

Silent as the wood around, the forlorn hope crept forward.

“Here, Frith,” commanded Maren, when they had reached a vantage point
of higher ground, “and here you, Alloybeau and McDonald, separate. If
during this night the good God shall deliver into our hands Mr. McElroy
and the venturer from Montreal, you will hear a panther's far-off call.
Make for the canoe, for that will mean swift flight. If, on the other
hand, aught should befall us ahead, a night-hawk will cry once. Hide and
wait. Wait one day, two, three. There is always hope. So. We go now.”

Thus they separated, that small band, as hopeless together as apart in
case of discovery, and at last Dupre followed alone, his heart heavy
within him and a grip in his throat of tears. On through the leafy
forest, parting the lacing vines, holding each branch that it might not
swish to place, they went, far from safety and the commonplace of life,
and a prescience of disaster weighed on the trapper's soul like lead.

At last it grew more than he could bear, and he reached a hand to
Maren's shoulder, a tentative hand, hesitating, as if it felt its touch
blasphemy.

“Ma'amselle,” he faltered, “forgive me! But, oh! without confession
this night I am sick to my heart's core! I lied to you back at the cove,
though with a clean conscience, for it is love,--love of a man warm and
wild that tears my soul to tatters! I love you with all love, of saint
and sinner, of Heaven and earth, and I would have you know it!”

His low voice was shaking, as was his whole slim body, and Maren felt it
in the hand on her shoulder.

“As a man, Ma'amselle, I would give my life for one touch of your lips!
As a lost monk I would kiss your garment's hem! See!”

He dropped to his knee and, catching her beaded skirt, pressed it to his
lips again and again, passionately, swept away by his French blood.

“As I live I love you as the dog loves his master! I am naught save the
dust under your feet, the thorn you brush in the forest, yet like them I
catch and cling! Forgive, Ma'amselle, and if the future is fair for you,
think sometimes in the dusk of Marc Dupre!”

“Hush!” said Maren, catching the hand at her knee, a shaking hand more
slender than her own; “hush, my friend! You break my heart anew. I know
the inmost grace of you, the glory of the love you tell, and be it of
heaven or earth, of angel or man, I would to the Good God there was yet
life enough within me to buy it with my own! I have seen naught so holy,
so worth all price, in the years of my life. It is dear to my heart as
that life itself. Dear as yourself, my more than friend.”

In all tenderness she stooped from her fair height and laid her arm
around the shoulders of the youth, drew his head against the beadwork of
McElroy's gift, and kissed him upon the lips,--once, twice, yearningly,
as a mother kisses a weakling child.

At that moment there came, borne on a waking breeze of the night, the
sound of the tom-toms, the yapping of many throats.

“The gods beckon,” she said sadly; “this life and love is all awry and
we who are bound against our will must but abide the end.”

“Aye,” whispered young Dupre, from the warm depths of her shoulder, and
his voice was like gold for joy; “aye,--the end.”

He rose swiftly.

“Forgive the passion that could forget the great business of the night,”
 he said, and they went forward, though Maren's fingers still rested in
his clasp.

Through the thinning wood which neared the stream presently there came a
glow and then the shine of a great fire ahead, with massed figures
that leaped and sprang, fantastic as a witch's carnival, and a roar of
frightful voices.

“Stay now, Ma'amselle!” begged Dupre, at last, for he had caught a sight
that shook him through and through; “stay you here in the wood while I
go forward!”

But his protest was lost on the maid. Eagerly she was pushing on, hid by
the shadows,--nearer and nearer, until suddenly she stopped and stared
upon the scene, the fingers in his clasp gripping Dupre's hand like
steel.

“God! God! God!” breathed Maren Le Moyne at the forest's edge as she
looked once more upon the face of the factor of Fort de Seviere.

Unspeakable was that scene. All reason had fled from the North savages.

What small veneer of docility had been spread over them by their three
years' dealing with the Hudson's Bays and their intercourse with the
quiet and tractable Assiniboines, had vanished. They were themselves as
nature made them, cruel to the point of art.

The work of the day was visible upon the captives tied to their stakes
on either side the fire. Half-clothed, for they had been thrown into
a lodge to recuperate for the night's festivities, they stood in
weariness, that from time to time drooped one head or the other, only to
lift again with taunt and jeer.

De Courtenay, his thin face between the curls thinner, was still facing
the mob with the smile that would not down. McElroy was as Maren had
ever known him, patient and strong, and from time to time he tossed up
the light hair falling in his eyes.

“We are none too soon,” she said tensely; “tonight it must end. Go you
around to the east, M'sieu, between the camp and the river. Look for the
lodge of the dead chief, for there will be the trader, Ridgar. Look for
him and read his face,--whether or no he will help us. I will skirt to
the north.”

“I--Ma'amselle! Stay far from their sight, for love of Heaven!”

“Sh! Go, my friend;” and Maren turned into the darkness.

“Mary Mother, now do thou befriend!” she whispered, as she felt her way
forward. With touch of tree trunk and slipping moccasin, lithe bend and
sway and turning, as sure in the forest as any savage, this Maid of the
Trail took into her hands the saving of a man. It was simple. Wit must
play the greater part, wit that invades a sleeping camp, risks its life,
and laughs at its victory. So would she work in the late hours when
revelry had worked its own undoing. Now she would learn the camp and the
safest side of it, the place of the captives and a way of escape. With
thought and eager plan she pushed from her mind the look of McElroy's
body.

She would--

In the darkness she stopped with inheld breath. Her groping foot had
touched an object, a soft object that stirred and rolled over on its
side and presently sat up. So near it was that she could feel the
movements of its garments, which fact told her it was human.

Then, without warning, a hand shot out and caught her knee in a grip of
steel. With all her strength the girl tore away, leaping backward. But a
tangle of vines snatched at her foot and she fell crashing forward with
a figure prone upon her, and in the darkness she fought silently for
life.

As in the camp of the Nakonkirhirinons the thin veneer had slipped away,
so now in the forest its heavier counterpart fell from this woman and
she turned savage as the thing with which she fought.

Of superb stature and strength, she was a match for the man, and two
pairs of hands searched for a throat, two bodies strained and struggled
for the mastery. It seemed that the noise of the conflict, the snapping
of dry dead wood, the swish and crash of leafy brush, must draw
attention from the camp, but it was too engrossed in its own mad
hilarity to heed so small a sound.

Over and over strained the strangely-met foes in silence, and presently
they struggled up, barehanded, face to face, for Maren had dropped her
rifle when she fell. As they whirled into a more open space the light
from the fire struck through the foliage and glistened on a tuft of
white hair on the swarthy temple before her.

“Hola! DesCaut!” gasped the girl.

“Oho! I win!”

For, with the sudden illumination, she forgot for a moment the present
and DesCaut; for it was the turncoat awaked from a drunken sleep
apart, who pushed swiftly forward, took the moment's advantage of her
hesitation, and pinioned her arms to her sides.

She might still have had a chance, for she was as strong as he, but that
he raised his voice in a call for help.

Thus it was that, in less time than the telling, Maren Le Moyne,
rescuer, leader of the long trail, was dragged, fast bound by a dozen
gripping hands, into the firelit space in the great circle, a captive
under the eyes of the man she had come to save.

Stumbling, jerked this way and that, one white shoulder gleaming against
the brown stain of throat and face where the doeskin garment was pulled
awry, she came into the central space before the great fire.

Every inch an Indian woman she looked, with the no-wak-wa berries
darkening her bright cheeks, her moccasins and beaded garment belted
with wampum got from the Indians by Henri, save for one thing, no Indian
woman in all the wilderness wrapped her braids around her head and
pinned them with whittled pegs. There alone had she blundered.

As the renegades loosed her and dropped away, leaving her alone in the
appalling light, for one instant she flung her hands over her face.

The quick disaster stunned her.

There was no longer hope within her for the moment. But, with the rise
of the roar of triumph, that part of her nature which joyed in the
facing of odds snatched down her hands, lifted her head, and set the old
fires sparkling in her eyes.

“White! White! White!” was the cry lifting on all sides. “A white woman
of the Settlements! Wis-kend-jac has sent the White Doe! A sign! A sign!
The Great Spirit would know the slayer of Negansahima!”

“The White Doe shall choose!”



CHAPTER XXIII THE PAINTED POST

When McElroy's eyes fell upon the woman he loved the breath was stopped
in his throat. For a moment it seemed he would suffocate with the surge
of emotions that choked him. Then a great sigh filled his lungs and a
cry was forced from him which pierced the uproar like an arrow.

“Maren!” he cried, in anguish; “Maren!”

It drew her eyes as the pole the faithful needle, and across the fire
they stared wide-eyed at each other.

Then De Courtenay's silver voice cut them apart.

“Again, Ma'amselle!” he cried, with the old magic of his smile. “Do
you bring by any chance a red flower to the council of the
Nakonkirhirinons?”

But the Indians closed in around her, pulling and plucking at her with
eager fingers, and they saw her fighting among them like a man.

McElroy for the first time loosed his tongue in blasphemy and cursed
like a madman, tugging at the bonds which held him.

“'Tis all in a day's march, M'sieu,” said De Courtenay, “and the sweet
spirit of Ma'amselle is like to cross the Styx with us.”

But for the first time, also, there was in his tone a note of weariness,
a breath of sadness that sang under the light words with infinite
pathos.

The new attraction drew the crowd, and the old ones were left in
solitude, while the Nakonkirhirinons surged and scrambled for a look
at the white woman fallen from a clear sky, leagues from where they had
seen her. Half-breeds, dissolute renegades, and Indians, they pushed
and peered and in many a face was already burning the excitement of her
beauty, especially those of the savage Bois-Brules.

McElroy prayed aloud to God for the heavens to fall, for some great
disaster.

But soon it became apparent that something of importance was to take
place. A hundred headmen gathered in knots and there was dissension
and brawling and once near a riot, while the girl stood in a circle of
malodorous, leering humans with her back against a tree, warding off
hands with man-like blows.

There was no order in the tribe. Negansahima, whose iron hand had ruled
with power and justice above the average, was dead. The new chief had
not yet come into power with fitting ceremony, and thus the old men of
the tribe were for the moment authority, and, as too many cooks spoil
the broth, so too many rulers breed dissension.

But finally a conclusion was reached.

A hundred hands scurried into preparation and the shouts were filled
with anticipation.

In the open space a post was set up, tall as a man's head and some
two feet thick, adzed flat on one side and painted in two sections,
perpendicularly, one half in red, the other in black. A medicine man,
hideous in adornments of buffalo horns and bearskin, approached De
Courtenay and with a feather painted on his bare breast a circle of
black with little red flames within.

McElroy was decorated in like manner, save that his circle was red and
it enclosed a death-maul, a dozen little arrows, and two knives.

Thus was foreshadowed the manner of their death.

Then arose a babble of voices.

“The White Doe! The White Doe that runs in the forest! Now shall She who
Follows decide!”

And into the midst of the vast circle once more Maren Le Moyne was
brought. She stood panting as they drew back and left her, and McElroy
looked upon her as he had never looked upon living being in all his
days.

There was the same high head, shining in the light, the same tall form
sweet in its rounded womanhood, the same strong shoulders, and from
them hung the white garment that he had carried to her door that day,
in spring. He had wondered then if he would ever see it cling to the
swelling breast, set up the round throat from its foamy fringe. And
thus he saw it again as he had dreamed, though, Holy Mother! in what sad
plight!

She had told him she would wear it. She had relied upon it to help her
get to De Courtenay! Of what depth and glory must be the love that sent
her after the savages! Even in the stress of the moment the old pain
came back an hundredfold. But events went forward and he had soon no
time to think.

They drew a line upon the earth as they had done before, squabbling
over its distance from the painted post; Bois-Brules, their keen eyes
gleaming, haggling for a greater stretch, and presently Maren stood upon
that line and they had pressed into her hand a bright new hatchet, one
of those bought from McElroy himself in the first days of trading.

Then an Indian, naked and painted like a fiend, whose toes turned out,
stepped forth and spoke in good English.

“Woman Who Follows,” he said distinctly, “one of these two dogs is a
murderer,--having killed the Great Chief when his people came in
peace to trade at the Fort. Therefore, one of them must die. The
Nakonkirhirinons take a skin for a skin,--not two skins for one. So did
the Great Chief teach his people. But none know which hand is red with
his blood. For two sleeps and a sun have the braves given them the
tests,--the Test of the Flying Knives, the Test of the Pine Splinters,
the Test of the Little Lines, but neither has shown Colour of the Dog's
Blood. Therefore, justice waits. Now has Wiskend-jac, the Great Spirit,
sent the White Doe from the forest to decide. Throw, White Woman, and
where the tomahawk strikes shall Death sit. Hi-a-wo!”

The renegade stepped back and a silence like death itself fell upon the
assembly.

Then did the colour drain out of the soft cheeks under the berry stain
and the girl from Grand Portage stand fingering the bright hatchet
in her hand. Her eyes went to McElroy's face and then to that of the
cavalier leaning forward between his swinging curls, and both men saw
the shine that was like light behind black marble, so mystic was it and
thrilling, beginning to flicker in them.

“Bravo!” cried De Courtenay, his brilliant face aglow with the splendid
hazard. “Bravo! We are akin, Ma'amselle,--both venturers, and my blood
leaps to your spirit! Throw, Sweetheart, throw! And may the gods of
Chance guide your hand!”

“Think not of me, Maren!” cried McElroy, in deadly earnest. “You owe me
naught! Throw for M'sieu, whose peril is my doing!”

For many moments she stood so, fingering the white handle of the weapon,
and there was no sound in all the vast assemblage save the crackle of
the flames. Then they saw her muscles tauten throughout her whole
young body, saw her draw herself up to her full height, and again for a
second's space she stood still. In that moment she had deliberately put
herself back in the surging turmoil of Grand Portage, was listening to
the words of old Pierre Vernaise: “Well done, Little Maid! Again now!
Into the cleft! Into the cleft! Ah-a! Little One, well done! Alas, but
you beat your old teacher!”--was feeling again the surge of a childhood
triumph which scorned to bring nearer that wilderness of her dreams.

With a swift motion her arm shot up and forward and the tomahawk left
her hand, flying straight as an arrow for the target. It struck with a
clean impact and stood, the handle a little raised and the point well
set in the green wood. There was a rush of the medicine men, who seemed
to act as judges, and then a silence. Peering, bending near to look
closer, they gathered with confusion of voices and presently stepped
back, that all might see.

Neither in black nor red, but directly between the two, the blade
cleaved cleanly down the dividing-line.

They surged forward, gathering round like flies with buzzing and
excitement, examining it from all sides, while the girl stood upon the
line with her hands shut hard beside her.

She did not glance again at the two men beside the fire.

A sachem pulled out the hatchet and carried it back to her, while the
circle formed and widened again.

Again she stood at poise, again they saw the tension of her body, again
the little wait, while the two men held their breath and De Courtenay's
eyes were shining like stars.

“A fitting close!” he was saying to himself, in that joy which was of
his venturer's soul and knew not time or place. “Heart of my Life! What
a close to a merry span!”

Again the swift, sure motion, unmeasured of the brain, coming out of
habit and pure instinct, again the “thud” of the strike, again the rush,
and again the wondering buzz of talk.

Once more the hatchet stood upon the line between the black and the red,
directly in its own cleft!

There was wondering comment, gesticulation, and swarthy faces turned
upon the woman on the line.

Once more the sachem in his waving feathers and tinkling ornaments drew
the blade from the post and gravely carried it back to her.

Excitement was riding high in the eager faces bending forward on
all sides, and everywhere a growing admiration. A tribe of prowess
themselves, the Nakonikirhirinons knew a clever feat when they saw it.

For the third time the tall woman in the beaded garment took the hatchet
and squared her shoulders.

“What does it mean?” McElroy was thinking wildly; “why does she not save
him while there is time?” And, even as the words went through his brain,
something snapped therein and he was conscious of the circle of faces in
the forest edge waving in grotesque undulations, of the arm of Maren as
it straightened forward, of the flash of the hatchet as it flew for the
painted post, and then of great darkness sewn with a thousand stars.

As Maren had raised her hand for the throw, from somewhere out of the
darkness behind the fire a stone death-maul had hurtled, aimed at her
wrist, but he who threw was sorry of sight as a drunken man, for it
struck the head of McElroy instead and he sagged down against the
moosehide thongs, even as the hatchet once more clicked snugly in its
former cleft.

Then from all the concourse there went up a shout, half in anger and
half in wild applause.

“Nik-o-men-wa!” they cried; “the Thrower of the Seven Tribes! But the
White Doe plays with the decree of Gitche Manitou! Bring the spear!
Fetch forth the spears, oh, Men of Wisdom!”

But in the midst of the excitement a figure walked slowly forth in the
light and held up a hand for silence.

It was Edmonton Ridgar.

Reluctantly they obeyed, sullenly, as if bound by a bond against their
will.

In the sudden hush he spoke.

“What do ye here, my brothers?” he asked, and waited.

There was no reply from the mass before him.

“Wherefore is the spirit of my Father vexed that it disturbs my watch
inside the death-lodge?”

The small rustling of the excited crowd ceased in every quarter.

They stilled themselves in a peculiar manner.

“Oh, ye sachems and Men of Wisdom,” he said, turning to the headmen
gathered together, “come ye to the tepee of Negansahima and behold what
ye have done!”

Slowly, as he had come, the chief trader of De Seviere turned about
and passed out of the light. One by one, in utter silence, their faces
changed in a moment into masks of uneasiness, the sachems and medicine
men rose and followed. In the wavering shadows thrown by the central
fire the big tepee stood in awesome majesty. Ridgar raised the flap and
entered, dropping it as the savages filed in to the number of all it
would hold.

“See!” he said dramatically.

Over the bier of piled skins which held the wrapped and smoke-dried
figure of the dead chief there danced upon the darkness, eerie in
pale-green living fire, the ghost of the crested and sweeping head-dress
that he had worn in life.

There was never a word among them, but, with one accord, after one
awe-struck look at the ghostly thing, they fled the lodge in a mass.

For several moments Ridgar stood in the darkness as those outside peered
fearfully in, and, when the last moccasin had slipped silently away,
he reached up and took down the fearsome thing, folding it beside the
chief.

“We were wise together, old friend,” he said sadly; “would I had your
knowledge and your power.”

Outside the word was spreading wildly.

“The spirit of Negansahima rests not in the lodge! The medicine men have
not dreamed true! Silence in the camp while They who Dream repair to the
forest fastnesses and seek true wisdom!”

And while the sachems and the headmen, the beaters of the tom-toms, and
those who tended the Sacred fires of the Dreamers formed into procession
and slowly filed out into the forest, Edmonton Ridgar drew a long breath
of relief. Maren had postponed the sure culmination of the tests by her
clever feat, he had postponed it a little longer by his own. Full well
he knew that the girl could not go on forever after the manner of her
beginning. She knew the hatchet, but would she know the spear, the
arrow, and the Test of the Flaming Ring? Sooner or later she would fail,
and then would come the last orgy of the rites of a Skin for a Skin. He
thought of the whimsical fate which so oddly gave the “Pro pelle cutem”
 of the H. B. C. to this unknown tribe of the North, and flayed one with
the other.

This night was the last wherein there lay one chance of help for the two
men and this woman who had so strangely followed from the post, and he
lay in the darkness of the death-lodge watching the hushing of the camp,
the loosing of the captives, the carrying of his factor, a limp
figure, to the lodge of captives on the edge, the leading thither of De
Courtenay and Maren.

“Fool woman!” he said in his heart; “sweet, brave, loving fool with the
woman's heart and the man's simple courage!”



CHAPTER XXIV THE STONE TO THE FOOT OF LOVE

Long Ridgar lay in the darkness listening to the hushed sounds that came
from lodge and dying fire--vague, awed sounds, that presently died
into silence as night took toll of humanity and sleep settled among the
savages.

Here and there low gutturals droned into the stillness, and at the
west there was oath and whispered comment where the Bois-Brules camped
together. Not wholly under the spell of mystery were these half-breeds,
but restless and suspicious under the conflicting promptings of their
mixed blood. Slower than the Indians were they to obey the mandate of
silence and peace that the Spirits of Dreams might descend upon the
forest, but at last they were quiet, the tires burned down to red heaps
of coals, then to white ashes, the great fire in the centre flamed and
died and flamed again like some vindictive spirit striving for vengeance
in the grip of death, and the utter stillness of the solitude fell
thick as a garment on all the wilderness. It seemed to Ridgar that only
himself in all the earth was awake and watching, save perhaps the two
guards pacing without a sound the lodge of the captives, and those two
within, so oddly brought near.

As for McElroy, his friend of friends, an aching fear tugged in his
heart that he had waited too long for the chance to help, that the
patient strength was sapped at last, that the end had come. He had seen
the flight of the maul, the sagging of the sturdy figure.

Who had thrown it, if not that brute DesCaut? Who save DesCaut was so
keen on the trail of the factor and the girl? True, De Courtenay was his
latest master, and his spoiling of Maren's aim might as easily send the
blade into the black as the red, but in either case he would cause her
to decide the death she was trying so bravely to postpone.

DesCaut, surely.

The stars wheeled in their endless march, the well-known ones of the
forenight giving place to strangers of the after hours, and Ridgar had
begun to move with the caution of the hunted, inch by inch, out from the
shelter of the lodge, when he felt a hand steal from the darkness
and touch him with infinite care. He lay still and presently a voice
whispered,

“M'sieu Ridgar?

“Aye?” breathed Ridgar.

“'Tis I,--Marc Dupre from De Seviere.”

“Voila! Another! Are there more of you?”

“I would know first, M'sieu,--where is your heart, with savage or
Hudson's Bay?”

“Fair question, truly. I but now am started for yonder lodge on quest of
their deliverance, though without hope. Your appearance lends me that.”

“Sacre! 'Tis done already. Listen, M'sieu, with all your ears. Just
beyond earshot, up the river to the south there lies a big canoe, with
at its nose for instant action two men of Mowbray's brigade, while a
hundred yards inland another waits, armed and ready to cover a hurried
flight. There needs but loosing of those yonder, M'sieu, and here are
we. Two Indians pace the lodge.... You one, me one. What easier?

“Many things, my young hot-blood. Yet it is our only way. Here are
death-mauls,--two. Take you,--they make no sound, provided a practised
hand is behind. Strike near and ease the fall, there are those who sleep
lightly here. Even the earth has ears to-night.”

“Think you Ma'amselle is bound?” whispered Dupre next; “I could not see
for the swinging of the factor's body.”

“No,” replied the trader; “both she and the Nor'wester walked free. But
how, for love of Heaven, comes she here?” he added.

Dupre sighed softly in the darkness.

“For love,” he said; “for love of a man.”

“I had guessed as much,--how how did she pass the many miles of lake and
stream and forest? And how overtake us?”

“I brought her. By day and night also, without camp, have we come, aided
by canoe-men from Mr. Mowbray's brigade, which we met on the eastern
shore of Winnipeg coming down from York, bound for the Assiniboine and
Cumberland House.”

“But for which man? She is unreadable, that woman, though love lives
naked in her face.”

But a sudden ache had gripped the throat of the young trapper and he did
not answer.

“Let us be off, M'sieu,” he whispered; “now is the time.”

“Aye,--if ever.”

Slowly, inch by inch, lifting their bodies that they might not rustle
the loose earth and trampled leaves of the camp, Ridgar and Dupre drew
forth into the shadows.

Meantime, within the skin tepee, where all three had been summarily
placed, Maren Le Moyne sat with her head upon her arms and her arms
crossed on her drawn-up knees. Across the opening, just inside the flap,
the body of McElroy lay inert, though she knew that a low breath rose
and fell within him, for she had laid a hand upon his breast. Beside
her, close in the darkness, De Courtenay sat upright and alert, as if
no forty hours of torture had hail their will of him. She could hear his
quick breathing.

Anguish rode her soul like a thousand imps and the slow tears were
falling, bitter as aloes, the symbol of defeat. Every fibre of her being
trembled with love of the man stretched beyond; she longed with all the
passion of her nature to gather the tawny head in her arms, to kiss
the silent lips, the closed eyes. Through the dim cloud that seemed to
envelop him since that night at the factory steps, holding her from him
like bars of iron, she heard again the ringing sweetness of his voice:

“From this day forth you are mine! Mine only and against the whole
world! I have taken you and you are mine!”

False as Lucifer, but, O bon Dieu! sweet as salvation to the lost

A hundred feelings tore at her heart,--bitterness and unbearable scorn
of her own blundering, and wild protest against failure, but chief of
all was the love that drew her to this man like running water to the
sea.

Now that death was near, so near that even now it might be calling
his earnest spirit out of the darkness, she would do more--a
thousandfold!--to give him life. Only life, the gentle, strong soul of
him safe in the sturdy body!

And she had but hastened the end she had come to avert!

“Jesu mia,” she prayed, from the shelter of her arms, “help! Help
Thou--Lord of Heaven, give him to be spared!”

And not once did she think of the great quest, broken by a meagre
waiting by the way; no thought crossed her mind in this crisis of the
Land of the Whispering Hills, of an old man, dreaming his dreams in the
wilderness.

Thus had love set aside like a bauble the thing for which her life
had been lived, for which she had grown and prepared herself in the
attainments of men.

She had felt the magic touch of the great mystery, and henceforth she
was captive, servant to its will, and its mandate had been service. And
here was the end--

A hand touched her shoulder, a hand infinitely soft of pressure,
infinitely gentle.

“Ma'amselle,” whispered the cavalier in her ear, “one more turn of the
wheel of Fate,--and we take the plunge together. Kin are we, truly;
kin of the tribe of Daring Hearts. A lioness are you, oh, maid with the
Madonna face! No woman, but a creature of the wild, superb in courage
and unknown to fear! I saw it in your face that day in De Seviere,--the
something alien to the common race, the spark, the light; oh, I know not
what it is, save that it is Divine and yet splendidly of the earth! We
are matched in heart. Venturers both, and like true venturers we shall
take the longest trail with a laugh and our hands together,--and trust
to the Aftermath to give us largess of that love which has its beginning
in such glorious wise. Pledge me, oh, my Queen of the World!”

With a grace beyond compare he drew her into his arms, silent and velvet
soft, light and inimitable in his love way.

In utter astonishment Maren felt his silken curls sweep her cheek, his
lips on hers. Her tears were wet on his face. She put up her hands and
pushed him loose.

“M'sieu!” she said, “what do you do?”

“Do? Why, bow to the One Woman of my heart,” he said; “my Maid of the
Red Flower, whom love has led to share my fate.”

“In all pity! M'sieu, you do mistake most grievously!”

“What? Was it not confession at the post gate when this painted rabble
fell upon us? Or is it still the maiden within fearing the word of love?
In such short space, Sweetheart, there is no time for girlish fears. Be
strong in that as in the courage of the lone trail. Speak!”

“Speak?” said Maren, with her old calmness; “of a surety, M'sieu. Though
I have thrilled at your careless bravery, your laughing daring which,
as you say truly, is kin of my heart,--though I have taken your red
flowers, yet there is in me no spark of love for you, no thought beyond
the admiration of a true son of fortune. That alone, M'sieu.”

De Courtenay was staring at her in the blackness of the lodge, his arm
fallen loose about her shoulders.

“Name of God!” he whispered wonderingly, “it is not love? Then what, in
the living world, has brought you over the waste to this camp of hostile
savages?”

“This,” said Maren, and she reached a hand to the body of McElroy.

“Sancta Maria! This factor? This heavy-blooded man?... But he did speak
of half-requited--Oh, Saints of Heaven! What a jest of the world! The
threads of tragedy are tangled into a farce!”

De Courtenay threw up his head and took a silent laugh at the ways of
Fate.

“Three fools together! And the riddle's key too late! At least I can set
it straight for one--”

He broke his laughing whisper to listen to new sounds without, a dull
blow, muffled and heavy, the slight whisper of garments sliding against
garments, the crunch and rustle of a body eased down to earth,--nay, two
blows, coming at a little interval, and from either end the beat walked
by the two guards, and from the southern end there came a grunt, a cry
choked in the throat that uttered it. Instantly the venturer was up and
at the flap, peering outside. A figure loomed against the stars, paced
slowly by with an audible step, passed and turned and passed again.

It was Marc Dupre, an eagle feather, snatched from the quivering form of
the guard lying in the darkness by the wall of the lodge, slanting from
his head against the heavens.

A little way beyond at the ashes of a fire a warrior stirred, lifted a
head, and peered toward the tepee of captives; then, satisfied that
all was well, lay down again to slumber. Back and forth, back and forth
paced the solitary watcher. De Courtenay within was quivering from head
to foot with the knowledge that something was happening. As he stood so
the pacing figure halted a moment before the opening.

“S-s-t!” it whispered; “warn Ma'amselle!” then walked away.

Swift on the words another figure crept noiselessly to the lodge door.

“M'sieu,” said Edmonton Ridgar, beneath his breath, “give me the
factor's shoulders. Do you take his feet and follow,--softly, for your
life. Bring the maid.”

De Courtenay stepped back, groped for Maren, took her head in his hands,
and brought her ear up to his lips.

“Rescue!” he breathed; “Ridgar and Dupre. We carry our friend of the
fort here. Follow.”

He loosed her and bent to lift McElroy.

With all her courage leaping at the turn, Maren quietly raised the flap
and in a moment they were all outside among the sleeping camp.

With measured tread Dupre came up to them, walked with them as they
moved silently back, and was on the turn when Maren touched his arm.

“This way,” she whispered; “straight ahead.”

One more step,--two,--the youth took beside her. It seemed that the
heart within him was breaking in his agony. The shadows of the wood were
drawing very near, the chances of escape multiplying with every step.

Another sweet moment of nearness and the misty white figure beside him
would fade into the darkness forever, pass forever out of his sight.

Dearer than all the joys of Paradise was that black head, that wondrous
face with its strength and its tenderness so adoringly mingled. The one
supreme thing in all the universe was this woman,--and she was passing.
With an involuntary motion he touched her softly and she stopped
instantly, even at that great moment. It thrilled through him, that
quick perception of his desire.

“Ma'amselle,” he whispered, “fare thee well!”

She caught his hand swiftly, pulling him forward. “Eh?” she said. “What
mean you?”

There was startled anxiety in her voice and the heart of Dupre leaped
exultantly.

“Naught,” he lied bravely, “save that I must hang behind for a moment or
so to cover any sound with my sentry's step, but I cannot part from you
even so small a space without,--God-speed. Hurry now, Ma'amselle! They
pass from sight!”

He pushed her gently after, but she turned against his hand.

“Come!” she commanded; “I will not leave you!”

“Nay,--how long, think you, before utter silence awakes that mob? You
must be at the water's edge before I follow. Go now,--quick, for love of
Heaven!”

He pushed her away and turned back toward the camp, pacing slowly by the
huddled heap that attested Ridgar's hand, past the empty lodge, and on
to the northern turn, where lay that other figure prone upon the earth,
yet still quivering in every muscle. He died hardly, this strong North
warrior, and Dupre almost regretted the need, though the trapper of the
Pays d'en Haut took without thought whatever of life menaced his own and
considered the deed accomplishment.

Back and forth, back and forth he walked the beat of the watcher and a
holy joy played over his soul like a light from the beyond. He turned
his mind to that hour in the woods, to the memory of the lips of Maren
Le Moyne, the warm sweetness of her beaded breast, the tender affection
of her embrace, and the present faded into that land of dreams wherein
walk those who love greatly.

Meanwhile Ridgar and De Courtenay pushed silently forward with the limp
body of McElroy swinging between, while the girl stepped softly in their
trail, straining her ears for sounds from the camp, and carrying the
only weapon among them, a rifle which Ridgar had taken from the Indian
he had killed.

“To the east,” she whispered, “down the little defile to the river, then
south along the shore,--it is shingled and open,--to the canoe. Walk
fast as you can, M'sieu.”

It was riskful going through the strip of woods, but when they entered
the little canon that cleft a ridge of cliffs, rising impudently out of
a level land, they mended their pace. Here was solid, dry rock beneath
them, walls of rock on either side, and a narrow strip of star-strewn
sky above.

“Thank God!” Ridgar was saying, under his breath, “the distance widens!”

But no sooner were the words out of his mouth than a cold chill shot
through him, and Maren pushed forward with compelling hands on De
Courtrnay's shoulders.

“Hurry, M'sieu!” she cried; “they have awakened!”

“Hi! Hi! Hi-a! He-a! Hi!”

Danger was waking in the camp behind, first with one sharp cry, then
another and another, until throat after throat took up the sound and the
yapping turned into a roar.

They were but half-way through the narrow gorge. The two men broke into
a stumbling run. Ridgar was going backwards, half-turned to see ahead,
and suddenly his foot struck a loose pebble and he fell headlong. De
Courtenay stumbled, and in the scramble to right themselves they lost
more time than they could spare. Before they were up and started, a
shrill voice came into the gorge, yelling its “Hi! Hi! Hi-a!”

De Courtenay suddenly stopped.

“'Tis useless!” he said breathlessly; “We'll never make it! Here,--do
you take my place, Ma'amselle!”

He caught Maren's shoulder and pushed her forward.

“Take his knees,--so! You are strong,--give me the rifle. Make haste,
Ridgar,--Ma'amselle!”

He bowed in the darkness.

“The last turn of the wheel, Ma'amselle,--and I take the plunge alone.
All in the day's march!”

With the last words he turned back to face the way they had come, shook
his long curls back across his shoulder, and lifted the rifle to his
cheek.

The footsteps of Ridgar and Maren were echoing down the rocky gap.

It had been a promising escape, a neat plan well carried out, and there
was but one thing lacking to its fulfilment,--another step to pace the
deserted lodge of captives.

Across in the darkness among the Bois-Brules one ear had lain close to
the tell-tale earth, one evil face peered unsleeping among the dusky
shapes of the camp, a swarthy face with a white lock on its temple.

Keener than all the rest, Bois DesCaut, driven by personal hate,
listened to all the sounds of night.

And he had heard a changing in the steps that passed and repassed,
that separated and came together, before that lodge across the sleeping
mob,--a change, a little silence, and then the steps again that
presently thinned to ONE,--one step that paced evenly, with a measured
tread, a moccasined step like that of an Indian, yet somehow alien in
its firmness and swing.

One step where there should have been two,--and the half-breed trapper
raised himself and gave the first “Hi! Hi!”

Like startled wolves they were up all around him in a moment and down on
that empty tepee with its one sentry!

A torch flared redly with the sudden revealing of a slim youth in
buckskins and two Nakonkirhirinon warriors deep in the Great Sleep.

What was there for Marc Dupre in that moment of roused fury,--that tense
moment of awaking rage, of baffled rights of payment?

What but death too swift and unrestrained for torture?

A dozen weapons reached him from as many crowding hands and he went down
on the last earth her feet had trod, the spot where she had last touched
his hand.

Her golden voice, sweet with its sliding minors, was in his ears, the
sweetness of her lips on his.

“A stone to your foot, Ma'amselle,” he whispered, as the darkness broke
and the stars began to dance on a sky of blood-red fire; “serve you
with my life,--no better fate,--oh, I love you! I--a stone to your
foot,--Ma'amselle!”

And at that moment Maren Le Moyne, straining every muscle of her young
body to save the man she loved, looked swiftly back, having left the
defile to stagger, stumbling, southward to where Mowbray's men waited
with the canoe.

She saw the sudden flaming of the torch, the slim, boyish figure in its
buckskins, the ring of faces, and the flash of weapons; saw the forms
close in and the slim boy go down like a reed in the winter storm, and
a cry broke from her lips as De Courtenay's rifle began to sound in the
gorge.

With tears on her cheeks and her face drawn hard, she raised her head
and gave a panther's far-off call.



CHAPTER XXV ANSWERED PRAYERS

Out of the forest at the signal came running Alloybeau and McDonald and
Frith, alert, ready for anything, wondering beyond wonder at the call
that meant deliverance. Not one of them had thought to see again this
strange, intrepid woman who pierced the forbidden places and wound men
like Mr. Mowbray around her fingers. It would have been a toss-up for
men to attempt what she had done.

She was coming to the canoe, and she was victorious. Yet they knew that
death was up and at her heels, from the sound of the shots.

The big canoe was in the water, the men were ready, paddle in hand, with
Wilson knee-deep in the stream ready to push off, when along the reach
of shore there came that sorry ending to the gallant venture,--Ridgar
and the girl, staggering, stumbling, trying to make what haste they
could, with swinging roughly between them the apparently lifeless body
of the factor of Fort de Seviere.

Breathless and exhausted they reached the boat. Brilliers and Wilson
reached for their burden, threw it into the bottom, and hauled Maren on
her knees among the thwarts.

There was a shove, a word, a dip of the paddles, and the canoe shot
out to the deeper waters, and none aboard her saw the form of Edmonton
Ridgar draw back into the shelter of tangled vines on shore.

“Give me a blade!”

From the rocking bottom Maren was reaching for a paddle, got it, thrust
by some one into her hands, and was cleaving water with the best of
them, deep stroke after deep stroke, the rush and suck of the eddy in
her ears.

In the cold blue darkness the stream whispered and warned like some old
witch at her cauldron, the night was clammy, and behind the new fires
flared against the towering trees.

A babble of voices told of pursuit,--shouts and gutturals that strung
out from the camp all through the gorge and were beginning to flow with
the river.

“Only a matter of time,--a little time,” thought Wilson, at the prow,
but never a word was uttered in the canoe.

Exerting every atom of strength, calling on all the will-power aboard,
they shot forward into the night and the current.

The noise behind increased, as the tones of a bell blown by the wind
increase when the wind sets in one's direction.

“Not now!” Maren was saying to herself. “Not now,--when we are so far
toward the winning! Not now,--oh, Friend of my heart! why was that
price demanded? Holy Mary rest him, that young Marc Dupre--and send
deliverance for this--”

Ahead the river swept around a turn. Keeping close to the shore they
caught shallow water and cut round into a wider opening.

The cries behind veered and deadened, and suddenly Wilson in the prow
raised his blade.

Maren leaned behind him and looked into the shadows.

On every side dark shapes covered the face of the stream like
water-bugs, from every side there came the “whoo-sh-st-whoo-sh” of
dipping paddles, the little plank and rattle of their shafts against
gunwales.

They had glided into the midst of a flotilla of canoes travelling at
night and in silence.

The maid from Grand Portage threw up her head.

“In among them,” she whispered, “quick! Deep as we can!”

“But, Ma'amselle,” whispered back Wilson, “they may be Indians.”

“What matters? A chance is a chance, and who would not risk its
turning?”

Unconsciously she was quoting that kinsman whose dauntless courage and
love of venture had found its last thrill in covering her retreat in the
gorge.

“In among them! Deep!”

Softly, as one of their number, the fugitive craft crept out to
midstream and forward, usurping boldly place and speed.

Leaning low at each stroke the little company strained eye and ear for
sight and sound, but, look as they might, they saw no eagle feathers
against the stars, heard no word or whisper.

Barely had they reached their uncertain sanctuary when the light of
torches shot southward across the bend and next moment circled, a
far-reaching arm, to spread out and illumine the river broadcast as the
Nakonkirhirinons swept into view, their savage faces peering under the
raised flambeaux, their eyes like fiery points--searching their prey.

It fell on all the river, that light, on the running waters disturbed
by myriad blades of white ash, on the banked background of the trees,
on the drooping foliage at the stream's edge,--frail triflers of the
wilderness, stooping from the sweet winds of Heaven to the water's
wanton kiss,--and on a swarm of canoes, each manned by full complement
of men, most of whose faces were eagle-featured and dark, blackeyed and
high-cheekboned, though here and there were the fair hair and white skin
of white men.

Odd, indeed, was the effect of this tableau on the Indians under the
torches. They had come for one lone canoe,--to find a horde; for one man
and one woman,--to fall upon a brigade.

They halted and the distance widened between.

And then the flotilla parted at a word of command from the darkness
ahead and a boat came back among them. It passed close to the fugitives,
and Maren saw a tall man with a square chin, who stood up in it.

When it reached the fringe it went on out into the open water toward the
halted canoes of the Nakonkirhirinons, on whose eager faces sat a sort
of stupid awe.

“What do yez want?” called the tall man sternly, as he swept face to
face with the foremost canoe in which stood a headman of the tribe.
“Whyfore is all this bally-hoo wid th' lights?”

There was no answer and he roared at them like a lion

“Can yez not shpake, ye haythen?”

Whereat a canoe glided from the back shadows and the voice of Bois
DesCaut came in its broken English,

“A boat,--M'sieu,--we seek a boat that but now escaped from camp with
a murderer aboard,--one who killed in cold blood the chief Negansahima
back at the post of De Seviere. My brothers travel to the Pays d'en Haut
that justice may be done. We only seek the murderer.”

The tall man stood in silence a moment and glared at the scene, at the
excited faces, the gleaming eyes, the shifting glance of the spokesman.

“A likely sthory!” he said presently. “An' who, may I make bould to ask,
is this murderer?”

DesCaut squirmed a moment in silence.

“Who,--did ye say?”

“A man, M'sieu,--a-a-trapper.”

“One lone man? Troth I commend his valour in evadin' such a rabble
o' hell-spawn! An' what from did he escape,--th' sthake an' th'
stretchline?”

“Justice, M'sieu,--his life for the chief's.”

“Ho-ho! From th' looks o' yer fri'nds, me lad, I'm thinkin' 'twill
be justice wid her eyes shut!... But ye may turrn back an' search the
forest,--we have no sthrangers in our party.”

DesCaut glowered at him a moment and spoke to the headmen around in
their speech. There were threatening gutturals and gestures.

The flotilla was small compared to that of the tribe back at the gorge,
they would know, at any rate.

“They say, if M'sieu will let one canoe go through his people with the
torches, all will be well. Otherwise,--five hundred warriors, M'sieu,
can take their will with two hundred.”

“Aye?” said the tall man, jerking his head around. He had been scanning
the mass of his own craft, packed behind him, fading into the shadows
out of the light. There was a peculiar look in his eyes when he faced
DesCaut again, a thrust to his square jaw. In that backward look he had
caught sight of the brown face of Maren Le Moyne, the white garment,
glittering with its beads,--but he had seen, too, the crown of braids,
wrapped round her head after the manner of the white woman.

“Go yer ways,” he said; “we thravel fast on urgent business,--ye cannot
throuble us wid yer lookin' an' pokin'. Tell yer fri'nds--No.”

At this there was commotion among the Indians. A hurried consultation
took place, with indrawing of canoes under the flambeaux, waving arms,
and angry gestures.

“Then, M'sieu,--we come,--make way!” It was DesCaut, important and ugly.

“No, ye don't, me lad. Shwing back The Little Devil, bhoys!”

The leader's canoe shifted sidewise and another craft, heavy,
lumbersome, and vastly bigger than the light boats of the rest poked its
nose into its place,--and that nose was brass and round with a gaping
maw,--a small cannon, scarcely big enough for the name, but a roaring
braggart for all that.

“Belch, me darlin', if ye have th' belly-ache!” cried this tall man,
and, without more warning, there was a tremendous flash and detonation,
a mighty flying of the clear waters just under the bows of the foremost
canoes of the Indians.

There was hiss and sputter of the torches, an upward leap of canoe and
savage, capsize and panic and fear, and the night screamed with many
voices.

“Formation again, lads!” called the sturdy voice of the leader. “We do
be wastin' time wid these haythen!”

The canoe rounded, passed up between the others, which closed in behind,
and the cannon-boat lumbered into place in the rear.

As he passed the strangers in their midst the tall man looked hard at
Maren, the five men, and leaned out a bit to see what lay in the bottom.

“A close shave!” he said; “kape close in the middle an' shpake me at
camp in the marnin'.”

The mass of dark objects, drawing out of the light, moved forward and,
with a rush of intuition, the girl knew that all danger was past and
that safety hovered over them like the luminous wings of an angel.

“Holy Master!” she cried within, “Thou didst answer my prayer,--but at
what cost! Oh, Lord of Heaven, what cost!”

Then she dropped her blade and, under cover of the darkness, sat back
upon her heels, covered her face with her hands, and wept.

In the silence that had fallen deep again, save for the lessening tumult
behind, her weeping sounded to the outermost canoe low and awful, hard
and terrible as the weeping of a man.

She did not even feel if the breath was still in McElroy.

Friendship was taking its toll of love.



CHAPTER XXVI SANCTUARY

“'Twas yer leader I meant, lassie, should rayport to me. Is it he I saw
yez rollin' out like a bag o' beans?”

“Nay, M'sieu,” said Maren Le Moyne, standing before the tall man in the
flush of dawn at the morning camp, her eyes red-rimmed and the curling
corners of her mouth drooped and sad; “what poor leader there is among
us has been myself.”

“Eh?”

All along the river bank were little fires, their blue smoke curling
up to the blue sky above, the bustle and fuss of preparation for the
morning meal. At one place in the centre of camp two women, their
appearance that of great fatigue, were languidly directing the work of
a couple of Indians. An abundance of truck was everywhere--utensils for
cooking, clothing, and blankets out of all reason to one used to the
trail.

These things had not escaped Maren as she came through them in search
of the leader. They all set his status in her mind, told her much of the
history of her rescuers.

“Eh?” he said in surprise again; “you the leader? An' whatlike was the
evil hap that placed ye in among that rabble o' painted beauties, may
I ask? An' how comes a slip of a lass”--he looked her over from head
to heel with his sharp grey eyes; “--well, not so much a slip, still a
colleen--like you wid th' command o' men in this part o' th' world?”

“Of a surety you may ask, M'sieu, and it will be my happiness to tell
you, since but for you and your quick help, given without knowledge, we
should be now in sorry plight.

“The man you saw taken from the canoe is Monsieur Anders McElroy, Factor
of Fort de Seviere on the Assiniboine, and of the Hudson's Bay Company.”

“Faith of me fathers! Say ye so! A man of our own men!”

“Aye. Then you are also of the Company? Good! Surely have we fallen
on the lap of fortune.... Those Indians, Nakonkirhirinons from the far
north and strangers in this country, came to De Seviere to trade. For
two--three dais, maybe more,--I have lost track of time, M'sieu,--they
passed up and down at the trading,--camped on the shore, and all seemed
well, though they were wild and shy as partridges. One man among them
seemed to wear the cloak of civilisation,--Negansahima the chief.

“Then one day at dusk,--it was a soft day, gold and sweet, M'sieu, and
soft, with all the post at the great gate watching the Indians,--there
were many,--four or five hundred warriors and as many women and
children,--this day there was,--a tragedy. Something happened,--a
trifle.”

The girl stopped a moment and a sigh caught her breath.

“Just a trifle--but two men fought at the gate, the factor and
another--a Nor'wester from the Saskatchewan,--a long-haired venturer,--a
man from Montreal, but a brave man, M'sieu, oh, a very brave man! They
fought and there was the discharge of a pistol,--and--the shot went
wild. It slew the good chief, M'sieu. There was uproar,--they swarmed
upon the two and bound them.”

Maren's eyes were growing large with the remembered excitement of that
moment.

The tall Irishman was watching her keenly.

“They bound them and struck away to the north, taking them along, and
the burden of their cry was, 'A skin for a skin!'

“They brought them so far,--they would have reached their own country
but for a band of Bois-Brules, who joined them some suns back with that
red liquor whose touch is hell to an Indian. They had gone wild, M'sieu;
wild!”

She was very weary and she shuddered a bit at the word.

“And,--so,--that is all,--save that we had done that much toward
escaping when you found us.”

She ceased and looked gravely into his face.

“Howly Moses! I see,--I see! But ye have left a wide rent in th' tale.
Wherefore are yez here yerself, lassie?”

“I?” said Maren, swaying where she stood. “I followed, M'sieu.”

“Followed? From the Assiniboine? Alone?”

“Nay. There was one came with me,--a youth,--a trapper,--my comrade, my
friend. He died yonder in that surging purgatory--”

The tears were welling to her weary eyes.

“The Nor'wester, Alfred de Courtenay, also--We only of that venture are
escaped alive,--a sorry showing. The five men who man my boat belong
to the brigade under Mr. Mowbray, which we met on Winnipeg. Such is
our small history, M'sieu, and all we ask is your protection out of the
reach of the Nakonkirhirinons. I take him back to De Seviere,--God
knows if he will live to reach it. He lies so still. But I must get him
back--”

She ceased and passed her hand across her eyes.

“I must get him back,--I must get him back.”

“Aye, aye. Ye come with me. Ye need a woman's hand, girl. Ye're well in
yerself.”

There was a huskiness to the sharp voice and the man took her by the
arm, turning her toward the fire and the two women. She stumbled a step
or two in the short stretch.

“I must go back to him, M'sieu!” she protested. “He will need--will
need--broth--and a wet cloth to his bruised head--”

“We'll see to him, don't ye fret. It's shlape ye need yerself. Sheila,
whativer do ye think o' this! Here's a colleen shlipped through the
fingers of those bow-legged signboards and fair done wid heroism an'
strategy, an' Lord knows what all, an' off her feet wid tire! Do ye take
her an' feed her. Put her to bed on th' blankets an' do for her like
yerself knows how, darlint! 'Tis an angel unaware, I'm thinkin'--an' her
on Deer River!”

One of the women, a little creature with dark hair and blue eyes, Irish
eyes “rubbed in with a smutty finger,” came forward and looked up into
Maren's stained face, streaked with her tears, her eyes dazed and all
but closing with the weariness that had only laid its hand upon her in
the last few moments, but whose sudden touch was heavy as lead.

“Say ye so!” she said wonderingly; “a girl! So this was what caused the
rumpus in the night! But come, dearie, 'tis rest ye want, sure!”

She laid her and on Maren's arm and there was in its gentle touch
something which broke down the last quivering strand of strength within
the girl, striving to stand upright.

“Yes, Madame,” she said dreamily. “Yes, but he must have--he must
have--broth--and a bandage,--wet”

“Sure, sure,--he shall,--but come to the blankets!”

As Maren went down with a long sigh, her limbs shirking the last task
of straightening themselves upon the softness of the unwonted couch, the
little woman looked up across her at the man with a world of questions
in her face.

“Poor darlin'!” she said softly. “Whativer is it, Terence?”

“A heroine, if all she says be thrue, an' as unconscious of it as a
new-born babe!”

When Maren awoke the sun was straight overhead and some one had been
calling from a distance for a very long time.

“Come, come, asthore! Opin yer eyes! That's it! A little more, now. Wake
up, for love av Heaven, or we'll all be overtaken be th' Injuns!”

Ah! Indians! At that she opened her eyes and looked into the pretty blue
ones she remembered last.

The little woman was kneeling beside her with an arm about her shoulder,
trying to lift her heavy head and falling short in the endeavour.

Maren was too much in her muscled height for the bird-like creature. She
sat up at once and looked around. The canoes were in the water, all the
miscellaneous luggage had been put aboard, and every one was ready for
a new start. Only herself, the blanket bed, and the little woman were
unready.

Just below, her own canoe, with Brilliers, Wilson, Frith, McDonald,
and Alloybeau in place, waited her presence. She could see, from the
elevation of the shore, the stretched form of McElroy in the bottom,
a bright blanket beneath him and his fair head pillowed on a roll of
leaves. A shelter of boughs hid his face, and for one moment her heart
stopped while the river and the woods, the people and the boats whirled
together in a senseless blur.

She sprang to her feet.

“Is he--” she faltered thickly, “is he--”

“No, no, dearie! He is like he was, only they have fixed him a bit av a
shelther from th' sun. Do ye dhrink this now,” she coaxed in her pretty
voice; “dhrink it, asthore,--ye'll nade it f'r th' thrip.”

She held up a bowl of broth, steaming and sweet as the flesh-pots of
Egypt, and Maren took it from her.

“But--did M'sieu--Oh, I have slept when I should have tended him!”

“Ye poor girl. Dhrink,--he has been fed like a babe be me own hands.
There!”

There were tears in the little woman's eyes, and Maren took the bowl and
drained it clear.

“You are good, Madame,” she said, with a long breath. “Merci! How good
to those in need! But now am I right as a trivet and shamed that I must
fail at the last. Are you ready?”

She picked up the blankets, smiled at the tall man who came for them,
and walked with them down to the canoes.

“In th' big boat, lass, wid th' women,” said the leader; “'tis more
roomy-like.”

“I thank you, M'sieu, but I have my place. I cannot leave it.” And she
stepped in her own canoe.

“Did ye iver behold such a shmile, Terence?” cried the little woman,
when the flotilla had strung into shape and the green summer shores were
slipping past. “'Tis like the look av th' Virgin in th' little Chapel av
St. Joseph beyant Belknap's skirts,--so sad and yet as fair as light!”

And so began with the slipping green shores, the airy summer sky laced
with its vanity of fleecy clouds, the backward journey to safety and De
Seviere.

The large party travelled at forced time, short camps and long pulls,
for, as the little woman told Maren at the next stop, they were hurrying
south to Quebec.

“Where th' ships sail out to th' risin' sun, ochone, and Home calls over
th' sea,--the little green isle wid its pigs an' its shanties, its
fairs an' its frolics, an' the merry face av th' Father to laugh at its
weddin's an' cry over its graves. Home that might make a lass forget
such a haythen land as this, though God knew if it would ever get out av
th' bad dreams at night!

“An' now will ye be afther tellin' us th' sthory av yer adventures, my
dear?”

Maren was cooking a broth of wild hen in the little pail of poor Marc
Dupre, across the fire, and the little woman was busy watching a bit
of bread baking on a smoothed plank. Her companion, a tall, fair-haired
woman with pale eyes, light as the grey-green sheen sometimes seen on
the waters before a storm, was reclining in tired idleness beside her.
This woman had not spoken to Maren, but her cold eyes followed her now
with an odd persistence.

“Or is it too wild and sad? If it gives ye pain, don't say a
word,--though, wurra! 'tis woild I am to hear!”

Maren looked up, and once more the smile that was stranger to her
features played over them in its old-time beauty.

“Nay,--why should I not tell so good a heart as yours?” said the girl
simply, and she began at the beginning and told the sorry tale through
to its end.

“And so he died, this young trapper with the soul of pearl, and I alone
go back to De Seviere with--with M'sieu the factor,” she concluded
heavily.

“Mother av Heavin! An' which,--forgive me lass,--which man av the three
did ye love? For 'tis only love could be behind such deeds as these!”

The ready tears were swimming in the Irishwoman's blue eyes, straight
from her warm heart, and she was leaning forward in the intensity of her
sympathy and excitement.

“Which, Madame? Why, M'sieu the factor, surely.”

And Maren looked into the red heart of the fire.

With a sudden impulse this daughter of Erin dropped her plank in the
ashes, and coming swiftly forward, fell on her knees with her arms
around the girl's neck.

“Saints be praised!” she cried, weeping openly. “Saints be praised, ye
have him safe! An' there can nothin' ha'arm ye now, with us goin' yer
ways so close! An' there'll be a weddin' av coorse whin th' poor lad
comes round! F'r a flip av ale I'd command Terence to turn aside an'
go triumphant entry-in' to this blessid fort av yours and witness th'
ceremonies!”

Maren smiled sadly and laid her hand on the black head tucked into her
neck. It was a caress, that touch, tender and infinitely sweet, for with
the quick heart of her she knew the little woman to be of the gold of
earth, and she was conscious of a longing to keep her near, who was so
soon to sail “into the risin' sun” and who had been so short a time her
friend.

Friend, assuredly, for friendship was not a thing of time, but hearts
alike, and they had turned together with the first look.

So they sat a while, these two from the ends of the earth, and the warm
Irish heart cleared itself of tears, like April weather, to come up
laughing in another moment.

“An' to think ye niver told us your name, asthore!” she said, wiping her
eyes; “nor yer home place! Were ye raised in this post av haythins?”

“Maren Le Moyne of Grand Portage. My father--was a smith.”

“Of Grand Portage! An' ye are so far inland! I am Sheila O'Halloran,
av all Oirland, an' wife to Terence th' same,--yer fri'nd for always,
asthore, f'r niver will I be forgettin' this time!”

She turned to the fair woman, smiling and alight.

“Did ye iver dhrame av such romance, my dear?” she asked. “An' isn't it
just wonderful to find a real live heroine in th' wilderness?”

The woman was toying with a bunch of grass, winding the slim green
blades around her pale fingers, and she looked back with peculiar
straightness.

“It is all very wonderful, Sheila, and commands admiration, of course;
but, for my part, a strange woman alone on the rivers with a party of
men must have something beside her own word to vouch for her before
I should take her in with open arms. You are too ready to believe
anything. How do you know this venturess is not a--Jezebel?”

For a moment an awful silence fell upon the three, and they could hear
the myriad sounds of the evening camp round about.

Then Maren, her eyes wide in amaze, said stupidly:

“Eh,--Madame?”

And the Irishwoman cried: “Frances! For shame!”

But the other was very much composed.

“I am right, all the same,--what woman of modesty would follow a man to
the wilderness, confessing brazenly her love? You haven't noticed any
hysterics on my part over it,--nor will you. I think it all a very open
scandal.”

The little woman was flying into a rage of tumbled words and hopeless
brogue, but Maren Le Moyne, the blood red to her temples, rose silently,
took the pot of broth, and walked away, and never in her life did she
hold herself so tall and straight.

As she knelt beside the blanket bed of McElroy, and lifted his helpless
head, her eyes were burning sombrely.

“This, too?” she was saying dumbly, within herself. “Is this, too, part
of the lesson of life?”

And all through the days that followed, long warm days, with the songs
of birds from the gliding shores, the ripple of waters beneath the prow
of a canoe, she sat beside the unconscious man and looked at him with
dumb yearning.

For love of him,--what would she not have done, what would she not do
still for love of him,--he who had sold her for a kiss; and for it there
came something,--she could not define it,--something that seemed to live
in the atmosphere, to taint the glory of the sunshine, to speak under
every word and whisper.

Never again did she cook at the fire with the others, but had her own
on the outskirts, and Sheila O'Halloran came and cooked with her, talked
and comforted and hovered about Anders McElroy where he lay in a silence
like death, his fair face flushed with fever and his strong hands
plucking at everything within their reach.

“Don't ye worry, dear, he'll not die. 'Twouldn't be accordin' to th'
rights av life,--not afther all ye've done f'r him. He'll opin his
blessid eyes some day an' know ye, an' Heaven itself will not be like
thim f'r glory.”

But Maren only looked tragically down upon him.

What would they say, those eyes that she had thought so earnest, so
all-deserving in their eager honesty, if they should open to her alone?

Would they lie as they had done before, with the thought of Francette
behind their blue clearness?

Ah, well,--it was all in the day's march.

This day at noon camp she came upon, close to a fallen tree, a wee red
flower nodding on its slender stalk. She sighed and broke it.

“In memory of a brave man,” she said sadly. “Oh, a very brave man!”



CHAPTER XXVII RETURN

Eastward through the little lakes, across the portages where McElroy was
carried by means of pole and blanket swung from sturdy shoulders, they
went at hurried pace, and never a man of Maren's small command but
watched the sadness of her face, that seemed to grow with the days and
to feel an aching counterpart of it within his own heart.

“Take my coat for your head, Ma'amselle,” when she rested among the
thwarts,--“Let me, Ma'amselle,” when she would do some little task.
Thus they served her from the old desire that sight of her face had ever
stirred in the breasts of men, she who had never played at the game of
love, nor knew its simplest trick.

Southward, presently, up the rivers hurrying to the great bay at the
north, and at last out upon the broad waters of Winnipeg, and never for
an hour had McElroy's wandering soul come back to his suffering body.
Day by day Maren tended him, feeding him as one feeds a helpless babe,
shielding him from the sun by her own shadow when the branches gathered
at morn withered ere noon, wetting the fair head with its waving
sunburnt hair with water dipped from overside, and praying constantly
for his life.

As they neared the southern end, where Winnipeg narrows like the neck
of a bottle, his tongue loosened from its silence and he began to babble
and talk in broken sentences, and it was all about De Courtenay and a
remorse that ate the troubled soul.

“I owe you apologies, M'sieu,--'tis a sorry plight and I alone am to
blame. And yet I have a score,--gladly would I take my will of you for
that one fault,--another time,--another place. Still have I no right,
save as one man who,--But I have a plan,--one may escape,--listen--when
I grapple with this guard, do you make for the river--with all speed--My
God! My God! M'sieu! Why did you not run?” And so he muttered and
sighed, and Maren bent above with wide eyes.

Something there was between these two, some enmity that followed even
into the land of shadows and yet held them gentlemen through it all,
offering and rejecting some chance of escape. A weary, weary tangle.

Again he would fancy himself back in De Seviere and always there was De
Courtenay with his smiling face and tantalizing beauty.

“Welcome, M'sieu, to our post! Seldom do we meet so gay a guest!”

Often the wandering words would stumble among his accounts at the
factory and he would give directions to the clerks, and then Ridgar's
name would come, only to carry him instantly to the camp of the savages
on Deer River.

“Edmonton,--friend of my heart,--alone! and you pass me without speech!
Ah,--that look! That look! I'd stake my soul--”

And once in the cool twilight of an ended day, with the tall trees above
and the river lapping below, he cried out her name,

“Maren!” and once again, “Maren!” with a world of change between the two
words.

The first plunged the girl's heart to her throat with its passion, the
second chilled her like a cool wind.

And all at once he said, after a pause, “What is it, little one?”

So passed the days of the return.

Hour by hour the bright waters of the lake spoke to the girl with voices
of regret and sadness. The blue sky above seemed to mirror the dark
face of Marc Dupre, the wind from the shores to be his low voice, each
passing shadow among the trees his slender figure returning from the
hunt for her.

Her heart was sore that Fate had willed it so, and yet, looking down
at the face of this man at her feet, she knew it had to be and that she
would do again all that she had done.

And ever before her passed the scornful face of the fair woman who had
set the little undertone to all the world.

It troubled her, and for hours together she sat in silence reasoning
it all out, while Mowbray's men dipped the shining blades and here and
there the voyageurs and Indians who wore no feathers sang snatches of
song, now a chanson of the trail and rapid, again a wordless monotony of
savage notes.

The evening camps were short spaces of blessed quietude and converse
when Sheila O'Halloran sat beside her and they talked of many
things,--chiefly the dear little Island whose green sod would soon again
receive the feet of “herself an' Terence.”

“'Tis thankful I am, me dear, to be out av this forsaken land alive
wid me hair on me head instid av on a hoop painted green wid little red
arrows on th' stretched shkin inside! 'Tis a sorry counthry an' fit f'r
no woman, but whin Terence must come on some mysterious business av th'
government,--an' niver, till this minute, accushla, do I know whut it
is,--a cryin' shame 'tis, too, wid me, his devoted wife!--I must come
along or die. Wurra! Many's th' time I thought I'd do th' thrick
here! But now are th' dangers passin' wid ivery mile,--hark to th' men
singin'! 'Tis bad business whin men do not sing at th' day's work. 'Tis
glad I am f'r safe deliverance from that counthry av nightmares wid its
outlandish name,--Athabasca,--where Terence must moon from post to post
av th' Hudson's Bay--”

“Athabasca!”

Maren's head was up and she was looking at the little woman with an
eager wistfulness.

“The Land of the Whispering Hills!”

“Thrue,--'tis th' Injun word,--but a woild, woild land f'r all that.”

“But beautiful, Madame,--oh! it is beautiful, is it not?”

“Fair,--wid high hills an' a great blue lake an' woildness!--Ah!”

But the tall leader was calling and camp was breaking for another
stretch.

And under the travelling stars of that night there awoke in the heart
of the maid of the trail something of the old love, the old longing for
that goal of her life's ambition.

She had turned aside from it, only to be taught a lesson whose scars
would stay deep in her soul so long as life lasted.

At last came an hour when the party under O'Halloran must turn to the
east, where the bottle-neck of Winnipeg split in two, going down that
well-worn way which led to Lake of the Woods, Rainy River, and at last
to the wide lakes, whose sparkling waves would waft them on to the great
outside world.

There was a scene at parting, when the warmhearted Irishwoman clung to
Maren and wept against her bosom, calling her all the hundred words for
“darling” in the Celtic and vowing to remember her always.

The fair woman, wife of a Scotchman who acted as some sort of secretary
to O'Halloran, sat apart in cold silence.

“M'sieu,” said Maren, at the last, “I have no words to thank you for
this that you have done. I but cast it into the balance of God, which
must hang heavy with your goodness.”

She had given her hand to the leader, and that impulsive son of the ould
sod kissed it gallantly.

“'Tis little we did, lass, for you and your poor lad yonder, and 'twas
in our hearts to do more. But here's luck to you both,--an early weddin'
an' sturdy sons!”

And, as the morning sun glittered on the ripples of the departing boats,
Maren stood long looking after them, a mist in her eyes and her full
lips quivering.

She looked until the gathering dimness hid the waving kerchief of the
only woman friend who had ever truly reached her heart.

Then she sat down and took up a paddle.

“Last lap, Messieurs,” she said, above the mutter of McElroy at her
feet, and they turned toward where the familiar river came rushing to
the lake.

The summer lay heavy on the land when they reached the Assiniboine.

Deep green of the forests, deep green of fern and bush and understuff,
told of the full tide of the year. Here and there a leaf trailed in the
shallows, yellow as gold in an early death.

She thought of the spring, so long past, when she had first come into
this sweet land, and it seemed like another time, another life, another
person.

This day at dusk they passed the hidden cove where she had found Marc
Dupre waiting to build her fire. The abandoned canoe still lay hidden
where he left it.

Cool blue dawn, hushed and wide-reaching, still with that stillness
which precedes the sunrise, lay over the river, when the lone canoe
rounded the lower bend and Anders McElroy, factor of Fort de Seviere,
came back to his own again.

In the prow there knelt a weary figure in a soiled and sun-bleached
garment of doeskin, its glittering plastron of bright beads broken here
and there, the ragged ends of sinews hanging as they were left by
briar and branch, and the haggard eyes went with eager swiftness to the
stockade standing in its grim invincibility facing the east.

The row of wonted canoes lay upturned upon the shelving shore at the
landing, the half-moon at the right still glowered with its puny cannon
which had spoken no word to save their master on that fateful day, and
all things looked as if but a day had passed between.

The great gate with its studded breast was closed, the bastions at the
corners were empty of watchers, for peace folded its wings above the
past.

Without sound the boat cut up to the landing, Brilliers leaped out and
steadied it to place, and Maren stepped once more upon the familiar
slope.

They lifted McElroy, swinging in his blanket, and the tread of the
moccasined feet was hollow on the planks.

Thus there passed up to the gate of De Seviere a triumphal procession
of victory, whose heart was heavy within it, and whose leader in her
tattered dress was the saddest sight of all.

She raised her hand and beat upon the gate, and a voice cried, “Who
comes?”

“Open, my brother,” she called, for the voice was that of Henri
Baptiste, whose turn at the gate it was.

There was an ejaculation, a swift rattle of chains, and the heavy portal
swung back, while the blanched face of young Henri stared into the dawn.
Maren motioned to the men and they stepped in with their burden.

“Holy Mary! Maren! Maren! Maren!” cried Henri Baptiste, and took both
her arms in a gripping clasp. He looked into her face with fear and
wonder, as if the girl had returned from the dead, while joy unspeakable
began to lighten his features.

“Sister! Holy Mary!”

And then, when the touch of her in the flesh had dispelled his first
horror, when the sight of the factor swinging grotesquely in the blanket
had taken on the sense of reality, he raised his voice in a stentorian
call.

From every door it brought the populace running, half-dressed and
startled, and in scant space a ring of faces stared upon the strangers
in stupid awe.

“Ma'amselle Le Moyne!” they whispered, fearfully.

“Mother of Heaven! The factor!”

“Our factor! Out of the hands of Death!”

“Mon Dieu! One of them! And the maid!”

And in the midst of the awed and hushed excitement that was growing with
each passing moment, there cut the voice of McElroy, babbling from the
blanket.

“Throw! Throw, Ma'amselle,--for M'sieu!”

“Hush!” said Maren; “where is Prix Laroux?”

“Here!”

The big fellow was pushing through the gathering crowd, to stand before
the weary girl with burning eyes.

“Maren!” he said simply, and could say no more.

“Take him, Prix,” she said quietly; “take him to the factory. Get Rette
de Lancy's hand above him for care, and Jack for all things else. Take
these my men, and give them all the post affords, but chiefly rest at
present. They have--”

Here there came a tumult among the listening populace, and Marie rushed
through and flung herself upon Maren and there was time for nothing
else, save that, as Maren turned with her hanging like a vice about
her throat and Henri's arm across her shoulders, there was a streak
of crimson, a flash of ornaments in the sun, but now risen above the
forest's rim, and some one threw herself upon the unconscious form of
McElroy, kissing his face and his helpless hands and weeping terribly.

It was the little Francette. At her heels the great dog, Loup, halted
and glowered at the strangers.



CHAPTER XXVIII THE OLD DREAM ONCE MORE

They led her through the new day, between the staring, whispering
people, this comer from beyond the grave, to the little new cabin beside
the northern wall, across its step and into its sweet, fresh cleanliness
of home; and when Henri had shut the door they stood together in a
group, their arms inwound, and Marie wept helplessly while Maren looked
down with moist and weary eyes.

“There! There! Hush, ma cherie! Hush!” she was saying, but Henri was
reading with amaze the change in her glorious face.

“It has been a long trail, Prix, but a longer one beckons with ceaseless
insistence. No longer can I sit in idleness. Can we, think you, raise
the debt to carry us on at once? My heart is sick for the Athabasca.”

Maren stood by the factory door conversing earnestly with Laroux.

From every point of the post curious eyes looked upon her. Here and
there groups of women whispered in the doorways, and once and again a
laugh, quick hushed, broke on the evening air.

Somehow they struck upon the girl's ears with an ugly sound, reminding
her vaguely of the fair woman who travelled eastward with Sheila
O'Halloran, and her voice grew more earnest.

Laroux, who had not spoken with her since that one word of the morning
at the gate, was dumb of tongue, aching with the old feeling in his
heart which had told him faithfully so long ago that all was not well
with her.

“At once, Maren,” he said huskily, “I will raise the debt. When would
you be gone?”

“Soon, my friend,--soon, soon.”

“The word shall go round to-night. All shall be ready in forty-eight
hours.”

He paused a moment and presently, “Maren, maid,” he said.

“Yes?”

“Hold you aught against me for the stand I took that day--the duty I saw
first?”

“Against you, Prix?--the truest, bravest friend I own? Nay, man,--you
are my staff, my hope, my courage. Would I had had your strength these
heavy days.”

“Would to the good God you had! It shall not fail you again.”

Maren held out her hand and Laroux grasped it in a clasp of faith.

“See!” cried Tessa Bibye, peeping eagerly from among the women, “she
holds hands with that blackhaired man of her people who spurs the rest.
One man or another,--as Francette says,--little cat!--all are fish
who come to Ma'amselle's net! The factor, or the cavalier, or a common
voyageur.

“Can they not see, these fool men, that the woman is a venturess,
playing with all?”

“You lie, Tessa Bibye!”

Micene Bordoux had passed unnoticed. Now she turned her accusing glance
on the loose-tongued girl.

“Because you are so small of soul yourself, are your eyes blinded to the
greater heights? Ma'amselle is lost in the clouds above you.”

She went on, and Maren at the factory door turned to enter.

“Give the word,--and make all haste. Fix all things as you think best.”

The great trading-room, lined with its shelves and circled with
counters, was empty, save for a clerk, Gifford, who cast accounts in the
big book on the factor's desk, and Maren's footsteps rang heavy to her
ears as she passed through it to the little room behind, where she could
see Rette passing back and forth at her tasks of mercy.

She stopped at the open door and looked within that little room. Here
were the things of McElroy's life,--the plain chairs, the table, the
shelf with its books, the chest against the western wall, and on the
bed, pulled out to get the breeze, lay the man himself prone in his
splendid strength.

The light from the setting sun was on his head with its fair hair and
flushed face, rolling restlessly from side to side. There was no reason
in the earnest blue eyes, and Maren felt a mighty anguish swell and grip
her throat as she stood looking on the pathetic scene.

“Come in, Ma'amselle,” whispered Rette from her motherly heart, drawn
by sight of her haggard face, but Maren's eyes had fallen on a little
figure huddled on the far side of the bed with its face buried against
McElroy's left hand.

She knew the small head running over with black curls.

“Nay, Rette,” she said quietly, “I would speak a moment with you.”

The woman came out and closed the door.

“Poor little fool!” she whispered, “she is worn to a shadow with these
weeks of weeping, and, now that he is back, will not give over hanging
to his hand like one drowning.”

“Heed not. Is it in your heart, Rette, to do a deed of kindness for me,
to keep a word of faith?”

“With all my heart, Ma'amselle!”

“Then,” whispered Maren, apart from the clerk's listening ears, “take
you this letter. Keep it until M'sieu the factor is in his right mind,
then give it him with your own hands. If he--if he should--burn it,
Rette, unopened.”

And she gave into the woman's keeping the only letter she had ever
written to a man.

It was in French, and the script was fine and finished.

This was what she had said, alone in the little room with its eastern
window at the end of the Baptiste cabin:

“MONSIEUR MCELROY, Factor of Fort de Seviere, ave atque vale.” (The
tender word of Father Tenau when he blessed her that last time in Grand
Portage)

“The time has come when I must take my people out of your post, must
break their contract and their word. Forgive them, M'sieu, and lay
not the fault to them, for I, and I only, am to blame. But the time I
promised is too long.... I can no longer hold back the tide of longing
which drives me to that land of which we spoke once....” (Here there was
a break in the letter, a smudge on the page, as if the quill had caught
the paper or a drop of moisture run into the ink.)

“I must go forward, and at once, to the Athabasca. The great quest is
strong at my heartstrings again. I thank you, M'sieu, for all kindness
done my people, and I promise that, should fortune favour them and me in
that far land to which we journey, they shall send what trade lies with
them to De Seviere. For one thing I ask,--if it be possible, M'sieu,
give to certain men who will be found by word to Mr. Mowbray of York,
such stipend as you can, for they were good and faithful,--namely, Frith
and Wilson and McDonald, Brilliers and Alloybeau.... Adieu, M'sieu. God
send you health. (Signed)

“MAREN LE MOYNE, of Grand Portage.”

Laroux was worth his word.

Forty-eight hours later there stood at the portal of Fort de Seviere,
ready for the trail, that small band of wanderers who had come into it
in the early spring.

They were fuller of hope, more eager to face the wilderness than on that
day, for joy after sorrow sat blithely on their faces, turned to the
tall young woman at their head. And they were fully equipped for travel.
Three canoes held wealth of supplies, while six huskies whined in leash,
nervous under new masters, touched with the knowledge of coming change.

Not a man in De Seviere who had not given gladly, nay, vied with his
neighbour to give, to the helping of this woman.

Had they not their factor back from death and its torments?

There was God-speed and hearty handclasp from the men, and Maren smiled
into their faces, reading their simple hearts.

With the women it was different. They hung, gazing, on the outskirts,
calling farewell to Marie, who wept a little at sight of her deserted
cabin, to Anon and Mora and Ninette, but there was no reflection of
the feeling of their masters for this girl with her weary beauty, her
steady, half-tragic eyes. Nor was there great regret over Micene. Too
sharp had been her tongue, too keen her perception of their faults.

True, the autumn was near at hand. Winter would come with its myriad
foes before they could hope to be ready for it, and Maren, looking far
ahead, saw it and its dangers, and her heart sickened a bit with the
thought of her people; but the thing within was stronger than all else.

She must leave De Seviere at once. Therefore, she raised her head with
her face to the west.

It was early dawn again. It seemed that it had ever been dawn when
fateful things had happened in this post, every log and stone of which
was suddenly dear to her.

She stood in the opened gate and looked back upon it, on the cabins, the
well where De Courtenay had placed his first red flower in her hair, the
storehouses, and the factory.

The factory!

With sight of it once more the wave of anguish swept over her. She
saw the small plain room at the back, the figure of a man prone in
his helplessness, a fair head with blue eyes, pleading in their honest
clearness, and her lips trembled.

“Ready?” she said, and the deep voice slipped unsteadily.

“Aye,” answered Prix Laroux, and picked up the last pack of chattels.

At that moment there was a flurry among the pressing men around, a sound
above the many voices wishing them luck, and little Francette broke
through.

“Ma'amselle!” she cried, looking up into Maren's eyes with conflicting
expressions on her small face, misery and solemn joy and hatred that
strove to soften itself beneath a better emotion; “Ma'amselle,--I would
thank you! Oh, bon Dieu! I am not all bad! Here!”

She seized Loup by the ears and dragged him forward, snarling. “Take
him, Ma'amselle! I love him! Do you take him,--and--and-understand!”

All her red-rose beauty had gone from the little maid along with her
dancing lightness.

These long weeks had turned her into a woman with a woman's heart.

They drew back and looked on with wonder, and then smiles of amusement,
but Maren, gazing into the tragic little face, saw deeper.

“Why,--little one,” she said gently, unconsciously falling into
McElroy's words after a trick she had, “I--I understand. You need not
give up the dog,--I know what you would say.”

“No!” cried Francette fiercely. “No! Take him! Take him! I will make you
take him! I will!”

She was whimpering, and Maren, stooping, laid a hand on the husky's
collar.

Without more words she turned and followed her people down to the
landing, half-dragging the brute, who hung back and turned his giant
head to the little maid, standing with her hands over her face.

He snarled and bit at Maren's wrist, but she picked him up and flung
him, half-dragging on the ground, for he was a mighty beast, into the
first canoe.

“Push off,” she said; and, taking her place in the prow, she raised her
face to the cool blue sky, and turned once more to that West whose voice
had called from her cradle, but, with some strange perversity of
fate, her heart drew back to the squat stockade slowly fading into the
distance.

The sweet wind of the Whispering Hills was very faint on her soul.



CHAPTER XXIX BITTER ALOES

Eight months passed over the country of the Assiniboine, bringing their
changes. The short full-tide of the summer seemed to run out with the
going of the venturers, and the autumn to come from the north-west in a
night.

Great splashes of colour dropped on the land, spilled from the palette
of some careless giant,--gold and crimson and purple. Glorious fires
burned in the cooling skies and the sweet breath of autumn tingled in
the air.

There was comment, and the shaking of heads among the old trappers. The
wrong time of year to take the long trail with women,--the wrong time,
but, bon Dieu! who was to stop that woman with the sombre eyes? Voila! A
woman to thrill the blood in any man who was still warm with life!

“Love awakened in her would be a thing of flame and fury, they had
thought, that long past day,” thought Pierre Garcon to himself; “he and
that friend of his heart, Marc Dupre,--it had been a thing of patient
servitude, of transcendent daring, and Marc Dupre; ah! He had been a
part of it. But there was much of mystery about it all, and no one knew,
nor would any know, all that it had meant.”

So the changes came and passed, and when Anders McElroy again opened his
eyes to reason, the world was white against the pane of the one window
of the little room,--the long snows had arrived. Winter was upon the
Northland.

It was on a night when the wind without howled like a lost soul shut
out from the universe and the sucking of the chimney-throat roared to
heaven.

Edmonton Ridgar sat at the hearth gazing into the leaping flames, and
Rette de Lancy passed and repassed among the shifting shadows, busy at
some kindly task.

Long he lay, this man returned from the Borderland of the Unknown,
and stared weakly at the familiar sights that were yet touched with a
puzzling strangeness.

It seemed that this was all as it should be, and yet there was something
lacking,--a great gap, whose images and happenings were wiped out as
a cloth wipes clean a slate,--a space of darkness, of blankness, whose
empty void held prescience of some great sadness. He lay on his side
facing the fire, and twice he thought to speak to Ridgar with a question
of this strangeness, and each time he was conscious of a vast surprise
that the man did not answer.

His lips, so long unused to sane direction, had made no sound in the
roar of the night.

And then Ridgar, drawn by that intangible sense of eyes upon him, raised
his head; and, as their glances met, that great void flashed suddenly
into full panoply of life peopled with a ring of painted faces against
the background of a night forest, a leaping fire, and the heroic figure
of a tall woman who stood in the dancing light and threw a hatchet at a
painted post.

Ridgar's eyes, as he had seen them in the dimness of the outskirts of
that massed circle, brought back the lost period of time and all that
had passed therein.

He stared wildly at him, and then around the firelit room.

“Ah!” said Ridgar softly, getting slowly to his feet with a smile at
once tender and exaggeratedly calm. “You have awakened, have you; eh,
lad? Would you sleep the whole night away as well as the day?”

He came to the bed and took McElroy's hand tenderly in his, while he
gave Rette a warning glance.

McElroy tried to rise, but only his head obeyed, lifting itself a bit
from the pillow to fall helplessly back.

He looked up at Ridgar with a look that cut that good man's heart, so
full was it of wild entreaty and piteous grief.

“Maren?” whispered the weak lips. “Maren,--where--?” And they, too,
failed him.

“Safe,” said Ridgar gently; “all is well. We are at De Seviere and there
is no need to think. Do you drink a sip of Rette's good broth and sleep
again.”

With a sigh of ineffable relief the sick man obeyed like a child,
falling back into the shadows, though this time they were the blessed
shades of the Vale of Healing Rest.

Rette in a corner was wiping her eyes and saying, over and over, a
prayer of thanksgiving for deliverance from death.

With infinite tact Ridgar kept him quiet, promising the tale of what
had happened, and, when the flow of returning life could no longer be
stemmed, he set himself the task of telling what he knew of those swift
days.

It was again night, though a week of nights had passed since that on
which the factor had awakened to consciousness, and Ridgar had dismissed
Rette.

There was only the roar of the wind without, the whistle of the fire,
and the two men alone in the room as they had been many a winter's
night.

“Now,--where shall I begin?” said the chief trader, gazing into the
fire. “At what point?”

“Maren,” said McElroy eagerly, from the bed; “begin with her.”

Ridgar shook his head.

“Nay, it goes farther back. Let it begin with the leaving of De Seviere
and the coldness of my bearing to you.... Did you never think, lad, that
it was but a blind, covering the determination to help you at the first
opportunity? Thought you the friendship of years so poor a thing as to
be turned in a day? Day by day my heart ached for some word with you,
or even a glance that would make all straight; but those painted devils
watched my every move, my every look, the very intaking of my breath,
as the coyote watches the gopher-hole when the badger is below. Only for
sake of the dead chief at my feet was I given such seemingly free leave
among them,--for myself, I had been shipped as were poor De Courtenay's
Nor'westers at Wenusk Creek. And now is the time when I must go farther
back and tell you of the good chief who was my father, indeed, at
heart.”

Ridgar paused a moment, and his eyes took on a look of distant things

“Have you not wondered how it was, lad, that a man should live long as I
have lived in the wilderness, alone, without ties other than those which
bind him to the Great Company, without love of woman, without the joy
of children?... I have not always lived so. Time was when I had my own
wickiup, when I lay by my own night-fire and played with the braids of a
woman's hair,--long black braids, bound with crimson silk and heavy with
ornaments, for whose buying I paid my year's catch, when I looked into
eyes black as the woods at night and dumb with the great love she could
not speak.... She lived it one day ... nay, died it--when I had some
words with a young man of the tribe, who drew a spear before I knew what
he meant and hurled it at me. She...leaped between. God!”

He ceased again, and McElroy could hear his breathing, see the whitened
knuckles of his hands grasping the poker from the hearth where he had
absently stirred the leaping fire.

“It went quite through her,--a foot beyond her swelling breast, full for
my only child, unborn.... She was Negansahima's daughter.... We mourned
together, the old chief and I, and our hearts were bound close as the
tree and its bark. In a far high hill of the Pays d'en Haut we put her
to sleep with that last look of love on her dark face...and we made a
pact to lie beside her when our time should come, he who out-lived the
other to see the rites of the Death Feast. He has joined her. I saw his
rites. So for this end, reaching far back, I did not return when you
came back to De Seviere, going on with that rabble who dared not harm me
who am to share the Sleep of Chiefs some day....

“So!

“Now for the rest. I know no more of Maren Le Moyne than that first
tragic sight of her, hauled into the light by the brute DesCaut. I only
know that she stood before those savages as fearless as a lioness and
threw again and again, her black head up and sane, her young body under
her own command in every taut cord and muscle, and that again and again
and yet again the flying hatchet landed in its own cleft,--a wonderful
performance!--putting off with coolness and skill the death they would
see her decide, choosing neither man of you.”

“But,” cried McElroy, “it was De Courtenay she came to see,--to
save,--to die with,--she loved him, man!”

“Aye,--maybe. But I know only that that young trapper, Marc Dupre, gave
his life as gallantly as might be to cover our retreat while we, the
Nor'wester and I, slipping among the sleepers, carried you to the river;
that they woke, those devils, before we had cleared the little gorge,
and that M'sieu de Courtenay, brave man and gay cavalier, gave your
knees to this woman who helped me get you to the canoe, himself taking
the only gun and meeting what fate was his in the narrow seam among the
rocks. She had with her men of Mr. Mowbray's brigade, that she had got
somewhere on Winnipeg, and we put you in their waiting canoe. She was
dragged in among the thwarts,--while I--slipped back among the shadows,
circled the camp, and was at my death-watch inside the big tepee when
peering eyes looked in. I saw no more of the dashing Nor'wester, save a
flash of long gold curls at a headman's belt. What fate was meted out to
him was swift and therefore merciful. Peace be to him!

“No more I know, my friend, save that, when I returned to De Seviere, I
found you ill with some fever of the brain.”

“But, Ridgar, for love of Heaven, what of Maren?”

“She had brought you here, and Rette says the women hung off from her
and laughed in corners, whispering and talking, and that her face was
worn and greatly changed, as if with some deep sorrow.”

McElroy turned his head upon the pillow and weak tears smarted under his
lids.

“Me! It was I she saved when it was I who slew her lover! God forgive
me, for I cannot forgive myself!”

“Nay, boy, hush! It is all as God wills. We are but shuttles in the web
of this tangled life.”

“But--tell me,--what does she now? How looks her dear face?”

Ridgar was silent a moment, and McElroy repeated his question, with his
face still turned away:

“Does she pass among them,--the vipers? Does she seem to care for life
at all now?”

“Lad,” said Ridgar gently, “I know not, for she is gone.”

“Gone!”

The pale man on the pillow sprang upright, staring at the other with
open mouth.

“Aye, softly, boy; softly! She has been gone these many weeks; even
while summer was here she gathered her people, outfitted by our men,
all of whom were so glad for your deliverance that they gave readily to
their debt, and took up again her long trail to the Athabasca. Rette, I
believe, has a letter which she left for you.... Would you read it now?”

McElroy nodded dumbly, and Ridgar went out in the night to Rette's cabin
for this last link between the factor and the woman he loved.

When he returned, and McElroy had taken it in his shaking hands, he sat
down and turned his face to the fire.

There was silence while the flames crackled and the chimney roared, and
presently the factor said heavily:

“I cannot! Read...”

So Ridgar, bending in the light, read aloud Maren's letter.

At its end the man on the bed turned his face to the wall and spoke no
more.

From that time forth the tide of returning life in him stopped
sluggishly, as if the locks were set in some ocean-tapping channel.

The bleakness of the cold north winter was in his heart and life was
barren as the eastern meadows.

So passed the days and the weeks, with quip and jest from Ridgar, whose
eyes wore a puzzled expression; with such coddling and coaxing from
Rette as would have spoiled a well man, and, with not the least to be
counted, daily visits to the factory of the little Francette, who defied
the populace and came openly.

With returned consciousness to McElroy, there came back to the little
maid much of her damask beauty. The pretty cheeks bloomed again and she
was like some bright butterfly flitting about the bare room in her red
kirtle.

Sometimes McElroy would smile, watching her play with a young bob-cat,
which some trapper had brought her from the woods, and whose savage
playfulness seemed to be held in leash under her small hands. The
creature would mouth and fawn upon her, taking her cuffs and slaps, and
follow her about like a dog.

Rette tolerated the two with a bad grace, for, since the day when Maren
Le Moyne had stood at the door with her haggard beauty so wistfully sad,
her sympathies had been all with the strange girl of Grand Portage.

Light and flitting, sparkling as an elf, full to the brim of laughter
and light, little Francette was playing the deepest game of her life.

With the cunning of a woman she was trying to woo this man back to the
joy of earth, to wind herself into his heart, and so to fill his hours
with her brightness that he would come to need her always.

So she came by day and day, and now it would be some steaming dainty
cooked at her father's hearth by her own hands, again a branch of the
fir-tree coated with ice and sparkling with a million gems, that she
brought into the dull blankness of the room, and with her there always
came a fresh sweet breath of the winter world without.

McElroy smiled at her pretty conceits, her babbling talk, her gambols,
and her gifts.

“What have you done with Loup, little one?” he asked, one day. “Does he
wait on the steps to growl at this usurper purring at your heels?”

The little maid grew pearly white and looked away at Rette fearfully, as
if at sudden loss, in danger of some betrayal.

“Nay,” she said, “Loup...is an ingrate. He has ceased to care.”

And always after she avoided aught that could excite mention of the dog.

But, in spite of all her effort, McElroy lay week after week in the back
room, looking for hours together into the red heart of the fire, silent,
uncomplaining, in no apparent pain, but shiftless as an Indian in the
matter of life.

The business of the factory was brought to him nightly by Ridgar and
the young clerk Gifford, and he would look over things and make a few
suggestions, dispose of this and that as a matter of course and fall
back into his lethargy.

“What think you, M'sieu?” asked Rette anxiously, of Ridgar. “Is there
naught to stir him from these hours of dulness?”

“I know not, Rette. Would I did! The surgeon says there is nothing
wrong with the man, save lack of desire to live. He has lost the love of
life.”

And so it seemed. Weeks dragged themselves by and months rolled after
them, and still he lay in a great weakness that held his strong limbs as
in a vice.

Winter was roaring itself away with tearing winds, with snow that
fell and drifted against the stockade wall, and fell again, with vast
silences and cold that glazed the surface of the world with ice.

January dragged slowly by, with dances for the young couples in the
cabins at nights, and little Francette, for the first time in her life,
refused to share in the merry-making of which she had always been the
heart and soul.

Instead, she lay awake in the attic of the Moline cabin and cried in her
hands, listening to the whirl of the nights without.

Alone in those long vigils instinct was telling her that she had failed.
Failed utterly!

The young factor cared no more for her than on that night in spring when
he had kissed her and told her to “play in the sunshine and think no
more of him.”

She had played for a man and failed.

Moreover, she had not played fairly, and for her wickedness he lay now
as he had lain so long, drifting slowly but surely toward that land of
shadows whence there is no return.

She clinched her small hands in the darkness and wept, and they were
woman's tears.

Back to her led all the threads of tragedy, of death and danger and
heartbreak, that had so hopelessly tangled themselves in Fort de
Seviere.

But for that one hour at the factory steps what time she lay in
McElroy's arms and saw Maren Le Moyne pause at the corner, all would be
well.

Young Marc, Dupre would be singing his gay French songs with his red cap
tilted on his curls, that handsome Nor'wester of the Saskatchewan would
be going his merry way, loving here and there,--instead of bleaching
their bones in some distant forest, as the whispers said; and, last
of all, this man she loved with all the intensity of her soul would be
brown and strong with life, not the weary wreck of a man who gazed into
the fire and would not get well.

So the long nights took toll of the little Francette and a purpose grew
in her chastened heart, a purpose far too big for it.

At last the purpose blossomed into full maturity, hastened by the dark
shadows that were beginning to spread beneath McElroy's hopeless eyes,
as if the spirit, so little in the body, were already leaving it to its
earthly end, and one day at dusk, trembling and afraid, she went to the
factory for the last time.

“Rette,” she said plaintively, “will you leave me alone with M'sieu the
factor for an hour? Think what you will,” she added fiercely, as she saw
the woman's look; “tell all the populace! I care not! Only give me one
hour! Mon Dieu! A little space to pay the debt of life! Leave me, Rette,
as you hope for Heaven!”

And Rette, wondering and vaguely touched, complied.

McElroy was looking, after his habit, at the leaping flames and his thin
hands played absently and constantly with the covering of the bed, when
the door opened and closed and the little maid stood shrinking against
it.

He did not look up for long, thinking, if his dull mind could form a
thought through his melancholy dreams, that Ridgar had come in.

At last a sigh that was like a gasp pierced his lethargy and he raised
his eyes.

She stood with one small hand over her beating heart and her cheeks
white in the firelight.

“Ah! little one!” he said gently. “Why did you come through such a
night? 'Tis wild as--as--Sit in the big chair,” he added kindly.

But Francette, in whose face was an unbearable anguish, came swiftly and
fell on her knees beside the bed, raising her eyes to his.

“M'sieu!” she cried, with great labouring breaths. “Oh! M'sieu, I have
come to confess! If there is in your good heart pity for one who has
sinned beyond pardon, give it me, I pray, for love of the good God!”
 McElroy stared down at her in wonder.

“Confess? Sinned?” he said. “Why, little one, what can a child like you
know of sin? 'Tis only some blunderer like myself who should speak its
damnable name.”

“Nay, nay! Oh, no! No! No! Not on you is there one lightest touch,
M'sieu, but on me,--me--me--does rest the weight of all!”

Her eyes were wide and full of tears, and McElroy laid a weak hand on
her head.

“Hush, child!” he said, with some of his old sternness, when condemning
wrong; “there is a fever at your brain. You have come too long to this
dull room--”

“No! No! Take away your hand! Touch me not, M'sieu, for I am as dust
beneath your feet! I alone am at bottom of all that has happened in Fort
de Seviere this year past! Through me alone have come death and sorrow
and misunderstanding! I caused it all, M'sieu, because I--loved you! For
love of you and hope to gain your heart I set you apart from that woman
of Grand Portage!”

She buried her face on the covering of the bed and her voice came
muffled and choking.

“That night at the factory steps,--you recall, M'sieu,--she came to
you,--I saw her in the dusk as she turned at the corner, a rod away, saw
her and knew with some touch of deviltry the sudden way of keeping you
from her, your arms from about her, your lips from hers! Oh, that I
could not bear, M'sieu! Not though I died for it! So I threw my own arms
about your throat--you remember, M'sieu--and whispered that for one
kiss I would go and forget. In the gentleness of your heart you kissed
me--and--she saw that kiss. Saw me lying in your arms as if you held
me there from love,--saw and turned away. She made no sound in the soft
dust, and when I loosed your face from my clasp she was gone! So I
broke your faith, M'sieu,--so I dragged forth one by one all the sorry
happenings that have followed that evil night.”

The muffled voice fell silent, save for the sobs that would no longer
be withheld, and there was an awful stillness in the room, broken by a
stick falling on the hearth and the added roar in the chimney.

When Francette raised her weeping eyes she saw McElroy's face above her
like a mask.

Its lips were open as if breath had suddenly been denied them, its
wasted cheeks were blue, and its eyes stared down upon her in horror:

“Oh! O God! Rette!”

She screamed and sprang up, to run back and crouch against the empty
chair beside the hearth.

The figure upon the bed, half-risen, worked its lips and then fell back,
and the little maid raised her voice and screamed again and again in
mortal terror.

It brought Rette running from where she had waited in the trading-room.

She raised him, and her face was red with rage.

“What have you done! You evil cat! What have you done to the man?”

But McElroy's breast had heaved with a great breath, sweet as the wind
over a harvest field to a tired man, and he looked up at Rette with eyes
that seemed to be suddenly flooded with life.

“Done?” he whispered; “done, Rette? The child has given me salvation!”
 And then he held out a shaking, thin hand.

“Come here,” he said softly; “come here.”

Fearful, trembling, tear-stained Francette crept back, and the factor
took both her small hands in a tender clasp:

“I thank you, little one,” he said, “from my heart I thank you,--there
is nothing to forgive. We are all sinners through the only bit of Heaven
we possess,--love. Go, little one, and cease this crying. Know that I
shall sleep this night in a mighty peace. You have given me--life!”



CHAPTER XXX THE LAND OF THE WHISPERING HILLS

Springtime once more kissed all the wilderness into tender green. From
the depths of the forest, lacing its myriad branches in finest fluff of
young leaves, came the old-new sound of birds at the mating, rivers and
tiny streams rushed and tumbled to the lakes, and overhead a sky as
blue and sweet as the eyes of loved rocked its baby clouds in cradles of
fresh winds.

They blew over vast reaches of forest and plain, these winds, wimpling
the new grass with playful fingers, and whispering in the ear of bird
and bee and flower that spring was come once more.

They came from the west, sweeping over sweet high meadows, over rushing
streams, and down from fair plateaus, and their breath was fresh and
cool with promise to one who faced them, eager in his hope, for they
brought the virgin sweetness of the Land of the Whispering Hills. By
streams, clear as crystal, he passed with a swinging stride, this lean
young man in the buckskins of the forest traveller, over meadows soft in
their green carpets, through woodlands whose flecked sunshine quivered
and shook on the young moss beneath, and ever his face was lifted to the
west with undying hope, with calmness of faith, and that great joy which
is humble in its splendour.

Thus he swung forward all through the pleasant hours of that last
day. Before him, raised against the sky, there loomed the magic Hills
themselves, fair to the eye of man, clothed in the green of blowing
grass and girdled about below with the encroaching forest.

At dusk he set foot upon their swelling slopes, and knew himself to be
near the goal of his heart's desire.

Over among them somewhere lay the blue lake. He could already hear the
murmur of its whispering shores, the roar of its circling forests, for
the trees followed on and over through some low defile as if loath to
lose the hills themselves, rising to heaven in virgin smoothness of
cloud-shadowed verdure.

The sun had gone behind them in splendid panoply of fire when he came
down into the sheltered woods, and through them to a wondrous meadow,
beautiful as the fields of Paradise, sloping, to the shore beyond where
waters blue as the sky above sent back the pageantry of light.

Here were the signs of tillage and cultivation, and even now a long dark
strip attested the spring's new work, sending forth on the evening air
the sweet scent of fresh-turned earth.

Beyond, across the field, in the edge of the farther woods, thin blue
smoke curled peacefully up from the pointed tops of some forty native
lodges, while nearer the lake there stood two cabins, one old and solid
with a look of having faced the elements for years, the other staring in
its newness. Indian ponies grazed at the clearing's edge or drank of
the rippling waters on the pebbly beach, and a plough lay in the last
furrow.

The stranger stood in amaze and gazed on the scene before him.

While he looked women came from the cabins and passed blithely about
at evening tasks, and one went to the lake with a vessel for water. He
could see its gleam in the reflection of the gorgeous light.

Thin and high came the sound of a voice singing, the ring of an axe
somewhere in the wood beyond the cabins, and peace ineffable seemed to
lie upon this blessed place. Here truly was Arcadia.

Long he stood in the fringe of the forest and looked eagerly among the
distant figures for one, taller than all the rest, clad in plain dark
garments, whose regal head should catch the dying glow, but strain as he
might, he saw no familiar form, could not detect the free and swinging
step.

Now that the goal of his hope was so near, within the very grasp of his
hand, a strange timidity fell upon him, and he shrank from crossing the
open field.

Rather would he follow the circling wood and come out at the upper end
by the lake, going down along the shore to the cabins.

Keeping well within the trees, giants of the wild nursed in this cradle
of sun and water, he bore to the north and ever his eager eyes peered
between the bolls at the distant habitat.

He had gone but short space when, suddenly, he stopped, drawn up by
sight of what lay in his path.

He had pierced a thicket of hanging vines, too eager to go around, and
come abruptly upon some pagan shrine, some savage Holy of Holies.

And yet not wholly savage, for the signs of the red man and the white
were strangely blended.

In the centre of the open space within the hanging wall of the
vines,--perfect sylvan temple,--there lay a mounded grave, covered from
head to foot with articles he knew at once to be the gifts of Indians
to some great chief gone to the shadowy hunting-grounds. Rich they
were, these gifts, in workmanship and carving, though mean and poor in
quality, showing that great love had attended their giving, though the
givers themselves must be a meagre people.

At the head of the mound towered a gigantic totem pole, carved and
painted with scenes of a most minute history, while at the foot of a
smaller stake, alike carved and coloured, bore, one upon another, twelve
rings of bone, each one of which stood for the circle of a year.

Crossed and shielded with infinite care, in the centre there lay a set
of smith's tools, crudely fashioned and well worn, tongs and a heavy
hammer and a small anvil.

But beyond all this, a thing that held his wondering gaze and brought
the fur cap from his head, there stood an altar, rude as the rest, but
still an altar of God, with a black iron crucifix, whose pale ivory
Christ glimmered in the gathering evening, upright upon it. Before the
crucifix, and at either end, were the burnt-out evidences of tallow
candles, while flanking the holy Symbol there stood two wooden crosses,
their pieces held together by bindings of thread. Before one there lay
a heap of little withered flowers, frail things of the forest and the
spring, and every one was snowy white. Across the other hung a solitary
blossom, first of its kind to open its passionate eyes to the sun, and
it was blood-red, counterpart of that wee star which Alfred de Courtenay
had snatched from the stockade wall one day in another spring.

The earnest blue eyes of the man were very grave, touched with a deep
tenderness.

“Maren!” he whispered reverently; “maid of the splendid heart!”

So deep was he in contemplation of the things before him and his own
holy thoughts that he did not hear a soft sound behind him, the fall of
a light step.

A breath that was half a gasp turned him on his heel.

Leaning through the parted curtain of the hanging vines, one hand at her
throat, the other holding three candles, and her dark eyes wide above
her thinned brown cheeks, she stood herself. At her knee there hung the
heavy head of the great dog, Loup.

She, as she had been when first he looked upon her, yet intangibly
changed, the same yet not the same.

They stood in silence and looked into each other's eyes as if void of
speech, of motion, held by the mighty yearning that must look and look
with insatiable intensity, the half unreal reality of the moment.

And then the stopped breath in the girl's throat caught itself with a
little sound that broke the spell.

The man sprang forward and took her in his arms, not passionately,
strongly, as he had done once before, but with a love so high, so
chastened, so humble that it gentled his touch to reverence.

“I have come, Maren,” he said brokenly; “I have followed you to the land
you sought. Maid of my heart! My soul!”

Without words, without question, she yielded herself to his embrace,
lifted her face to him and gave into his keeping that which was his from
the beginning.

“Mother Mary! I thank Thee!” he heard her whisper, and when he loosed
her to look once more into her level eyes, they were dim with tears.


*****


Night had fallen on the Athabasca when they passed out of the wood
across the field, and they walked together hand in hand.

A great round moon was rising over the eastern forest, silvering the
hills with shining crowns.

Peace brooded on the world.

“And here I found him, M'sieu,” Maren Le Moyne was saying sadly, “in
that low mound, cared for and worshipped by these peaceful beings who
till the land and follow his teachings. They were his people. He taught
them purity and peace, the use of plough and tool, the creed of love and
kindness. Here was his dream of empire, his plan of progress. He of the
Good Heart they called him, these Indians who were his people, and mourn
him as a chief. That was his castle yonder, the older cabin to the east.
Here is the fruit of his labour.” She motioned over the new-ploughed
land.

“Beyond the trees yonder are bigger fields, a wider holding. And yet
they are poor, these people of peace. The tribes despise them and scoff
at their worship...He taught them the prayers,--the rosary. I have
come after him...Who knows? This is my dream also, my fulfilment. Love,
M'sieu,” she raised her face to him, and the deep eyes flickering with
the old elusive light, “Love shall be my crown!”

“Aye,” said Anders McElroy, after the manner of a covenant, “together we
shall work and dream yet greater things, trusting in God,--live and
love and enter into our heritage.... I have left the Company forever.
Together we shall build the empire of your dreams.... Oh, Maid of my
Heart, the Long Trail has ended in the harbour of New Homes!”








End of Project Gutenberg's The Maid of the Whispering Hills, by Vingie E. Roe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAID OF THE WHISPERING HILLS ***

***** This file should be named 5253-0.txt or 5253-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/2/5/5253/

Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
