The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of Calico Clown, by Laura Lee Hope

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Story of Calico Clown

Author: Laura Lee Hope

Posting Date: September 26, 2012 [EBook #5845]
Release Date: June, 2004
First Posted: September 11, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF CALICO CLOWN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.










MAKE BELIEVE STORIES

THE STORY OF A CALICO CLOWN

BY

LAURA LEE HOPE

Author of "The Story of a Sawdust Doll," "The Story
of a Monkey on a Stick," "The Bobbsey Twins
Series," "The Bunny Brown Series," "The
Six Little Bunkers Series," Etc.





CONTENTS


I.    THE GIANT'S SWING

II.   A BROKEN LEG

III.  THE CLOWN'S DANCE

IV.   UP IN A TREE

V.    TAKEN DOWN TOWN

VI.   IN THE OFFICE

VII.  IN THE WASH-BASKET

VIII. DOWN IN A DEEP HOLE

IX. BACK HOME

X. THE TOY PARTY




CHAPTER I

THE GIANT'S SWING


"To-night we shall have a most wonderful time," said the Elephant from
the Noah's Ark to a Double Humped Camel who lived in the stall next to
him.

"What kind of a time?" asked the Camel. He stood on the toy counter of
a big department store, looking across the top of a drum toward a Jack
in the Box who was swaying to and fro on his long spring. "What do you
call a wonderful time, Mr. Elephant?"

"Oh, having fun," replied the big toy animal, slowly swinging his
trunk to and fro. "And to-night the Calico Clown is going to give a
special exhibition."

"Oh, is he?" suddenly asked a funny little Wooden Donkey with a head
that wagged up and down. "Is he going to climb a string again and burn
his red and yellow trousers as he once did?"

"Indeed I am not!" exclaimed the Calico Clown himself. The Clown was
leaning against his friend Mr. Jumping Jack, who was a cousin of Jack
in the Box. "I'm not going to give any special exhibition like that,"
went on the Clown. "I'm just going to do a few funny tricks, such as
standing on my head and banging my cymbals together. And, I am not
sure, but I may ask a riddle."

"Will it be that one about what makes more noise than a pig under a
gate?" inquired a Celluloid Doll. "Well, yes, it will be that riddle,"
replied the Clown, trying to look very stern.

"That's the only riddle he knows," whispered the Elephant.

"What I should like to know," said the Camel, "is why a pig should
want to get under a gate, anyhow. Why didn't he stay in his pen?"

"Oh, there's no use trying to make you understand," sighed the Clown.
"I'll just have to dance around, do a few jigs, bang my cymbals
together, and do things like that to amuse you."

"Well, we'll have a good time to-night, anyhow," said the Celluloid
Doll. "We really haven't had much fun since the Candy Rabbit and the
Monkey on a Stick went away. I wish--"

"Hush!" suddenly called the Calico Clown. "Here come the clerks. The
store will soon be filled with customers."

The toys became very still and quiet. This talk among them had taken
place in the early morning hours, after a night of jolly good times.
But when daylight came, and when clerks and customers filled the
store, the toys were no longer allowed to do as they pleased. They
could not move about or talk as they could on other occasions.

The Calico Clown was a jolly chap, and he seemed to stand out among
all the other toys on the counter. He wore calico trousers of which
one leg was red and the other yellow. He had a calico shirt that was
spotted, speckled and striped in gay colors, and on each of his hands
was a round piece of brass. These pieces of brass were called
"cymbals," and the Calico Clown could bang them together as the
drummer bangs his cymbals in the band.

I say the Calico Clown could bang his cymbals together, and by that I
mean he could do it when no boys or girls or grown folk were looking
at him. This was the rule for all the toys. They could move about and
talk only when no human eyes were looking. As soon as you glanced at
them they became as still and as quiet as potatoes.

But any one who picked up the Calico Clown could make him bang his
cymbals together by pressing on his chest. There was a little spring,
and also a sort of squeaker, such as you have heard in toy bears or
sheep.

Besides being able to clap his cymbals together, the Calico Clown
could also move his arms and legs when you pulled certain strings,
like those on some Jumping Jacks. The Calico Clown was a lively
fellow, as well as being very gaily dressed.

But now all the toys were still and quiet. They sat or stood or were
lying down on the counter, waiting for what would happen next. And
what generally did happen was that some customers came to the store
and bought them.

Already a number of the toys had been sold and taken away. There was
the Sawdust Doll. She was the first to go. Then the White Rocking
Horse had been bought for a boy named Dick, a brother of Dorothy, who
now owned the Sawdust Doll. The Lamb on Wheels had been purchased by a
jolly sailor, and when the Lamb saw him she feared she would be taken
on an ocean trip and made seasick. But the sailor gave the Lamb to a
little girl named Mirabell. And, in the course of time, her brother
Arnold was given a Bold Tin Soldier and some soldier men.

The Candy Rabbit--about whom I have told you in a book, as I have told
you of these other toys--the Candy Rabbit was given as an Easter
present to a little girl named Madeline, and her brother Herbert had,
later, been given the Monkey on a Stick.

The Calico Clown was looking over at the Celluloid Doll, thinking how
pretty she was, and he was also thinking of the Sawdust Doll, whom he
had liked very much, when, all of a sudden, it seemed as if a
whirlwind had blown into the toy department.

A boy with a very loud voice and feet that tramped and stamped on the
floor rushed up to the counter.

"I want a toy! I want something to play with!" cried this boy. "I want
a Jumping Jack and I want a Noah's Ark! You said you'd get me
something if I let the dentist pull that tooth, and now you've got to!
I want a lot of toys!" he cried to the lady who was with him.

"Yes, Archibald. But please be quiet!" begged his mother. "I will get
you a toy. Which one do you want?"

"I want this Elephant!" cried the boy who, I am afraid, was rather
rude. He caught the Elephant up by his trunk, and twisted the poor
animal around.

"Goodness me, sakes alive! I'm getting dizzy," thought the Elephant.
"I hope this boy is not to be my master!"

And this, it would seem, was not going to happen. Suddenly the boy
dropped the Elephant.

"I don't want this toy! He can't do anything!" the boy shouted. "I
want something that jiggles and joggles and does things! Oh, I want
this one!" and, as true as I'm telling you, that boy caught up the
Calico Clown.

"Well, I guess this is the last of me!" thought the Calico Clown. "I
will not last very long in the hands of this rude chap."

The boy had grabbed up the Calico Clown and had thrown the Elephant
down so hard that the Celluloid Doll was knocked over.

"Be careful, little boy, if you please," gently said the girl clerk.

"Oh, I've got to have this Clown!" went on the rude boy. "I don't care
for other toys. Does this fellow do anything?" he asked of the clerk,
while his mother looked on, hardly knowing what to say. Archibald had
just been to the dentist's to have a tooth pulled, so perhaps we
should forgive him for being a little rough.

"The Clown plays his cymbals when you touch him here," and the clerk
pointed to the spring hidden in the chest of the gay fellow, under his
speckled, striped and spotted calico jacket.

"Oh, I'll touch him all right! I'll punch him!" cried the boy, and he
jabbed the Calico Clown so hard in the chest that the cymbals rattled
together like marbles in a boy's pocket.

"He's dandy! I want him!" cried the boy. "What else does he do?" he
asked.

"He moves his arms and legs when you pull these strings," was the
answer, and the clerk showed the boy how to do it.

"Oh, he's a jolly toy!" cried Archibald. "I'll have some fun with him
when I show him to the other fellows. Hi! Look at him jig!" and he
pulled the strings so fast that it seemed as if the poor Clown would
turn somersaults.

"I can see what will happen to me," thought the Clown. "I shall come
to pieces in about a week, and be thrown in the ash can. Why can't he
be nice and quiet?"

But Archibald was not that kind of boy. He seemed to want to make a
noise or do something all the while. Most of his toys at home were
broken, and that is why his mother had to promise to get him another
before he would let her take him to the dentist's to have an aching
tooth pulled.

"I want this Clown!" cried Archibald, making the cymbals bang together
again and again.

"Very well, you may have it," his mother replied.

"I'll wrap it up for you," said the clerk, and the poor Clown was
quickly smothered in a wrapping of paper around which a string was
tied.

"Here is your toy, Archibald," said his mother, when the plaything
came back ready to be taken out of the store. The mother had taken it
from the clerk, and now she handed it to her little boy.

And so he carried the Calico Clown away, without giving the poor,
jolly fellow a chance to say good-bye to the Elephant, the Camel or
the Celluloid Doll.

"Now our good time for to-night is spoiled," sadly thought the
Elephant. "Our jolly comrade is gone!"

All the way home in the automobile Archibald kept punching the red and
yellow Clown in the chest and banging the cymbals together until the
boy's mother said:

"Oh, Archibald, please be quiet! My head aches!"

"All right, I'll make my Clown jiggle!" said the boy, who really loved
his mother, though sometimes he was rude.

Then he pulled the strings until the poor Clown thought his arms and
legs would come off, so fast were they jerked about.

When Archibald reached home with his new toy he ran out into the
street to find some of his playmates. He saw a boy named Pete and
another named Sam.

"Look what I've got!" cried Archibald.

"A Jumping Jack!" exclaimed Sam.

"It's a Calico Clown, and he can do everything," said Archibald. "He's
like one in a circus, and he can do funny tricks. He can jiggle his
arms and legs and play the cymbals. I'll show you!"

He worked the Clown so fast that the red and yellow chap grew dizzy
again.

"That's fine!" said Sam. "I wish I had a Clown like that."

"Can he do the giant's swing?" asked Pete.

"What's the giant's swing?" Archibald wanted to know.

"It's something the men do in a circus," was the answer. "Here, I have
some string in my pocket. We'll make a trapeze in your back yard and
we'll have the Calico Clown do the giant's swing."

"Oh, that'll be fun!" cried Archibald.

"Yes, it may be fun for you," thought the Calico Clown, "but what
about me? What is the giant's swing, anyhow? Oh, I wish I were back on
the toy counter!"




CHAPTER II

A BROKEN LEG


Sam and Pete hurried with Archibald to his back yard. Archibald
carried the red and yellow Calico Clown in his hands. Now and then the
boy would punch the gay fellow in the chest, making the cymbals clang
together with a bang. Again Archibald would pull the strings, causing
the Calico Clown to jiggle his arms and legs.

"You're a nice toy, all right," said Archibald. "I like my Clown!"

"But wait until I make him do the giant's swing!" exclaimed Pete.
"That will be worth seeing!"

When the boys reached a tree in Archibald's yard, Pete found a piece
of broken broom handle for the bar of the trapeze. From his pocket he
took some strong pieces of string. With these the broomstick was tied
to the limb of a tree, so that it hung down and swung to and fro like
a swing.

"Now well put the Clown on," Pete called to Archibald, when the
trapeze was finished.

"How are you going to make him stay on?" asked Sam.

"Oh, I can tie him on with another piece of string," Pete answered.

"That's easy!" yelled Archibald.

It did not take Pete long to tie the Calico Clown on the swinging
trapeze. It was quite high from the ground, and as the little toy man
looked down and saw how far below him the green grass was, his knees
seemed to shake and his cymbals to tremble.

"Oh, if I should fall now I would be broken to pieces!" said the
Calico Clown to himself, for of course he dared not speak aloud now,
and he dared not move by himself. "This is much higher than when I
climbed the string in the toy store and caught fire at the gas jet.
This is much higher than I ever was up before," sighed the Clown.

"Is he ready to do the giant's swing now?" asked Sam.

"In a minute," answered Pete.

Once the Clown was tied on, Pete began to swing the trapeze to and
fro. Farther and farther swung the Calico Clown, and, as he moved to
and fro, his cymbals clanged together. His arms and legs also jiggled
and jumped, as they had done when Archibald pulled the strings.

Pete stood behind the trapeze and gave it little pushes with his hands
every now and then. This made it swing farther and farther.

"Oh, it almost turned all the way over!" suddenly cried Archibald.

"That's what I want it to do," said Pete. "When the trapeze goes all
the way over and around and around, that's the giant's swing I was
telling you about. Watch!"

Archibald and Sam watched, and in another moment the trapeze swung up
and over so hard that it turned around and around in a regular circle.

"Hurray! There she goes!" cried Pete.

"Oh, look!" exclaimed Sam.

"Say, that's great!" yelled Archibald. "I didn't know my Calico Clown
could do that!"

As for the Calico Clown himself, he did not know it either, and he
felt very bad that he was made to do the giant's swing.

"Oh, how dizzy it makes me feel!" he said to himself. "I know I'm
going to fall!"

He could feel the strings that tied him to the broomstick bar
beginning to loosen. The Calico Clown shut his eyes, thinking that if
he did not see the green grass whirling around beneath him he would
not feel so dizzy. Around and around he went in the giant's swing.

And then, all of a sudden, something broke. It was the string holding
the Calico Clown to the broomstick. And when the string broke off flew
the Clown!

He flew off just when the trapeze was at the highest point, and away
through the air sailed the red and yellow toy, as if he had been shot
from a cannon.

"Oh, look at that!" cried Archibald, "Now you've gone and done it,
Pete!"

"He busted loose!" shouted Sam.

"If he falls and breaks, you've got to get me another," cried
Archibald.

"I'm going to fall, all right," thought the poor Clown to himself,
"and I shouldn't be a bit surprised if I broke into bits!"

One can not go sailing through the air forever, even if one is a
Calico Clown. And, after being flung off the trapeze and shooting
along high above the green grass, the Calico Clown felt himself
falling down.

Once more he shut his eyes, as he could do this without the boys
seeing him. His arms and legs jiggled and joggled about, and his
cymbals clanged with a tinkling sound.

"Oh, dear!" sighed the Calico Clown.

There came a soft, dull thud on the grass. That was the Calico Clown
falling down. He felt a sudden, sharp pain go through him, and then he
seemed to faint away.

For a time the Calico Clown knew nothing of what happened. Archibald,
Sam and Pete ran over to where the toy had fallen. Archibald was the
first to pick it up. The cymbals were still fast to the Clown's hands,
and so were the jiggling strings attached to his arms and legs. But
something was wrong.

"Oh, one of his legs is broken!" cried Archibald. "My Calico Clown is
spoiled! Pete, you've broken one of his legs!"

And that was what had happened. In his fall from the trapeze the poor
red and yellow toy had cracked one of his wooden legs. It was the one
on which he wore the red half of his trousers.

"I--I didn't mean to do that," said Pete.

"Well, you did it; and now you have to get me another toy!" exclaimed
Archibald. "If you don't I'll tell my mother on you."

"Oh, Arch!" exclaimed Sam.

"Oh, all right. I'll get you another," said Pete quickly. "You can
come over to my house now, and I'll give you anything I have in place
of your Calico Clown. I didn't think his leg would break so easily."

The three boys, with Archibald carrying the poor, broken-legged Clown,
hurried out of the yard. As they were going to Pete's house they met a
boy named Sidney, who was a brother of Herbert and Madeline. Madeline
owned the Candy Rabbit, and Herbert had a Monkey on a Stick--both of
them toys that had once lived in the same store with the Calico Clown.

"What have you?" asked Sidney of Archibald.

"A Calico Clown," was the answer. "He was new a little while ago, but
Pete put him on a trapeze and made him do the giant's swing and now
he's done for--he's got a broken leg."

"What are you going to do with him?" asked Sidney.

"He's going to make me give him one of my toys in place of the Clown,"
answered Pete. "Of course it was my fault he broke--I guess I didn't
tie him on tight enough. And I'm willing to give Archie another toy
for him, but--"

Sidney suddenly thrust his hand into his pocket and pulled out a gaily
painted top that hummed and made music when you spun it.

"I'll trade you that for your Calico Clown," said Sidney to Archibald.

"But the Clown has a broken leg," explained Pete.

"I don't care. Maybe I can mend it," Sidney answered. "Once I fixed a
Jumping Jack that had lost his head."

"Well, if you did that, you can fix a Clown that has only a broken
leg," said Sam. "Go on and trade with him, Archie."

"All right, I will," decided Archibald. He held out the broken Clown
and in trade took the musical top.

"Now I don't have to give you any of my toys, do I, Archie?" asked
Pete.

"Nope," Archibald answered. "I'd rather have this top than a broken
Calico Clown."

While he was being traded for the top the Calico Clown came out of his
faint. His broken leg did not hurt so much now. He felt more like
himself.

"Oh, ho!" he thought. "I am to have a new master, it seems. Well, I
hope it will not be one who makes me do the giant's swing. Once is
enough for that!"

Archibald went off with Sam and Pete to try the musical top. Sidney
carried the Calico Clown toward the house where Madeline and Herbert
lived.

"I'll fix you as good as new," said Sidney, looking at the dangling,
broken leg.

And, as Sidney walked along, all of a sudden he heard his sister
calling.

"Oh, quick, somebody! Somebody come quick! He's fallen into the
water!"




CHAPTER III

THE CLOWN'S DANCE


Sidney stuffed the Calico Clown into his pocket and ran as fast as he
could toward his sister. He saw her standing near a little fountain in
the side yard of their home.

"What's the matter, Madeline?" asked Sidney, making sure the Calico
Clown was not falling out of his pocket as he ran along.

"Oh, he's in the water!" said the little girl.

"Who is?" her brother wanted to know. "Who's in?"

"My Candy Rabbit. I set him on the edge of the fountain so he could
watch the birds having a bath, and he fell right in."

Sidney looked toward the fountain. He saw nothing of the Candy Rabbit.

"You can't see him 'cause he's over the edge, down inside," went on
Madeline. "I can't reach and get him, or I'd fish him out myself. And
if he stays there very long he'll melt, as he almost did once when he
fell into the bathtub. Oh, please get him out for me."

"I will!" promised Sidney.

"Oh, is it possible I am to see my dear old friend, the Candy Rabbit,
again?" thought the Calico Clown, who, though stuffed into Sidney's
pocket, had heard all that was said. The toys could hear and
understand talk at all times, except when they were asleep. The broken
leg of the gay red and yellow chap did not hurt him very much just
now. "I shall certainly be glad to see the Candy Rabbit again," the
Clown thought. "And Sidney had better hurry and get him out of the
water, or he surely will melt, and that would be dreadful."

The fountain in the yard of the house where Herbert, Madeline and
Sidney lived was rather a high one. The little girl could just reach
up to the rim of the basin to set her Rabbit there, but, once he had
toppled over and was down inside, she could neither see nor reach him.

"You'll have to stand on something or you can't get him," Madeline
said to Sidney. "Shall I get you a box?"

"No, I'll stand on my tiptoes," he answered. And he did, thus making
himself tall enough to reach over into the water and fish out the
Candy Rabbit.

Out that sweet fellow came, dripping wet, but not much harmed.

"Oh, he didn't melt, did he?" asked Madeline. "I'm so glad!"

"He hasn't melted yet," answered Sidney, as he handed the Easter toy
to his sister. "But you'd better put him in the sun to dry, or he may
crumble away."

"I will," Madeline promised.

As Sidney turned to walk away, the Calico Clown fell out of his
pocket.

"What's that? Where'd you get him?" cried Madeline. At the same time
the Candy Rabbit saw the gay red and yellow chap from the toy store.

"Oh, there's my dear old Clown friend!" thought the Rabbit, all wet as
he was. "How in the wide world did he get here?"

But of course he could not ask, any more than the Calico Clown could
answer.

And when the Clown, lying on the grass where he had fallen from
Sidney's pocket, saw the Candy Rabbit, the Clown said to himself:

"Yes, there he is! The same one I knew before. Oh, if we could only
get together by ourselves and talk! How much we could say!"

Sidney picked the Calico Clown up off the grass.

"Where did you get him?" asked Madeline again. "He's awfully cute. I
saw one like that in the store where Aunt Emma got my Candy Rabbit."

"Maybe this is the same one," Sidney answered. "I traded off my
musical top to Archibald for the Clown. His leg is broken."

"Whose--Archibald's?" asked Madeline, in surprise.

"No, the Clown's," answered Sidney, with a laugh. "I'm going to fix
it. Course a Calico Clown is worth more than a musical top, for the
Clown is new and my top was old. But a Clown with a broken leg isn't
worth so much."

"Is it worth anything?" asked Madeline. "I mean can you fix him?"

"Oh, yes," her brother answered. "He can still bang his cymbals, and
he can jiggle both his arms and the leg that isn't broken."

Sidney punched the Clown in the chest, and the red and yellow fellow
clapped his hands together and made the cymbals tinkle. Then Sidney
pulled the strings and the two arms of the Clown went up and down, and
one leg kicked out as nicely as you please. But the other leg did not
move.

"That's the leg that's broken," Sidney explained. "He got broken when
Pete made him do the giant's swing."

"He looks as though he was trying to dance on one leg!" laughed
Madeline. "He's awfully cute, but he's funny!"

"I'll soon fix him, and he'll be as good as ever," declared her
brother. "You'd better go and put your Rabbit in the sun to dry."

So Madeline did this, and very glad the sweet chap was to feel the
warm sun on his back, for he had been made quite drippy and sticky by
having fallen into the fountain.

Sidney, as I have told you, was a boy who could mend things. Once he
had fixed Herbert's toy boat that was broken, and, another time, he
had glued a head back on Madeline's Celluloid Doll.

"And I think I can glue my Clown's broken leg," thought Sidney, as he
went toward the kitchen. There, he remembered, the cook always kept a
tube of sticky glue.

"What are you going to mend now?" asked the cook.

"A broken leg," Sidney answered.

"Oh, you can't mend a broken leg with glue!" cried the cook. "You had
much better call in the doctor. Whose leg is it?"

"I'm going to be the toy doctor," the little boy went on. "It's the
wooden leg of a Calico Clown I'm going to mend."

"Oh, that's different," said the cook. "Well, here's the glue."

She handed Sidney the tube. He took it and his Clown over to a table.
Pushing up the red trouser Sidney saw where the Clown's leg was
broken. The wood was cracked and splintered, but the two pieces were
there.

"I'll just glue them together," said the boy. And this he did. Then,
as he knew that glue must set, or get hard, he put his Calico Clown
away on a shelf in a closet, where the toy chap saw something that
made him wonder.

At first, in the darkness, the Clown could not make out what or who it
was on the shelf in the closet with him. Then, as his eyes became
accustomed to the gloom, he noticed that it was a Cat.

"Oh, are you a toy, too?" asked the Calico Clown politely, for he
wanted company and some one to talk to.

"No, I am not exactly a toy," answered the Cat.

"You look like one," the Clown said. "There was one just like you in
our store, only that cat's head wobbled."

"Well, my head doesn't wobble--it comes off," said the Cat.

"Your head comes off!" cried the Clown in great surprise. "I should
think that would hurt!"

"No, it's made to do that," the Cat explained. "You see I'm a match
safe, and I also have a place inside me where burned matches may be
put. To put them in me you have to lift off my head. It doesn't hurt
at all--I'm used to it."

"Oh, that's different," said the Calico Clown. "Well, I am very glad
to meet you. Do you know the Candy Rabbit?"

The Cat said she did, and very well, too.

"He sleeps here on the closet shelf with me every night," she added.
"You'll see him, pretty soon!"

"I shall be very glad to," remarked the Clown. "Excuse me for not
sitting up as I talk," he said, for Sidney had laid him down flat on
his back. "The truth of the matter," went on the Clown, "is that my
leg was broken a while ago, and the boy just glued it together."

"Oh, I'm so sorry!" mewed the Match-Safe Cat.

"I'm not--I'm glad," said the Clown. "If it wasn't glued I'd be a
slimpsy lopsy sort of chap."

"Oh, I didn't mean I was sorry your leg was GLUED, I meant that I was
sorry it was BROKEN," went on the Cat. "Now let's tell each other our
adventures."

So they did, talking until late in the evening when, suddenly, the
closet door was opened by Madeline. Of course, then the Cat and the
Calico Clown had to be very still and quiet.

"There, I guess you'll be best in the closet for the rest of the
night," said Madeline to her Candy Rabbit Easter toy. "You'll be all
dry in the morning, I hope," and she thrust the Rabbit back on the
shelf and shut the door.

"Oh, my dear Calico Clown friend!" cried the Candy Rabbit, as soon as
it was safe for the toys to speak, "how glad I am to see you again."

"And I am glad to see you," said the Clown. "I rather like it here
with the Cat."

"But why are you lying flat on your back?" asked the Candy Rabbit.
"You used to be such a lively, jolly fellow. Come, get up and give us
one of your old-time jigs or dances."

"I'm very sorry, but I can't," answered the Clown. Then he told about
his glued, broken leg, and how he would have to lie very stiff and
straight and keep quiet.

"But maybe, toward morning, I'll be well again, and then I can dance
for you," he promised.

"I hope so," mewed the Cat. "I have never seen a Calico Clown do a
dance."

"You should see him--he is quite wonderful," whispered the Candy
Rabbit behind his paw.

"Well, if I can't dance for you, I can ask a riddle," said the Clown,
after a bit. "What makes more noise than a pig under--"

"Oh, PLEASE don't start that over again," begged the Candy Rabbit.
"You used to ask it in the store, and none of us could think of the
answer. Don't tell riddles! Let's just talk!"

So the toys talked together and told one another their different
adventures. The night passed. Madeline, Herbert and Sidney slept, and
Sidney dreamed of the fun he would have with his Calico Clown when the
broken leg was firmly glued together again.

And as the night passed the glue dried and set, and the Clown, feeling
his leg growing better, grew happier.

"I say!" he called out just before morning to the Rabbit and the Cat.
"Are you asleep?"

"I was, but I am awake now," the sugar Bunny answered.

"And I am awake too," added the Cat.

"Then I will dance for you," went on the Clown. "My leg is better."

He stood up and he cut such funny antics by clapping his cymbals
together, standing first on one leg and then on the other, jiggling
his hands and feet, that the Cat went into mews of laughter and the
Rabbit chuckled until his pink nose seemed to wrinkle all up like an
accordion.




CHAPTER IV

UP IN A TREE


Faster and faster danced the Calico Clown. No one needed to pull his
strings now, for he could dance by himself, no eyes of children or
grown folk being in the closet to watch him.

Up and down, first to this side and then to the other, now on his left
foot and now on his right, tapping his cymbals softly together, and
wagging his head, the Calico Clown amused the Match-Safe Cat and the
sugar Bunny in the closet.

"Oh, don't dance any more! Please stop!" begged the Candy Rabbit,
holding one paw to his side.

"Don't you like it?" asked the Calico Clown, rather surprised.

"Oh, yes!" was the answer. "But your dance is so funny that it makes
me laugh so hard that my ears ache! Do please stop!"

"Yes, please do," begged the Cat. "If you don't, I'm afraid I'll laugh
so hard my head may come off and roll to the floor."

"Oh, I wouldn't want THAT to happen!" exclaimed the Clown, as he
brought his queer, jerky dance to an end. "If you'd rather, I could
tell a riddle."

"Not the one about what makes more noise than a pig under a gate!"
exclaimed the Candy Rabbit. "Don't ask that one!"

"Well, it's the only one I know," said the Clown. "I'll try to think
of another. But, anyhow, I'll stop my dancing. However, I'm glad for
one reason that I did it. It shows that my broken leg is almost as
good as the other. A bit stiff, perhaps, but almost as good."

"Yes, you danced as well as I ever saw you jig back in the toy store,"
said the Rabbit. "You have made the night pass very pleasantly for
us."

"You have indeed," added the Cat. "We appreciate your dancing and your
fun very much."

"Thank you, both," replied the Calico Clown. "It is a pleasure to do
things for fellows such as you."

Then they rested quietly.

A little later Sidney opened the door of the closet to see if his
Calico Clown was all right. There lay the yellow and red chap on his
back, with one leg stuck straight up in the air, as if he had just
kicked a football and then had fallen down.

"Why! Why!" exclaimed Sidney in surprise. "I didn't leave my Clown
like THAT!"

"What has happened to him?" asked Madeline, who came to see if her
Candy Rabbit was dry.

"He has one leg stuck up in the air," went on her brother. "I left him
lying flat on his back, so the broken leg I mended would get good and
hard and stiff again. Now look at him!"

"It IS funny," agreed Madeline. "Didn't you move him?"

"I didn't touch him, and I don't believe anybody has come to this
closet since I put him here, except you. Wouldn't it be funny,
Madeline, if the Clown got up by himself to see if he could walk on
his glued leg?"

"Yes, it would be very funny," agreed the little girl. "But maybe my
Rabbit helped him, or this Match-Safe Cat. Maybe they moved the
Clown!"

"How could they?" Sidney wanted to know.

"They couldn't, unless they came to life," went on Madeline in a
whisper. "And sometimes," she went on, looking around to make sure no
one else heard her, "sometimes I think that our toys CAN do things by
themselves when we can't see them."

"Oh, ho! Course they can't do anything!" laughed Sidney.

But if he could have seen the Calico Clown dancing on the closet
shelf, and if he could have heard the Cat and the Candy Rabbit
laughing until one's head nearly came off and the other had pains in
his ears, then Sidney would have thought differently, wouldn't he?

"Well, anyhow, I'm going to take my Calico Clown out and see how he
jumps around this morning," said Sidney, after a while.

Sidney found that the Calico Clown was almost as good an acrobat, or
jumper, as ever. When punched in the chest, the Clown would bang his
cymbals together. And when the strings were pulled, out shot the arms
and legs like those of a Jumping Jack, only in different fashion.

The red and yellow trousers of the Clown had not been soiled by his
giant's swing accident, and Sidney had been careful not to get any
spots of glue on his toy when he mended him.

"The only thing wrong is that the broken leg is a little stiffer than
the other," Sidney said, as he made his Clown do all sorts of funny
tricks. "I suppose that leg is a little shorter, or maybe the glue
made it stiff. But he is just what I want, and I'd rather have him
than the musical top I traded for him. Maybe Herbert and I can get up
a little circus, as Herbert once had a show with his Monkey on a
Stick. A clown belongs in a circus, and so do monkeys. Maybe we'll
have one."

The Calico Clown, who heard Sidney say this, thought it would be very
jolly to be in a circus.

Sidney certainly liked the Calico Clown. He made him do many funny
tricks for the boys and girls--Dick, Dorothy, Mirabell, Arnold, and
for Madeline and Herbert, who were Sidney's brother and sister.

"With my Monkey on a Stick and your Calico Clown we surely can have a
fine circus some day," said Herbert, as he and Sidney were playing out
on the porch one warm, summer day.

The Monkey and Clown had been glad to see each other when they met
again after having been separated at the store. Each one had different
adventures to tell.

All of a sudden, as Herbert and Sidney, with their Monkey and Clown
toys, were making each other laugh by the funny antics of the two
playthings, a voice called:

"Boys, do you want some bread and jam?"

"Oh, I should say we did!" cried Herbert.

"We're coming," answered Sidney, for it was the jolly, good-natured
cook who had called to them from her kitchen where she had just made
some fresh raspberry jam.

Leaving the Monkey and the Clown on the porch, the boys ran around to
the side door for their jam and bread.

"Now we have a chance to talk," said the Monkey to the Clown.

"Yes, but it will not be for very long," was the answer. "Those boys
will soon be back here. They'll not eat forever. I was just wondering--"

"What?" asked the Monkey, for the Calico Clown suddenly stopped
speaking and looked down the street. "What were you wondering?"

"Well, just NOW I am wondering if that is your brother," went on the
Clown, pointing toward the gate with one hand on which was fastened a
clanging cymbal. "Look, here comes a chap who looks just like you,
except that he has no stick, and his cap is blue, while yours is red.
And hark! I hear music!"

"Oh, it's a hand organ, and that's a real, live monkey you see!"
exclaimed the Monkey on a Stick. "It is true he looks like me, but we
are no relation. He is a live monkey and I am a toy."

"Here he comes now!" cried the Calico Clown, and, as he spoke, the
hand-organ man, making music, came along, and the live monkey ran into
the yard and up on the steps. And then a dreadful thing happened!

For the live monkey quickly caught up the Calico Clown, and, holding
the red and yellow chap in his hands, the long-tailed creature climbed
up into a tree. Yes, indeed, as true as I'm telling you, the live
monkey carried the Calico Clown up into a tree!




CHAPTER V

TAKEN DOWN TOWN


The Calico Clown was so surprised at the quick action of the monkey in
catching him by one leg and carrying him up into the tree, that, for a
moment or two, the toy said nothing. But as the hand-organ monkey
climbed higher and higher the Clown finally cried:

"Here! Hold on if you please! What are you going to do?"

"Oh, just have some fun!" answered the monkey in a laughing voice. You
see, he could understand and speak toy talk, just as the Calico Clown
knew how to talk and understand animal language.

[Illustration with caption: Calico Clown Amuses the Monkey.]

"Well, it may be fun for you," went on the Clown, "but I don't like
it! This is no fun for me! Ouch! Look out for my leg!" the Clown
suddenly cried, as the monkey banged him against a branch of the tree.

"What about your leg?" asked the monkey, sitting down on a branch and
winding his tail around it so he wouldn't fall off. "I don't see
anything the matter."

"I mean look out and don't hurt my broken leg," went on the Clown.
"Sidney, the little boy who owns me, glued it, but if you bang it too
hard it may break all over again and then I'll be in a mighty bad
fix."

"Oh, excuse me. I'll be careful," said the monkey.

"Well, I wish you'd take me down out of this tree," begged the Calico
Clown. "I don't see why you brought me up here, anyhow."

"Oh, I just grabbed hold of you and brought you up here for fun," said
the monkey. "I felt like playing. And I had to do it quickly, or my
master would have stopped me. Every time I grab up anything he doesn't
want me to take, I have to climb a tree. He can't chase me up there,
though he'd like to lots of times, I guess."

"I thought hand-organ monkeys had collars around their necks, and a
long rope fast to that which their masters held," said the Clown.

"Well, I had that, too, but I took the rope off a little while ago, so
I could run loose," explained the live monkey. "I want to have some
fun. Can you do anything to amuse me?" and he looked at the cymbals on
the Calico Clown's hands and at the strings which were fast to his
legs and arms.

"I can ask you a riddle about what makes more noise than a pig under a
gate," said the Clown. "Shall I?"

"Please don't do that," begged the monkey. "I never was any good at
guessing riddles. Can't you do anything else?"

"Yes, a few things," the Clown said. Then he banged his cymbals
together and began to jiggle his arms and legs in such a funny way
that the monkey who was holding him laughed and laughed and laughed.

"Oh, you are too funny for anything!" cried the monkey. "I'm glad I
picked you up. Oh, excuse me while I laugh a little harder!"

The monkey set the Clown down astraddle the limb of a tree near the
trunk, and quite a distance up from the ground. Then the monkey
laughed so hard that, if he had not been holding on by his tail, he
surely would have fallen. For the Clown kept on doing his funny antics
and tricks, and the monkey kept on laughing until he had to hold his
sides with feet and hands, they ached so.

"Oh, I'm so glad I met you!" said the monkey, when he had a chance
between his fits of laughter. "I hope my master comes through this
street every day with his hand organ. I'll be looking for you."

"And I'll be looking for you--to keep out of your way, if I can,"
thought the Clown, though he did not say it out loud.

The monkey finally grew a little quiet, and he was just going to ask
the Clown to do some more jiggling when, all at once, the music of the
hand organ stopped, and the Italian man cried:

"Ah, Jacko! I see you! Up-a in de tree. Bad monk! Come down right away
to your Tony! Come, Jacko!"

"Oh, goodness me! I've got to go. My fun is over! Now I've got to go
to work gathering pennies in my cap!" said the monkey. "Good-bye!" he
called to the Calico Clown, and down out of the tree the monkey began
to climb, swinging from limb to limb by his tail, as he used to do in
the cocoanut groves of the forest where he had once lived.

"Here! Come back and get me! Don't leave me up in a tree like this!"
begged the Calico Clown, who had sat down astride the limb after he
had done his last funny trick. "Come and get me!"

"Sorry, but I haven't time! My master is calling me! I must go!"
answered the monkey, hurrying more than ever. Down the tree he swung.

"Oh take me down! Don't leave me like this!" begged the Clown. But it
was of no use. There he was, left all alone, high up in a tree,
sitting on a branch.

Of course neither Tony, the music man, nor Sidney nor Herbert had
heard this talk between the toy and the animal, for they spoke in a
language that only a few can understand. The organ grinder was anxious
for his monkey to come back, and he watched him scrambling down the
tree. The two boys, who had gone to get bread and jam, came back to
the front yard. They saw the organ grinder and his monkey, and, for
the moment, they forgot all about their Clown and the Monkey on a
Stick. They did not look toward the porch, or they would have noticed
that the Clown was gone, though the toy Monkey was still there. The
live monkey was dancing toward the boys, holding out his cap for
pennies.

And the Calico Clown was up in the tree, not knowing how in the world
he was ever going to get down.

"Oh, look at the monkey!" cried Herbert, as he saw the music man's
long-tailed animal.

"He's nice," said Sidney. "He's like your Monkey on a Stick, only
bigger, Herb. I'm going in and ask mother for a penny."

"So'm I!" said Herbert.

Still thinking that their own toys were safe on the porch, the little
boys ran back into the house, where each one got a penny for the
hand-organ monkey. And the monkey took off his blue cap to gather the
pennies for his master.

"Good boys!" said the Italian with a smile, and he played another tune
for them. And then it was time for him to travel on.

"Come along, Jacko!" he called to his monkey, and then he fastened the
rope back on his monkey's collar and made him jump up on the organ.
Then the two of them went down the street.

"Oh, there he goes!" thought the poor Calico Clown, still up in the
tree. "Oh, he's going to leave me here! Oh, what shall I do?"

Well might he ask that. What could he do? How was he going to get
down?

Herbert and Sidney, standing at the gate, saw the music man turn
around the corner of the street.

"Now we'll go back and play with my Monkey and your Clown," said
Herbert. "We'll practice for the circus we're going to have."

"That'll be fun!" laughed Sidney.

But when the two boys went back to the porch--well, you know, as well
as I, what happened. They saw the Monkey on a Stick, but no Clown!

"Why--why, where is he?" asked Sidney, looking around. "Did you take
him, Herb? Did you take my Calico Clown?"

"No, of course not," answered Herbert. "They were both here when we
went to get our bread and jam. Oh, Sid! I know what happened!" he
suddenly exclaimed.

"What?" asked his brother.

"The hand-organ monkey took your Clown away with him!" went on
Herbert.

At first Sidney thought that this might be so, but, after thinking
over the matter for a moment, he shook his head and answered:

"No, the live monkey didn't take my Clown. Don't you remember? He came
up here with his cap in his hand to get our pennies. Then, when he
went away, he was sitting on top of the organ and he had his cap off
and so did the music man, and they didn't either of them have my
Clown."

"Yes, I guess that's right," Herbert said. "But he's gone."

"We've got to find my Clown," said Sidney. "I want him back, and we
can't have a circus without him. We've GOT to find him."

"Yes, we have," agreed Herbert. "Maybe Carlo, the dog, came and
carried him away."

"Maybe," said Sidney. They blamed lots of things on poor Carlo, and
sometimes he did do tricks. But this was not one of those times. So
the two boys began searching for the Calico Clown.

As for that jolly chap himself he was still up in the tree. And he was
not so very jolly just then, either. He did not once think of asking
his pig riddle.

"I wonder if I can wiggle down?" he asked himself. "There is no one to
see me now, and I can move about. I'm going to try to get down."

He wiggled and he woggled, whatever that is, and managed to get one
leg over the limb, so both were on the same side. The Clown was just
going to try to swing to the next lowest branch, as he had seen the
live monkey do, when, all of a sudden, he slipped and fell.

"Oh, dear! Another accident! This is going to be a bad one--worse than
the giant's swing!" he cried.

Down, down, down, he fell. What was going to happen?

Now, just about this time, it chanced that a man was passing under the
tree. This man had on a large, loose coat with large pockets on the
sides, and he was so used to carrying things in his pockets that each
nearly always stood wide open, like a hungry mouth, waiting for some
one to fill it.

And, as luck would have it, the man came under the tree just as the
Calico Clown slipped and fell. And so, instead of falling to the
ground, the Clown fell into one of the wide open side pockets of the
man's coat. And the man never knew about it--at least for a time.

"Oh, my goodness me, what a narrow escape!" exclaimed the Clown as he
landed safely in the soft pocket. "This is better than falling on the
hard ground. But I wonder what will happen to me now."

And well might he ask that, for the man, not knowing the Clown was in
his pocket, hurried on down town to his office.




CHAPTER VI

IN THE OFFICE


The Man, into whose pocket the Calico Clown had fallen from the tree,
hurried along the street, not knowing a thing of what had happened. He
was anxious to get to his office to look after his business, for he
was a very busy Man. He kept other folks busy, too--clerks and office
boy and a girl to write letters on the typewriter.

Now, as it happened, the Man was a little late that morning, and when
he reached his office he was in such haste that he did not take time
to do anything before he sat down in his big chair to look over his
mail.

"Please write some letters for me on the typewriter," he said to Miss
Jones, who worked the machine.

Miss Jones sat down and became very busy. The Man told her what to
write and she banged away on the machine. Every once in a while she
would look at the Man when he paused to think of something else to
say. And once, as she did this, a queer look came over the face of
Miss Jones. Then she smiled and next she burst right out into a loud
laugh.

And the funny part of it was that just then the Man was telling her to
put in a letter something like this:

"I am very, very sorry to tell you that I can not do as you want me
to."

And, just as he said the word "sorry," Miss Jones laughed her very
hardest.

"Eh! What's the matter? What is so very funny about my saying I am
sorry?" asked the Man. The girl typewriter and the office boy called
him "the Boss" behind his back, and they liked him very much, for he
was kind and good to them.

"Oh, dear! I MUST laugh!" said Miss Jones.

Miss Jones pointed to something sticking out of his side coat pocket.
The Man put his hand there and pulled out--the Calico Clown!

You should have seen the strange look come over the Man's face. Then
he laughed as hard as Miss Jones, and the office boy in the next room,
hearing them, laughed also.

"Well, how in the world did that Calico Clown come to be in my
pocket?" exclaimed the man. He took the toy out, turned it over and
looked at it from all sides. As he did so he happened to punch the
Clown in the chest, and of course the Clown banged his cymbals
together, as he had been taught to do in the workshop of Santa Claus,
where he had been made.

And as the cymbals tinkled and clanged the typewriter girl laughed
harder than ever. Then the man happened to pull one of the strings,
and the Clown kicked up his legs. The office boy was looking into the
room just then, and, seeing this antic of the jolly red and yellow
chap, the office boy laughed out loud.

"Dear me! I'm glad every one in this office is so good-natured,"
thought the Clown to himself. "And I certainly am glad to get out of
that Man's pocket. I was nearly smothered there, but of course it was
better than being in the tree. I'll do some more tricks for them if
the Man pulls more strings."

And the Man did. He pulled the strings fastened to the Clown's arms,
and they jiggled and joggled in a merry fashion, so the girl and the
office boy laughed harder than ever.

"Well, how in the world did that Clown toy come to be in my pocket?
That's what I want to know," said the Man, very much puzzled.

"Maybe one of the children put it in," suggested the girl. She knew
the Man had children at home.

"No, I hardly think it was any of MY children," said the Man. "Arnold
has no toy like this. He has a Bold Tin Soldier, as he calls him, and
some soldier men. And my little girl, Mirabell, has a Lamb on Wheels.
But neither of them has a Calico Clown."

"Perhaps some of their playmates called at your house, to have fun
with Arnold or Mirabell," said the typewriter girl, "and they may have
dropped the Clown into your pocket as your coat hung on the rack."

"Yes, that could have happened," said the Man. "But I remember I put
my hand in my pocket as I left the house, to make sure I had some
letters I was to mail. The Clown was not in my pocket then. He must
have got in after I left my house. And how could that happen, I should
like to know! I didn't go in any place. How could it have happened?"

Of course neither the office boy nor the typewriter girl could tell.
They had not seen the Calico Clown fall from the tree into the pocket
of the Man as he passed underneath. And even the Man himself had not
seen this.

"It's very queer," said the father of Mirabell and Arnold. "The only
way it could have happened that I can think of is that some children I
passed on the street may have tossed the Clown into my pocket. I have
very large ones in this coat, and sometimes they stand wide open."

The Calico Clown stayed in the office all that day. It was the first
time he had ever been to business, and he rather liked it as a change.
Very few toys ever have the chance he had. He sat up on the Man's desk
and watched the girl click at the typewriter, and he watched the
office boy come in and out. The office boy looked at the Clown, too.

"I'm going to have some fun with him when the Boss goes out to lunch,"
said the office boy to himself.

Now the Clown felt rather strange in the office. His part in life was
to make joy and laughter, and he could not do it sitting up straight
and stiff on a desk. He looked around, and he saw, not far from him, a
jolly little man, like a dwarf.

"I wish I could speak to him," thought the Clown. "He looks as if he
belonged to the toy family."

And you can imagine how surprised the Clown was when, all of a sudden,
the Man lifted the head right off the queer-looking little dwarf and
dipped his pen down inside him!

"Why, he's an ink well!" thought the Clown. "That's what he is! An ink
well! And his head comes off the same as the Porcelain Cat's head
lifts off for matches to be put inside her. How very odd! I'd like to
talk to that chap."

When the Man went out to lunch, into the office hurried the office boy
with a grin on his face.

"What do you want?" asked the typewriter girl. "I want to make that
Clown jiggle," was the answer. "I'm going to have some fun with him."

"No, you mustn't!" exclaimed the girl. "The Boss won't like it if you
touch him. If you break him--"

"Aw, I won't break him!" cried the boy. "Let me have him!"

He made a grab for the Calico Clown, and the girl tried to stop the
boy. As a result the Clown was knocked off the desk to the floor.

"Oh, dear! I hope my glued leg is not broken!" thought the Clown.




CHAPTER VII

IN THE WASH-BASKET


"There, now look what you did!" cried the girl.

"I didn't do it! You did!" said the boy. "If you hadn't jiggled it out
of my hand when I was taking it down it wouldn't have fallen."

I don't know how long they might have gone on disputing in this
fashion if the office boy from next door had not poked his head in and
called:

"What's the matter?"

Then he saw the Calico Clown lying on the floor and he added:

"Has Santa Claus been here?" and he laughed.

"It came out of the pocket of the Boss," explained the first office
boy. "He put it on his desk. I was going to look at it and pull the
strings, 'cause the Boss is out to lunch, but she jiggled my hand and
made me drop it. Now it's busted."

"Maybe it isn't," said the second office boy. "I'll see."

He picked the Calico Clown up off the floor, punched him in the chest,
and the gay red and yellow chap banged his cymbals together.

"He's all right so far," said the second office boy. "Now we'll pull
the strings."

"And there's where trouble may come in," thought the Calico Clown
himself, for he heard and saw and felt all that went on. "I'm almost
sure my glued leg is broken," said the Clown to himself.

But when the strings were pulled, one after another, and the arms and
legs and head of the funny fellow twisted and turned and jerked, the
two office boys and the typewriter girl laughed. And the Clown himself
was glad, for he felt that he was not broken.

"If the Boss comes in and finds you playing with that Clown you'll
catch it," said the girl to the first office boy, after a while.

"I guess I'd better put him back on the desk. I'm going out to get my
dinner pretty soon," the boy said.

And a little later, while the girl was in an outer office looking over
some papers and while the Man was still at his lunch and while the
office boy was out getting something to eat, the Calico Clown was left
alone with the Ink-Well Dwarf.

"How do you do?" politely asked the Clown.

[Illustration: Calico Clown Has a Chat With Ink-Well Dwarf.]

"Very well, thank you," answered the Dwarf. "And how are you? Where
did you come from? Are you going to work here?"

"I never work!" exclaimed the Clown. "I am only to make jolly fun and
laughter."

"Then this is no place for you," went on the Dwarf. "This is an
office, and we must all work, though I must admit that those boys seem
to get as much fun out of it as any one. They're always skylarking,
cutting up, and playing jokes. But I work myself. I hold ink for the
Boss."

"I see you do," answered the Clown. "I suppose I don't really belong
here, made only for fun, as I am. And I did not want to come here. It
was quite accidental. I was brought."

"How!" asked the Ink-Well Dwarf.

"In the pocket of the Man they call the Boss," was the reply. And then
the Clown told of how he had fallen out of the tree.

All the remainder of the day the Calico Clown sat on the desk of the
Man, wondering what would happen to him. At last he found out.

At the close of the afternoon, when no more business was to be done,
the Man arose and closed his desk. He put papers in his different
pockets to take home with him, and then he saw the Calico Clown.

"Oh, I mustn't forget you!" he said, speaking out loud as he sometimes
did when alone. And he was alone in the office now, for the boy and
the typewriter girl had gone. "I'll take you home and ask Arnold or
Mirabell to whom you belong," went on the man. "You are some child's
toy, I'm sure of that, and one of my children may know where you
live."

The Calico Clown knew this to be so, and he knew that either Arnold or
Mirabell would at once be able to say that the Clown belonged to
Sidney, for they had seen Sidney playing with this toy.

"Back into my pocket you go!" said the Man, and he took the Clown down
off the top of the desk. "There are a lot of handkerchiefs in that
pocket," the man went on. "They'll make a good, soft bed for you to
lie on."

And, surely enough, there was a soft bed of handkerchiefs for the
Calico Clown. They were handkerchiefs the man had been carrying in his
pocket for some time, and he had forgotten to put them in the wash, as
his wife, over and over again, had told him to do.

A little later, with the Calico Clown nestled down in among a pile of
handkerchiefs in his pocket, the Man started for home from his office.

"Well, I am certainly doing some traveling this day," thought the
Clown, as he reposed in the Man's pocket. "First I am carried up a
tree, and then I fall down. Next I am taken to an office, just as if I
were in business like the Ink-Well Dwarf, and now I am being taken to
the home of Mirabell and Arnold. I wonder what will happen next."

He did not have to wait long to find out.

Down the street walked the Man, and soon he was within sight of his
home, where Mirabell and Arnold lived. The two children were out in
front, waiting for their father. As soon as they saw him coming they
stopped swinging on the gate and cried:

"Here comes Daddy!"

He waved his hand to them.

Down the street they raced to meet him, and taking hold of his hands,
one on either side, they led him toward the house.

Just then out of the side gate came Mandy, the jolly fat colored
washer-woman. She had a basket full of clothes on a small express
wagon.

"Oh, that reminds me!" exclaimed Mirabell's father. "I'll put these
handkerchiefs from my pocket in your basket of wash, Mandy! You can
take them home with you, wash them clean and iron them and bring them
back to me."

"'Deed an' dat's just what I can do!" exclaimed Mandy, smiling
broadly. "Put 'em right down yeah in mah basket!"

She turned back the sheet she had spread over the soiled clothes and
made a little place down in one corner for the Man to put his
handkerchiefs.

There was quite a bundle of them, all wadded together.

"There, you can tell Mother I didn't forget my handkerchiefs this
time," said Daddy to his two children. "You saw me put them in the
wash, didn't you?"

"Yes, Daddy, we did!" exclaimed Mirabell. "And, oh, you ought to see
what happened to my Lamb on Wheels to-day!"

"What happened?" asked Daddy, as he straightened up after having
stooped down to thrust the handkerchiefs into the basket.

"Why, Arnold's Bold Tin Soldier got caught in the curly wool on my
Lamb's back," explained Mirabell, "and they both fell into the flour
barrel!"

"That WAS funny!" laughed Daddy. And he was thinking so much about
this and laughing so with Arnold and Mirabell that he never stopped to
think of the Calico Clown in among the handkerchiefs he had put in the
wash-basket.

But that is what he had done. He had thrust the Clown, with the
handkerchiefs, down in Mandy's basket of soiled clothes.

"Oh, my! Oh, dear me! Oh, what is going to happen now?" thought the
Calico Clown as he felt himself covered up and taken away. "Oh, if I
could only tell Mirabell or Arnold I am here. Oh, this is dreadful."

But he could do nothing! Away he was taken in the wash-basket.




CHAPTER VIII

DOWN IN A DEEP HOLE


Daddy hurried into the house with Mirabell and Arnold. The children
were eager to show their father into what a funny pickle the Bold Tin
Soldier and the Lamb on Wheels had got. Of course, it wasn't exactly a
"pickle." I only call it that for fun. It was really the flour barrel
into which the two toys had fallen.

"How did it happen?" asked Daddy, as the children brought out their
playthings, the Soldier still entangled in the Lamb's wool, and both
of them white with flour.

"It happened when we were in the kitchen watching the cook make a
cake," explained Mirabell. "I was playing with my Lamb on the floor
and I lifted her up to let her see how nice the cake looked."

"But what about your Soldier, Arnold?" asked Daddy.

"Oh, I had set my Soldier Captain on the back of Mirabell's Lamb to
give him a ride," explained the little boy.

"I said he could," remarked Mirabell.

"And when she lifted her Lamb up she lifted my Soldier up, too," added
Arnold.

"And then!" burst out Mirabell, laughing, "my foot slipped and I let
go of my Lamb on Wheels, and she fell into the flour barrel, and so
did Arnold's Bold Tin Soldier."

"And they were a sight, all white and covered with flour!" exclaimed
the little boy.

But now we must see what happened to the Calico Clown.

At first he was very uncomfortable, stuck down in among the soiled
clothes. He feared he would smother; but really he did not need much
air, and he soon found he was getting all he needed. The clothes were
so soft that they did not crush him, and--he was not near any of
Mirabell's or Arnold's play clothes--he soon found that they were not
badly soiled. So, after getting over his first distaste, he began
rather to like the ride in the little express wagon.

"It isn't as smooth as an automobile," thought the Calico Clown, "but
it is jolly for a change. The only thing that's worrying me is what is
going to happen next; and to know whether or not I shall ever see
Sidney again."

And at this time, which was early in the evening, Sidney was still
looking everywhere for his Calico Clown. The little boy told his
mother and sister how he and Herbert had left the Clown and the Monkey
on a Stick on the porch while they went to get bread and jam.

"And when we came back my Monkey was there," said Herbert, "but Sid's
Clown was gone."

"It is very strange where your toy has got to," said Mother. She
helped Sidney and Herbert look, but the Clown seemed gone forever, and
Sidney felt sorry.

"Now we can never have that circus," he said to his brother.

"Oh, maybe he'll be found some day," was the answer. But Sidney sadly
shook his head.

Trundling the little express wagon with her basket of clothes along
the streets, Mandy finally reached her home where she did the washing
and ironing. Her children were waiting for her to come to supper. Liza
Ann, the oldest girl, had set the table, and Jim, the next oldest boy,
was out on the steps watching for his mother, just as Arnold and
Mirabell watched for their daddy.

"Is de table all set, honey?" asked Mandy of Liza Ann. "I hopes it is,
'cause I wants to put dese yeah clothes in to soak after I eats."

"De table is all sot," explained Liza Ann. "An' de meat an' taters is
all ready to hotten up."

"Dass good," sighed Mandy, for she was rather tired. "I'll jest leave
these yeah clothes till after supper," she went on, putting the basket
down in a corner of the room.

"Dear me! I wonder how much longer I shall have to stay here," thought
the Calico Clown, tucked away under the sheet and in the pile of
handkerchiefs. "Aren't they ever going to let me out? This is worse
than being in jail!"

But at last Mandy's supper was finished, and, with Liza Ann and Jim to
help her sort the clothes, she filled a tub with water and began. The
big sheet was taken off the top of the basket, and then Liza Ann
reached in and took up the bundle of handkerchiefs.

"You wants to be keerful o' dem, honey," said her mother. "Dem's de
bestest an' most special hankowitches o' Mirabell's pa, an' he's very
'tickler how dey is washed. Better let me have dem, honey."

Mandy reached over to take the handkerchiefs from Liza Ann, and at
that moment the little colored girl saw something red and yellow among
them.

"Oh, what a funny handkowitch!" she called, and the next moment they
all saw the Calico Clown. Mandy took him out of the bundle.

"Oh, Mammy! I want him!" cried Jim.

"Nope! He's mine! I saw him, fustest!" exclaimed Liza Ann, and she
reached for the Calico Clown.

"Wait a minute, now, chilluns. Wait a minute!" said Mandy, and she
held the toy close to her breast. "Dish yeah don't belongs to us."

"But it come in de basket of wash, Mammy!" said Jim. "Why can't we
keep it?"

"'Cause tain't belongin' to us," answered his mother. "I can jest
guess how it come in. Mirabell or Arnold, dey done drop it in dere
Daddy's pocket, an' he didn't know nothin' about its bein' in. He took
it out wif his hankowitches, and put it in mah basket of wash. An' I
brung it home. My! My! It suah is funny how it happened!"

She held the Calico Clown up and looked at him.

"Oh, ain't he jest grand!" cried Jim, his eyes shining with delight.

"He suah is a gay fellow all right," said Mandy.

Liza Ann reached up and pulled one of the Clown's strings. Quickly his
legs jiggled and he cut some funny capers.

"Oh, my! Dat suah is scrumptious!" laughed the little colored girl.

"Oh, Mammy, jest let us play with him a little while!" begged Jim.
"Den I'll take him back to where he belongs."

"All right," agreed Mandy. "But be mighty keerful of him! If dat
Calico Clown should get busted Mirabell or Arnold is gwine to feel
mighty bad!"

You see she didn't know the Clown belonged to Sidney, and not to
either Mirabell or Arnold.

"Come on, we'll have some fun wif him!" said Liza Ann to her brother.

And then, while their mother put the clothes to soak, the children
played with the Calico Clown. They were good and gentle children, and
the gay toy did not in the least mind clanging his cymbals for them or
doing his funny dance. He jiggled and joggled his arms and legs, and
went through such funny antics that Jim and Liza Ann laughed again and
again.

"Po' li'l honey lambs!" said Mandy with a sigh, as she bent over the
wash tub. "I wish dey had some toys of dere own. But den I'se got good
clean and soft watah to wash wif, an' dat's a blessin'! Lots of folks
hasn't got only hard watah, what won't make no suds."

After the clothes had been put to soak in a tub Mandy dried her hands
and sat and looked at Liza Ann and Jim playing with the Calico Clown.

"Come now, you'd better get ready to take him back," she said to Jim,
after a while.

"Does you mean to take him back where you got de basket of wash,
Mammy?" asked the colored boy.

"Yes," his mother answered. "You know de big green house. You's been
dere befo', honey. You go dere now, Jim--tisn't late yet--an' you take
back dis Clown. Tell Mirabell or Arnold dat it got in de wash wif dere
daddy's pocket hankowitches."

"All right," said Jim, with a sigh. "I will. But I suah does wish we
could keep him!"

"So do I," sighed Liza Ann in a low voice.

"Well, maybe some day I can make money enough to git you somethin' to
play wif," said their mother.

As she had said, it was not late, though the sun had set. It was a
warm, summer night, and the moon was shining brightly. Jim knew the
way to the house where Mirabell and Arnold lived, for he had often
gone there both with his mother and alone, either to get or bring back
the clothes.

With the Calico Clown wrapped in a piece of paper, Jim set off on his
trip. He hurried along, thinking how nice it would be if he had a toy
like that. He was wondering how long it would be before his mother
could earn enough money to buy one when, just as he turned into the
yard of the house where Arnold and Mirabell lived, Jim stumbled and
fell.

The Calico Clown shot out of his hands, and the poor toy, as he flew
along, thought to himself:

"Oh, what is happening now!"

The next moment he fell into a deep hole, and only that he grasped the
long grass at the edge of it, Jim would have fallen in himself.

"Fo' de lan' sakes!" exclaimed the little colored boy as he picked
himself up. "What have done gone an' happened now?"

You see, he felt about it just as the Calico Clown did.




CHAPTER IX

BACK HOME


The door of the house in which Arnold and Mirabell lived opened, and
their daddy looked out toward the front yard. He had heard the grunt
made by Jim when the little colored boy fell down and dropped the
Calico Clown into a hole.

"Is anybody there?" asked Mirabell's father.

"I'se heah!" exclaimed Jim, as he slowly arose. "I was bringin' back
de Calico Clown, an' I 'mos' fell into a big hole."

"There, Father! I told you that hole ought to be covered up!"
exclaimed Mirabell's mother, who had also come to the door.

"Oh, no'm! I didn't fall in!" answered Jim, who heard what was said.
"But I almos' did, an' I guess de Clown he fell in complete an'
altogether."

"The Clown? What do you mean?" asked Daddy.

"De Clown what got in Mammy's basket of wash," explained the little
colored boy.

By this time he had picked himself up, and in the light that streamed
out from the open door of the house he saw the hole into which he had
so nearly fallen. It was a hole dug by a man who had come to fix the
sewer pipes that day, and when night came he had not finished. He left
a deep, wide, gaping hole just beside the front walk.

Arnold, Mirabell and the others in the house knew of the hole, and
kept away from it. In the daylight, when Mandy had taken away the
wash, she had seen it and had not fallen in. But poor Jim, coming
after dark, had stumbled in the thick grass and had nearly plumped
himself in.

As for the Clown--well, there he was down in the dirt at the bottom of
the hole!

"I wonder what is the matter with me!" thought the gay red and yellow
fellow as he came to a stop in some soft dirt. "I seem to be very
unlucky!"

"What does Jim mean about a Clown falling in the hole?" asked Arnold
curiously.

"And a Clown being in the basket with the wash?" added Mirabell.

"I think I can tell you," their father answered, suddenly remembering
what he had put in his pocket to bring home from the office. "But
first I will put some boards over the hole the plumber left so no one
else will fall in, or nearly fall in."

"You'll get the Clown up, won't you, Daddy?" asked Mirabell. "Maybe
it's like the one Sidney had."

"Did Sidney have a Calico Clown with one leg red and the other leg
yellow?" asked Daddy.

"Yes, and it did all sorts of funny tricks when you pulled the
strings; and he clapped his cymbals when you punched him in the
chest," said Arnold.

"Well, then this must be Sidney's Clown. But how it came in my pocket
is more than I can guess," said Daddy. "Yes, I'll get the Clown up out
of the hole, and then I'll put some boards over it."

A lantern was brought out and flashed down into the hole. There, on
the bottom, lay the Calico Clown.

"I'll bring him up!" offered Jim, and quickly he climbed down, caught
hold of the gay toy, and climbed out again.

"Thank you, Jim," said Daddy.

"Yes, that's Sidney's Clown," declared Arnold, when he had looked at
the red and yellow chap. "But how did he get in the basket of
clothes?"

"That's quite a long story," said Daddy. "Come into the house and I'll
tell you. Did your mother send you back with the Clown, Jim?" he asked
of the little colored boy.

"Yes'm--I mean yes, sah!" Jim answered. "He was in de basket all done
wrapped up in hankowitches."

"Those were the handkerchiefs I took from my pocket and put in Mandy's
basket when I met her at the gate," said Mirabell's daddy. "And so you
found him, Jim!"

"Yes'm--I mean yes, sah! Me an' Liza Ann found him. He's a jolly good
Clown; but Mammy, she wouldn't let us keep him 'cause as how she said
he belonged to Mirabell or Arnold."

"No, he doesn't live here," said Arnold. "Oh, Sid will be so glad to
get him back!"

"I suppose you and your sister felt bad about losing the Clown," said
Daddy to Jim. "Didn't you?"

"I suahly did!" exclaimed the little colored boy. "So did Liza Ann."

Daddy and Mother talked softly together a moment, and then Mother
hurried away to come back with something that made Jim's eyes sparkle
and open wide.

For she had a little toy engine, which could be wound up with a key
and sent whizzing along. And there was a fine Jumping Jack, which
jiggled almost as nicely as did the Calico Clown.

"Here are two toys that Arnold and Mirabell are through with," said
Mother, with a smile at Jim. "They are not broken, and they will each
go. Perhaps you will like them almost as much as you did the Calico
Clown."

"Oh, golly!" cried Jim. "We'll like 'em better! 'Cause dere's two of
'em--one fo' each of us! Oh, we's eber so much obligedness."

Clasping the two toys in his little brown hands, away Jim raced in the
darkness to tell his sister the good news. The Jumping Jack was for
her and the toy engine for him. And I may as well tell you now that
the two children were made perfectly happy with their toys--just as
happy as they would have been with the Calico Clown.

"Well, thank goodness, I think my adventures are over for the night,"
thought the Clown, as he was taken into Mirabell's house and the dirt
brushed off his red and yellow trousers. "This has been such a day!
Oh, SUCH a day!"

And indeed it had been from the time he fell out of the tree into the
Man's coat pocket until Jim stumbled with him and he fell into the
hole.

"Sidney will be glad to get his Clown back," went on Arnold, when the
toy had been set on the table where Daddy took his place to tell the
evening story.

"I wish we could take it to him now," said Mirabell.

"Mayn't we?" asked her brother.

"It is getting late," said their mother. "You may take the toy over
the first thing in the morning."

"But all the while Sidney will be wondering where his Clown is,"
objected the little girl.

"I know what we can do!" exclaimed Arnold. "We can telephone and tell
him it's here."

"Yes, we can do that," said Daddy.

So, a little later, Sidney was told, over the telephone, that his lost
Calico Clown had been found. The story was briefly told of how it had
got into the wash-basket after having been found in Daddy's pocket and
taken to the office.

"Oh, I'm so glad!" cried Sidney. "I'll be over the first thing in the
morning to get him."

"But what I'm wondering about is how the Clown got in my pocket," said
Daddy, with a puzzled look on his face. "If you children didn't put it
there, who did?" and he looked at Mirabell and Arnold.

And I might say that this was always a mystery, as much so as the
Clown's riddle about what made more noise than a pig under a gate.

Daddy told Mirabell and Arnold their usual good-night story. Then the
children went to bed and Mother put the Calico Clown on the
mantelpiece where he would be safe for the night.

"Whoever sees Sidney first in the morning," said Mother, as she, too,
got ready to go to bed, "may be the one to give him his toy."

Then the lights were put out and the house was still and quiet.
Ordinarily, when this time came, the Calico Clown, like the other
toys, would have been at his liveliest. But now he was so tired, with
all his adventures of the day, that he just gave a long sigh and said:

"I am not going to stir! I am just going to lie down here and sleep
until morning! Enough has happened for one day."

So he stretched out, with a pen wiper for a cushion, and went to
sleep.

Bright and early the next morning Sidney ran over to the house of his
cousins.

"Is my Calico Clown here?" he cried.

"Yes," answered Arnold, who was also up. "I'll get him for you."

"Oh, thank you!" said Sidney, when he had his toy once more. And a
little later the Calico Clown was back home. But his adventures were
not over.




CHAPTER X

THE TOY PARTY


"Oh, Sidney! aren't you glad you have your Calico Clown back?" cried
his sister Madeline when she saw her brother coming toward the house
with his toy which he had got at Arnold's home. "I just guess I am!"
said the little boy. "I thought I'd never see him again."

"And I'm glad, too," cried Herbert, as he made his Monkey go up and
down the Stick. "Now we can get ready for our circus."

"Are you going to have a show?" asked Madeline.

"Yes," answered Sidney. "We have a Clown and a Monkey, and they're
always the funniest things in a circus. Don't you remember when we had
the show with my Monkey in it?"

"Yes. And that was lots of fun," said Madeline. "But I know something
better than a show."

"What?" Sidney asked.

"A party," went on Madeline. "Let's have a Toy Party. That will be
better than a show, even a circus show."

Sidney wanted to know how it would be better, and Madeline said:

"'Cause you can have things to eat at a Toy Party, and you can't
always have things at a circus, lessen you buy 'em; and maybe not
then, 'cepting peanuts and lemonade. Let's have a Toy Party and we can
get mother to give us real things to eat."

"Oh, that will be fun!" cried Sidney. "I should say so!" agreed
Herbert.

"And we'll ask Dorothy to bring her Sawdust Doll," said Madeline,
"Arnold can bring his Bold Tin Soldier, and Mirabell her Lamb on
Wheels. And I'll bring my Candy Rabbit."

"You did have a party for him," said Herbert.

"Well, this one can be for Sid's Calico Clown," explained Madeline.
"And you can bring your Monkey on a Stick, Herb."

The idea of a Toy Party seemed to please the two boys, and Madeline
was glad she had thought of it. She lost no time in getting ready for
it.

"I'll go and put a new ribbon on the neck of my Candy Rabbit," she
said to her brothers. "You get your Monkey and Clown all nice and
clean, and then I'll ask Mother if Cook can make a special cake."

"My Monkey is clean enough," said Herbert. "Dirt doesn't show on him,
anyhow. He's colored brown."

"And my Clown's pretty good, even if he did fall in a dirt hole," went
on Sidney. "A Clown has to be a little dirty, for he falls all over
the circus ring, you know."

"There isn't going to be any circus ring at our Toy Party," laughed
Madeline. "Now I'll go and see about the cake."

"And we'll go and tell Dick, Arnold and the girls," said Sidney.
"Here, Madeline, please keep my Calico Clown for me until I come
back."

Away he ran with his brother, who carried the Monkey on a Stick. The
Calico Clown rather hoped the long-tailed chap would be left to keep
him company, but it was not to be just yet.

"But perhaps I can talk to the Candy Rabbit while Madeline is getting
ready for the party," thought the Clown. "He and I are old friends."

But even this was not to be. Madeline probably did not think that the
Clown would have liked to be with some of the other toys for a while.
She just kept hold of the gay red and yellow fellow after her brother
had handed him to her, and took him with her to the kitchen, where she
knew her mother was.

"Oh, Mother! may Cook bake us a cake for the Toy Party?" cried
Madeline, and, not thinking what she was doing, she laid the Calico
Clown down in a large basket of oranges which the fruit man had just
set on the kitchen table.

"A cake for a Toy Party?" repeated Mother. "Yes, I think so. Tell me
more about it."

So Madeline told about the Toy Party that was going to be held, and
how the Sawdust Doll, the White Rocking Horse, and all the other jolly
creatures were to come.

"Course they won't EAT the cake--only make believe," explained
Madeline. "We'll eat the cake--we children."

"Yes, I supposed you would," said Mother, with a laugh as she looked
at Cook.

"And, please, may I help?" asked Madeline.

"Yes," promised Cook, and then, not thinking what she was doing and
not seeing the Calico Clown, who had slipped away down in among the
oranges, she took the basket of fruit from the table.

"I'll just set the oranges in the ice box," she said. "They need to be
well chilled for the orangeade, and it's a hot day."

And that is how it was that the Clown, a little later, found himself
beginning to feel freezing cold. He had not minded being laid for a
time in with the golden, yellow fruit. It smelled so nice that he shut
his eyes and breathed deep of the perfume. He even took a little
sleep. And then, the next thing he knew, he felt a breath of cold air
after a door was slammed shut.

"Dear me! what can have happened now?" said the Calico Clown, suddenly
awakening. "Am I back again at the North Pole workshop of Santa Claus?
It feels like it, but it doesn't look like it. For his shop was nice
and light, though it was sometimes cold. Here it is dark."

"Well, I simply am freezing!" went on the Clown. "I've got to keep
warm, somehow!"

So what did he do but stand up and begin to dance around among the
oranges. Up and down, first to this side and then to the other danced
the jolly fellow, jerking his arms and swinging his legs. He clapped
his hands together to warm them, and his cymbals clanged in the cold,
frosty air of the ice box.

After a while the Clown began to feel warmer. But as soon as he
stopped jumping around he felt cold again.

"I've got to keep moving, that's all there is to it!" he said to
himself, and he had to dance again.

Really he must have looked funny, doing a jig on a basket of oranges,
but it was not so funny for the poor Clown himself. He was beginning
to get tired, and he was wondering how long he would have to keep up
his exercise, when the ice-box door suddenly opened and Cook lifted
out a bowl of cream.

"Oh, for the love of trading stamps!" she cried, as she saw the Clown
in among the oranges. "How did you ever get there? You must be almost
frozen!"

And the poor fellow would have been, if he had not danced.

"I certainly didn't see you there when I put the fruit in the ice
box," went on the cook. "Madeline must have put you among the
oranges."

And, of course, this was just what had happened. Naturally you may say
that the reason the cook saw the Clown the second time, after she
opened the ice-box door, was because some of the oranges rolled to one
side, allowing the Clown to be seen. But that isn't how it happened at
all. The Clown simply climbed out from among the fruit to dance and
keep himself warm, and that's how he happened to be seen.

"Oh, dear me! To think I should do a thing like that!" cried Madeline,
when the cook handed her the Calico Clown. "Sidney might have thought
his toy was lost again if you hadn't found him. Now we'll bake the
cake, and I'll put the Clown by the stove to get warm."

After a while everything was ready for the party. The cake was baked
and covered with icing. There were also some crullers and some
cookies.

Herbert, Sidney and Mirabell put on their party clothes, and with the
Monkey on a Stick nicely brushed, the Candy Rabbit with a new ribbon
on his neck, and with the last specks of dirt shaken off the red and
yellow trousers of the Clown, they all waited for the others to come.

"Here's Dorothy with her Sawdust Doll!" cried Madeline, running to the
window.

[Illustration with caption: "Oh, I Have So Many Things to Tell You!"]

"Yes, and Arnold is helping Dick carry over the White Rocking Horse,"
added Sidney. "Oh, what fun we'll have!"

"I hope Arnold brought his Bold Tin Soldier Captain and all the
others," said Herbert.

Arnold brought them, and his sister Mirabell came with her Lamb on
Wheels.

Then such fun as there was at the Toy Party! I really don't know
whether the children or the toys enjoyed it most. But I do know that
the children ate the cakes and cookies, which was something the toys
could not do.

While Dick, Dorothy and the other boys and girls were in the room, the
toys could not speak to one another. But when, in playing some game
the lads and lassies went out into the yard, the toys had their
chance.

"Oh, I have so many things to tell you!" said the Calico Clown. "I
have had so many adventures!"

Then he related how the monkey had taken him up into the tree and how
finally he had got back home.

"Quite remarkable," said the Lamb on Wheels. "You certainly have--
Ouch! Oh, dear!" said the Lamb, suddenly switching one of her legs.

"What's the matter?" asked the Bold Tin Soldier. "If anybody is
teasing you I'll make him stop!" and he drew his sword and looked very
fierce--as all tin soldiers look.

"It was nothing," said the Lamb on Wheels. "Just a pang of rheumatism.
The remains of the cold I caught in one of my wheels the time I made
the voyage down the brook on the raft the boys built."

Then the Sawdust Doll told of a little adventure she had had recently,
when she was left in the wrong doll carriage by mistake and was taken
home to the wrong house.

"Nothing as remarkable as jumping downstairs and scaring the burglars
has happened to me," said the White Rocking Horse. "But Dick was
riding me in the kitchen the other day and he ran me over an egg."

"Did it hurt you?" asked the Monkey.

"No; but it spoiled the egg," said the Horse, laughing.

"Well, I must say it is very nice of the children to get up a party
for us like this," said the Calico Clown. "And I, for one--"

"Hush! Here they come! We must be very still and quiet!" whispered the
Candy Rabbit.

And back into the room trooped the merry children, and they played
more games and ate more cake until none was left, and then the party
was over.

"Well, I certainly have come to a happy home," thought the Calico
Clown, when he was put to bed that night on a closet shelf. "This is
just as jolly as being in the store!" And he snuggled up close to the
Candy Rabbit and the Monkey on a Stick. Then they all went to sleep.

THE END










End of Project Gutenberg's The Story of Calico Clown, by Laura Lee Hope

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF CALICO CLOWN ***

***** This file should be named 5845.txt or 5845.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/4/5845/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
