The Project Gutenberg EBook You Never Know Your Luck, Parker, V3
#114 in our series by Gilbert Parker

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: You Never Know Your Luck, Volume 3.

Author: Gilbert Parker

Release Date: August, 2004  [EBook #6287]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on December 5, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YOU NEVER KNOW YOUR LUCK, V3***



This eBook was produced by David Widger





YOU NEVER KNOW YOUR LUCK

[BEING THE STORY OF A MATRIMONIAL DESERTER]

By Gilbert Parker

Volume 3.


XII.      AT THE RECEIPT OF CUSTOM
XIII.     KITTY SPEAKS HER MIND AGAIN
XIV.      AWAITING THE VERDICT
XV.       "MALE AND FEMALE CREATED HE THEM"
XVI.      "'TWAS FOR YOUR PLEASURE YOU CAME HERE, YOU GO BACK FOR MINE"
XVII.     WHO WOULD HAVE THOUGHT IT?
EPILOGUE




CHAPTER XII

AT THE RECEIPT OF CUSTOM

"What are you laughing at, Kitty?  You cackle like a young hen with her
first egg."  So spoke Mrs. Tynan to her daughter, who alternately swung
backwards and forwards in a big rocking-chair, silently gazing into the
distant sky, or sat still and "cackled" as her mother had said.

A person of real observation and astuteness, however, would have noticed
that Kitty's laughter told a story which was not joy and gladness--
neither good humour nor the abandonment of a luxurious nature.
It was tinged with bitterness and had the smart of the nettle.

Her mother's question only made her laugh the more, and at last Mrs.
Tynan stooped over her and said, "I could shake you, Kitty.  You'd make a
snail fidget, and I've got enough to do to keep my senses steady with all
the house-work--and now her in there!"  She tossed a hand behind her
fretfully.

Quick with love for her mother, as she always was, Kitty caught the
other's trembling hand.  "You've always had too much to do, mother;
always been slaving for others.  You've never had time to think whether
you're happy or not, or whether you've got a problem--that's what people
call things, when they're got so much time on their hands that they make
a play of their inside feelings and work it up till it sets them crazy."

Mrs. Tynan's mouth tightened and her brow clouded.  "I've had my problems
too, but I always made quick work of them.  They never had a chance to
overlay me like a mother overlays her baby and kills it."

"Not 'like a mother overlays,' but 'as a mother overlays,'" returned
Kitty with a queer note to her voice.  "That's what they taught me at
school.  The teacher was always picking us up on that kind of thing.
I said a thing worse than that when Mrs. Crozier"--her fingers motioned
towards another room--"came to-day.  I don't know what possessed me.  I
was off my trolley, I suppose, as John Sibley puts it.  Well, when Mrs.
James Shiel Gathorne Crozier said--oh, so sweetly and kindly--'You are
Miss Tynan?' what do you think I replied?  I said to her, 'The same'!"

Rather an acidly satisfied smile came to Mrs. Tynan's lips.  "That was
like the Slatterly girls," she replied.  "Your father would have said it
was the vernacular of the rail-head.  He was a great man for odd words,
but he knew always just what he wanted to say and he said it out.  You've
got his gift.  You always say the right thing, and I don't know why you
made that break with her--of all people."

A meditative look came into Kitty's eyes.  "Mr. Crozier says every one
has an imp that loves to tease us, and trip us up, and make us appear
ridiculous before those we don't want to have any advantage over us."

"I don't want Mrs. Crozier to have any advantage over you and me, I can
tell you that.  Things'll never be the same here again, Kitty dear, and
we've all got on so well; with him so considerate of every one, and a
good friend always, and just one of us, and his sickness making him seem
like our own, and--"

"Oh, hush--will you hush, mother!" interposed Kitty sharply.  "He's
going away with her back to the old country, and we might just as well
think about getting other borders, for I suppose Mr. Bulrush and his
bonny bride will set up a little bulrush tabernacle on the banks of the
Nile"--she nodded in the direction of the river outside--"and they'll
find a little Moses and will treat it as their very own."

"Kitty, how can you!"

Kitty shrugged a shoulder.  "It would be ridiculous for that pair to have
one of their own.  It's only the young mother with a new baby that looks
natural to me."

"Don't talk that way, Kitty," rejoined her mother sharply.  "You aren't
fit to judge of such things."

"I will be before long," said her daughter.  "Anyway, Mrs. Crozier isn't
any better able to talk than I am," she added irrelevantly.  "She never
was a mother."

"Don't blame her," said Mrs. Tynan severely.  "That's God's business.
I'd be sorry for her, so far as that was concerned, if I were you.  It's
not her fault."

"It's an easy way of accounting for good undone," returned Kitty.
"P'r'aps it was God's fault, and p'r'aps if she had loved him more--"

Mrs. Tynan's face flushed with sudden irritation and that fretful look
came to her eyes which accompanies a lack of comprehension.  "Upon my
word, well, upon my word, of all the vixens that ever lived, and you
looking like a yellow pansy and too sweet for daily use!  Such thoughts
in your head!  Who'd have believed that you--!"

Kitty made a mocking face at her mother.  "I'm more than a girl, I'm a
woman, mother, who sees life all around me, from the insect to the
mountain, and I know things without being told.  I always did.  Just life
and living tell me things, and maybe, too, the Irish in me that father
was."

"It's so odd.  You're such a mixture of fun and fancy, at least you
always have been; but there's something new in you these days.  Kitty,
you make me afraid--yes, you make your mother afraid.  After what you
said the other day about Mr. Crozier I've had bad nights, and I get
nervous thinking."

Kitty suddenly got up, put her arm round her mother and kissed her.
"You needn't be afraid of me, mother.  If there'd been any real danger,
I wouldn't have told you.  Mr. Crozier's away, and when he comes back
he'll find his wife here, and there's the end of everything.  If there'd
been danger, it would have been settled the night before he went away.
I kissed him that night as he was sleeping out there under the trees."

Mrs. Tynan sat down weakly and fanned herself with her apron.  "Oh, oh,
oh, dear Lord!" she said.  "I'm not afraid to tell you anything I ever
did, mother," declared Kitty firmly; "though I'm not prepared to tell you
everything I've felt.  I kissed him as he slept.  He didn't wake, he just
lay there sleeping--sleeping."  A strange, distant, dreaming look came
into her eyes.  She smiled like one who saw a happy vision, and an eerie
expression stole into her face.  "I didn't want him to wake," she
continued.  "I asked God not to let him wake.  If he'd waked--oh, I'd
have been ashamed enough till the day I died in one way!  Still he'd have
understood, and he'd have thought no harm.  But it wouldn't have been
fair to him--and there's his wife in there," she added, breaking off into
a different tone.  "They're a long way above us--up among the peaks, and
we're at the foot of the foothills, mother; but he never made us feel
that, did he?  The difference between him and most of the men I've ever
seen!  The difference!"

"There's the Young Doctor," said her mother reproachfully.

"He-him!  He's by himself, with something of every sort in him from the
top to the bottom.  There's been a ditcher in his family, and there may
have been a duke.  But Shiel Crozier--Shiel"--she flushed as she said the
name like that, but a little touch of defiance came into her face too--
"he is all of one kind.  He's not a blend.  And he's married to her in
there!"

"You needn't speak in that tone about her.  She's as fine as can be."

"She's as fine as a bee," retorted Kitty.  Again she laughed that almost
mirthless laugh for which her mother had called her to account a moment
before.  "You asked me a while ago what I was laughing at, mother," she
continued.  "Why, can't you guess?  Mr. Crozier talked of her always as
though she was--well, like the pictures you've seen of Britannia, all
swelling and spreading, with her hand on a shield and her face saying,
'Look at me and be good,' and her eyes saying, 'Son of man, get upon thy
knees!'  Why, I expected to see a sort of great--goodness--gracious
goddess, that kept him frightened to death of her.  Bless you, he never
opened her letter, he was so afraid of her; and he used to breathe once
or twice hard--like that, when he mentioned her!"  She breathed in such
mock awe that her mother laughed with a little kindly malice too.

"Even her letter," Kitty continued remorselessly, "it was as though she
--that little sprite--wrote it with a rod of chastisement, as the Bible
says.  It--"

"What do you know of the inside of that letter?" asked her mother,
staring.

"What the steam of the tea-kettle could let me see," responded Kitty
defiantly; and then, to her shocked mother, she told what she had done,
and what the nature of the letter was.

"I wanted to help him if I could, and I think I'll be able to do it--I've
worked it all out," Kitty added eagerly, with a glint of steel in the
gold of her eyes and a fantastic kind of wisdom in her look.

"Kitty," said her mother severely and anxiously, "it's madness
interfering with other people's affairs--of that kind.  It never was
any use."

"This will be the exception to the rule," returned Kitty.  "There she
is"--again she flicked a hand towards the other room--"after they've been
parted five years.  Well, she came after she read my letter to her, and
after I'd read that unopened letter to him, which made me know how to put
it all to her.  I've got intuition--that's Celtic and mad," she added,
with her chin thrusting out at her mother, to whom the Irish that her
husband had been, which was so deep in her daughter, was ever a mystery
to her, and of which she was more or less afraid.

"I've got a plan, and I believe--I know--it will work," Kitty continued.
"I've been thinking and thinking, and if there's trouble between them; if
he says he isn't going on with her till he's made his fortune; if he
throws that unopened letter in her face, I'll bring in my invention to
deal with the problem, and then you'll see!  But all this fuss for a
little tiny button of a thing like that in there--pshaw!  Mr. Crozier is
worth a real queen with the beauty of one of the Rhine maidens.  How he
used to tell that story of the Rhinegold--do you remember?  Wasn't it
grand?  Well, I am glad now that he's going--yes, whatever trouble there
may be, still he is going.  I feel it in my heart."

She paused, and her eyes took on a sombre tone.  Presently, with a
slight, husky pain in her voice, like the faint echo of a wail, she went
on: "Now that he's going, I'm glad we've had the things he gave us,
things that can't be taken away from us.  What you have enjoyed is yours
for ever and ever.  It's memory; and for one moment or for one day or one
year of those things you loved, there's fifty years, perhaps, for memory.
Don't you remember the verses I cut out of the magazine:

                  "'Time, the ruthless idol-breaker,
                    Smileless, cold iconoclast,
                    Though he rob us of our altars,
                    Cannot rob us of the past.'"

"That's the way your father used to talk," replied her mother.  "There's
a lot of poetry in you, Kitty."  "More than there is in her?" asked
Kitty, again indicating the region where Mrs. Crozier was.

"There's as much poetry in her as there is in--in me.  But she can do
things; that little bit of a babywoman can do things, Kitty.  I know
women, and I tell you that if that woman hadn't a penny, she'd set to
and earn it; and if her husband hadn't a penny, she'd make his home
comfortable just the same somehow, for she's as capable as can be.  She
had her things unpacked, her room in order herself--she didn't want your
help or mine--and herself with a fresh dress on before you could turn
round."

Kitty's eyes softened still more.  "Well, if she'd been poor he would
never have left her, and then they wouldn't have lost five years--think
of it, five years of life with the man you love lost to you!--and there
wouldn't be this tough old knot to untie now."

"She has suffered--that little sparrow has suffered, I tell you, Kitty.
She has a grip on herself like--like--"

"Like Mr. Crozier with a broncho under his hand," interjected Kitty.
"She's too neat, too eternally spick and span for me, mother.  It's as
though the Being that made her said, 'Now I'll try and see if I can
produce a model of a grown-up, full-sized piece of my work.'  Mrs.
Crozier is an exhibition model, and Shiel Crozier's over six feet three,
and loose and free, and like a wapiti in his gait.  If he was a wapiti
he'd carry the finest pair of antlers ever was."

"Kitty, you make me laugh," responded the puzzled woman.  "I declare,
you're the most whimsical creature, and--"

At that moment there came a tapping at the door behind them, and a small,
silvery voice said, "May I come in?" as the door opened and Mrs.
Crozier, very precisely yet prettily dressed, entered.

"Please make yourself at home--no need to rap," answered Mrs. Tynan.
"Out in the West here we live in the open like.  There's no room closed
to you, if you can put up with what there is, though it's not what you're
used to."

"For five months in the year during the past five years I've lived in a
house about half as large as this," was Mrs. Crozier's reply.  "With my
husband away there wasn't the need of much room."

"Well, he only has one room here," responded Mrs. Tynan.  "He never
seemed too crowded in it."

"Where is it?  Might I see it?" asked the small, dark-eyed, dark-haired
wife, with the little touch of nectarine bloom and a little powder also;
and though she spoke in a matter-of-fact tone, there was a look of
wistfulness in her eyes, a gleam of which Kitty caught ere it passed.

"You've been separated, Mrs. Crozier," answered the elder woman, "and
I've no right to let you into his room without his consent.  You've had
no correspondence at all for five years--isn't that so?"

"Did he tell you that?" the regal little lady asked composedly, but with
an underglow of anger in her eyes.

"He told the court that at the Logan Trial," was the reply.

"At the murder trial--he told that?" Mrs. Crozier asked almost
mechanically, her face gone pale and a little haggard.

"He was obliged to answer when that wolf, Gus Burlingame, was after him,"
interposed Kitty with kindness in her tone, for, suddenly, she saw
through the outer walls of the little wife's being into the inner courts.
She saw that Mrs. Crozier loved her husband now, whatever she had done in
the past.  The sight of love does not beget compassion in a loveless
heart, but there was love in Kitty's heart; and it was even greater than
she would have wished any human being to see; and by it she saw with
radium clearness through the veil of the other woman's being.

"Surely he could have avoided answering that," urged Mona Crozier
bitterly.

"Only by telling a lie," Kitty quickly answered, "and I don't believe he
ever told a lie in his life.  Come," she added, "I will show you his
room.  My mother needn't do it, and so she won't be responsible.  You
have your rights as a wife until they're denied you.  You mustn't come,
mother," she said to Mrs. Tynan, and she put a tender hand on her arm.

"This way," she added to the little person in the pale blue, which suited
well her very dark hair, blue eyes, and rose-touched cheeks.




CHAPTER XIII

KITTY SPEAKS HER MIND AGAIN

A moment later they stood inside Shiel Crozier's room.  The first glance
his wife gave took in the walls, the table, the bureau, and the desk
which contained her own unopened letter.  She was looking for a
photograph of herself.

There was none in the room, and an arid look came into her face.  The
glance and its sequel did not escape Kitty's notice.  She knew well--as
who would not?--what Mona Crozier was hoping to see, and she was human
enough to feel a kind of satisfaction in the wife's chagrin and
disappointment; for the unopened letter in the baize-covered desk which
she had read was sufficient warrant for a punishment and penalty due the
little lady, and not the less because it was so long delayed.  Had not
Shiel Crozier had his draught of bitter herbs to drink over the past five
years?

Moreover, Kitty was sure beyond any doubt at all that Shiel Crozier's
wife, when she wrote the letter, did not love her husband, or at least
did not love him in the right or true way.  She loved him only so far as
her then selfish nature permitted her to do; only in so far as the pride
of money which she had, and her husband had not, did not prevent; only in
so far as the nature of a tyrant could love--though the tyranny was pink
and white and sweetly perfumed and had the lure of youth.  In her
primitive way Kitty had intuitively apprehended the main truth, and that
was enough to justify her in contributing to Mona Crozier's punishment.

Kitty's perceptions were true.  At the start, Mona was in nature
proportionate to her size; and when she married she had not loved Crozier
as he had loved her.  Maybe that was why--though he may not have admitted
it to himself--he could not bear to be beholden to her when his ruin
came.  Love makes all things possible, and there is no humiliation in
taking from one who loves and is loved, that uncapitalised and communal
partnership which is not of the earth earthy.  Perhaps that was why,
though Shiel loved her, he had had a bitterness which galled his soul;
why he had a determination to win sufficient wealth to make himself
independent of her.  Down at the bottom of his chivalrous Irish heart
he had learned the truth, that to be dependent on her would beget in her
contempt for him, and he would be only her paid paramour and not her
husband in the true sense.  Quixotic he had been, but under his quixotism
there was at least the shadow of a great tragical fact, and it had made
him a matrimonial deserter.  Whether tragedy or comedy would emerge was
all on the knees of the gods.

"It's a nice room, isn't it?" asked Kitty when there had passed from
Mona Crozier's eyes the glaze or mist--not of tears, but stupefaction--
which had followed her inspection of the walls, the bureau, the table,
and the desk.

"Most comfortable, and so very clean--quite spotless," the wife answered
admiringly, and yet drearily.  It made her feel humiliated that her man
could live this narrow life of one room without despair, with sufficient
resistance to the lure of her hundred and fifty thousand pounds and her
own delicate and charming person.  Here, it would seem, he was content.
One easy-chair, made out of a barrel, a couch, a bed--a very narrow bed,
like a soldier's, a bed for himself alone--a small table, a shelf on the
wall with a dozen books, a little table, a bureau, and an old-fashioned,
sloping-topped, shallow desk covered with green baize, on high legs, so
that like a soldier too he could stand as he wrote (Crozier had made that
high stand for the desk himself).  That was what the room conveyed to
her--the spirit of the soldier, bare, clean, strong, sparse: a workshop
and a chamber of sleep in one, like the tent of an officer on the march.
After the feeling had come to her, to heighten the sensation she espied a
little card hung under the small mirror on the wall.  There was writing
on it, and going nearer, she saw in red pencil the words, "Courage,
soldier!"

These were the words which Kitty was so fond of using, and the girl had
a thrill of triumph now as she saw the woman from whom Crozier had fled
looking at the card.  She herself had come and looked at it many times
since Crozier had gone, for he had only put it there just before he left
on his last expedition to Aspen Vale to carry through his deal.  It had
brought a great joy to Kitty's heart.  It had made her feel that she had
some share in his life; that, in a way, she had helped him on the march,
the vivandiere who carried the water-bag which would give him drink when
parched, battle-worn, or wounded.

Mona Crozier turned away from the card, sadly reflecting that nothing in
the room recalled herself; that she was not here in the very core of his
life in even the smallest way.  Yet this girl, this sunny creature with
the call of youth and passion in her eyes, this Ruth of the wheat-fields,
came and went here as though she was a part of it.  She did this and that
for him, and she was no doubt on such terms of intimacy with him that
they were really part of each other's life in a scheme of domesticity
unlike any boarding-house organization she had ever known.  Here in
everything there was the air, the decorum, and the unartificial comfort
of home.

This was why he could live without his wedded wife and her gold and her
brocade, and the silk and the Persian rugs, and the grand piano and the
carriages and the high silk hat from Piccadilly.  Her husband had had the
luxuries of wealth, and here he was living like a Spartan on his hill--
and alone; though he had a wife whom men had beseiged both before and
after marriage.  A feeling of impotent indignation suddenly took
possession of her.  Here he was with two women, unattached,--one
interesting and good and agreeable and good-looking, and the other almost
a beauty,--who were part of the whole rustic scheme in which he lived.
They made him comfortable, they did the hundred things that a valet or a
fond wife would do; they no doubt hung on every word he uttered--and he
could be interesting beyond most men.  She had realised terribly how
interesting he was after he had fled; when men came about her and talked
to her in many ways, with many variations, but always with the one tune
behind all they said; always making for the one goal, whatever the point
from which they started or however circuitous their route.

As time went on she had hungrily longed to see her husband again, and
other men had no power to interest her; but still she had not sought to
find him.  At first it had been offended pride, injured self-esteem, in
which the value of her own desirable self and of her very desirable
fortune was not lost; then it became the pride of a wife in whom the
spirit of the eternal woman was working; and she would have died rather
than have sought to find him.  Five years--and not a word from him.

Five years--and not a letter from him!  Her eyes involuntarily fell on
the high desk with the greenbaize top.  Of all the letters he had written
at that desk not one had been addressed to her.  Slowly, and with an
unintentional solemnity, she went up to it and laid a hand upon it.  Her
chin only cleared the edge of it-he was a tall man, her husband.

"This is the place of secrets, I suppose?" she said, with a bright smile
and an attempt at gaiety to Kitty, who had watched her with burning eyes;
for she had felt the thrill of the moment.  She was as sensitive to
atmosphere of this sad play of life as nearly and as vitally as the
deserted wife.

"I shouldn't think it a place of secrets," Kitty answered after a moment.
"He seldom locks it, and when he does I know where the key is."

"Indeed?"  Mona Crozier stiffened.  A look of reproach came into her
eyes.  It was as though she was looking down from a great height upon a
poor creature who did not know the first rudiments of personal honour,
the fine elemental customs of life.

Kitty saw and understood, but she did not hasten to reply, or to set
things right.  She met the lofty look unflinchingly, and she had pride
and some little malice too--it would do Mrs. Crozier good, she thought--
in saying, as she looked down on the humming-bird trying to be an eagle:

"I've had to get things for him-papers and so on, and send them on when
he was away, and even when he was at home I've had to act for him; and so
even when it was locked I had to know where the key was.  He asked me to
help him that way."

Mona noted the stress laid upon the word home, and for the first time she
had a suspicion that this girl knew more than even the Logan Trial had
disclosed, and that she was being satirical and suggestive.

"Oh, of course," she returned cheerfully in response to Kitty--"you acted
as a kind of clerk for him!"  There was a note in her voice which she
might better not have used.  If she but knew it, she needed this girl's
friendship very badly.  She ought to have remembered that she would not
have been here in her husband's room had it not been for the letter Kitty
had written--a letter which had made her heart beat so fast when she
received it, that she had sunk helpless to the floor on one of those soft
rugs, representing the soft comfort which wealth can bring.

The reply was like a slap in the face.

"I acted for him in any way at all that he wished me to," Kitty answered,
with quiet boldness and shining, defiant face.

Mona's hand fell away from the green baize desk, and her eyes again lost
their sight for a moment.  Kitty was not savage by nature.  She had been
goaded as much by the thought of the letter Crozier's wife had written to
him in the hour of his ruin as by the presence of the woman in this
house, where things would never be as they had been before.  She had
struck hard, and now she was immediately sorry for it: for this woman was
here in response to her own appeal; and, after all, she might well be
jealous of the fact that Crozier had had close to him for so long and in
such conditions a girl like herself, younger than his own wife, and
prettier--yes, certainly prettier, she admitted to herself.

"He is that kind of a man.  What he asked for, any good woman could give
and not be sorry," Kitty convincingly added when the knife had gone deep
enough.

"Yes, he was that kind of a man," responded the other gently now, and
with a great sigh of relief.  Suddenly she came nearer and touched
Kitty's arm.  "And thank you for saying so," she added.  "He and I have
been so long parted, and you have seen so much more of him than I have of
late years!  You know him better--as he is.  If I said something sharp
just now, please forgive me.  I am--indeed, I am grateful to you and your
mother."

She paused.  It was hard for her to say what she felt she must say, for
she did not know how her husband would receive her--he had done without
her for so long; and she might need this girl and her mother sorely.  The
girl was a friend in the best sense, or she would not have sent for her.
She must remind herself of this continually lest she should take wrong
views.

Kitty nodded, but for a moment she did not reply.  Her hand was on the
baize-covered desk.  All at once, with determination in her eyes, she
said: "You didn't use him right or you'd not have been parted for five
years.  You were rich and he was poor, he is poor now, though he may be
rich any day, and he wouldn't stay with you because he wouldn't take your
money to live on.  If you had been a real wife to him he wouldn't have
seen that he'd be using your money; he'd have taken it as though it was
his own, out of the purse always open and belonging to both, just as
though you were partners.  You must feel--"

"Hush, for pity's sake, hush!" interrupted the other.

"You are going to see him again," Kitty persisted.  "Now, don't you think
it just as well to know what the real truth is?"

"How do you know what is the truth?" asked the trembling little stranger
with a last attempt to hold her position, to conceal from herself the
actual facts.

"The Young Doctor and my mother and I were with him all the time he was
ill after he was shot, and the Trial had only told half the truth.  He
wanted us, his best friends here, to know the whole truth, so he told us
that he left you because he couldn't bear to live on your money.  It was
you made him feel that, though he didn't say so.  All the time he told
his story he spoke of you as though you were some goddess, some great
queen--"

A look of hope, of wonder, of relief came into the tiny creature's eyes.
"He spoke like that of me; he said--?"

"He said what no one else would have said, probably; but that's the way
with people in love--they see what no one else sees, they think what no
one else thinks.  He talked with a sort of hush in his voice about you
till we thought you must be some stately, tall, splendid Helen of Troy
with a soul like an ocean, instead of"--she was going to say something
that would have seemed unkind, and she stopped herself in time--"instead
of a sort of fairy, one of the little folk that never grow up; the same
as my father used to tell me about."

"You think very badly of me, then?" returned the other with a sigh.
Her courage, her pride, her attempt to control the situation had vanished
suddenly, and she became for the moment almost the child she looked.

"We've only just begun.  We're all his friends here, and we'll judge you
and think of you according to what happens between you and him.  You
wrote him that letter!"

She suddenly placed her hand on the desk as the inspiration came to her
to have this matter of the letter out now, and to have Mrs. Crozier know
exactly what the position was, no matter what might be thought of
herself.  She was only thinking of Shiel Crozier and his future now.

"What letter did I write?"  There was real surprise and wonder in her
tone.

"That last letter you wrote to him--the letter in which you gave him fits
for breaking his promise, and talked like a proud, angry angel from the
top of the stairs."

"How do you know of that letter?  He, my husband, told you what was in
that letter; he showed it to you?"  The voice was indignant, low, and
almost rough with anger.

"Yes, your husband showed me the letter--unopened."

"Unopened--I do not understand."  Mona steadied herself against the foot
of the bed and looked in a helpless way at Kitty.  Her composure was
gone, though she was very quiet, and she had that look of a vital
absorption which possesses human beings in crises of their lives.

Suddenly Kitty took from behind a book on the shelf a key, opened the
desk, and drew out the letter which Crozier had kept sealed and unopened
all the years, which he had never read.

"Do you know that?" Kitty asked, and held it out for Mrs. Crozier to
see.

Two dark blue eyes stared confusedly at the letter--at her own
handwriting.  Kitty turned it over.  "You see it is closed as it was when
you sent it to him.  He has never opened it.  He does not know what is in
it."

"He has-kept it--five years--unopened," Mona said in broken phrases
scarce above a whisper.

"He has never opened it, as you see."

"Give--give it to me," the wife said, stepping forward to stay Kitty's
hand as she opened the lid of the desk to replace the letter.

"It's not your letter--no, you shall not," said Kitty firmly as she
jerked aside the hand laid upon her wrist, and threw one arm on the lid,
holding it down as Mrs. Crozier tried to keep it open.  Then with a swift
action of the free hand she locked the desk and put the key in her
pocket.

"If you destroyed this letter he would never believe but that it was
worse than it is; and it is bad enough, Heaven knows, for any woman to
have written to her husband--or to any one else's husband.  You thought
you were the centre of the world when you wrote that letter.  Without a
penny, he would be a great man, with a great future; but you are only a
pretty little woman with a fortune, who has thought a great lot of
herself, and far too much of herself only, when she wrote that letter."

"How do you know what is in it?"  There was agony and challenge at once
in the other's voice.  "Because I read it--oh, don't look so shocked!
I'd do it again.  I knew just how to act when I'd read it.  I steamed it
open and closed it up again.  Then I wrote to you.  I'm not sorry I did
it.  My motive was a good one.  I wanted to help him.  I wanted to
understand everything, so that I'd know best what to do.  Though he's so
far above us in birth and position, he seemed in one way like our own.
That's the way it is in new countries like this.  We don't think of lots
of things that you finer people in the old countries do, and we don't
think evil till it trips us up.  In a new country all are strangers among
the pioneers, and they have to come together.  This town is only twenty
years old, and scarcely anybody knew each other at the start.  We had to
take each other on trust, and we think the best as long as we can.  Mr.
Crozier came to live with us, and soon he was just part of our life--not
a boarder; not some one staying the night who paid you what he owed you
in the morning.  He was a friend you could say your prayers with, or eat
your meals with, or ride a hundred miles with, and just take it as a
matter of course; for he was part of what you were part of, all this out
here--don't you understand?"

"I am trying hard to do so," was the reply in a hushed voice.  Here was a
world, here were people of whom Mona Crozier had never dreamed.  They
were so much of an antique time--far behind the time that her old land
represented; not a new world, but the oldest world of all.  She began to
understand the girl also, and her face took on a comprehending look, as
with eyes like bronze suns Kitty continued:

"So, though it was wrong--wicked--in one way, I read the letter, to do
some good by it, if it could be done.  If I hadn't read it you wouldn't
be here.  Was it worth while?"

At that moment there was a knock at the outer door of the other room, or,
rather, on the lintel of it.  Mona started.  Suppose it was her husband
--that was her thought.

Kitty read the look.  "No, it isn't Mr. Crozier.  It's the Young Doctor.
I know his knock.  Will you come and see him?"

The wife was trembling, she was very pale, her eyes were rather staring,
but she fought to control herself.  It was evident that Kitty expected
her to do so.  It was also quite certain that Kitty meant to settle
things now, in so far as it could be done.

"He knows as much as you do?" asked Mrs. Crozier.

"No, the Young Doctor hasn't read the letter and I haven't told him
what's in it; but he knows that I read it, and what he doesn't know he
guesses.  He is Mr. Crozier's honest, clever friend.  I've got an idea--
an invention to put this thing right.  It's a good one.  You'll see.  But
I want the Young Doctor to know about it.  He never has to think twice.
He knows what to do the very first time."

A moment later they were in the other room, with the Young Doctor smiling
down at "the little spot of a woman," as he called Crozier's wife.




CHAPTER XIV

AWAITING THE VERDICT

"You look quite settled and at home," the Young Doctor remarked, as he
offered Mrs. Crozier a chair.  She took it, for never in her life had she
felt so small physically since coming to the great, new land.  The
islands where she was born were in themselves so miniature that the minds
of their people, however small, were not made to feel insignificant.  But
her mind, which was, after all, vastly larger in proportion than the body
enshrining it, felt suddenly that both were lost in a universe.  Her
impulse was to let go and sink into the helplessness of tears, to be
overwhelmed by an unconquerable loneliness; but the Celtic courage in
her, added to that ancient native pride which prevents one woman from
giving way before another woman towards whom she bears jealousy,
prevented her from showing the weakness she felt.  Instead, it roused
her vanity and made her choose to sit down, so disguising perceptibly the
disparity of height which gave Kitty an advantage over her and made the
Young Doctor like some menacing Polynesian god.

Both these people had an influence and authority in Mona Crozier's life
which now outweighed the advantage wealth gave her.  Her wealth had not
kept her husband beside her when delicate and perfumed tyranny began to
flutter its banners of control over him.  Her fortune had driven him
forth when her beauty and her love ought to have kept him close to her,
whatever fate might bring to their door, or whatever his misfortune or
the catastrophe falling on him.  It was all deeply humiliating, and the
inward dejection made her now feel that her body was the last effort of a
failing creative power.  So she sat down instead of standing up in a vain
effort at retrieval.

The Young Doctor sat down also, but Kitty did not, and in her buoyant
youth and command of the situation she seemed Amazonian to Mona's eyes.
It must be said for Kitty that she remained standing only because a
restlessness had seized her which was not present when she was with Mona
in Crozier's room.  It was now as though something was going to happen
which she must face standing; as though something was coming out of the
unknown and forbidding future and was making itself felt before its time.
Her eyes were almost painfully bright as she moved about the room doing
little things.  Presently she began to lay a cloth and place dishes
silently on the table--long before the proper time, as her mother
reminded her when she entered for a moment and then quickly passed on
into the kitchen, at a warning glance from Kitty, which said that the
Young Doctor and Mona were not to be disturbed.

"Well, Askatoon is a place where one feels at home quickly," added the
Young Doctor, as Mona did not at once respond to his first remark.
"Every one who comes here always feels as though he--or she--owns the
place.  It's the way the place is made.  The trouble with most of us is
that we want to put the feeling into practice and take possession of
'all and sundry.' Isn't that true, Miss Tynan?"

"As true as most things you say," retorted Kitty, as she flicked the
white tablecloth.  "If mother and I hadn't such wonderful good health I
suppose you'd come often enough here to give you real possession.  Do you
know, Mrs. Crozier," she added, with her wistful eyes vainly trying to be
merely mischievous, "he once charged me five dollars for torturing me
like a Red Indian.  I had put my elbow out of joint, and he put it in
again with his knee and both hands, as though it was the wheel of a wagon
and he was trying to put on the tire."

"Well, you were running round soon after," answered the Young Doctor.
"But as for the five dollars, I only took it to keep you quiet.  So long
as you had a grievance you would talk and talk and talk, and you never
were so astonished in your life as when I took that five dollars."

"I've taken care never to dislocate my elbow since."

"No, not your elbow," remarked the Young Doctor meaningly, and turned to
Mona, who had now regained her composure.

"Well,  I shan't call you in to reduce the dislocation--that's the
medical term, isn't it?" persisted Kitty, with fire in her eyes.

"What is the dislocation?" asked Mona, with a subtle, inquiring look but
a manner which conveyed interest.

The Young Doctor smiled.  "It's only her way of saying that my mind is
unhinged and that I ought to be sent to a private hospital for two."

"No--only one," returned Kitty.

"Marriage means common catastrophe, doesn't it?" he asked quizzically.

"Generally it means that one only is permanently injured," replied Kitty,
lifting a tumbler and looking through it at him as though to see if the
glass was properly polished.

Mona was mystified.  At first she thought there had been oblique
references to her husband, but these remarks about marriage would
certainly exclude him.  Yet, would they exclude him?  During the time in
which Shiel's history was not known might there not have been--but no,
it could not have been so, for it was Kitty who had sent the letter which
had brought her to Askatoon.

"Are you to be married--soon?" she asked of Kitty, with a friendly yet
trembling smile, for her agitation was, despite appearances, troubling
every nerve.

"I've thought of it quite lately," responded Kitty calmly, seating
herself now and looking straight into the eyes of the woman, who was
suggesting more truth than she knew.

"May I congratulate you?  Am I justified on such slight acquaintance?
I am sure you have chosen wisely," was the smooth rejoinder.

Kitty did not shrink from looking Mona in the eyes.  "It isn't quite time
for congratulations yet, and I'm not sure I've chosen wisely.  My family
very strongly disapproves.  I can't help that, of course, and I may have
to elope and take the consequences."

"It takes two to elope," interposed the Young Doctor, who thought that
Kitty, in her humorous extravagance, was treading very dangerous ground
indeed.  He was thinking of Crozier and Kitty; but Kitty was thinking of
Crozier, and meaning John Sibley.  Somehow she could not help playing
with this torturing thing in the presence of the wife of the man who was
the real "man in possession" so far as her life was concerned.

"Why, he is waiting on the doorstep," replied Kitty boldly and referring
only to John Sibley.

At that minute there was the crunch of gravel on the pathway and the
sound of a quick footstep.  Kitty and Mona were on their feet at once.
Both recognised the step of Shiel Crozier.  Presently the Young Doctor
recognised it also, but he rose with more deliberation.

At that instant a voice calling from the road arrested Crozier's advance
to the open door of the room where they were.  It was Jesse Bulrush
asking a question.  Crozier paused in his progress, and in the moment's
time it gave, Kitty, with a swift look of inquiry and with a burst of the
real soul in her, caught the hand of Crozier's wife and pressed it
warmly.  Then, with a face flushed and eyes that looked straight ahead of
her, she left the room as the Young Doctor went to the doorway and
stepped outside.  Within ten feet of the door he met Crozier.

"How goes it, patient?" he said, standing in Crozier's way.  Being a man
who thought much and wisely for other people, he wanted to give the wife
time to get herself in control.

"Right enough in your sphere of operations," answered Crozier.

"And not so right in other fields, eh?"

"I've come back after a fruitless hunt.  They've got me, the thieves!"
said Crozier, with a look which gave his long face an almost tragic
austerity.  Then suddenly the look changed, the mediaeval remoteness
passed, and a thought flashed up into his eves which made his expression
alive with humour.

"Isn't it wonderful, that just when a man feels he wants a rope to hang
himself with, the rope isn't to be had?" he exclaimed.  "Before he can
lay his hands on it he wants to hang somebody else, and then he has to
pause whether he will or no.  Did I ever tell you the story of the old
Irishwoman who lived down at Kenmare, in Kerry?  Well, she used to sit at
her doorway and lament the sorrows of the world with a depth of passion
that you'd think never could be assuaged.  'Oh, I fale so bad, I am so
wake--oh, I do fale so bad,' she used to say.  'I wish some wan would
take me by the ear and lade me round to the ould shebeen, and set me
down, and fill a noggen of whusky and make me dhrink it--whether I would
or no!'  Whether I would or no I have to drink the cup of self-denial,"
Crozier continued, "though Bradley and his gang have closed every door
against me here, and I've come back without what I went for at Aspen
Vale, for my men were away.  I've come back without what I went for, but
I must just grin and bear it."  He shrugged his shoulders and gave a
great sigh.

"Perhaps you'll find what you went for here," returned the Young Doctor
meaningly.

"There's a lot here--enough to make a man think life worth while"--inside
the room the wife shrank at the words, for she could hear all--"but just
the same I'm not thinking the thing I went to look for is hereabouts."

"You never know your luck," was the reply.  "'Ask and you shall find,
knock and it shall be opened unto you.'"

The long face blazed up with humour again.  "Do you mean that I haven't
asked you yet?" Crozier remarked, with a quizzical look, which had still
that faint hope against hope which is a painful thing for a good man's
eyes to see.

The Young Doctor laid a hand on Crozier's arm.  "No, I didn't mean that,
patient.  I'm in that state when every penny I have is out to keep me
from getting a fall.  I'm in that Starwhon coal-mine down at Bethbridge,
and it's like a suction-pump.  I couldn't borrow a thousand dollars
myself now.  I can't do it, or I'd stand in with you, Crozier.  No, I
can't help you a bit; but step inside.  There's a room in this house
where you got back your life by the help of a knife.  There's another
room in there where you may get back your fortune by the help of a wife."

Stepping aside he gave the wondering Crozier a slight push forward into
the doorway, then left him and hurried round to the back of the house,
where he hoped he might see Kitty.

The Young Doctor found Kitty pumping water on a pail of potatoes and
stirring them with a broom-handle.

"A most unscientific way of cleaning potatoes," he said, as Kitty did not
look at him.  "If you put them in a trough where the water could run off,
the dirt would go with the water, and you would'nt waste time and
intelligence, and your fingers would be cleaner in the end."

The only reply Kitty made was to flick the broomhead at him.  It had been
dipped in water, and the spray from it slightly spattered his face.

"Will you never grow up?" he exclaimed as he applied a handkerchief to
his ruddy face.

"I'd like you so much better if you were younger--will you never be
young?" she asked.

"It makes a man old before his time to have to meet you day by day and
live near you."

"Why don't you try living with me?" she retorted.  "Ah, then, you meant
me when you said to Mrs. Crozier that you were going to be married?
Wasn't that a bit 'momentary'?  as my mother's cook used to remark.  I
think we haven't 'kept company'--you and I"

"It's true you haven't been a beau of mine, but I'd rather marry you than
be obliged to live with you," was the paradoxical retort.

"You have me this time," he said, trying in vain to solve her reply.

Kitty tossed her head.  "No, I haven't got you this time, thank Heaven,
and I don't want you; but I'd rather marry you than live with you, as I
said.  Isn't it the custom for really nice-minded people to marry to get
rid of each other--for five years, or for ever and ever and ever?"

"What a girl you are, Kitty Tynan!" he said reprovingly.  He saw that
she meant Crozier and his wife.

Kitty ceased her work for an instant and, looking away from him into the
distance, said: "Three people said those same words to me all in one day
a thousand years ago.  It was Mr. Crozier, Jesse Bulrush, and my mother;
and now you've said it a thousand years after; as with your inexpensive
education and slow mind you'd be sure to do."

"I have an idea that Mrs. Crozier said the same to you also this very
day.  Did she--come, did she?"

"She didn't say, 'What a girl you are!' but in her mind she probably did
say, 'What a vixen!"'

The Young Doctor nodded satirically.  "If you continued as you began when
coming from the station, I'm sure she did; and also I'm sure it wasn't
wrong of her to say it."

"I wanted her to say it.  That's why I uttered the too, too utter-things,
as the comic opera says.  What else was there to do?  I had to help cure
her."

"To cure her of what, miss?"

"Of herself, doctor-man."

The Young Doctor's look became graver.  He wondered greatly at this young
girl's sage instinct and penetration.  "Of herself?  Ah, yes, to think
more of some one else than herself!  That is--"

"Yes, that is love," Kitty answered, her head bent over the pail and
stirring the potatoes hard.

"I suppose it is," he answered.

"I know it is," she returned.

"Is that why you are going to be married?" he asked quizzically.

"It will probably cure the man I marry of himself," she retorted.  "Oh,
neither of us know what we are talking about--let's change the subject!"
she added impatiently now, with a change of mood, as she poured the water
off the potatoes.

There was a moment's silence in which they were both thinking of the same
thing.  "I wonder how it's all going inside there?" he remarked.
"I hope all right, but I have my doubts."

"I haven't any doubt at all.  It isn't going right," she answered
ruefully; "but it has to be made go right."

"Whom do you think can do that?"

Kitty looked him frankly and decisively in the face.  Her eyes had the
look of a dreaming pietist for the moment.  The deep-sea soul of her was
awake.  "I can do it if they don't break away altogether at once.  I
helped her more than you think.  I told her I had opened that letter."

He gasped.  "My dear girl--that letter--you told her you had done such a
thing, such--!"

"Don't dear girl me, if you please.  I know what I am doing.  I told her
that and a great deal more.  She won't leave this house the woman she was
yesterday.  She is having a quick cure--a cure while you wait."

"Perhaps he is cured of her," remarked the Young Doctor very gravely.

"No, no, the disease might have got headway, but it didn't," Kitty
returned, her face turned away.  "He became a little better; but he was
never cured.  That's the way with a man.  He can never forget a woman he
has once cared for, and he can go back to her half loving her; but it
isn't the case with a woman.  There's nothing so dead to a woman as a man
when she's cured of him.  The woman is never dead to the man, no matter
what happens."

The Young Doctor regarded her with a strange, new interest and a puzzled
surprise.  "Sappho--Sappho, how did you come to know these things!" he
exclaimed.  "You are only a girl at best, or something of a boy-girl at
worst, and yet you have, or think you have, got into those places which
are reserved for the old-timers in life's scramble.  You talk like an
ancient dame."

Kitty smiled, but her eyes had a slumbering look as if she was half
dreaming.  "That's the mistake most of you make--men and women.  There's
such a thing as instinct, and there's such a thing as keeping your eyes
open."

"What did Mrs. Crozier say when you told her about opening that five-
year-old letter?  Did she hate you?"

Kitty nodded with wistful whimsicality.  "For a minute she was like an
industrious hornet.  Then I made her see she wouldn't have been here at
all if I hadn't opened it.  That made, her come down from the top of her
nest on the church-spire, and she said that, considering my
opportunities, I was not such an aboriginal after all."

"Now, look you, Saphira, prospective wife of Ananias, she didn't say
that, of course.  Still, it doesn't matter, does it?  The point is,
suppose he opens that letter now."

"If he does, he'll probably not go with her.  It was a letter that would
send a man out with a scalping-knife.  Still, if Mr. Crozier had his
land-deal through he might not read the letter as it really is.  His
brain wouldn't then be grasping what his eyes saw."

"He hasn't got his land-deal through.  He told me so just now before he
saw her."

"Then it's ora pro nobis--it's pray for us hard," rejoined Kitty
sorrowfully.  "Poor man from Kerry!"  At that moment Mrs. Tynan came from
the house, her face flushed, her manner slightly agitated.  "John Sibley
is here, Kitty--with two saddle-horses....  He says you promised to ride
with him to-day."

"I probably did," responded Kitty calmly.  "It's a good day for riding
too.  But John will have to wait.  Please tell him to come back at six
o'clock.  There'll be plenty of time for an hour's ride before sundown."

"Are you lame, dear child?" asked her mother ironically.  "Because if
you're not, perhaps you'll be your own messenger.  It's no way to treat a
friend--or whatever you like to call him."

Kitty smiled tenderly at her mother.  "Then would you mind telling him
to come here, mother darling?  I'm giving this doctor-man a prescription.
Ah, please do what I ask you, mother!  It is true about the prescription.
It's not for himself; it's for the foreign people quarantined inside."
She nodded towards the room where Shiel Crozier and his wife were shaping
their fate.

As her mother disappeared with a gesture of impatience and the remark
that she washed her hands of the whole Sibley business, the Young Doctor
said to Kitty, "What is your prescription, Ma'm'selle Saphira?  Suppose
they come out of quarantine with a clean bill of health?"

"If they do that you needn't make up the prescription.  But if Aspen Vale
hasn't given him what he wanted, then Mr. Shiel Crozier will still be an
exile from home and the angel in the house."

"What is the prescription?  Out with your Sibylline leaves!"

"It's in that unopened letter.  When the letter is opened you'll see it
effervesce like a seidlitz powder."

"But suppose I am not here when the letter is opened?"

"You must be here-you must.  You'll stay now, if you please."

"I'm afraid I can't.  I have patients waiting."  Kitty made an impetuous
gesture of command.  "There are two patients here who are at the crisis
of their disease.  You may be wanted to save a life any minute now."

"I thought that with your prescription you were to be the AEsculapius."

"No, I'm only going to save the reputation of AEsculapius by giving him a
prescription got from a quack to give to a goose."

"Come, come, no names.  You are incorrigible.  I believe you'd have your
joke on your death-bed."

"I should if you were there.  I should die laughing," Kitty retorted.

"There will be no death-bed for you, miss.  You'll be translated--no,
that's not right; no one could translate you."

"God might--or a man I loved well enough not to marry him."

There was a note of emotion in her laugh as she uttered the words.  It
did not escape the ear of the Young Doctor, who regarded her fixedly for
a moment before he said: "I'm not sure that even He would be able to
translate you.  You speak your own language, and it's surely original.
I am only just learning its alphabet.  No one else speaks it.  I have a
fear that you'll be terribly lonely as you travel along the trail, Kitty
Tynan."

A light of pleasure came into Kitty's eyes, though her face was a little
drawn.  "You really do think I'm original--that I'm myself and not like
anybody else?" she asked him with a childlike eagerness.

"Almost more than any one I ever met," answered the Young Doctor gently;
for he saw that she had her own great troubles, and he also felt now
fully what this comedy or tragedy inside the house meant to her.  "But
you're terribly lonely--and that's why: because you are the only one of
your kind."

"No, that's why I'm not going to be lonely," she said, nodding towards
the corner of the house where John Sibley appeared.

Suddenly, with a gesture of confidence and almost of affection, she laid
a hand on the Young Doctor's breast.  "I've left the trail, doctor-man.
I'm cutting across the prairie.  Perhaps I shall reach camp and perhaps I
shan't; but anyhow I'll know that I met one good man on the way.  And I
also saw a resthouse that I'd like to have stayed at, but the blinds were
drawn and the door was locked."

There was a strange, eerie look in her face again as her eyes of soft
umber dwelt on his for a moment; then she turned with a gay smile to John
Sibley, who had seen her hand on the Young Doctor's chest without dismay;
for the joy of Kitty was that she hid nothing; and, anyhow, the Young
Doctor had a place of his own; and also, anyhow, Kitty did what she
pleased.  Once when she had visited the Coast the Governor had talked to
her with great gusto and friendliness; and she had even gone so far as to
touch his arm while, chuckling at her whimsically, he listened to a story
she told him of life at the rail-head.  And the Governor had patted her
fingers in quite a fatherly way--or not, as the mind of the observer saw
it; while subsequently his secretary had written verses to her.

"So you've been gambling again--you've broken your promise to me," she
said reprovingly to Sibley, but with that wonderful, wistful laughter in
her eyes.

Sibley looked at her in astonishment.  "Who told you?" he asked.  It had
only happened the night before, and it didn't seem possible she could
know.

He was quite right.  It wasn't possible she could know, and she didn't
know.  She only divined.

"I knew when you made the promise you couldn't keep it; that's why I
forgive you now," she added.  "Knowing what I did about you, I oughtn't
to have let you make it."

The Young Doctor saw in her words a meaning that John Sibley could never
have understood, for it was a part of the story of Crozier's life
reproduced--and with what a different ending!




CHAPTER XV

"MALE AND FEMALE CREATED HE THEM"

When Crozier stepped out of the bright sunlight into the shady living-
room of the Tynan home, his eyes were clouded by the memory of his
conference with Studd Bradley and his financial associates, and by the
desolate feeling that the five years since he had left England had
brought him nothing--nothing at all except a new manhood.  But that he
did not count an asset, because he had not himself taken account of this
new capital.  He had never been an introspective man in the philosophic
sense, and he never had thought that he was of much account.  He had
lived long on his luck, and nothing had come of it--"nothing at all, at
all," as he said to himself when he stepped inside the room where,
unknown to him, his wife awaited him.  So abstracted was he, so disturbed
was his gaze (fixed on the inner thing), that he did not see the figure
in blue and white over against the wall, her hand on the big arm-chair
once belonging to Tyndall Tynan, and now used always by Shiel Crozier,
"the white-haired boy of the Tynan sanatorium," as Jesse Bulrush had
called him.

There was a strange timidity, and a fear not so strange, in Mona's eyes
as she saw her husband enter with that quick step which she had so
longingly remembered after he had fled from her; but of which she had
taken less account when he was with her at Lammis long ago-When Crozier
of Lammis was with her long ago.  How tall and shapely he was!  How large
he loomed with the light behind him!  How shadowed his face and how
distant the look in his eyes.

Somehow the room seemed too small for him, and yet he had lived in this
very house for four years and more; he had slept in the next room all
that time; had eaten at this table and sat in this very chair--Mrs. Tynan
had told her that--for this long time, like the master of a household.
With that far-away, brooding look in his face, he seemed in one sense as
distant from her as when she was in London in those dreary, desolate
years with no knowledge of his whereabouts, a widow in every sense save
one; but in her acts--that had to be said for her--a wife always and not
a widow.  She had not turned elsewhere, though there had been temptation
enough to do so.

Crozier advanced to the centre of the room, even to the table laid for
dinner, before he was conscious of some one in the room, of a figure by
the chair.  For a moment he stood still, startled as if he had seen a
vision, and his sight became blurred.  When it cleared, Mona had come a
step nearer to him, and then he saw her clearly.  He caught his breath as
though Life had burst upon him with some staggering revelation.  If she
had been a woman of genius, as in her way Kitty Tynan was, she would have
spoken before he had a chance to do so.  Instead, she wished to see how
he would greet her, to hear what he would say.  She was afraid of him
now.  It was not her gift to do the right thing by perfect instinct;
she had to think things out; and so she did now.  Still it has to be said
for her that she also had a strange, deep sense of apprehension in the
presence of the man whose arms had held her fast, and then let her go
for so bitter a length of time, in which her pride was lacerated and her
heart brought low.  She did not know how she was going to be met now, and
a womanly shyness held her back.  If she had said one word--his name
only--it might have made a world of difference to them both at that
moment; for he was tortured by failure, and now when hope was gone, here
was the woman whom he had left in order to force gifts from fate to bring
himself back to her.

"You--you here!" he exclaimed hoarsely.  He did not open his arms to her
or go a step nearer to her.  His look was that of blank amazement, of
mingled remembrance and stark realisation.  This was a turn of affairs
for which he had made no calculation.  There had ever been the question
of his return to her, but never of her coming to him.  Yet here she was,
debonnaire and fresh and perfectly appointed--and ah, so terribly neat
and spectacularly finessed!  Here she was with all that expert formality
which, in the old days, had been a reproach to his loosely-swung life and
person, to his careless, almost slovenly but well-brushed, cleanly, and
polished ease--not like his wife, as though he had been poured out of a
mould and set up to dry.  He was not tailor-made, and she had ever been
so exact that it was as though she had been crystallised, clothes and
all--a perfect crystal, yet a crystal.  It was this very perfection, so
charming to see, but in a sense so inhuman, which had ever dismayed him.
"What should I be doing in the home of an angel!" he had exclaimed to
himself in the old home at Lammis.

Truth is, he ought never to have had such a feeling, and he would not
have had it, if she had diffused the radiance of love, which would have
made her outer perfectness mere slovenliness beside her inner charm and
magnetism.  Very little of all this passed through Crozier's mind, as
with confused vision he looked at her.  He had borne the ordeal of the
witness-box in the Logan Trial with superb coolness; he had been in
physical danger over and over again, and had kept his head; he had never
been faced by a human being who embarrassed him--except his own wife.
"There is no fear like that of one's own wife," was the saying of an
ancient philosopher, and Crozier had proved it true; not because of
errors committed, but because he was as sensitive as a girl of
sensibility; because he felt that his wife did not understand him, and he
was ever in fear of doing the wrong thing, while eager beyond telling to
please her.  After all, during the past five years, parted from her while
loving her, there had still been a feeling of relief unexplainable to
himself in not having to think whether he was pleasing her or not, or to
reproach himself constantly that he was failing to conform to her
standard.

"How did you come--why?  How did you know?" he asked helplessly, as she
made no motion to come nearer; as she kept looking at him with an
expression in her eyes wholly unfamiliar to him.  Yet it was not wholly
unfamiliar, for it belonged to the days when he courted her, when she
seemed to have got nearer to him than in the more intimate relations of
married life.

"Is--is that all you have to say to me, Shiel?" she asked, with a
swelling note of feeling in her voice; while there was also emerging in
her look an elusive pride which might quickly become sharp indignation.
That her deserter should greet her so after five years of such offence to
a woman's self-respect, as might entitle her to become a rebel against
matrimony, was too cruel to be borne.  This feeling suddenly became alive
in her, in spite of a joy in her heart different from that which she had
ever known; in defiance of the fact that now that they were together once
more, what would she not do to prevent their being driven apart again!

"After abandoning me for five years, is that all you have to say to me,
Shiel?  After I have suffered before the world--"

He threw up his arms with a passionate gesture.  "The world!" he
exclaimed--"the devil take the world!  I've been out of it for five
years, and well out of it.  What do I care for the world!"

She drew herself up in a spirit of defence.  "It isn't what you care for
the world, but I had to live in it--alone, and because I was alone,
eyebrows were lifted.  It has been easy enough for you.  You were where
no one knew you.  You had your freedom"--she advanced to the table, and,
as though unconsciously, he did the same, and they gazed at each other
over the white linen and its furnishings--"and no one was saying that
your wife had left you for this or that, because of her bad conduct or of
yours.  Either way it was not what was fair and just; yet I had to bear
and suffer, not you.  There is no pain like it.  There I was in misery
and--"

A bitter smile came to his lips.  "A woman can endure a good deal when
she has all life's luxuries in her grasp.  Did you ever think, Mona, that
a man must suffer when he goes out into a world where he knows no one,
penniless, with no trade, no profession, nothing except his own helpless
self?  He might have stayed behind among the luxuries that belonged to
another, and eaten from the hand of his wife's charity, but"--(all the
pride and pain of the old situation rose up in him, impelled by the
brooding of the years of separation, heightened by the fact that he was
no nearer to his goal of financial independence of her than he was when
he left London five years before)--"but do you think, no matter what I've
done, broken a pledge or not, been in the wrong a thousand times as much
as I was, that I'd be fed by the hand of one to whom I had given a pledge
and broken it?  Do you think that I'd give her the chance to say, or not
to say, but only think, 'I forgive you; I will give you your food and
clothes and board and bed, but if you are not good in the future, I will
be very, very angry with you'?  Do you think--?"

His face was flaming now.  The pent-up flood of remorse and resentment
and pride and love--the love that tore itself in pieces because it had
not the pride and self-respect which independence as to money gives--
broke forth in him, fresh as he was from a brutal interview with the
financial clique whom he had given the chance to make much money, and who
were now, for a few thousand dollars, trying to cudgel him out of his one
opportunity to regain his place in his lost world.

"I live--I live like this," he continued, with a gesture that embraced
the room where they were, "and I have one room to myself where I have
lived over four years"--he pointed towards it.  "Do you think I would
choose this and all it means--its poverty and its crudeness, its distance
from all I ever had and all my people had, if I could have stood the
other thing--a pauper taking pennies from his own wife?  I had had taste
enough of it while I had a little something left; but when I lost
everything on Flamingo, and I was a beggar, I knew I could not stand the
whole thing.  I could not, would not, go under the poor-law and accept
you, with the lash of a broken pledge in your hand, as my guardian.  So
that's why I left, and that's why I stay here, and that's why I'm going
to stay here, Mona."

He looked at her firmly, though his face had that illumination which the
spirit in his eyes--the Celtic fire drawn through the veins of his
ancestors--gave to all he did and felt; and now as in a dream he saw
little things in her he had never seen before.  He saw that a little
strand of her beautiful dark hair had broken away from its ordered place
and hung prettily against the rosy, fevered skin of her cheek just beside
her ear.  He saw that there were no rings on her fingers save one, and
that was her wedding-ring--and she had always been fond of wearing rings.
He noted, involuntarily, that in her agitation the white tulle at her
bosom had been disturbed into pretty disarray, and that there was neither
brooch nor necklace at her breast or throat.

"If you stay, I am going to stay too," she declared in an almost
passionate voice, and she spoke with deliberation and a look which left
no way open to doubt.  She was now a valiant little figure making a fight
for happiness.

"I can't prevent that," he responded stubbornly.

She made a quick, appealing motion of her hands.  "Would you prevent it?
Aren't you glad to see me?  Don't you love me any more?  You used to love
me.  In spite of all, you used to love me.  Even though you hated my
money, and I hated your gambling--your betting on horses.  You used to
love me--I was sure you did then.  Don't you love me now, Shiel?"

A gloomy look passed over his face.  Memory of other days was admonishing
him.  "What is the good of one loving when the other doesn't?  And,
anyhow, I made up my mind five years ago that I would not live on my
wife.  I haven't done so, and I don't mean to 'do so.  I don't mean to
take a penny of your money.  I should curse it to damnation if I was
living on it.  I'm not, and I don't mean to do so."

"Then I'll stay here and work too, without it," she urged, with a light
in her eyes which they had never known.

He laughed mirthlessly.  "What could you do--you never did a day's work
in your life!"

"You could teach me how, Shiel."

His jaw jerked in a way it had when he was incredulous.  "You used to say
I was only--mark you, only a dreamer and a sportsman.  Well, I'm no
longer a dreamer and a sportsman; I'm a practical man.  I've done with
dreaming and sportsmanship.  I can look at a situation as it is, and--"

"You are dreaming--but yes, you are dreaming still," she interjected.
"And you are a sportsman still, but it is the sport of a dreamer, and a
mad dreamer too.  Shiel, in spite of all my faults in the past, I come to
you, to stay with you, to live on what you earn if you like, if it's only
a loaf of bread a day.  I--I don't care about my money.  I don't care
about the luxuries which money can buy; I can do without them if I have
you.  Am I not to stay, and won't you--won't you kiss me, Shiel?"

She came close to him-came round the table till she stood within a few
feet of him.

There was one trembling instant when he would have taken her hungrily
into his arms, but as if some evil spirit interposed with malign purpose,
there came the sound of feet on the gravel outside, and the figure of a
man darkened the doorway.  It was Augustus Burlingame, whose face as he
saw Mona Crozier took on an ironical smile.

"Yes--what do you want?" inquired Crozier quietly.  "A few words with
Mr. Crozier on business, if he is not too much occupied?"

"What business?"

"I am acting for Messrs.  Bradley, Willingden, Baxter, & Simmons."

The cloud darkened on Crozier's face.  His lips tightened, his face
hardened.  "I will see you in a moment--wait outside, please," he added,
as Burlingame made as though to step inside.  "Wait at the gate," he
added quietly, but with undisguised contempt.

The moment of moments for Mona and himself had passed.  All the
bitterness of defeat was on him again.  All the humiliation of undeserved
failure to accomplish what had been the dear desire of five years bore
down his spirit now.  Suddenly he had a suspicion that his wife had
received information of his whereabouts from this very man, Burlingame.
Had not the Young Doctor said that Burlingame had written to lawyers in
the old land to get information concerning him?  Was it not more than
likely that he had given his wife the knowledge which had brought her
here?

When Burlingame had disappeared he turned to Mona.  "Who told you I was
here?  Who wrote to you?" he asked darkly.  The light had died away from
his face.  It was ascetic in its lonely gravity now.

"Your doctor cabled to Castlegarry and Miss Tynan wrote to me."

A faint flush spread over Crozier's face.  "How did Miss Tynan know where
to write?"

Mona had told the truth at once because she felt it was the only way.
Now, however, she was in a position where she must either tell him that
Kitty had opened that still sealed letter from herself to him which he
had carried all these years, or else tell him an untruth.  She had no
right to tell him what Kitty had confided to her.  There was no other way
save to lie.

"How should I know?  It was enough for me to get her letter," she
replied.

"At Castlegarry?"

What was there to do?  She must keep faith with Kitty, who had given her
this sight of her husband again.

"Forwarded from Lammis," she said.  "It reached me before the doctor's
cable."

So it was Kitty--Kitty Tynan-who had brought his wife to this new home
from which he had been trying so hard to get back to the old home.
Kitty, the angel of the house.

"You wrote me a letter which drove me from home," he said heavily.

"No--no--no," she protested.  "It was not that.  I know it was not that.
It was my money--it was that which drove you away.  You have just said
so."

"You wrote me a hateful letter," he persisted.  "You didn't want to see
me.  You sent it to me by your sweet, young brother."

Her eyes flashed.  "My letter did not drive you away.  It couldn't have.
You went because you did not love me.  It was that and my money, not the
letter, not the letter."

Somehow she had a curious feeling that the very letter which contained
her bitter and hateful reproaches might save her yet.  The fact that he
had not opened it--well, she must see Kitty again.  Her husband was in a
dark mood.  She must wait.  She knew that her fortunate moment had passed
when the rogue Burlingame appeared.  She must wait for another.

"Shall I go now?  You want to see that man outside.  Shall I go, Shiel?"
She was very pale, very quiet, steady and gentle.

"I must hear what that fellow has to say.  It is business--important,"
he replied.  "It may mean anything--everything, or nothing."

As she left the room he had an impulse to call her back, but he conquered
it.




CHAPTER XVI

"'TWAS FOR YOUR PLEASURE YOU CAME HERE, YOU SHALL GO BACK FOR MINE"

For a moment Crozier stood looking at the closed doorway through which
Mona had gone, with a look of repentant affection in his eyes; but as the
thought of his own helpless insolvency and broken hopes flashed across
his mind, a look of dark and harassed reflection shadowed his face.  He
turned to the front doorway with a savage gesture.  The mutilated dignity
of his manhood, the broken pride of a lifetime, the bitterness in his
heart need not be held in check in dealing with the man who waited to
give him a last thrust of enmity.

He left the house.  Burlingame was seated on the stump of a tree which
had been made into a seat.  "Come to my room if you have business with
me," Crozier said sharply.

As they went, Crozier swung aside from the front door towards the corner
of the house.

"The back way?" asked Burlingame with a sneer.

"The old familiar way to you," was the smarting reply.  "In any case, you
are not welcome in Mrs. Tynan's part of the house.  My room is my own,
however, and I should prefer you within four walls while doing business
with you."

Burlingame's face changed colour slightly, for the tone of Crozier's
voice, the grimness of his manner, suggested an abnormal condition.
Burlingame was not a brave man physically.  He had never lived the
outdoor life, though he had lived so much among outdoor people.
He was that rare thing in a new land, a decadent, a connoisseur in vice,
a lover of opiates and of liquor.  He was young enough yet not to be
incapacitated by it.  His face and hands were white and a little flabby,
and he wore his hair rather long, which, it is said, accounts for the
weakness of some men, on the assumption that long hair wastes the
strength.  But Burlingame quickly remembered the attitude of the lady--
Crozier's wife, he was certain--and of Crozier in the dining-room a few
moments before, and to his suspicious eyes it was not characteristic of
a happy family party.  No doubt this grimness of Crozier was due to
domestic trouble and not wholly to his own presence.  Still, he felt
softly for the tiny pistol he always carried in his big waistcoat pocket,
and it comforted him.

Beyond the corner of the house Crozier paused and took a key from his
pocket.  It opened a side door to his own room, seldom used, since it was
always so pleasant in this happy home to go through the main living-room,
which every one liked so much that, though it was not the dining-room, it
was generally used as such, and though it was not the parlour, it was its
frequent substitute.  Opening the door, Crozier stepped aside to let
Burlingame pass.  It was two years since Burlingame had been in this
room, and then he had entered it without invitation.  His inquisitiveness
had led him to explore it with no good intent when he lived in the house.

Entering now, he gave it quick scrutiny.  It was clear he was looking for
something in particular.  He was, in fact, searching for signs of its
occupancy by another than Shiel Crozier--tokens of a woman's presence.
There was, however, no sign at all of that, though there were signs of
a woman's care and attention in a number of little things--homelike,
solicitous, perhaps affectionate care and attention.  Certainly the
spotless pillows, the pretty curtains, the pincushion, and charmingly
valanced bed and shelves, cheap though the material was, showed a woman's
very friendly care.  When he lived in that house there were no such
little attentions paid to him!  It was his experience that where such
attentions went something else went with them.  A sensualist himself, it
was not conceivable to him that men and women could be under the same
roof without "passages of sympathetic friendship and tokens of affinity."
That was a phrase he had frequently used when pursuing his own sort of
happiness.

His swift scrutiny showed that Crozier's wife had no habitation here, and
that gave him his cue for what the French call "the reconstruction of the
crime."  It certainly was clear that, as he had suggested at the Logan
Trial, there was serious trouble in the Crozier family of two, and the
offender must naturally be the man who had flown, not the woman who had
stayed.  Here was circumstantial evidence.

His suggestive glance, the look in his eyes, did not escape Crozier, who
read it all aright; and a primitive expression of natural antipathy
passed across his mediaeval face, making it almost inquisitorial.

"Will you care to sit?" he said, however, with the courtesy he could
never avoid; and he pointed to a chair beside the little table in the
centre of the room.  As Burlingame sat down he noticed on the table a
crumpled handkerchief.  It had lettering in the corner.  He spread it out
slightly with his fingers, as though abstractedly thinking of what he was
about to say.  The initial in the corner was K.  Kitty had left it on the
table while she was talking to Mrs. Crozier a halfhour before.  Whatever
Burlingame actually thought or believed, he could not now resist picking
up the handkerchief and looking at it with a mocking smile.  It was too
good a chance to waste.  He still hugged to his evil heart the
humiliating remembrance of his expulsion from this house, the share
Crozier had had in it, and the things which Crozier had said to him then.
He had his enemy now between the upper and the nether mill-stones, and he
meant to grind him to the flour of utter abasement.  It was clear that
the arrival of Mrs. Crozier had brought him no relief, for Crozier's face
was not that of a man who had found and opened a casket of good fortune.

"Rather dangerous that, in the bedroom of a family man," he said,
picking up the handkerchief and looking suggestively from the lettering
in the corner to Crozier.  He laid it down again, smiling detestably.

Crozier calmly picked up the handkerchief, saw the lettering, then went
quietly to the door of the room and called Mrs. Tynan's name.  Presently
she appeared.  Crozier beckoned her into the room.  When she entered, he
closed the door behind her.

"Mrs. Tynan," he said, "this fellow found your daughter's handkerchief on
my table, and he has said regarding it, 'Rather dangerous that, in the
bedroom of a family man.'  What would you like me to do with him?"

Mrs. Tynan walked up to Burlingame with the look of a woman of the
Commune and said: "If I had a son I would disown him if he didn't mangle
you till your wife would never know you again, you loathesome thing.
There isn't a man or woman in Askatoon who'd believe your sickening
slanders, for every one knows what you are.  How dare you enter this
house?  If the men of Askatoon had any manhood in them they would tar-
and-feather you.  My girl is as good as any girl that ever lived, and
you know it.  Now go out of here--now!"

Crozier intervened quietly.  "Mrs. Tynan, I asked him in here because it
is my room.  I have some business with him.  When it is over, then he
shall go, and we will fumigate the place.  As for the tar-and-feathers,
you might leave that to me.  I think I can arrange it.

"I'll turn the hose on him as he goes out, if you don't mind," the irate
mother exclaimed as she left the room.

Crozier nodded.  "Well, that would be appropriate, Mrs. Tynan, but it
wouldn't cleanse him.  He is the original leopard whose spots are there
for ever."

By this time Burlingame was on his feet, and a look of craft and fear and
ugly meaning was in his face.  Morally he was a coward, physically he was
a coward, but he had in his pocket a weapon which gave him a feeling
of superiority in the situation; and after a night of extreme self-
indulgence he was in a state of irritation of the nerves which gave
him what the searchers after excuses for ungoverned instincts and acts
call "brain-storms."  He had had sense enough to know that his amorous
escapades would get him into trouble one day, and he had always carried
the little pistol which was now so convenient to his hand.  It gave him a
fictitious courage which he would not have had unarmed against almost any
man--or woman--in Askatoon.

"You get a woman to do your fighting for you," he said hatefully.  "You
have to drag her in.  It was you I meant to challenge, not the poor girl
young enough to be your daughter."  His hand went to his waistcoat
pocket.  Crozier saw and understood.

Suddenly Crozier's eyes blazed.  The abnormal in him--the Celtic strain
always at variance with the normal, an almost ultra-natural attendant of
it awoke like a tempest in the tropics.  His face became transformed,
alive with a passion uncanny in its recklessness and purpose.  It was a
brain-storm indeed, but it had behind it a normal power, a moral force
which was not to be resisted.

"None of your sickly melodrama here.  Take out of your pocket the pistol
you carry and give it to me," Crozier growled.  "You are not to be
trusted.  The habit of thinking you would shoot somebody some time--
somebody you had injured--might become too much for you to-day, and then
I should have to kill you, and for your wife's sake I don't want to do
that.  I always feel sorry for a woman with a husband like you.  You
could never shoot me.  You couldn't be quick enough, but you might try.
Then I should end you, and there'd be another trial; but the lawyer who
defended me would not have to cross-examine any witness about your
character.  It is too well-known, Burlingame.  Out with it--the pistol!"
he added, standing menacingly over the other.

In a kind of stupor, under the storm that was breaking above him,
Burlingame slowly drew out of a capacious waistcoat pocket a tiny but
powerful pistol of the most modern make.

"Put it in my hand," insisted Crozier, his eyes on the other's.

The flabby hand laid the weapon in Crozier's lean and strenuous fingers.
Crozier calmly withdrew the cartridges and then tossed the weapon back on
the table.

"Now we have equality of opportunity," he remarked quietly.  "If you
think you would like to repeat any slander that's slid off your foul
tongue, do it now; and in a moment or two Mrs. Tynan can turn the hose on
the floor of this room."

"I want to get to business," said Burlingame sullenly, as he took from
his pocket a paper.

Crozier nodded.  "I can imagine your haste," he remarked.  "You need all
the fees you can get to pay Belle Bingley's bills."

Burlingame did not wince.  He made no reply to the challenge that he was
the chief supporter of a certain wanton thereabouts.

"The time for your option to take ten thousand dollars' worth of shares
in the syndicate is up," he said; "and I am instructed to inform you that
Messrs.  Bradley, Willingden, Baxter, & Simmons propose to take over your
unpaid shares and to complete the transaction without you."

"Who informed Messrs.  Bradley, Willingden, Baxter, & Simmons that I am
not prepared to pay for my shares?" asked Crozier sharply.

"The time is up," surlily replied Burlingame.  "It is assumed you can't
take up your shares, and that you don't want to do so.  The time us up,"
he added emphatically, and he tapped the paper spread before him on the
table.

Crozier's eyes half closed in an access of stubbornness and hatred.
"You are not to assume anything whatever," he declared.  "You are to
accommodate yourself to actual facts.  The time is not up.  It is not up
till midnight, and any action taken before then on any other assumption
will give grounds for damages."

Crozier spoke without passion and with a coldblooded insistence not lost
on Burlingame.  Taking down a calendar from the wall, he laid it beside
the paper on the table before the too eager lawyer.  "Examine the dates,"
he said.  "At twelve o'clock tonight Messrs.  Bradley, Willingden,
Baxter, & Simmons are free to act, if the money is not at the disposal of
the syndicate by then; but till then my option is indefeasible.  Does
that meet the case or not?"

"It meets the case," said Burlingame in a morose voice, rising.
"If you can produce the money before the stroke of midnight, why can't
you produce it now?  What's the use of bluffing!  It can't do any good in
the end.  Your credit--"

"My credit has been stopped by your friends," interrupted Crozier, "but
my resources are current."  "Midnight is not far off," viciously remarked
Burlingame as he made for the door.

Crozier intercepted him.  "One word with you on another business before
you go," he said.  "The tar-and-feathers for which Mrs. Tynan asks will
be yours at any moment I raise my hand in Askatoon.  There are enough
women alone who would do it."

"Talk of that after midnight," sneered Burlingame desperately as the door
was opened for him by Crozier.  "Better not go out by the front gate,"
remarked Crozier scornfully.  "Mrs. Tynan is a woman of her word, and the
hose is handy."

A moment later, with contemptuous satisfaction, he saw Burlingame climb
the picket-fence at the side of the house.

Turning back into the room, he threw up his arms.  "Midnight--midnight--
my God, where am I to get the money!  I must--I must have it .  .  .
It's the only way back."

Sitting down at the table, he dropped his head into his hands and shut
his eyes in utter dejection.  "Mona--by Heaven, no, I'll never take it
from her!" he said once, and clenched his hands at his temples and sat
on and on unmoving.




CHAPTER XVII

WHO WOULD HAVE THOUGHT IT?

For a full half-hour Crozier sat buried in dark reflection, then he
slowly raised his head, and for a minute looked round dazedly.  His
absorption had been so great that for a moment he was like one who had
awakened upon unfamiliar things.  As when in a dream of the night the
history of years will flash past like a ray of light, so for the bad
half-hour in which Crozier had given himself up to despair, his mind had
travelled through an incongruous series of incidents of his past life,
and had also revealed pictures of solution after solution of his present
troubles.

He had that-gift of visualization which makes life an endless procession
of pictures which allure, or which wear the nature into premature old
age.  The last picture flashing before his eyes, as he sat there alone,
was of himself and his elder brother, Garnett, now master of Castlegarry,
racing ponies to reach the lodge-gates before they closed for the night,
after a day of disobedience and truancy.  He remembered how Garnett had
given him the better pony of the two, so that the younger brother, who
would be more heavily punished if they were locked out, should have the
better chance.  Garnett, if odd in manner and character, had always been
a true sportsman though not a lover of sport.

If--if--why had he never thought of Garnett?  Garnett could help him, and
he would do so.  He would let Garnett stand in with him--take one-third
of his profits from the syndicate.  Yes, he must ask Garnett to see him
through.  Then it was that he lifted his head from his hands, and his
mind awakened out of a dream as real as though he had actually been
asleep.  Garnett--alas!  Garnett was thousands of miles away, and he had
not heard from him for five years.  Still, he knew the master of
Castlegarry was alive, for he had seen him mentioned in a chance number
of The Morning Post lately come to his hands.  What avail!  Garnett was
at Castlegarry, and at midnight his chance of fortune and a new life
would be gone.  Then, penniless, he would have to face Mona again; and
what would come of that he could not see, would not try to see.  There
was an alternative he would not attempt to face until after midnight,
when this crisis in his life would be over.  Beyond midnight was a
darkness which he would not now try to pierce.  As his eyes again became
used to his surroundings, a look of determination, the determination of
the true gambler, came into his face.  The real gambler never throws up
the sponge till all is gone; never gives up till after the last toss of
the last penny of cash or credit; for he has seen such innumerable times
the thing come right and good fortune extend a friendly hand with the
last hazard of all.

Suddenly he remembered--saw--a scene in the gambling rooms at Monte Carlo
on the only visit he had ever paid to the place.  He had played
constantly, and had won more or less each day.  Then his fortune turned
and he lost and lost each day.  At last, one evening, he walked up to a
table and said to the croupier, "When was zero up last?"  The croupier
answered, "Not for an hour."  Forthwith he began to stake on zero and on
nothing else.  For two hours he put his louis at each turn of the wheel
on the Lonely Nought.  For two hours he lost.  Increasing his stake,
which had begun at five francs and had risen at length to five louis, he
still coaxed the sardonic deity.  Finally midnight came, and he was the
only person playing at the table.  All others had gone or had ceased to
play.  These stayed to watch the "mad Inglesi," as a foreigner called
him, knocking his head against the foot stool of an unresponsive god of
chance.  The croupiers watched also with somewhat disdainful, somewhat
pitying interest, this last representative of a class who have an insane
notion that the law of chances is in their favour if they can but stay
the course.  And how often had they seen the stubborn challenger of a
black demon, who would not appear according to the law of chances, leave
the table ruined for ever!

Smiling, Crozier had played on till he had but ten louis left.  Counting
them over with cheerful exactness, he rose up, lit a cigarette, placed
the ten louis on the fatal spot with cynical precision, and with a gay
smile kissed his hand to the refractory Nothing and said, "You've got it
all, Zero-good-night!  Goodnight, Zero!"  Then he had buttoned his coat
and turned away to seek the cool air of the Mediterranean.  He had gone
but a step or two, his head half gaily turned to the table where the
dwindling onlookers stood watching the wheel spin round, when suddenly
the croupier's cry of "Zero!" fell upon his ears.

With cheerful nonchalance he had come back to the table and picked up the
many louis he had won--won by his last throw and with his last available
coin.

As the scene passed before him now he got to his feet and, with that look
of the visionary in his eyes, which those only know who have watched the
born gamester, said, "I'll back my hand till the last throw."  Then it
was, as his eyes gazed in front of him dreamily, he saw the card on his
mirror bearing the words, "Courage, soldier!"

With a deepening flame in his eyes he went over and gazed at it.  At
length he reached out and touched the writing with a caressing finger.

"Kitty--Kitty, how great you are!" he said.  Then as he turned to the
outer door a softness came into his face, stole up into his brilliant
eyes and dimmed them with a tear.  "What a hand to hold in the dark--the
dark of life !" he said aloud.  "Courage, soldier!" he added, as he
opened the door by which he had entered, through which Burlingame had
gone, and strode away towards the town of Askatoon, feeling somehow in
his heart that before midnight his luck would turn.

From the dining-room Kitty had watched him go.  "Courage, soldier!" she
whispered after him, and she laughed; but almost immediately she threw
her head up with a gasping sigh, and when it was lowered again two tears
were stealing down her cheeks.

With an effort she conquered herself, wiped away the tears, and said
aloud, with a whimsical but none the less pitiful self-reproach, "Kitty-
Kitty Tynan, what a fool you are!"

Entering the room Crozier had left, she went to the desk with the green-
baize top, opened it, and took out the fateful letter which Mona Crozier
had written to her husband five years ago.  Putting it into her pocket
she returned to the dining-room.  She stood there for a moment with her
chin in her hands and deep reflection in her eyes, and then, going to the
door of her mother's sitting-room, she opened it and beckoned.  A moment
later Mrs. Crozier and the Young Doctor entered the dining-room and sat
down at a motion from her.  Presently she said:

"Mrs. Crozier, I have here the letter your husband received from you five
years ago in London."

Mrs. Crozier flushed.  She had been masterful by nature and she had had
her way very much in life.  To be dominated in the most intimate things
of her life by this girl was not easy to be borne; but she realised that
Kitty had been a friend indeed, even if not conventional.  In response to
Kitty's remark now she inclined her head.

"Well, you have told us that you and your husband haven't made it up.
That is so, isn't it?" Kitty continued.

"If you wish to put it that way," answered Mona, stiffening a little in
spite of herself.

"P'r'aps I don't put it very well, but it is the stony fact, isn't it,
Mrs. Crozier?"

Mona hesitated a moment, then answered: "He is very upset concerning the
land syndicate, and he has a quixotic idea that he cannot take money from
me to help him carry it through."

"I don't quite know what quixotic means," rejoined Kitty dryly.  "If it
wasn't understood while you lived together that what was one's was the
other's, that it was all in one purse, and that you shut your eyes to
the name on the purse and took as you wanted, I don't see how you could
expect him, after your five years' desertion, to take money from you
now."

"My five years' desertion!" exclaimed Mona.  Surely this girl was more
than reckless in her talk.  Kitty was not to be put down.  "If you don't
mind plain speaking, he was always with you, but you weren't always with
him in those days.  This letter showed that."  She tapped it on her
thumb-nail.  "It was only when he had gone and you saw what you had lost,
that you came back to him--in heart, I mean.  Well, if you didn't go away
with him when he went, and you wouldn't have gone unless he had ordered
you to go--and he wouldn't do that--it's clear you deserted him, since
you did that which drove him from home, and you stayed there instead of
going with him.  I've worked it out, and it is certain you deserted him
five years ago.  Desertion does't mean a sea of water between, it means
an ocean of self-will and love-me-first between.  If you hadn't deserted
him, as this letter shows, he wouldn't have been here.  I expect he told
you so; and if he did, what did you say to him?"

The Young Doctor's eyes were full of decorous mirth and apprehension, for
such logic and such impudence as Kitty's was like none he had ever heard.
Yet it was commanding too.

Kitty caught the look in his eyes and blazed up.  "Isn't what I said
correct?  Isn't it all true and logical?  And if it is, why do you sit
there looking so superior?"

The Young Doctor made a gesture of deprecating apology.  "It's all true,
and it's logical, too, if you stand on your head when you think it.  But
whether it is logical or not, it is your conclusion, and as you've taken
the thing in hand to set it right, it is up to you now.  We can only hold
hard and wait."

With a shrug of her graceful shoulders Kitty turned again to Mrs.
Crozier, who intervened hastily, saying, "I did not have a chance of
saying to him all I wished.  Of course he could not take my money, but
there was his own money!  I was going to tell him about that, but just
then the lawyer, Mr. Burlingame--"

"They all call him 'Gus' Burlingame.  He doesn't get the civility of Mr.
here in Askatoon," interposed Kitty.

Mona made an impatient gesture.  "If you will listen, I want to tell you
about Mr. Crozier's money.  He thinks he has no money, but he has.  He
has a good deal."

She paused, and the Young Doctor and Kitty leaned forward eagerly.
"Well, but go on," said Kitty.  "If he has money he must have it to-day,
and now.  Certainly he doesn't know of it.  He thinks he is broke,--dead
broke,--and there'd be a hundred and fifty thousand dollars for him if he
could put up ten thousand dollars to-night.  If I were you I wouldn't
hide it from him any longer."

Mona got to her feet in anger.  "If you would give me a chance to
explain, I would do so," she said, her lips trembling.  "Unfortunately,
I am in your hands, but please give me credit for some intelligence--and
some heart.  In any case I shall not be bullied."

The Young Doctor almost laughed outright, despite the danger of the
situation.  He was not prepared for Kitty's reply and the impulsive act
that marched with it.  In an instant Kitty had caught Mona Crozier's hand
and pressed it warmly.  "I was only doing what I've seen lawyers do," she
said eagerly.  "I've got something that I want you to do, and I've been
trying to work up to it.  That's all.  I'm not as mean and bad mannered
as you think me.  I really do care what happens to him--to you both," she
hastened to add.

Struggling to keep back her tears, and in a low voice, Mona rejoined: "I
meant to have told him what I'm going to tell you now.  I couldn't say
anything about the money belonging to him till I had told him how it came
to be his."

After a moment' pause she continued: "He told you all about the race
which Flamingo lost, and about that letter."  She pointed to the letter
which Kitty still carried in her hand.  "Well, that letter was written
under the sting of bitter disappointment.  I was vain.  I was young.
I did not understand as I do now.  If you were not such good friends--
of his--I could not tell you this.  It seemed to me that by breaking his
pledge he showed he did not care for me; that he thought he could break a
sacred pledge to me, and it didn't matter.  I thought it was treating me
lightly--to do it so soon after the pledge was given.  I was indignant.
I felt we weren't as we might be, and I felt, too, that I must be at
fault; but I was so proud that I didn't want to admit it, I suppose, when
he did give me a grievance.  It was all so mixed.  I was shocked at his
breaking his pledge, I was so vexed that our marriage hadn't been the
success it might have been, and I think I was a little mad."

"That is not the monopoly of only one of your sex," interposed the Young
Doctor dryly.  "If I were you I wouldn't apologise for it.  You speak to
a sister in like distress."

Kitty's eyes flamed up, but she turned her head, as though some licensed
libertine of speech had had his say, and looked with friendly eyes at
Mona.  "Yes, yes--please go on," she urged.

"When I wrote that letter I had forgotten what I had done the day before
the race.  I had gone into my husband's room to find some things I needed
from the drawer of his dressing-table; and far at the back of a drawer I
found a crumpled-up roll of ten-pound notes.  It was fifty pounds
altogether.  I took the notes--"

She paused a moment, and the room became very still.  Both her listeners
were sure that they were nearing a thing of deep importance.

In a lower voice Mona continued: "I don't know what possessed me, but
perhaps it was that the things he did of which I disapproved most had got
a hold on me in spite of myself.  I said to myself: 'I am going to the
Derby.  I will take the fifty pounds, and I'll put it on a horse for
Shiel.'  He had talked so much to my brother about Flamingo, and I had
seen him go wrong so often, that I had a feeling if I put it on a horse
that Shiel particularly banned, it would probably win.  He had been wrong
nearly every time for two years.  It was his money, and if it won, it
would make him happy; and if it didn't win, well, he didn't know the
money existed--I was sure of that; and, anyhow, I could replace it.  I
put it on a horse he condemned utterly, but of which one or two people
spoke well.  You know what happened to Flamingo.  While at Epsom I heard
from friends that Shiel was present at the race, though he had said he
would not go.  Later I learned that he had lost heavily.  Then I saw him
in the distance paying out money and giving bills to the bookmakers.  It
made me very angry.  I don't think I was quite sane.  Most women are like
that at times."

"As I said," remarked the Young Doctor, his face mirthfully alive.  Here
was a situation indeed.

"So I wrote him that letter," Mona went on.  "I had forgotten all about
the money I put on the outsider which won the race.  As you know, I was
called away to my sick sister that evening, and the money I won with
Shiel's fifty pounds was not paid to me till after Shiel had gone."

"How much was it?" asked Kitty breathlessly.

"Four thousand pounds."

Kitty exclaimed so loudly that she smothered her mouth with a hand.
"Why, he only needs for the syndicate two thousand pounds--ten thousand
dollars," she said excitedly.  "But what's the good of it, if he can't
lay his hand on it by midnight to-night!"

"He can do so," was Mona's quick reply.  "I was going to tell him that,
but the lawyer came, and--"

Kitty sprang up and down in excitement.  "I had a plan.  It might have
worked without this.  It was the only way then.  But this makes it sure
--yes, most beautifully sure.  It shows that the thing to do is to follow
your convictions.  You say you actually have the money, Mrs. Crozier?"

Mona took from her pocket an envelope, and out of it she drew four Bank
of England notes.  "Here it is--here are four one-thousand-pound notes.
I had it paid to me that way five years ago, and here--here it is," she
added, with almost a touch of hysteria in her voice, for the excitement
of it all acted on her like an electric storm.

"Well, we'll get to work at once," declared Kitty, looking at the notes
admiringly, then taking them from Mona and smoothing them out with tender
firmness.  "It's just the luck of the wide world, as my father used to
say.  It actually is.  Now you see," she continued, "it's like this.
That letter you wrote him"--she addressed herself to Mona--"it has to be
changed.  You have got to rewrite it, and you must put into it these four
bank-notes.  Then when you see him again you must have that letter opened
at exactly the right moment, and--oh, I wonder if you will do it exactly
right!" she added dubiously to Mona.  "You don't play your game very
well, and it's just possible that, even now, with all the cards in your
hands, you will throw them away as you did in the past.  I wish that--"

Seeing Mona's agitation changing to choler, the Young Doctor intervened.
He did not know Kitty was purposely stinging Crozier's unhappy little
consort, so that she should be put upon her mettle to do the thing
without bungling.

"You can trust Mrs. Crozier to act carefully; but what exactly do you
mean?  I judge that Mrs. Crozier does not see more distinctly than I do,"
he remarked inquiringly to Kitty, and with admonishment in tone and
emphasis.

"No, I do not understand quite--will you explain?" interposed Mona with
inner resentment at being managed, but feeling that she could not do
without Kitty even if she would.

"As I said," continued Kitty, "I will open that letter, and you will put
in another letter and these bank-notes; and when he repeats what he said
about the way you felt and wrote when he broke his pledge, you can blaze
up and tell him to open the letter.  Then he will be so sorry that he'll
get down on his knees, and you will be happy ever after."

"But it will be a fraud, and dishonest and dishonourable," protested
Mona.

Kitty almost sniffed, but she was too agitated to be scornful.  "Just
leave that to me, please.  It won't make me a bit more dishonourable to
open the letter again--I've opened it once, and I don't feel any the
worse for it.  I have no conscience, and things don't weigh on my mind at
all.  I'm a light-minded person."

Looking closely at her, the Young Doctor got a still further insight into
the mind and soul of this prairie girl, who used a lid of irony to cover
a well of deep feeling.  Things did not weigh on her mind!  He was sure
that pain to the wife of Shiel Crozier would be mortal torture to Kitty
Tynan.

"But I felt exactly what I wrote that Derby Day when he broke his pledge,
and he ought to know me exactly as I was," urged Mona.  "I don't want to
deceive him, to appear a bit better than I am."

"Oh, you'd rather lose him!" said Kitty almost savagely.  "Knowing how
hard it is to keep a man under the best circumstances, you'd willingly
make the circumstances as bad as they can be--is that it?  Besides,
weren't you sorry afterwards that you wrote that letter?"

"Yes, yes, desperately sorry."

"And you wished often that your real self had written on Derby Day and
not the scratch-cat you were then?"

Mona flushed, but answered bravely, "Yes, a thousand times."

"What business had you to show him your cat-self, your unreal, not your
real self on Derby Day five years ago?  Wasn't it your duty to show him
your real self?"

Mona nodded helplessly.  "Yes, I know it was."

"Then isn't it your duty to see that your real self speaks in that letter
now?"

"I want him to know me exactly as I am, and then--"

Kitty made a passionate gesture.  Was ever such an uncomprehending woman
as this diamond-button of a wife?

"And then you would be unhappy ever after instead of being happy ever
after.  What is the good of prejudicing your husband against you by
telling the unnecessary truth.  He is desperate, and besides, he has been
away from you for five years, and we all change somehow--particularly
men, when there are so many women in the world, and very pretty women of
all ages and kinds and colours and tastes, and dazzling, deceitful
hussies too.  It isn't wise for any woman to let her husband or any one
at all see her exactly as she is; and only the silly ones do it.  They
tell what they think is the truth about their own wickedness, and it
isn't the truth at all, because I suppose women don't know how to tell
the exact truth; and they can be just as unfair to themselves as they are
to others.  Besides, haven't you any sense of humour, Mrs. Crozier?  It's
as good as a play, this.  Just think: after five years of desertion, and
trouble without end, and it all put right by a little sleight-of-hand.
Shall I open it?"

She held the letter up.  Mona nodded almost eagerly now, for come of a
subtle, social world far away, she still was no match for the subtlety of
the wilds--or was it the cunning the wild things know?

Kitty left the room, but in a moment afterwards returned with the letter
open.  "The kettle on the hob is the friend of the family," she said
gaily.  "Here it is all ready for what there is to do.  You go and keep
watch for Mr. Crozier," she added to the Young Doctor.  "He won't be gone
long, I should think, and we don't want him bursting in on us before I've
got that letter safe back into his desk.  If he comes, you keep him busy
for a moment.  When we're quite ready I'll come to the front door, and
then you will know it is all right."

"I'm to go while you make up your prescription--all right!" said the
Young Doctor, and with a wave of the hand he left the room.

Instantly Kitty brought a lead pencil and paper.  "Now sit down and write
to him, Mrs. Crozier," she said briskly.  "Use discretion; don't gush;
slap his face a little for breaking his pledge, and afterwards tell him
that you did at the Derby what you had abused him for doing.  Then
explain to him about this four thousand pounds--twenty thousand dollars
--my, what a lot of money, and all got in one day!  Tell him that it was
all won by his own cash.  It's as easy as can be, and it will be a
certainty now."

So saying, she lit a match.  "You--hold this wicked old catfish letter
into the flame, please, Mrs. Crozier, and keep praying all the time, and
please remember that 'our little hands were never made to tear each
other's eyes.'"

Mona's small fingers were trembling as she held the fateful letter into
the flame, and then in silence both watched it burn to a cinder.  A
faint, hopeful smile was on Mona's face now.

"What isn't never was to those that never knew," said Kitty briskly, and
pushed a chair up to the table.  "Now sit down and write, please."

Mona sat down.  Taking up a sheet of notepaper she looked at it
dubiously.

"Oh, what a fool I am!" said Kitty, understanding the look.  "And that's
what every criminal does--he forgets something.  I forgot the notepaper.
Of course you can't use that notepaper.  Of course not.  He'd know it in
a minute.  Besides, the sheet we burned had an engraved address on it.
I never thought of that--good gracious!"

"Wait--wait," said Mona, her face lighting.  "I may have some sheets in
my writing-case.  It's only a chance, but there were some loose sheets in
it when I left home.  I'll go and see."

While she was gone to her bedroom Kitty stood still in the middle of the
room lost in reflection, as completely absorbed as though she was seeing
things thousands of miles away.  In truth, she was seeing things millions
of miles away; she was seeing a Promised Land.  It was a gift of hers, or
a penalty of her life, perhaps, that she could lose herself in reverie at
a moment's notice--a reverie as complete as though she was subtracted
from life's realities.  Now, as she looked out of the door, far over the
prairie to a tiny group of pine-trees in the vanishing distance, lines
she once read floated through her mind:

              "Away and beyond the point of pines,
               In a pleasant land where the glad grapes be,
               Purple and pendent on verdant vines,
               I know that my fate is awaiting me."

What fate was to be hers?  There was no joy in her eyes as she gazed.
Mrs. Crozier was beside the table again before she roused herself from
her trance.

"I've got it--just two sheets, two solitary sheets," said Mona in
triumph.  "How long they have been in my case I don't know.  It is almost
uncanny they should be there just when they're most needed."

"Providential, we should say out here," was Kitty's response.  "Begin,
please.  Be sure you have the right date.  It was--"

Mona had already written the date, and she interrupted Kitty with the
words, "As though I could forget it!"  All at once Kitty put a
restraining hand on her arm.

"Wait--wait, you mustn't write on that paper yet.  Suppose you didn't
write the real wise thing--and only two sheets of paper and so much to
say?"

"How right you always are!" said Mona, and took up one of the blank
sheets which Kitty had just brought her.

Then she began to write.  For a minute she wrote swiftly, nervously, and
had nearly finished a page when Kitty said to her, "I think I had better
see what you have written.  I don't think you are the best judge.  You
see, I have known him better than you for the last five years, and I am
the best judge please, I mean it in the rightest, kindest way," she
added, as she saw Mona shrink.  It was like hurting a child, and she
loved children--so much.  She had always a vision of children at her
knee.

Silently Mrs. Crozier pushed the sheets towards her.  Kitty read the page
with a strange, eager look in her eyes.  "Yes, that's right as far as it
goes," she said.  "It doesn't gush.  It's natural.  It's you as you are
now, not as you were then, of course."

Again Mona bent over the paper and wrote till she had completed a page.
Then Kitty looked over her shoulder and read what had been written.  "No,
no, no, that won't do," she exclaimed.  "That won't do at all.  It isn't
in the way that will accomplish what we want.  You've gone quite, quite
wrong.  I'll do it.  I'll dictate it to you.  I know exactly what to say,
and we mustn't make any mistake.  Write, please--you must."

Mona scratched out what had been written without a word.  "I am waiting,"
she said submissively.

"All right.  Now we go on.  Write.  I'll dictate."  "'And look here,
dearest,'" she began, but Mona stopped her.

"We do not say 'look here' in England.  I would have said 'and see.'"

"'And see-dearest,'" corrected Kitty, with an accent on the last word,
"'while I was mad at you for the moment for breaking your promise--'"

"In England we don't say 'mad' in that connection," Mona again
interrupted.  "We say 'angry' or 'annoyed' or 'vexed.'" There was real
distress in her tone.

"Now I'll tell you what to do," said Kitty cheerfully.  "I'll speak it,
and you write it my way of thinking, and then when we've finished you
will take out of the letter any words that are not pure, noble, classic
English.  I know what you mean, and you are quite right.  Mr. Crozier
never says 'look here' or 'mad,' and he speaks better than any one I ever
heard.  Now, we certainly must get on."

After an instant she began again.

"--While I was angry at you a moment for breaking your promise, I cannot
reproach you for it, because I, too, bet on the Derby, but I bet on a
horse that you had said as much against as you could.  I did it because
you had very bad luck all this year and lost, and also last year, and I
thought--"

For several minutes, with greater deliberation than was usual with her,
Kitty dictated, and at the end of the letter she said, "I am, dearest,
your--"

Here Mona sharply interrupted her.  "If you don't mind I will say that
myself in my own way," she said, flushing.

"Oh, I forgot for the moment that I was speaking for you!" responded
Kitty, with a lurking, undermeaning in her voice.  "I threw myself into
it so.  Do you think I've done the thing right?" she added.

With a direct, honest friendliness Mona looked into Kitty eyes.  "You
have said the exact right thing as to meaning, I am sure, and I can
change an occasional word here and there to make it all conventional
English."

Kitty nodded.  "Don't lose a minute in copying it.  We must get the
letter back in his desk as soon as possible."

As Mona wrote, Kitty sat with the envelope in her hand, alternately
looking at it and into the distance beyond the point of pines.  She was
certain that she had found the solution of the troubles of Shiel and Mona
Crozier, for Crozier would now have his fortune, and the return to his
wife was a matter of course.  Was she altogether sure?  But yes, she was
altogether sure.  She remembered, with a sudden, swift plunge of blood in
her veins, that early dawn when she bent over him as he lay beneath the
tree, and as she kissed him in his sleep he had murmured, "My darling!"
That had not been for her, though it had been her kiss which had stirred
his dreaming soul to say the words.  If they had only been meant for her,
then--oh, then life would be so much easier in the future!  If--if she
could only kiss him again and he would wake and say--

She got to her feet with an involuntary exclamation.  For an instant she
had been lost in a world of her own, a world of the impossible.

"I almost thought I heard a step in the other room," she said in
explanation to Mona.  Going to the door of Crozier's room, she appeared
to listen for a moment, and then she opened it.

"No, it is all right," she said.

In another few minutes Mona had finished the letter.  "Do you wish to
read it again?" she asked Kitty, but not handing it to her.

"No, I leave the words to you.  It was the right meaning I wanted in it,"
she replied.

Suddenly Mona came to her and laid a hand on her arm.  "You are
wonderful--a wonderful, wise, beloved girl," she said, and there were
tears in her eyes.

Kitty gave the tiny fingers a spasmodic clasp, and said: "Quick, we must
get them in!"  She put the banknotes inside the sheets of paper, then
hastily placed both in the envelope and sealed the envelope again.

"It's just a tiny bit damp with the steam yet, but it will be all right
in five minutes.  How soiled the envelope is!"  Kitty added.  "Five years
in and out of the desk, in and out of his pocket--but all so nice and
unsoiled and sweet and bonny inside," she added.  "To say nothing of the
bawbees, as Mr. Crozier calls money.  Well, we are ready.  It all depends
on you now, Mrs. Crozier."

"No, not all."

"He used to be afraid of you; now you are afraid of him," said Kitty, as
though stating a commonplace.

There was no more shrewishness left in the little woman to meet this
chastisement.  The forces against her were too many.  Loneliness and the
long struggle to face the world without her man; the determination of
this masterful young woman who had been so long a part of her husband's
life; and, more than all, a new feeling altogether--love, and the
dependence a woman feels, the longing to find rest in strong arms, which
comes with the first revelation of love, had conquered what Kitty had
called her "bossiness."  She was now tremulous before the crisis which
she must presently face.  Pride in her fortune, in her independence, had
died down in her.  She no longer thought of herself as a woman especially
endowed and privileged.  She took her fortune now like a man; for she had
been taught that a man could set her aside just because she had money,
could desert her to be independent of it.  It had been a revelation to
her, and she was chastened of all the termagancy visible and invisible in
her.  She stood now before Kitty of "a humble and a contrite heart," and
made no reply at all to the implied challenge.  Kitty, instantly sorry
for what she had said, let it go at that.  She was only now aware of how
deeply her arrows had gone home.

As they stood silent there was a click at the gate.  Kitty ran into
Crozier's room, thrust the letter into its pigeonhole in the desk, and in
a moment was back again.  In the garden the Young Doctor was holding
Crozier in conversation, but watching the front door.  So soon, however,
as Kitty had shown herself, as she had promised, at the front door and
then vanished, he turned Crozier towards the house again by an adroit
word, and left him at the door-step.

Seeing who was inside the room Crozier hesitated, and his long face, with
paleness added to its asceticism, took on a look which could have given
no hope of happiness to Mona.  It went to her heart as no look of his had
ever gone.  Suddenly she had a revelation of how little she had known of
what he was, or what any man was or could be, or of those springs of
nature lying far below the outer lives which move in orbits of sheltering
convention.  It is because some men and women are so sheltered from the
storms of life by wealth and comfort that these piercing agonies which
strike down to the uttermost depths so seldom reach them.

Shiel half turned away, not sullen, not morose, but with a strange apathy
settled on him.  He had once heard a man say, "I feel as though I wanted
to crawl into a hole and die."  That was the way he felt now, for to be
beaten in the game which you have played like a man yourself and have
been fouled into an unchallenged defeat, without the voice of the umpire,
is a fate which has smothered the soul of better men than Crozier.

Mona's voice stopped him.  "Do not go, Shiel," she urged gently.  "No,
you must not go--I want fair-play from you, if nothing else.  You must
play the game with me.  I want justice.  I have to say some things I had
no chance to say before, and I want to hear some things I have a right to
hear.  Indeed, you must play the game."

He drew himself up.  Not to be a sportsman, not to play the game--to
accuse him of this would have brought him back from the edge of the
grave.

"I'm not fit to-day.  Let it be to-morrow, Mona," was his hesitating
reply; but he did not leave the doorway.

She shook her head and made a swift little childlike gesture towards him.
"We are sure of to-day; we are not sure of to-morrow.  One or the other
of us might not be here to-morrow.  Let us do to-day the thing that
belongs to to-day."

That note struck home, for indeed the black spirit which whispers to men
in their most despairing hours to end it all had whispered to him.

"Let us do to-day the thing that belongs to to-day," she had just said,
and, strange to say, there shot into his mind words that belonged to the
days when he went to church at Castlegarry and thought of a thousand
things other than prayer or praise, but yet heard with the acute ears of
the young, and remembered with the persistent memory of youth.  "For the
night cometh when no man can work," were the words which came to him.  He
shuddered slightly.  Suppose that this indeed was the beginning of the
night!  As she said, he must play the game--play it as Crozier of Lammis
would have played it.

He stepped inside the room.  "Let it be to-day," he said.

"We may be interrupted here," she replied.  Courage came to her.  "Let us
talk in your own room," she added, and going over she opened the door of
it and walked in.  The matured modesty of a lost five years did not cloak
her actions now.  She was a woman fighting for happiness, and she had
been so beaten by the rods of scorn, so smothered by the dust of
humiliation, that there had come to her the courage of those who would
rather die fighting than in the lethargy of despair.

It was like her old self to take the initiative, but she did it now in so
different a way--without masterfulness or assumption.  It was rather like
saying, "I will do what I know you wish me to do; I will lay all reserve
aside for your sake; I will be bold because I love you."

He shut the door behind them and motioned her to a chair.

"No, I will not sit," she said.  "That is too formal.  You ask any
stranger to sit.  I am at home here, Shiel, and I will stand."

"What was it you wanted to say, Mona?" he asked, scarcely looking at
her.

"I should like to think that there was something you wished to hear," she
replied.  "Don't you want to know all that has happened since you left
us--about me, about your brother, about your friends, about Lammis?  I
bought Lammis at the sale you ordered; it is still ours."  She gave
emphasis to "ours."  "You may not want to hear all that has happened to
me since you left, still I must tell you some things that you ought to
know, if we are going to part again.  You treated me badly.  There was no
reason why you should have left and placed me in the position you did."

His head came up sharply and his voice became a little hard.  "I told you
I was penniless, and I would not live on you, and I could do nothing in
England; I had no trade or profession.  If I had said good-bye to you,
you would probably have offered me a ticket to Canada.  As I was a pauper
I preferred to go with what I had out of the wreck--just enough to bring
me here.  But I've earned my own living since."

"Penniless--just enough to bring you out here!"  Her voice had a sound of
honest amazement.  "How can you say such a thing!  You had my letter--you
said you had my letter?"

"Yes, I had your letter," he answered.  "Your thoughtful brother brought
it to me.  You had told him all the dear womanly things you had said or
were going to say to your husband, and he passed them on to me with the
letter."

"Never mind what he said to you, Shiel.  It was what I said that
mattered."  She was getting bolder every minute.  The comedy was playing
into her hands.

"You wrote in your letter the things he said to me," he replied.

Her protest sounded indignantly real.  "I said nothing in the letter I
wrote you that any man would not wish to hear.  Is it so unpleasant for a
man who thinks he is penniless to be told that he has made the year's
income of a cabinet minister?"

"I don't understand," he returned helplessly.

"You talk as though you had never read my letter.

"I never have read your letter," he replied in bewilderment.

Her face had the flush of honest anger.  "You do not dare to tell me you
destroyed my letter without reading it--that you destroyed all that
letter contained simply because you no longer cared for your wife;
because you wanted to be rid of her, wanted to vanish and never see her
any more, and so go and leave no trace of yourself!  You have the
courage here to my face"--the comedy of the situation gained much from
the mock indignation--she no longer had any compunctions--"to say that
you destroyed my letter and what it contained--a small fortune it would
be out here."

"I did not destroy your letter, Mona," was the embarrassed response.

"Then what did you do with it?  Gave it to some one else to read--to some
other woman, perhaps."

He was really shocked and greatly pained.  "Hush!  You shall not say that
kind of thing, Mona.  I've never had anything to do with any woman but my
wife since I married her."

"Then what did you do with the letter?"

"It's there," he said, pointing to the high desk with the green baize
top.

"And you say you have never read it?"

"Never."

She raised her head with dainty haughtiness.  "Then if you have still the
same sense of honour that made you keep faith with the bookmakers--you
didn't run away from them!--read it now, here in my presence.  Read it,
Shiel.  I demand that you read it now.  It is my right.  You are in
honour bound--"

It was the only way.  She dare not give him time to question, to suspect;
she must sweep him along to conviction.  She was by no means sure that
there wasn't a flaw in the scheme somewhere, something that would betray
her; and she could hardly wait till it was over, till he had read the
letter.

In a moment he was again near her with the letter in his hand.

"Yes, that's it--that's the letter," she said, with wondering and
reproachful eyes.  "I remember the little scratchy blot from the pen on
the envelope.  There it is, just as I made it five years ago.  But how
disgracefully soiled the envelope is!  I suppose it has been tossed about
in your saddle-bag, or with your old clothes, and only kept to remind you
day by day that you had a wife you couldn't live with--kept as a warning
never to think of her except to say, 'I hate you, Mona, because you are
rich and heartless, and not bigger than a pinch of snuff.'  That was the
kind way you used to speak of her even when you were first married to
her--contemptuously always in your heart, no matter what you said out
loud.  And the end showed it--the end showed it; you deserted her."

He was so fascinated by the picture she made of passion and incensed
declamation that he did not attempt to open the letter, and he wondered
why there was such a difference between the effect of her temper on him
now and the effect of it those long years ago.  He had no feeling of
uneasiness in her presence now, no sense of irritation.  In spite of her
tirade, he had a feeling that it didn't matter, that she must bluster in
her tiny teacup if she wanted to do so.

"Open the letter at once," she insisted.  "If you don't, I will."  She
made as though to take the letter from him, but with a sudden twist he
tore open the envelope.  The bank-notes fell to the floor as he took out
the sheet inside.  Wondering, he stooped to pick them up.

"Four thousand pounds!" he exclaimed, examining them.  "What does it
mean?"

"Read," she commanded.

He devoured the letter.  His eyes swam; then there rushed into them the
flame which always made them illumine his mediaeval face like the light
from "the burning bush."  He did not question or doubt, because he saw
what he wished to see, which is the way of man.  It all looked perfectly
natural and convincing to him.

"Mona--Mona--heaven above and all the gods of hell and Hellas, what
a fool, what a fool I've been!" he exclaimed.  "Mona--Mona, can you
forgive your idiot husband?  I didn't read this letter because I thought
it was going to slash me on the raw--on the raw flesh of my own
lacerating.  I simply couldn't bear to read what your brother said was
in the letter.  Yet I couldn't destroy it, either.  It was you.  I had
to keep it.  Mona, am I too big a fool to be your husband?"

He held out his arms with a passionate exclamation.  "I asked you to kiss
me yesterday, and you wouldn't," she protested.  "I tried to make you
love me yesterday, and you wouldn't.  When a woman gets a rebuff like
that, when--"

She could not bear it any longer.  With a cry of joy she was in his arms.

After a moment he said, "The best of all was, that you--you vixen, you
bet on that Derby and won, and--"

"With your money, remember, Shiel."

"With my money!" he cried exultingly.  "Yes, that's the best of it--the
next best of it.  It was your betting that was the best of all--the best
thing you ever did since we married, except your coming here."

"It's in time to help you, too--with your own money, isn't it?"

He glanced at his watch.  "Hours--I'm hours to the good.  That crowd--
that gang of thieves--that bunch of highwaymen!  I've got them--got them,
and got a hundred and fifty thousand dollars, too, to start again at
home, at Lammis, Mona, back on the--but no, I'm not sure that I can live
there now after this big life out here."

"I'm not so sure, either," Mona replied, with a light of larger
understanding in her eyes.  "But we'll have to go back and stop the
world talking, and put things in shape before we come here to stay."

"To stay here--do you mean that?" he asked eagerly.

"Somewhere in this big land," she replied softly; "anyhow, to stay here
till I've grown up a little.  I wasn't only small in body in the old
days, I was small in mind, Shiel."

"Anyhow, I've done with betting and racing, Mona.  I've just got time
left--I'm only thirty-nine--to start and really do something with
myself."

"Well, start now, dear man of Lammis.  What is it you have to do before
twelve o'clock to-night?"  "What is it?  Why, I have to pay over two
thousand of this,"--he flourished the banknotes--"and even then I'll
still have two thousand left.  But wait--wait.  There was the original
fifty pounds.  Where is that fifty pounds, little girl alive?  Out with
it.  This is the profit.  Where is the fifty you staked?"  His voice was
gay with raillery.

She could look him in the face now and prevaricate without any shame or
compunction at all.  "That fifty pounds--that!  Why, I used it to buy my
ticket for Canada.  My husband ought to pay my expenses out to him."

He laughed greatly.  All Ireland was rioting in his veins now.  He had no
logic or reasoning left.  "Well, that's the way to get into your old
man's heart, Mona.  To think of that!  I call it tact divine.  Everything
has spun my way at last.  I was right about that Derby, after all.  It
was in my bones that I'd make a pot out of it, but I thought I had lost
it all when Flamingo went down."

"You never know your luck--you used to say that, Shiel."

"I say it again.  Come, we must tell our friends--Kitty, her mother, and
the Young Doctor.  You don't know what good friends they have been to me,
mavourneen."

"Yes, I think I do," said Mona, opening the door to the outer room.

Then Crozier called with a great, cheery voice--what Mona used to call
his tally-ho voice.  Mrs. Tynan appeared, smiling.  She knew at a glance
what had happened.  It was so interesting that she could even forgive
Mona.

"Where's Kitty?" asked Crozier, almost boisterously.

"She has gone for a ride with John Sibley," answered Mrs. Tynan.

"Look, there she is!" said Mona, laying a hand on Crozier's arm, and
pointing with the other out over the prairie.

Crozier looked out towards the northwestern horizon, and in the distance
was a woman riding as hard as her horse could go, with a man galloping
hard after her.  It seemed as though they were riding into the sunset.

"She's riding the horse you won that race with years ago when you first
came here, Mr. Crozier," said Mrs. Tynan.  "John Sibley bought it from
Mr. Brennan."

Mona did not see the look which came into Crozier's face as, with one
hand shading his eyes and the other grasping the banknotes which were to
start him in life again, independent and self-respecting, he watched the
girl riding on and on, ever ahead of the man.

It was at that moment the Young Doctor entered the room, and he
distracted Mona's attention for a moment.  Going forward to him Mona
shook him warmly by the hand.  Then she went up to Mrs. Tynan and kissed
her.

"I would like to kiss your daughter too, Mrs. Tynan," Mona said.  .  .  .
"What are you looking at so hard, Shiel?" she presently added to her
husband.

He did not turn to her.  His eyes were still shaded by his hand.

"That horse goes well yet," he said in a low voice.  "As good as ever--
as good as ever."

"He loves horses so," remarked Mona, as though she could tell Mrs. Tynan
and the Young Doctor anything about Shiel Crozier which they did not
know.

"Kitty rides well, doesn't she?" asked Mrs. Tynan of Crozier.

"What a pair--girl and horse!" Crozier exclaimed.  "Thoroughbred--
absolutely thoroughbred!"

Kitty had ridden away with her heart's secret, her very own, as she
thought: but Shiel Crozier knew--the man that mattered knew.




EPILOGUE

Golden, all golden, save where there was a fringe of trees at a
watercourse; save where a garden, like a spot of emerald, made a button
on the royal garment wrapped across the breast of the prairie.  Above,
making for the trees of the foothills far away, a golden eagle floated,
a prairie-hen sped affrighted from some invisible thing; and in the far
distance a railway train slipped down the plain like a serpent making for
a covert in the first hills of the first world that ever was.

At a casual glance the vast plain seemed uninhabited, yet here and there
were men and horses, tiny in the vastness, but conquering.  Here and
there also--for it was July--a haymaker sharpened his scythe, and the
sound came singing through the air radiant and stirring with life.

Seated in the shade of a clump of trees a girl sat with her chin in her
hands looking out over the prairie, an intense dreaming in her eyes.  Her
horse was tethered near by, but it scarcely made a sound.  It was a horse
which had once won a great race, with an Irish gentleman on his back.
Long time the girl sat absorbed, her golden colour, her brown-gold hair
in harmony with the universal stencil of gold.  With her eyes drowned in
the distance, she presently murmured something to herself, and as she did
so the eyes deepened to a nameless umber tone, deeper than gold, warmer
than brown; such a colour as only can be found in a jewel or in a leaf
the frost has touched.

The frost had touched the soul which gave the colour to the eyes of the
girl.  Yet she seemed all summer, all glow and youth and gladness.  Her
voice was golden, too, and the words which fell from her lips were as
though tuned to the sound of falling water.  The tone of the voice would
last when the gold of all else became faded or tarnished.  It had its
origin in the soul:

         "Whereaway goes my lad?  Tell me, has he gone alone?
          Never harsh word did I speak; never hurt I gave;
          Strong he was and beautiful; like a heron he has flown
          Hereaway, hereaway will I make my grave."

The voice lingered on the words till it trailed away into nothing, like
the vanishing note of a violin which seems still to pulse faintly after
the sound has ceased.

"But he did not go alone, and I have not made my grave," the girl said,
and raised her head at the sound of footsteps.  With an effort she
emerged from the half-trance in which she had been, and smiled at a man
hastening towards her.

"Dear bully, bulbous being--how that word 'bully' would have, made her
cringe!" she said as the man ambled nearer.  He could not go as fast as
his mind urged him.

"I've got news--news, news!" he exclaimed, wading through his own
perspiration to where she sat.  "I can guess what it is," the girl
remarked smilingly, as she reached out a hand to him, but remained
seated.  "It's a real, live baby born to Lydia, wife of Methuselah, the
woman also being of goodly years.  It is, isn't it."

"The fattest, finest, most 'scrumpshus' son of all the ages that ever--"

Kitty laughed happily and very whimsically.  "Like none since Moses was
found among the bulrushes!  Where was this one found, and what do you
intend to call him--Jesse, after his 'pa'?"

"No--nothing so common.  He's to be called Shiel--Shiel Crozier Bulrush,
that's to be his name."

The face of the girl became a shade pensive now.  "Oh!  And do you think
you can guarantee that he will be worth the name?  Do you never think
what his father is?"

"I'm starting him right with that name.  I can do so much, anyway,"
laughed the imperturbable one.  "And Mrs. Bulrush, after her great
effort--how is she?

"Flying--simply flying.  Earth not good enough for her.  Simply flying.
But here--here is more news.  Guess what--it's for you.  I've just come
from the post office, and they said there was an English letter for you,
so I brought it."

He handed it over.  She laid it in her lap and waited as though for him
to go.

"Can't I hear how he is?  He's the best man that ever crossed my path,"
he said.

"It happens to be in his wife's, not his, handwriting--did ever such a
scrap of a woman write so sprawling a hand!" she replied, holding the
letter up.

"But she'll let us know in the letter how Crozier is, won't she?"

Kitty had now recovered herself, and slowly she opened the envelope and
took out the letter.  As she did so something fluttered to the ground.

Jesse Bulrush picked it up.  "That looks nice," he said, and he whistled
in surprise.  "It's a money-draft on a bank."

Kitty, whose eyes were fixed on the big, important handwriting, answered
calmly and without apparently looking, as she took the paper from his
hand: "Yes, it's a wedding present--five hundred dollars to buy what I
like best for my home.  So she says."

"Mrs. Crozier, of course."

"Of course."

"Well, that's magnificent.  What will you do with it?"

Kitty rose and held out her hand.  "Go back to your flying partner, happy
man, and ask her what she would do with five hundred dollars if she had
it."

"She'd buy her lord and master a present with it, of course," he
answered.

"Good-bye, Mr. Rolypoly," she responded, laughing.  "You always could
think of things for other people to do; and have never done anything
yourself until now.  Good-bye, father."

When he was gone and out of sight her face changed.  With sudden anger
she crushed and crumpled up the draft for five hundred in her hand.  "'A
token of affection from both!'" she exclaimed, quoting from the letter.
"One lone leaf of Irish shamrock from him would--"

She stopped.  "But he will send a message of his own," she continued.
"He will--he will.  Even if he doesn't, I'll know that he remembers just
the same.  He does--he does remember."

She drew herself up with an effort, and, as it were, shook herself free
from the memories which dimmed her eyes.

Not far away a man was riding towards the clump of trees where she was.
She saw, and hastened to her horse.

"If I told John all I feel he'd understand.  I believe he always has
understood," she added with a far-off look.

The draft was still crushed in her hand when she mounted the beloved
horse, whose name now was Shiel.

Presently she smoothed out the crumpled paper.  "Yes, I'll take it; I'll
put it by," she murmured.  "John will keep on betting.  He'll be broke
some day and he'll need it, maybe."

A moment later she was riding hard to meet the man who, before the wheat-
harvest came, would call her wife.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

He saw what he wished to see, which is the way of man
Searchers after excuses for ungoverned instincts and acts
Telling the unnecessary truth
What isn't never was to those that never knew





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YOU NEVER KNOW YOUR LUCK, V3 ***

******** This file should be named 6287.txt or 6287.zip *********

This eBook was produced by David Widger

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*
