The Project Gutenberg EBook of Seven Maids of Far Cathay, by Bing Ding, Ed.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: Seven Maids of Far Cathay

Author: Bing Ding, Ed.

Release Date: August, 2004  [EBook #6345]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on November 29, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, SEVEN MAIDS OF FAR CATHAY ***




This eBook was produced by David Schwan <davidsch@earthlink.net>.



Seven Maids of Far Cathay
Being English Notes From A Chinese Class Book



Compiled By
Bing Ding



Illustrated By
Ai Lang


The custom of Americanism having been related unto me - "That one book
shall take unto self one dedication" - I have honor to make speeches of
presentation unto N-B-E, a Grandmother Genius of Geniuses.



Foreword



The English Notes which go to make up this Chinese Class book are the
result of a game which the President of the Woman's Anglo-Chinese
College of Neuchang, China, induced the seven Chinese girls of the
graduating class to play during the last six months of their College
course. The Notes were read aloud in class, taken down by a
stenographer, and afterwards arranged alphabetically by the Biographer
assisted by the President of the College. At the request of interested
friends the President has now permitted the publication of these Notes
exactly as they were originally produced, without revision, that the
unique atmosphere pervading them might not be lost.



Contents



Foreword
Biographer
Correspondent
Diarist
Essayist
Folklorist
Genius



Illustrations



"I Will Therefore Now Make Picture or Our Adorable College"
     (Frontispiece)
"It Was He of the Bridge of the Ten Thousand Ages"
"All Day Long Very Good Water, Very Much Pleasure"
"I Find Many Idols of Uselessness"
"Gui (Devil) Always Travel in Straight Line, Road Wind Around so Gui No
     Can Catch Traveler"
Cliff Near the Monkey Mother's Home
"All is of Great Stillness and Peace"



Biographer



Because I drew the B - I have honor to commence this Class book. For once
English A comes not at the head, for our Artist, (whoever is she?) can
at the first do nothing.

It all began thus: The first of last semester in the English class Each,
most horribly read. Miss Sterling, (our Adored Teacher), play with rings
and shake head and say, "Girls, why do you all mispronounce that word,
B-O-U-G-H-? It is pronounced - Bow - like this." She arise and make
grand Kow-Tow, "Or like this," she shake head until little yellow curls
all up and down dance and say, "Bow-wow! Bow-wow! Bow-wow!" The door
open and Miss Powers, (our Honored President), come in. She say nothing,
but Look! Ging Muoi giggle. Miss Sterling grow all white and pink like
Chinese lady. Then Miss Powers speak much dignified:

"We are here to teach these young ladies the art of deportment; can it
be that you were demonstrating a lesson on manners, Miss Sterling?"

Miss Sterling opens lips; no sound come out and her blue eyes with tears
fill up. Most times so timid I cannot tell or act out what I most long
to do, but I love Miss' Sterling.

"Miss Powers," I say, afraid forgetting, "May I have speech?"

Miss Powers smile with corners of mouth only and say, "Yes, Bing Ding,
proceed."

"You know what kind girls we are, Miss Powers, of such a stupidness that
we cannot of the English to learn. We only are to blame, not Miss
Sterling," I say, then afraid remember and sit down.

"It is true that our language is very difficult for you," say Miss
Powers most graciously. "And in order that you may learn to construct
and pronounce it correctly, I propose that this last semester of your
College course, you play a game that we may call 'English Notes.' Have
any of you ever heard of it?" When we told her we had not so heard, she
smile with chin also, and hold to view small package all of a whiteness.

"These are sealed envelopes," she say. "Each one contains one of the
first seven letters of the English Alphabet: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, a
letter for each girl. Miss Sterling, will you be kind enough to give
them to the young ladies?"

It seemed of a purpose that to me came Miss Sterling last. Afterward,
when I so state privately to her, she smile all about and say, "It is
most fortunate that your envelope contains the B, Bing Ding, for being a
Eurasion, you can write the English more fluently than the others." But
that is of Biography unimportant, so I return to where I stop.

Fuku start to open envelope, Miss Powers hold out hand and say, "Wait,
Fuku, and I will tell you about the game. It is played thus:"

"For the next five months, every Saturday each girl must deposit in my
office letter-box an unsigned, written paper of not less than two
hundred English words, on a topic corresponding to the word represented
by the letter found in her envelope. For example: A stands for the
Artist of the class. B - for the Biographer. C - Correspondent. D -
Diarist. E - Essayist. F - Folklorist. G - Genius, to her goes my
heartfelt sympathy." Miss Powers look at Miss Sterling and draw down
corners of mouth and take on sadness. All Chinese girls grow solemnity,
but Miss Sterling laugh, and we know it is of American funniness, and
are much relieved.

"Bing Ding will distribute this writing paper which I wish you to use in
preparing your articles," say Miss Powers, and again hold to view a
package, this time of much largeness and most blue. "Six of you will
begin playing the game this week. A, cannot play until next week; her
name, alone, I must know that I may send her the papers to illustrate
after they are typed."

"On next Monday afternoon and on all the following Mondays, I shall
expect you to come to my study at Two of the clock, to drink tea and
play your game. That is all now, Young Ladies, except that each girl
must keep the secret of her letter; that is for her alone. Good after
noon," and Miss Powers disappear with much graceful carriage, of which
all Chinese girls admire but cannot to imitate.

Miss Powers great lady; of a tallness and much commanding, with snow
hair and bright eyes - at times of a hardness like steel - of them we
have much fear. For Miss Powers we have admiration greatly but our love
we cannot show out to her; only can we show that to Miss Sterling who is
of great dearness, with heart of so great bigness that for her we take
the name of "Mother Heart." Each, to her gather and wish of her that she
may play the new foreign game with us, but she make explanation that of
the letters there are but seven, and soon all Chinese girl go to herself
alone and open her envelope. As I have before spoken, B, was in mine. A
Biographer I have now become. I shall at once at the Dictionary of the
Centuries arrive and study to show forth the meaning of my word.



When we went forth on the first Monday afternoon to play our game and
drink the tea of our Honored President, the Chrysanthemums were of great
beauty. For many days the gardener had present pots of Chrysanthemums of
great choiceness, so that the walks of the Compound and the steps
leading to Miss Powers' study were of a two times border; inside part
show tiny yellow and white hemispheres, outside part show much large
yellow globes. When I behold Chrysanthemums to me alone I say, "Can it
be English flower-book is of a rightness? 'That a heart to desolation is
now left?' Perhaps the foreign game we cannot play." and I enter much
afraid.

Miss Powers meet us on balcony and invite us in and to take seat; we
have hesitation for Chinese must not at once sit down, but Miss Powers
command, "Be seated, it is the American way." Then she wave hand to tray
on table and say, "Young Ladies, here are your notes; I have had them
put into type that you may not know whose notes you are reading. Go
forward, Cui Ai, and select one to read aloud."

We watch with carefulness Cui Ai open paper and read of Folk-lore. I
look about, but girls' faces all most composed and to me I think, "That
paper is of Cui Ai's own make," when I see Fuku all of a shakiness and
am full of doubt.

Miss Powers ask of each girl to read in turn until there is but one
remainder, Fuku, who seems much offended that she comes at the last. She
take paper, open, throw on floor with great noise. First time like
little squeak of mouse, second time like Chinese Tom-Tom, and all time
kick at paper on floor with much strength of purpose. We at once arise
and when the foot of Fuku is high in air Da Hua make rescue of paper.
Miss Powers say, "Be seated, Young Ladies," and we sit down with
stillness; but Fuku keep most noisy. Miss Powers sit at telephone and by
and by Dr. Ewing come and try to introduce Fuku into next-door room but
she cry, "No, No, it is not my will to go! I shall of the paper now
read." Then she again squeak and Tom-Tom, and Dr. Ewing draw up arm and
put big slap in Fuku's nose centre. Fuku at once come to self and say,
"Where am I?" When she look see us - six Chinese girls in a row sitting
- she put up thumbs to cover face and it seem as if she would cry to
death, and all time she whisper, "Take me away! Take me away! I belong
not to the land! I am of the boat people!"

We look at Each, full of dumbness. A boat child! Born of a people
without a foundation, whom the Gods had command to live all the many
moons to come on the water and never again upon the land! Impossible!
But Miss Powers put finger to lips and nod head, and we know that it is
of a truth that Fuku has spoken.

By and by Fuku go with Dr. Ewing and Miss Powers say one half to
ownself, one half to ourself, "Poor little girl," and look about at
Each, most earnestly.

"Young Ladies, you have much to give thankfulness for," she say. "It is
good to be well born. I shall tell you of Fuku that you may help her to
overcome these unfortunate attacks. It is as she said, she is of the
boats. When a little child playing on the deck of her boat-home, the
rope fastened about her waist, parted, and she fell into the water. She
struck her head as she went down, which I think partly accounts for
these attacks; when she came up, an American who happened to be passing
that point in a sampan, caught her by her long hair and tried to give
her back to her parents, but they said, 'Return her to the water. The
Water Gods have claimed her; she is theirs, not ours. We will not take
her back.' So he brought her to me. Here she has grown up and from here,
God willing, she will go forth into the world a noble woman!"

Then Miss Powers make a little prayer of Fuku and we drink of the tea
and eat of the cakes of much sweetness. The clock strike five times
before we leave the home of our Honored President.

When we arrive at her balcony a strange happening come to view. The
Chrysanthemum pots were all departed. In their place were our lilies of
China, nodding tiny heads in greeting as we pass over the walks to our
dormitory. I go most quickly that I may arrive at the English
Flower-book, for I know not the meaning of our lilies.



For five moons we play at game with greatest pleasure and much gaining
of English. All read aloud with more understanding and our Honored
President say we also write better. No Chinese girl know what other
Chinese girl have written, so we talk of papers most freely and with
great funniness.

One afternoon when we had complete our Readings and were drinking the
tea of our Honored President, she say, "Do you realize, Young Ladies,
that we shall meet together but once more, then our game is finished?"

When we told her that we had not so realized and were full of sorrow,
she say, "I, too, am sorry for I have enjoyed the play." Then she look
all about and of a suddenness request - "How many girls wish to
commemorate our game?" We look at Each. Commemorate is an Americanism
uncommon; we not the meaning know, but Miss Powers' bright eyes most
kind and at once we hold up hands. She nod head and say, "I thought so!
All of you! Each week I have marked the papers which you voted 'best.'
If your Biographer will select and arrange them I will have them printed
in book form that each girl may possess a Class book." We have haste to
assure her that such a possession will be most pleasurable, and Eng Muoi
jump on feet and say out loudly, "Our Honored President must also
possess Class book." Fear comes at sound of voice and at once she sit
down. Miss Powers smile most graciously and say, "Thank you, Eng Muoi, I
would like one, but there is one condition, it is necessary that I shall
know which girl has the B - not in her bonnet," she laugh, and we join
with laughter, for we also have knowledge of the bonnet - B.

Next morning I have honor to walk from Chapel with Miss Powers (our
Honored President) and tell to her of my troubles. By the Dictionary of
the Centuries, a Biographer speaks of one human in one book. How then
can I be a Biographer of correctness?

"But a Class book is different," Miss Powers say most polite. "It is a
chronicle of College life, Bing Ding." I am much puzzled. On steamer
days Cui Ai present Miss Sterling with American newspaper and say, "Here
is Chronicle!" Is newspaper in America all the same as book? Miss Powers
tell, in Class book must be something written by, and about Each; also
something about Residence and Doings. I will therefore now make picture
of our Adorable College. It is situate on hills of Island grown from the
shining bosom of river Ping. At left hand the Monastery of Dreams stands
of a whiteness of snow, from the tall mountain - Kushan. At right hand,
if eyes follow glistening trail many Li (miles) by and by see blue of
ocean of an unexplainable vastness. And all time - of gold with shining
of Sun - of silver with Moonbeams play, sleeps the great, beautiful
river Ping.

The seven buildings of our adorable College are of a brick and stand
quite at the top of hill. From their feet green lawns run away down to
hide their greennesses in shadow of wall which about the Compound
encircles. This wall, of a ten-foot height, from grey stone is made. At
top of stones, not too often, posts stand of a color like lawn, and upon
posts looking at sky, sits the balustrade made of stone of a redness to
be seen afar. When the wistaria is full of bloom many times have I wish
to sit upon balustrade that I might make rain of wistaria blossoms upon
Honorable Strangers making entrance through door in wall, but Sedia (the
keeper of the gate) is of much strength and bigness and I do not dare.



Today when from Chapel we arrive, on breeze of morning come sound of
Tom-Tom from without the Compound wall. All Chinese girl run down to
gate. Miss Sterling enter in and Sedia at once close gate but not too
quickly. In opening I view Chinese all about box in street-centre
standing. On box, man; he make movement to turn face, and to me alone I
cry, "It is He of the Bridge of the Ten Thousand Ages!" My soul is in
darkness and my feet have wings. I fly far away. When I wish no more to
fly I cannot cease, but go onward. At last I fall to earth and know no
more.

When I awake it is in a place of strangeness - a room full of sunshine,
making entrance through windows of much number. The walls and carpets
are of the blue of the sky; the chairs, dressing-table and couch upon
which I lie are all of a whiteness; the Mieng about me is again blue. I
shut my eyes in wonderment; all is of beauty extraordinary! A hand comes
to my miserable forehead and Mother Heart (Miss Sterling) give of
sympathy to her unhappy child.

The memory of being like Fuku - not well born - smites my heart and bids
my tongue be still. I speak not. By and by Miss Sterling whisper, "Why
did you run away from the gate, Bing Ding?" I whisper return: "It was He
of the Bridge of the Ten Thousand Ages. Of his power I have greatest
fear. If He find, He will sell me to be a slave, for to him do I owe my
most miserable existence." Miss Sterling's eyes flash of fire and she
say, "No! No! I will have care."

Comfort to my heart creeps in, and I have speech with her of the Story
Teller of the Streets. How, seventeen years past by, He was telling
tales from box as now happen, and to Chinese all about standing, He say,
"Do good deeds! Be of unselfishness! Have of others care!" One Chinese
laugh and make large fun of Story Teller and say, "Why, O Wise Man, dost
thou not perform goodnesses, thyself? Just now I pass over the Bridge of
the Ten Thousand Ages and beside the stones of bridge I view babe of new
birth. Go, thou, and take of it all care." To save his face the Story
Teller went upon the bridge and took the babe unto his arms and house;
but having children of much number, that night when all was dark that
none could see, he went again upon his way and with him went the babe. I
could no more speak.

Miss Sterling press my unworthy hand and say, "I know the rest, Bing
Ding. He took you to an orphanage where we found you and brought you
here that you might be educated. Have no fear; I will take care of you."
I cry out of joy now, so happy to be of safety in Miss Sterling's heart.



Our I last game is played. Next week we graduate. The separation as of
one family is upon us. We have been most happy in our Adorable College
and are full of sadness that Each, alone her way must go. Some Chinese
girls to be married, other Chinese girls, teachers to become. I, with
Mother Heart to America, am going.

Times of much number have I been to the study of our Honored President
to make arrangements of our Class book. With Miss Powers' assistance I
have honor to select of the papers those that of our Adorable College
make pictures of clearness. That when Each, goes by self, one reading in
Class book will bring forth memories and together we will all be
sitting, playing our game and drinking the tea of our Honored President.
When so sitting, will please Each, give thought of kindliness to most
humble Biographer, is the wish of your most unworthy.

Bing Ding.
Woman's Anglo-Chinese College,
Neuchang, China, June 15th.



Correspondent



Cherished and Honorable Mother, Moy Sen. Most respectful salutations.
Bing Ang. Bing Ang.

Your lazy and careless child has much that she wishes to say to you,
while her heart bleeds because she is separate by so many miles from the
most to be revered Mother.

Though so great distance divide us, yet my heart is as near to you as
ever; rivers and mountains will hinder us from seeing one another, but
they can never give obstruction to our mutual love and help.

By day and by night I pray for your safety and I offer to heaven much
incense, and also foods, and my hope is that no harm may come near to
your house.

Before the rise of the sun each day I make my worship as you have taught
me, though many of the girls in this College do not so, and sometimes I
have very great fear that the Guis (devils) will all swallow up on this
account.

One day Miss Sterling come into my room and say, "It offends me much to
see so many tablets and images here; will you not place them away from
sight at least?" This I do at once having greatest fear to offend and
bring upon us all great troubles though not yet come.

Miss Sterling, so beautiful, so good, so full kind thoughts for every
one, all girls in this College say, "She too kind, too good." Already I
love Miss Sterling so much my heart ache to do some good thing for her.

Last night all girls in this College go take walk on far hills to see
set of sun in Ocean; Miss Sterling walk by me and say, "Please try a
little to speak out your thought when possible for how then can we help
you to better ones?" I promise to try but I always so afraid, O I know I
not worthy to speak out my mean thoughts to great people, who all so
wise so clever.

For a long time Miss Sterling talk to me of her home in America across
the great water, and she tell me many stories of how she live there, how
all people live, what kind, beautiful country is America; sometimes I
think I see bright tears in her eyes when she so talk, and then I feel
sharp pain go into heart, for I well know that this time Miss Sterling
think she like much to go to American home.

When Miss Sterling go to American home I surely cry to death; many other
girls in the College say same thing.

Each girl in College have one duty for every day, mine very nice kind,
must to look all about mails, what time come, what time go, when
Steamers close, carry mail to rooms, keep care stamps and all writing
materials.

All this make for me very great interest, when big mail come in, every
body so much excitement, every body snatch letters then run away and
read - read like hungry dog bite bone. Miss Sterling all time get very
big letter, very large character on cover, color blue; when big blue
letter not come, O then Miss Sterling too sad. One day I very bold and
say: "Miss Sterling you very much love big blue letter?" she all smiling
say, "Yes truly I do love big blue letter the very best of all."

This time we have very hard work, for spring time near, and much of work
is to be done before we to our homes may go.

One day Miss Powers say, "Perhaps we are giving too much hard work just
now, perhaps more better we go on river have play for one week." O then
all College have greatest joy and excitement; girls all time talk, what
can do, how can do. Some times girls talk too late at night, Matron have
much hard work. When Matron say, "No more of talk tonight," then all
very still for little while, then when Matron go far away, talk begin
again, and go on and on. Matron have another bad trouble with girls,
every Chinese girl think she die if air from night get into her lungs,
so she go to bed and pull Mieng all over head and ears so no air can
touch her. Today too sad thing happen, "Miss I Sterling fall ill, cannot
to class room come, Dr. Ewing say cannot do work for many days, and ask
Matron to send some good girl to help Nurse. Matron appoint me to go, I
most happy to have honor, and because of this I can no more write at
this time.

To My Honorable Family, Bing Ang. Bing Ang.
Your Most Miserable and Contemptible Child.
Neuchang, China.
January 25th.



To My Honorable and Wise Mother, Moy Sen, Greetings. Bing Ang. Bing Ang.

Two Moons ago I have sorrow to tell you Miss Sterling very ill. This
time I have great gladness to tell you she all well again and we all
happiness once more.

Great joy and pain have gone over our heads like flocks of birds since
last time I have Honor to write to you.

Both day and night I watch over Miss Sterling though Matron say many
times I must to go into air or be ill. Nothing can my heart comfort but
to every moment look to see if some little thing I may not do to relieve
Miss Sterling from so great pain. Every day the burnings of the fever
make fire in brain of our Adorable Miss Sterling until she know nothing
of what say or of what do, this all too terrible, and make my heart to
bleed most so of all when she cry out one name over and over again, this
name sound like Dick, Dick, sometimes Dear Dick, then most times she try
to rise up, but is too weak and so she sink back on pillows and lie so
still, so still, I freeze with fear she be dead, O then I creep out and
cry to death, and pray pray to heaven, and burn much incense, and then
creep back and bend close over Miss Sterling to bear if any little
wavering breath come from lips or not, for it seem to me she is surely
to die.

One day very strange thing happen. Nurse go out and say I am to watch
all what Miss Sterling do? if she call out or move to rise I must give
to her of large bottle one portion. A very long time I watch every
breath, then all suddenly Miss Sterling try to sit up, and cry out:
"Where am I, What has happened? O yes I remember I am in China" - and
she sink back on pillows, like one little baby she fall asleep, all so
full of peace and so quiet and still. When Nurse come back and I tell
her of all this, she say - "O yes the climax, now Miss Sterling will
surely live I think." That moment such a joy, too great to bear, come
into my heart, I could to shout for gladness, and all the other girls
too glad also.

Now every day Miss Sterling one little bit stronger grow, so that Miss
Powers promise us she soon will be able to go on beautiful river fete,
for that day all wait with heart of gladness.

Bing Ang. Bing Ang.
From Your Detestable and Foolish Child.
Neuchang, China.
March 20th.



Most Honorable and Wise Mother, Moy Sen, Greetings. Bing Ang. Bing Ang.

So wonderful thing happen since last time I write, my poor language can
nothing show out of what my heart now hold.

Have patience with my dull and stupid writing while to you I give one
complete history.

On the fifth day of this Moon Miss Powers say - "Tomorrow morning all
girls in this College have clothing and beds ready packed, for river
fete. Ten boats wait at Short Bridge landing. Ten of the clock strike
all must be there. Each girl take one carrying basket, no more."

Next day two hours before rise of sun all girls run up and down make
large noise and excitement.

Matron and Cook make much shoutings, Coolies work very hard to pack 30
food baskets, 20 bags rice, 20 live chickens, 60 carrying baskets, 3 cot
beds for teachers, just outside gate 60 man and women Coolies wait to
carry all safely to Boat.

This time every body talk at same time, most time shout, every body say
Hurry! Hurry! Cook, because head man, talk most loudly, part time jump
on table, wave long bamboo stick and command all to work rightly. After
two hours time, yet no make start. What reason? Miss Powers come out and
say very sternly, "Cook, why do you not send baskets to Boats? it is
long past time." Cook say "All ready" and open gates, let outside
Coolies come in, then sixty more Coolies shout and begin to fight,
because every body will to carry the light loads, and no body will to
carry the heavy ones! Again Cook climb on table and compel every one to
do his work rightly.

Twelve o'clock strike, all things on board boats, every body happy to
make start. River men have much trouble to get boats off because of high
wind and waves against Bridge. At last all started safely, every body
sing songs, play games, and enjoy to look see all things which pass on
river.

All day very good water, very much pleasure, all night good sleep by
bank of river placing Miengs on floor of Boats. Next day very happy till
noon then come very high winds, and much rough water, after long time
men begin loud shoutings, and take down high covers from overhead. "What
matter, What matter?" every body cry out, all fear some trouble come,
boatmen say - "Now come to rapids, very swift, very dangerous, many bad
rocks."

I well remember how many boats go to pieces on such rocks, so I hide my
head and see nothing, only shake with fear, only can hear screams, and
know some boat has already gone on the rocks.

Now our Captain began to shout to our men the awful shout - "Buy your
coffins," "Buy your coffins" and I know well that this means that we too
will soon be on the rocks. Then I could only pray to heaven that we be
not all drowned.

At last come one most awful crash, some girls catch hold of me and cry,
others make most awful screamings, and because the boat is fast filling
with water all try quickly to climb upon the rocks, only I am left in
Boat at last, and am much too afraid to move. Suddenly one Coolie lift
me by arm and throw me over on rocks with sacks of rice and baskets of
bedding.

Now we all very sure it is to die that we have come on this great river,
and so we wait.

Over us the sky shine in glory of sun set, nothing of this do we see,
only do we know of cold and great fear and of wetness, and pain most
miserable.

Where our other Boats, where our most dear Miss Sterling? We look up
river and down, some boats top-side, some bottomside, two boats on
rocks, like our own poor broken one. Now night comes swiftly, all grows
dark and we more and more afraid, every one say - "Now we die!" "Now we
die!" I alone think not so, but very sorrowful and cry in my heart, but
not with my lips.

Whole heart eat out with fear that our most precious Miss Sterling may
already be drowned, no body can to tell.

After long time we hear men calling loudly, one boat comes near to our
rocks in darkness, we could only see one little lantern like insect
flash.

"Who comes near our rocks?" we say, and through the black night comes
Miss Sterling's voice to us. O what joy. Quickly I run to edge of rocks
and hold out arms to her with heart beating loudly for gladness, all our
miserable lives will now be saved we know this of a truth.

In one breath Miss Sterling cry out "Are all safe, Is no one hurt here?"
and we say, "No one is hurt, only all so horribly afraid, so wet, and
cold."

At once Miss Sterling have Coolies make big fire on rocks, make all dry
and warm, get rice ready cooked then girls eat with long hair pins for
chopsticks like playing at feast when children.

After long time Miengs quite dry, Miss Sterling say all must try to
sleep, she so like Mother make all cover up warmly then no cover left
for herself, I see this and make her take one half of my blanket and we
lie down so closely I can hear poor Miss Sterling heart beat, O so fast
and loudly, then I know she have much fear, but too proud, too brave to
let girls know she also afraid; this all I cannot bear, so I put arms
about Miss Sterling and beg her to let me be good helper to her, I say
"Chinese girl very strong, American girl not so, our Chinese people very
strange and make you afraid; dear Miss Sterling not any one can harm you
while I live, believe me true."

Miss Sterling then say if any thing happen to her I must to write letter
to Dr. Richard Newman and tell to him all what happen here, and he will
of me take care because I her good friend. Then Miss Sterling tell me
all about this Friend also all about when she very little girl she go
live with old lady called Aunt because Father and Mother both die; this
Aunt only go Church, nothing play, nothing laugh, nothing happy look
see, always sad, always talk little girl some day go be Missionary. By
and By little girl grow up, then Aunt say, "Now time come go Mission
field."

That same time Miss Sterling very much love one man Dr. Newman he no
like her go Mission pigeon; What can do? That time Miss Sterling break
heart, but she say, No, I good girl, no turn back, no break promise to
Aunt. Dr. Newman angry to death. Miss Sterling nothing say, only go away
without good-by say. Long time Dr. Newman keep anger, no write letter,
now write much blue letter and say all time, "Come back, Come back?"

This all give Miss Sterling too much sorrow, not know rest of heart, not
know what to do; I perish of thought about all this, and I say "I will
all well do for you that you may live and go back to this Doctor man
that you so truly love some day quite soon."

Before Miss Sterling can reply make, we hear sudden loud shoutings from
all parts of river, and because the light is beginning to come we can a
little see, and wonderful things we do see, hundreds of boats come near
our rocks. Miss Sterling cry with joyfulness, "O these men have come to
save us." Chinese girl know these men do not save, well we know they
come only to rob and murder and take slaves, for these are river
pirates.

Now I know the time has surely come when I must with life protect Miss
Sterling, so I cry to all people on rocks to take bamboo poles and fight
for lives, not one pirate must come on rocks or we die. Every girl know
this true, and our boatmen help and fight strongly; so fast do all hit
at men with poles that they much surprised, and after a little while go
away to talk and say - what do. Just that time Miss Sterling look see
how water rise swiftly and she well know that soon our rocks will be
covered and we all drown, so with face as white as paper she go to edge
of rocks and call to one of pirate band and say - "I give you $20 gold
if you will all to land carry." He only laugh and say - "$150 gold" she
say "$50" he say "$120" she say "$75" he say "$100" she say, "All right
$100" and in one minute all men begin work to carry us on shore.

Most girls very afraid and say pirates no keep word, no can trust to
take to shore safely.

Miss Sterling and I say not so, Chinese always keep word even pirates do
so.

Most strange, most wonderful when we land and turn back to look at rocks
where we spend the night we see nothing but swift water running like
wild horses over that place, and we know that so nearly had we been
drowned that nothing could have us saved if Miss Sterling had not been
so wise, so clever.

This letter is of too great longness already.

My Bing Ang to My Honorable Brothers and Sisters
From Your Utterly Contemptible Child
Neuchang, April 5th.



Most Wise and Honorable Mother, Moy Sen, Greetings. Bing Ang. Bing Ang.

After four adorable years in this most distinguished and advantageous
College I am now about to go to the home of my Mother-in-law in this
same village.

To go is like fire against my face.

Day and night I cease not to weep and nothing can turn me about from
much weeping.

Miss Sterling come in to me often and say, "To marry is right and
proper, my husband will be very wise because he is learned man, I go to
live with kind, not cruel, Mother-in-law, I must not longer weep and
refuse food."

Truly I try at all times to please Miss Sterling, but to cease I cannot.

I with all of wonder and nothing of understanding see how with joy and
song like bird Miss Sterling go about the house packing trunks, boxes
all things make ready to go America side to marry with Dr. Newman; truly
she so happy she send out light from every part, from top of head to
sole of foot. Miss Sterling say to me she no have fear of Mother-in-law
what she say, how she do, how best to please Mother-in-law so as to
escape beatings daily or other hard punishments.

Miss Sterling reveal to me how Dr. Newman have one adorable, beautiful
home already builded, already furnished, where they two live without
Mother-in-law to live with them.

I very glad and astonished about these things, so like beautiful, golden
dream, while for my own marriage I have only terror, and cannot but weep
all the day.

Today my betrothed came to College to have speech with me, also to make
plans for our marriage; Miss Sterling come to fetch me to see Honorable
betrothed, but finding my miserable eyes all swollen from many tears,
contemptible nose all red, whole face most ugly, she begin to bathe face
with Cologne and say she will not have such things; she will to
betrothed freely speak that he must make separate home for me after the
American way. My heart stand still with I know not what kind of fears,
but Miss Sterling never mind, she drag me after her to Reception room,
seat me before Honorable betrothed into whose face I dare not to look,
and then she talk many hours to show out how much better way American
way to make home.

I listen and tremble like awful chill. O, if Honorable betrothed would
only listen and believe!

At last he speak giving good assurance that he will all carry out as
Miss Sterling has requested. Then all my heart rise up and go out to
Miss Sterling in blessing; when Honorable betrothed come and stand
before me and make solemn promise. I in return beg Honorable betrothed
to pardon the contemptible selfishness of selfish me, that such
unspeakable gladness come to me with this promise.

Now almost I could love him that he this thing will do for poor unworthy
me. Can it be that to Chinese girl also can come gladness to marry, and
can come that love so wonderful, so strange that Miss Sterling has told
me of?

Today beautiful gift come from Honorable betrothed one messenger bring
to me large blue No. 1 Lacquer box, in box two gold and jade bracelets,
most fine, most rare; when I try bracelets on arms all girls come look
see, all say - "Too excellently fine," "Too dazzlingly beautiful," "Too
costly," "All same high Official lady," - "All same Princess."

This give me much elevation of heart, but I careful not show out what
feel, only say, "Gift too small, too ugly, too mean." This time Miss
Sterling go with me to street to buy all things proper for wedding, I
find in it great pleasure, and all the girls most interest to look see.

Another visit from Honorable betrothed, this time I Not afraid so much
and can a little tell out, after Miss Sterling praise me, and say now I
become as American girl not too timid. O these American ways very new,
very strange to Chinese girl but now I have no more fear to marry and
sit all day working on beautiful red Marriage shoes and weep not any
more, truly this is magic, and not any devil magic to make fear come.

Now on my fingers I can count the days when you and my Honorable Sisters
and Brothers will come to my Marriage. O then can speak out all things
which now too ignorant, too afraid to write.

At all times my prayers go up to the heavens for your good safety and
health, and good journey to this village.

Your Detestable and Most Foolish Child
Neuchang, China
June 18th.



Diarist



1st Moon - 1st day.

Deign to listen to me, an unworthy member of the graduating class of the
Woman's Anglo-Chinese College of Neuchang, for by lot I am Keeper of
Diary of the class of which I have before spoken, and now make
statement:

Firstly - That I know not how to so do and will make secret consultation
among our most Learned Teachers that they may give unto me of their
wisdom.

Lastly - That if the tongues of our Greatest Ones yield me not the so
great secret, then will I ask of Dr. Ewing that I may look upon the book
in which she writeth nightly, after the stars gleam forth.

5th day - Last night I made three journeyings - upon our Honored
President (Miss Powers), our Adorable Teacher (Miss Sterling) and our
Beloved Doctor (Miss Ewing). After diverse conversation, that they know
not whereof my visit is made, I ask of each Honorable Person the so
great question - "Of what does a diary consist?"

Our Honored President make explanation, "It is a register of
explanation, happenings or duties and is daily happenings most useful
for reference. I have kept one for years." The word duties she spake
with stress of voice. Shall I then transcribe the College hours of
hair-brushing or tooth-washing?

When to Miss Sterling I make question, her face become as the rosy dawn.
"A diary is a book of so great intimacy that the writing there in is to
be looked upon only by the eyes of him who writes - or - perhaps - one
other," she make answer with slowness.

At the once knowledge of her so great secret grow within me and I think,
"She also keepeth a diary and hath what they name in America - a Lover."

To Dr. Ewing I arrive at the last. She was seated within the Hospital
office writing in a small, black volume. Upon the outside of volume was
writ in large, golden letters, D-I-A-R-Y and beneath, in smaller forms,
Alice Ewing. All these things mine eyes beheld before I ask of her my
question.

"A Diary - why?" she make laughter as pleasant as the ripple of a
tinkling brook. "What do you know about Diaries, Moonflower?" Then came
the Matron in so great haste to beg of Dr. Ewing that she come at once
unto the bedside of Fuku. "She hath an attack," saith the Matron and was
departed.

"Remain here, Moonflower, and make speech with whoever come in," Dr.
Ewing ask of me; and I with so great gladness sit down before the table
upon which lieth the Book of the Golden Letters. For having asked my
question of all the Honorable Ones and no Honorable One having answered
in full I make resolution to look within the Book that the so great
secret of success I may at the once learn.

Many persons make entrance and departure into office. It seemeth best to
make study of Book when none are present to divert my thinkings. When
FooFoo (the Chow dog) and I are alone I make haste to open Book. Within,
the volume was writ in parts. One part days of week; other part, hours
of day. Also the writings of Dr. Ewing were of so great smallness, to
translate produced much troubles. Thereupon I make selection of one day
alone, that I may best interpret the meanings of its hours. This is
them:

From the Diary of Dr. Ewing:

Tuesday -

 8 a.m. Withdrew mole-tooth from the mouth of Eng Muoi.
 9 a.m. No. 1 Cook's wife's sister-in-law make birth of big boy -
weight, 12 knocks or pounds.
11 a.m. Transcribe letter of No to Y. M. C. A. Secretary.
12.30   Dr. Wardoff came to Tiffin. He hath given me six months to make
answer to his clothes or suit.
 2 p.m. Unbound feet of Luey See. Delicious operation. Time two hours.
 5 p.m. Took from left ear of FooFoo bamboo tree.

Upon mine ear fall the sound of approaching feet-steps. Thereupon I at
the once close Book and go to look within the ear of FooFoo who is full
of gladsome barkings at Dr. Ewing making entrance. To her, I present
good-night partings - and without delay make arrival at Dormitory where
warmly wrapt in my Mieng of comfort I lie in readiness for sleep, but
she come not. Upon her little bed in further corner my room-mate, Ging
Muoi, make slumberings of so great audibleness I find not rest.

Again and again I make repetition of Dr. Ewing's Diary unto myself.
Again and again Ging Muoi make whistlings through noses with much warmth
of expression not unto herself. By and by I arise and remove from
closet, bamboo stick unto the bedside of Ging Muoi; she awake with much
suddenness and make end to whistles. At the once I return within my
Mieng and come to so great decision - that on the morrows will I nothing
of duties write - but all, of happenings. Sleep comes to mine eyelids
and I dream.



2d Moon - 10th day - Upon yesterday fell the birthday of our Beloved
Doctor Ewing. Miss Powers invite all to eat Tiffin at Faculty house. At
the hour of noon we move upward upon Faculty steps, when our eyes behold
legs and feet, only, of man making entrance upon Dr. Ewing's balcony.
His upper parts were enclosed within a bouquet of much magnitude and his
shoes were of the color of clay so that he present appearance like unto
a single flower-pot of our gardens of the Compound. We call to mind the
extensiveness of the feet and the inconsiderableness of the body of the
most Honorable Secretary of the Y. M. C. A. and at the once make
recognition of him.

Miss Powers (our Honored President) come out and say, "Come in and have
seat." Thereupon we sit. Dr. Ewing make entrance from balcony with much
redness of face and we donate birthday greetings unto her. A bell ring
and Miss Powers say, "Let us go into the dining-room."

When all seated Dr. Ewing, invited, makes little prayer and the foreign
feast begin, of a formality not like anything we know. We unfold napkins
and spread them upon our laps to preserve clothes clean, and eat soup
from the side of spoons which we push away from us, watching our
Honorable Teachers with so great care because we know not what is the
polite or what is the impolite. At close of feast Boy bring cups of
smallness filled with coffee. Miss Sterling (our Adorable Teacher) put
hand over cup, we do likewise, and say:

"Before we drink of the coffee, Young Ladies, I will tell you of an
American birthday custom. It is called a Toast, and each one drinks to
it standing. I will now make one to the health and longevity of Dr.
Ewing."

All persons get to feet and Miss Sterling hold up cup and shake yellow
curls and say to Dr. Ewing with so great solemnity, "May your path be
strewn with roses and your husband meek as Moses." We all put cups to
lips when man's voice come loudly from doorway: "Impossible! The roses
are all right, but Moses would not stand a ghost of a chance with Dr.
Ewing." We turn as one people and behold the Community Doctor (Dr.
Wardoff) standing in the doorway, his arms also full of flowers. Our
Honored President grow much dignified then she regard Dr. Ewing all of
an adorable pinkiness, and she sink within chair and make much silent
laughter.

Dr. Ewing take from Dr. Wardoff the flowers he hath brought unto her and
cover her pinkiness of face in their blossoms of fragrance.

No. 1 Boy make entrance with yet another bouquet of flowers of so great
magnificence and say with much strength of voice, as he present flowers
unto the arms of Dr. Ewing: "From the Son of the Consul." Dr. Ewing drop
all flowers upon floor. Dr. Wardoff scowl, look see watch and say, "I
must be off!" making departure of quickness. We Chinese girls pick up
flowers and place them within the arms of Dr. Ewing.



3d Moon - 15th day - This morning the Chinese boys from St. Marks arrive
to Confirmation at Chapel. Upon left of aisle-centre they were seated,
all Chinese girls, on right.

Eng Muoi receive Confirmation and seem of so great humbleness, Cui Ai,
sitting at side whisper to me, "Can the change of heart of Eng Muoi be
of everlastingness?" I answer not, being much occupied with view of
Honorable Head Master of St. Marks; a man of much magnificence of
person.

For the past Moon Eng Muoi hath made offers of lendings, bestowing upon
other Chinese girls gifts of hairpins and bracelets and hath been of so
great meekness, unlike her disposition of naturalness, that all Chinese
girls say, "Unto Eng Muoi hath come the Goddess of Mercy." Now all know
it is the God of the foreigner that hath made the difference.

Cui Ai displayed unto me her Beloved Betrothed. A small man he seemed,
seated upon the bench before the Honorable Head Master of Magnificence.

We descend upon Chapel-steps one side; other side, descend Cui Ai's
Beloved Betrothed and Honorable Head Master.

Miss Sterling say, "Cui Ai, do you wish to hold speech with your
Betrothed?" Cui Ai and Beloved Betrothed stand all together before Miss
Sterling. Dr. Ewing put hand upon arm of me, stop, say one - two words
unto Honorable Head Master. Head Master speak back to her but Look at
me. At the once my heart knocketh with so loud beating I have greatest
fear that unto the ears of the Honorable Head Master will the sound
thereof arrive.



4th Moon - 10th day - Today Dr. Ewing send for me. When I make entrance
into Hospital-office Foo Foo bark welcomes and Dr. Ewing say, "Sit down,
Moonflower, I have something to tell you." First she make speech of
weather, next she make speech of health, last she make speech of
Honorable Head Master of St. Marks, Quong Lee. It seemeth the Honorable
Head Master of Magnificence having looked upon useless me findeth my
uselessness good unto his sight, and hath presented Miss Powers, through
Dr. Ewing, an offer of marriage with useless me.

"In America a suitor endeavors to learn if he is acceptable to the girl
whom he wishes to marry before he asks her parents for her," Dr. Ewing
make explanation. "Quong Lee is a Christian and knows of this custom so
he came first to me. He is a fine man and would make you a good husband,
Moonflower - what say you?"

Dr. Ewing sit on sofa beside me and smooth hair of useless brow, and
look see deep down into my heart of uselessness and find there what I
dare not to confess.

Already, when yet a child, I was betrothed to the son of the Exalted
Friend of my August Father. Him I have never seen.

All these things I tell unto Dr. Ewing, and she make arrangements that
on the morrow I go unto the House of my Mother-in-law there to abide for
such a time as it seemeth best, until I behold in secret the face of my
Betrothed - for "You shall not marry a man you have never seen; it is
not right," say Dr. Ewing.



4th Moon - 16th day - For five days have I dwelt within the House of my
Gifted and Capable Mother-in-law who hath for useless me all kindnesses
and considerations. My heart of guilt lieth heavy within my breast.
Today, in cleaning of House, I give of help unto Capable Mother-in-law
and in closet obtain many Idols of uselessness. Long time I think so to
say unto Capable Mother-in-law but have much fear. When she say unto me,
"Hath the task of the closet come to accomplishment?" I say, "No, not
so," and tell to her of foreign cleanliness. "Behold!" I say, and bring
to view most filthy and awful Idol, "These are dirty old Idols! Let us
cast them forth and clean the closet rightly," I speak on, fear
forgetting.

Capable Mother-in-law nod head. I open window and fear returning, throw
Idols into garden with great shakiness.

At noise of so loud violence Boy make appearance in garden walking with
four legs. One pair, own legs; other pair, wooden legs. Upon his
shoulders, also of a difference, sat a head of much bigness. He upward
look see. I downward look see. Horror come upon my heart! Capable
Mother-in-law at the once close window but I have knowledge that my
Betrothed I have now beheld. With him I can never, never to marry.
Tonight will I send chit (letter) to Dr. Ewing that she may help me to
make departure of quickness from the House of most Gifted and Capable
Mother-in-law.



5th Moon - 1st day - Last week I make return unto College. All Honorable
Teachers and Chinese girls give greetings of gladness. This place so
dear home I make wish all time here to dwell, then before mind come the
Magnificent person of the Honorable Head Master of St. Marks and I think
to change wish.

I tell unto Dr. Ewing of the Deformities of my Imperfect Betrothed and
it seem as if I cry to death. If I do not will to marry with my
Imperfect Betrothed, Peace of Fervid Mind and Ardent Heart will dwell no
more within me. On the contrary, Lifelong Disgrace will sit by side
forevermore. Nevertheless I cannot to possess him for husband.

This morning Dr. Ewing go unto my August Father to tell to him the
useless troubles of his most useless daughter.

Firstly - August Father was of so great anger, his ears listened not
unto Beloved Doctor making to speak, but he tell with lengthiness and
loudness of voice of meddlesome persons' intrusiveness.

By and by August Father make pause to catch up breath, and Dr. Ewing
quick to speak Deformities of Imperfect Betrothed, then August Father
rest tongue and lend ears.

Lastly - August Father is again with so great anger that his Official
Friend (my Exalted Father-in-law) hath not related unto him the story of
his son's misshapen members, August Father give of promise unto Dr.
Ewing that if she can to make arrangements of honorableness with Exalted
Father-in-law, he will not marry poor, useless me unto Betrothed of
Deformities.

At Tiffin arrive Community Doctor. With him Dr. Ewing hold much speech
on Hospital-balcony.

From balcony went Dr. Wardoff to House of Capable Mother-in-law there to
make visitation upon Imperfect Betrothed.

Tonight Head Boy of Community Doctor bring chit. I watch with
carefulness Dr. Ewing making reading. She look see my interest of face
and say, "It will all come right, Moonflower. Tomorrow afternoon we hold
council. Run along to bed, now." I give unto her good night partings and
retire within my Mieng but sleep not.



5th Moon - 2d day - When sun glow in window I arise and make entrance
into garden. It is my week to make daily providings of flowers and I
prepare many bouquets, one of greatest importance.

That I may know of Consultation Meeting, I ask of No. 1 Boy where shall
repose my most important bouquet. No. 1 Boy say, "At Two of the clock,
in Teakwood reception room our Honored President hold visitation of
moment. Establish there the bouquet of so great importance." I so do.
Thereupon look see all about. No person present. Quick I make withdrawal
of screen to balcony window and go away.

At Two of the clock I stand behind screen and give heed to August Father
and Exalted Father-in-law making greetings unto Honorable President. Dr.
Wardoff also make entrance. No. 1 Boy produce tea and much speech of so
great politeness take place.

"I am the bearer of ill tidings," say Dr. Wardoff unto Miss Powers.

"I am sorry," say Miss Powers. "Speak on."

Dr. Wardoff tell to her he has been to consult about son of his friend
Wong Ging (Exalted Father-in-law make most honorable bow) and that son's
heart is of so great enlargement that at any hour may come death to
friend's son. (August Father shake head in sorrow deep), Miss Powers
much sad, much shocked, much surprised.

Dr. Wardoff say on: "Therefore Wong Ging wishes me to state that it is
with great sorrow he requests that the betrothal of his son to the
beautiful daughter of his friend (Ling Ang) be now terminated."

Mental pain and much lamentation at the once come unto August Father; of
so great sympathies for his Exalted Friend that tongue cannot to tell.

My Exalted Father-in-law partake of pain and sympathies freely; with
him, also, tongue cannot to speak sorrow.

Destiny in face of August Father and Exalted Father-in-law dwells. I
behold face of two from behind screen and catch at breath.

My Exalted Father-in-law make beginnings. "All things are possible to
the Mighty! The Powerful are ever Generous! What sayeth my Mighty
Friend? Will the loss of my most unhappy son make strainings of his
Mercy?"

"It is well," my August Father make answer. "Wong Ging, thou art a
worthy father of a most worthy son. To be Master of Accidents as well as
of Arts is for one Noble Person of great enrichment and gaining!"

All Honorable persons arise and with cup of tea in hand take sip.

On wings of thunder come sounds of bombs outside in City. I make
movement. Window at back fall down; screen in front fold over. No person
look see. All have much callings from garden. Dr. Wardoff alone to me
say, "Bombs mean much trouble. Go quickly and bid Dr. Ewing to come at
once to Community Hospital."

In garden I make pause beside Boy bringing chit. "Bad man think to kill
Governor of Province," say Boy. "Twenty men dead, many maim on Bridge of
the Ten Thousand Ages."



5th Moon - 3d day - All of night we stay outside Compound at Community
Hospital. Dr. Ewing grow so great tire I try to make lie down. She say,
"No, No," and tell of one more leg to cut. Dr. Wardoff make arrival with
cutter. Dr. Ewing help; I hold to sponge. Leg go off. Beloved Doctor
face grow all of a whiteness; body sway, I try to catch but Dr. Wardoff
give to me a push and take unto himself the body of unknowingness of Dr.
Ewing. "She belong to me," he say. "Bring water." I bring of water and
all time he say, "Darling-Dearest-Love!"



6th Moon - 12th day - It is night and the daylight sleepeth while the
Moonbeams play. Fireflies make journeyings of pleasurings with their so
small lanterns. Only the wonderful river Ping toils on in its silver
bed. Under my window roses of fragrance beckon, beckon, with heads of
wisdom. Perhaps I may win the favor of the Gods! The garden is full of
the whisperings of Chance! Youth is headlong. I will descend.

Later - When I depart into garden I come upon Dr. Ewing. By side walk Y.
M. C. A. Secretary. He of inconsiderableness of body and extensiveness
of feet.

Dr. Ewing make silent beckonings to stand by side. I so do. Honorable
Secretary of Y. M. C. A. most cross. "Send the girl away," he say, "I
have not finished."

"But I have," Dr. Ewing say, with so great loftiness of head. "My answer
will always be 'No!"

Then appear the son of the Consul and depart the Honorable Secretary of
the Y. M. C. A. I make movement to proceed. Dr. Ewing link arm in mine
and put stop to movement. Son of the Consul look see, with little sob
make laugh and say, "So Moonflower remains. It's all the same! You can't
put me off! I will say it! I love you!"

All time of speech Dr. Ewing try to make son of the Consul to stop.
"Very, very sorry," she say, but of no use.

With so great sadness the son of the Consul take leavings and we make
entrance into Hospital.

At our approach Community Doctor arise from shadow on balcony and stand
forth in sheet of silver moonlight.

Dr. Ewing make pause and face seem all of a whiteness in moonshine.
Community Doctor say, "Is it yes?" and open wide his arms of bigness
that Dr. Ewing may creep therein. No more she beckon, "stay here," no
more link arm; and I make entrance into office with heart of so great
heaviness. Strange sounds of Kissings (an American custom) follow after;
I put up thumbs unto ears and it seem as if I would cry to death; no
longer Beloved Doctor hath need of poor, useless me.



Next day - Dr. Ewing tell to me this morning that all of arrangements
are now perfection. To my Betrothed of Deformities (that once was) hath
mine August Father given his Tea-House in Shanghai.

Tomorrow, to Teakwood reception room, at Four of the clock, cometh Quong
Lee, the Honorable Head Master of Magnificence. To him in my so fine
silken robes will I make appearance. The sun of my fortune is newly
arisen! The event of my life approaches! It is well!



Essayist



Every day since learning that upon me the so great honor fall to become
Essayist, I have secretly and with great carefulness searched within the
libraries of each of our Honored Instructors to find out what Essay is,
and to gain information about this thing.

At last, O, so great happiness, I find in Miss Powers' library one great
and important book called, "Essay on Man," by Honorable Pope; also one
small, unimportant book called, "Studies in Prose Essays." Now surely
all these things I can to know about Essay.

All day, all evening, and again next day, I read most secretly, hiding
book quickly if any one come near, for no one must know of these
readings in Honorable Pope.

"Surely," I say, "By and by I will find part easy to understand."
Another day I read and hide away books, yet no more can to understand
what Honorable Pope make meaning. This time head ache, eyes ache, heart
ache. Truly all too sad, too sorrowful.

Next day have no heart to read more, but try one little while. Then, O
too great joy, one part not before found reveal new meaning to me! Here
all parts separate with large, plain numbers - 1-2-3 - like questions in
great Examination. "Possibly," I say, "one Essay I can do like book of
wisdom." The great and wise book say:

"Three roads are open for further expansion of the stimulation of the
brain; for the sensory nerve finds three -

1st - Other Sensory nerves. 2d - Sympathetic nerves. 3d - Motor nerves.
The transference of its excitation to other sensory nerves, consequently
the production of an accompanying sensation in the other than actually
stimulated parts, must be confined within a narrow range."

Wonderful! I think at once to begin; can surely write Essay of 1, 2, 3
parts, and then some one very learned will answer questions and I will
all things know which for three, four years make deep trouble in my
heart.

O too great happiness, I will my Essay at once begin.

Question I - Honorable Pope make much speech of brain, what meaning I
know not; Chinese people oldest wisest people in whole world, Chinese
people know all learning is put away in stomach. When men know many
things all people say, "He have many characters in his stomach."

Foreign people say not so, they say all learning put in brain, top-side
head. Foreigner very afraid to let sun shine on head, afraid melt brain
- perhaps mix characters.

Dr. Ewing say, "Chinese must of Solar-Plexus take good care." I not know
what meaning "Solar-Plexus;" yet I know Chinese people of so great age
so great wisdom, surely all will of "Solar-Plexus" take great care.

Question II - One year ago today Miss Sterling call me to room to
transcribe for her a letter to a dear friend in Peking, this friend very
fond Chinese letter.

I make beginning so -

Honorable and most learned Mme.
Bing Ang. Bing Ang.

"Your detestable and most contemptible friend wishes to know if you have
eaten full, and if all of your household have eaten full, and are at
peace."

"Your August consideration honorably vouchsafe as I have the honor to
rejoice at your august robustness.

Then Miss Sterling stop me and say -

"Read me what is now written." I read; immediately Miss Sterling begin
action like one crazy -

"Robustness! - Robustness!" she cry out. "Do you not know that -
Robustness - means fat - a most awful insult to offer an American Lady"

Now what I wish most to know is, why is it that the most proper and
polite Chinese is the most rude and impolite thing to write to an
American lady?

Question III - One day every body run out of House because of loud angry
quarrel in garden between Sedia and his wife Eksaw.

Dr. Ewing come quickly and say, "So loud talking must at once stop."
Sedia say "Very sorry, Dr. Ewing, but what can do? If Eksaw want to be a
man, and be boss, why she no put on skirts and be a man?"

Then Dr. Ewing laugh and say: "O you up-side-down people."

Why all people say Chinese make all things to stand on honorable heads,
make honorable insides outsides, make honorable top sides down sides?
Truly these things I cannot to understand.

Question IV - Every body know Chinese people greatest inventors in whole
world, invent gunpowder, printing press, compass. Why Chinese way not
best and wisest? Why, in this College, every body say must read from
front to back of book? Why say eye of needle, when they mean nose of
needle? Why speak to learned person without taking eye-glasses from
face? Why is it best to serve dessert at the end and not at the
beginning of a feast?

Dr. Ewing say one day when we go to walk in country, "This road just
like one corkscrew," and ask of me the reason why? "Very good reason," I
reply. "Chinese people know very well how to protect selves from Gui
(devils). Gui always travel in straight line, roads wind around, so Gui
no can catch traveler." Dr. Ewing look at me long time then say, "Can it
be that after so long time in our great College you still believe such
things as these?"

To this I only make reply - "Perhaps when your country become same age
as China, you will learn how true these things are that I tell you."
Then I take opportunity to tell Dr. Ewing why her friend's little child
so very ill. Over the house in which this little child now sick to death
grow vines, long vines that cover windows nearly up, and that hang down
over roof, and doors, all truly most dangerous vines. Americans not know
that Guis can enter house most easily where vines hang down over roofs
and doors and windows; another most dangerous thing about this house is
it have eaves about top side all turning down also. Now Chinese people
can keep wicked devils out of all houses, all temples, because they know
to build eaves to turn up, to throw devils into air, so no can come into
house. I say surely baby in that foreign house must to die, and I feel
very sorry, but can to do nothing because foreigner no listen to what
poor ignorant Chinese girl say.

I well know how with whole heart Dr. Ewing love this little child, so
one night I creep out so still, and carry long garden shears, and climb
on step-ladder of window where baby so very sick, and cut away every
little vine where hang down over window. That time very cold, very dark
night make me very afraid, because angry Gui may come catch me
protecting child, but I so much love little child, will try what can do.
Next day Dr. Ewing say - "Dear little baby much better, now will to
live." I know and no other know why baby live, but I keep secret down
deep in heart, and feel greatest happiness.



Folklorist



For four days past have great Chinese New Year Feast been celebrated.
Third day the greatest day of all. Every where in land much feasting,
much of firework, much of congratulating. (Gung-hi).

Out side Compound wall, can hear soldiers marching in day, can see
processions marching by night carrying lanterns and torches, with much
music and fire-works.

Every body greet each other and say, "Seng Meng. Bing Ang." All girls in
College most happy, because Honorable Teachers say, "For one week we now
turn over College to students; we nothing say, nothing do. Students must
plan all things, arrange all things, what most like to do;" every one
quite joyous. Second and third day have great secret, we most wonderful,
beautiful surprise give Honorable Teachers.

With large, red paper carefully written in black characters and folded
into red envelope, we invite all to Chinese girls' reception hall at
eight o'clock of third day.

Teachers much have wonderment. Girls all too great excitement. From
village call No. 1 Good Feast Maker; he plan all things according to
high official style. He say, "This feast must contain all very best;
twenty-eight courses not enough, must have forty-two courses, with many
special servants and on each table one Chafing dish."

All day keep doors locked many girls work to trim hall make all look
like one-piece garden, every one so happy, faces shine like flower
faces, Coolies very interest, come bring much Bamboo, Poinsettia, make
one large arch over fire-place like arch way in street, then fill up
over top and side with Bamboo, Cryptomeria bough, and build another
archway or arbor to top of room, where build high seats for Honorable
Teachers where sit at feast.

Many friends of girls send much beautiful lanterns, some look like fish,
some look like bird, some like fire-balloon - all most large and bright.

Coolies hang lanterns from top of green arbors, then Coolies bring much
big log and fill stone fire-place, ready for great fire at night to make
room bright. Have wood fire and lanterns, no other light.

To make feast ready, twenty Coolies and girls work two days and nights,
then great night come, and eight o'clock strike. Inside hall all
prepare, all like one golden dream, great fire blaze up Chimney.
Lanterns spread glow like red of sun set, all through green arbors, and
through great room. A bell sounds. Ah, the Honorable Teachers have come!

Girls all stand in row beside the door and make low bowings as Teachers
pass. Bing Ding invite to seats, and when all in place, girls also take
seats and feast begin.

After Miss Powers say little word of blessing servants bring in covered
dishes, and place on tables.

In middle of feast all suddenly begin great noise outside of hall,
fire-crackers and rockets and Tom-Toms then all so still we very much
surprised and know not who come to congratulate us. Then most wonderful,
most beautiful Band begin to play under window and every body look at Da
Hua because well we know it is St. Marks College Band and we know who is
at the head of that Band, and why it plays for our feast. Da Hua dare
not look up for she too knows it is for her that the Head Master is
bringing congratulations thus. When the Band stops playing all clap
hands for more, Miss Powers stand up and say, "Seng Meng. Bing Ang, and
many times thank you. Ke Dang." Again beautiful music begin, and
continue all through feast.

When feast is finished we hear more large fire-crackers and musicians go
away. Honorable Instructors stand and Miss Powers begin to make polite
thank you's and farewells.

Then I go forward because I have the Folk stories to introduce. I beg
Honorable Teachers to remain a little while that we may relate to them
some Chinese Folk-lore of our feasts and festivals, of which we have so
many.

Quickly, like magic, Coolies carry tables and other feast furniture
away, and move seats to centre of room, where make one-half circle
before fire, Honorable Teachers in centre, and girls sitting on floor
all about each side.

After some little explanations about stories of great enchantment to all
Chinese people, I say to all, "Since this feast the very greatest of the
whole year, we make selections of two other feasts for stories, and Cui
Ai will tell the first story."

Cui Ai at once came to centre of wide half circle, and after making
little bow, take seat on low hassock, Miss Sterling whisper to Dr.
Ewing, "She look like fire-witch with the great flames framing her black
head, and those long braids sweeping out over the floor."

Cui Ai begin with voice much of shakiness at first, after awhile grow
strong, and all time so clear so plain Chinese girls whisper together
that it wonderful to speak the difficult foreign language so clearly.

Cui Ai's Story.
The Mid-Autumn Festival.

Our country has a feast every year, on the fifteenth day of the eighth
moon, to commemorate King Dong Ming who invented the Musical
Instruments.

This is the story:

When King Dong Ming was crowned King he loved a Sorcerer and promised
him promotion and set him above all the Princes that were in the land
with him.

One day the Sorcerer said to him - "I can take you up into the Moon," so
King Dong Ming set many masons and carpenters to build a very high tower
for looking at the Moon.

The tower was finished on the fifteenth day of the eighth month, just on
the night that the moon was full.

That night King Dong Ming prepared a feast in the tower and sent for the
Sorcerer to come and banquet with him.

When they had feasted they saw a ladder set up on the tower, the top of
which reached the Moon.

King Dong Ming ascended to the Moon on this great ladder. When they
reached there they saw many Moon Daughters all dressed in shining black
robes, and crowned with flowers.

When the beautiful Moon Daughters saw two men coming in they all stood
up and bowed very low before them and treated them with great kindness.
Every girl played for them her Musical Instrument, such as the
Psalteries, the Cymbals, the Harp, the Organ, and the Tymbal, then they
sang songs in one grand concert.

King Dong Ming knew nothing more, until he found himself in a bed in the
tower.

The King was very much surprised to find himself in bed, and without
having come down the ladder into the tower, and very much surprised that
the Sorcerer was not any longer with him. The King remembered all the
songs which the girls had sung to him, and also all the shapes of all
the Musical Instruments which they had played upon for him.

He sent for a skillful man and told him to make all the Instruments
according to all that he had seen in the Moon.

Then King Dong Ming taught the people the use of the Instruments.

Chinese Musical Instruments date from that time.

Then the people began to imitate King Dong Ming on the 15th day of the
8th Moon by making a feast with their friends and their relations every
year. They expect that they can see the beautiful Moon Palace, and hear
the music from out this Palace if they only listen.

Ai Lang then took the story teller's place and began the wonderful story
of the

Winter Festival.

Our Country has a Festival three days before Christmas to commemorate a
family meeting again.

The story is as follows:

Once there was a man who wished to go a long journey, so he went down to
a harbor and found a boat, he paid the boat hire for it, and then he
went down into the boat, just then a mighty tempest was on the sea; the
boat was about to be broken and the men were very much afraid; and the
sailor thinking to do something against the wind fell overboard and was
drowned.

Then the lone man could not bear up against the wind so he let the boat
drive. The day went by, on, on the boat sailed, but no land appeared in
sight.

The lone man grew sadder and sadder, he neither ate or slept, but spent
his time praying to his Gods.

One morning he saw many birds fluttering around his masts, so that he
knew the land was near.

Two hours after this the boat floated near to a great Mountain. On this
Mountain many beasts had their homes. When the man realized this he was
very much afraid, and he said to himself, "If I stay in this spot, in
this boat I will starve soon; and if I go out and up the Mountain I will
be killed by the wild beasts."

In the very midst of the young man's trouble and wonder who should come
down the Mountain but a female Monkey. This Monkey was the Queen of the
place; she led him to her cave and prepared a dinner for him, and sat
with him at meat.

After a few days the female Monkey made a stately bow before him and
asked him to become her husband.

Then the man said to himself, "If do not consent to her she will kill
me, so I shall have to marry her to save my life, and perhaps after a
time I shall have a good chance to go back to my home again."

So he promised to marry her.

On their wedding day there were many little Monkeys who came to
congratulate her.

After a year the Monkey bore a baby to him.

When the boy was old enough his Mother took him out to hunt for game,
which they carried home for dinner.

The man taught her to cook, so that they could roast the game quite
nicely.

One day the man got very homesick so he went out, wishing to escape from
his wife. Just that time the Monkey and her son were returning from
their hunt. When they saw him come up they were very angry and led him
home.

Next time she went out to hunt she left the boy at home to watch his
Father.

After another year the Monkey bore him another son. When this second son
was old enough his Mother made him a bow and arrow, and taught him to
shoot the animals; from that day forth she always took her second son
with her when she went out to shoot, leaving the oldest son at home to
keep guard over the Father. The man always told this big boy about his
home, and the big boy talked to his little brother about it, so that
after a while the second boy began to refuse to go hunting with his
Mother.

One day the man said to his sons, "If I go home I can only let one of
you go with me," but they said "Surely we will both go with you," and
the man saw that they would both go with him and he was much perplexed
as to how he could bring it to pass.

One day soon after they saw a boat coming toward the Mountain, so they
went down into it, the boat sailed away very quickly. When the Monkey
came home and found that her husband and children were not there she
began to search for them. Then she saw a great boat opposite her in
which three men were sitting, she began to call to them and to cry, but
the three waved their hands to her from the boat and gave her a silent
farewell.

After a few days the boat reached the City in which the man was born.

When the man came to his home and his wife saw him and the two boys, she
was very angry, because she thought that he had married another wife.

The man told her all about all his troubles and said, "If you will look
at them very carefully then you will know that they are come from a
breed of animals." When she so looked at the two boys she knew that this
was true, and then she made a feast for him, and called in her friends
and neighbors to come and rejoice with them.

The two boys' Step-Mother treated them very badly and always scolded
them, saying, "Of what good are you, sons of an animal?" But after a few
years the two boys became very famous Officers; and often talked about
what their Step-Mother had called them, and after a while they went by
boat to search for their own Mother.

At last when they reached the Mountain they saw a Monkey coming toward
them with full eyes; then they knew it was their Mother and they wished
to carry her home with them, but she had grown very savage, so that they
could not lead her home. Then they remembered that their Father had told
them that their Mother liked things made of rice, so they made a kind of
dough of rice and stuck it upon the trees or grass, when the Monkey saw
this she was very happy and began to eat the rice from the trees and
grass.

The two Brothers stuck the rice upon every thing as they went upon their
homeward way, and the Monkey came nearer and nearer to get the rice
balls, at length she came very near to the boys' home, and they stuck
the rice balls inside the court, when the Monkey came in there to get
the rice, the boys bolted the door, and locked her in a room, and gave
her well cooked things to eat and treated her well.

The hair on her body began to drop off, and she became very tame; and
the two boys were very happy to get their own Mother again.

The Monkey was tempted home by her two sons in the winter time two days
before Christmas, so from that time the people always make a feast with
their families and roll rice balls on that day each year.

When people are rolling the rice balls they want the whole family
present, because they think that if the whole family is together to make
the rice balls, the whole family will have peace and prosperity
throughout the coming year.



Genius



Geniuses are birthed not made.

Of that, the truth, I have confidence of the uttermost. Two possessions
must be theirs - Longevity of Hair and Biliousness of Character.
Likewise it is more better than a Father or Mother Genius has made
proceedings. Most best that a Grandfather Genius walks in front. Then,
is all of most wellness and the Genius is of excellency birthed.

No Honorable Ancestors of Geniuses have walked before me. No Longevity
of Hair have I (since the all powerful fever raged in our Province). No
Character of Biliousness, the Character of me being of unimportantness.
How then can I, not having been birthed with properness become into one
Genius on the instant? It is of uttermost impossibility, albeit the
American friend of Miss Sterling say she teach to me many fine words of
American Slang most profitable in works of Genius. Only can the Goddess
of Mercy and perhaps the Foreign God a little, lend of aid to me in my
extremities. To them I design the Poem below, of which you shall have
readings. To composition, Poem take with much exactitude, six of hours
and forty-five of moments. At endings of time, eyes ached and stomache
have yearnings but Poem come out. I have extensive happiness for I now
have knowings that, if of eats I partake of littleness, and make
anointments of hair that it may to grow, I shall yet arrive at the
business of Genius.

Give unto me of the sacred power,
O, Goddess of Mercy, now, this hour,
That into a GENIUS I may flower,
Like silver dewdrops in summer shower.

Yesterday Miss Powers say in class - "Some are born great, some achieve
greatness and some have greatness thrust upon them." Thus has the
business of Genius been thrust upon me and I must get busy. For three
days now, in searchings of library of Honored President, I come upon Eng
Muoi also making searchings. She hide book, I hide book. Today I make
findings of space of emptiness on book-shelf where yesterday stood
Honorable Pope. Eng Muoi has taken him unto herself. Next where
Honorable Pope once was and now is not, I found book of Honorable Lord
Kames, most evident a Genius with knowledge of Geniuses incomparable. He
says, "A Constitution of Warmth and Inflamableness must a Genius
possess. Likewise a Delicacy of Taste and Sedateness." Three of these
Constitutions have I - Warmth (of coldness I know not) Inflamableness
(anger comes quickly unto my heart) Delicacy of Taste (is it not I who
of foods make selectings for our feasts?) But Sedateness, I have it not.
Perhaps if I hump me and make trackings I can to catch it.

We are making a journey, Miss Sterling, Ai Lang, Bing Ding and I to the
Monastery of Dreams on the tall mountain Koshan. From the Compound we
came in early morning time by boat and now in sedan chairs we ascend
into the clouds. At each placement of rest we stop. While coolies catch
at breath and smoke at pipe, we drink of tea and watch at view. It is
most wondrous. Trees of a growth extraordinary. Rocks of mightiness each
bearing an inscription from the Classics. Down side of mountain,
tumbling into waterfalls over boulders of bigness flows a stream of the
clearness of glass. Below, the "Happy Valley" stretches myriads of miles
away, of green in shadow and gold in sunshine, all of uttermost beauty.

There are steps of stone that one may arrive at Tea-houses higher up
mountain side. I beg of Miss Sterling that I may to leave chair and
mount up steps. All girls come and we climb, making readings of rocks as
we go. I find great comfort in my reading - "With what little wisdom is
the world governed." For the business of Genius makes me tired and
tonight I must become fresh, like unto a daisy, for out of me must I
cough up a Poem.

We are nearing the Monastery. High in air above our heads, the bell from
the Temple tolls. As we climb Miss Sterling tells of the wicked man who
tolls it. For twenty-five years he has made penance for his wicked sins.
He was doomed to toll the bell and never speak; now he cannot to speak
one word, but tolls on. That's not dead easy. I have of sorrow for that
man. Tonight I will to compose a Poem to him.

We enter the open court of the Monastery. All is of great stillness and
peace. Only tinkling of fountain in centre of court makes soundings.
Beyond fountain is lake full of brilliant colourings. By lake we make
pauses and see that colourings are red, blue, green and gold fishes -
most beautiful! At end of lake an old man sits by stand; on stand are
cakes all strung on string like Chinese cash. We buy of the cakes, Bing
Ding cut strings, and we enjoy much pleasurings in fishes feeding
forgetful of hours. But Miss Sterling say, "The time is passing. If you
wish your fortunes told we must go."

We mount up stone steps and enter Temple of the Prophets. Bing Ding,
alone, makes way to Priest at altar and tells to him of her desire. From
his Divining Sticks he makes selection of one and lays it upon the
altar, then opens the Taheo (Book of Great Learning) and reads:

The accomplishment of thy plans rests with Heaven. The Spirits of the
Earth, Sea and Air are propitious. Thou shalt ride far upon the Sea into
Foreign Countries and return in safety. The Earth Spirit gives thee
great power in things political through thy marriage to a high official
of thy Country. Seven worthy sons shall be born unto thee and thy days
shall be full and many.

Bing Ding was of manifest satisfaction when she join us sitting on seat
at back of temple.

We hike on up other stone steps to the Temple of the Moon. I enter with
Ai Lang, Miss Sterling and Bing Ding making readings of Classics outside
on rocks.

Unto the Priest of Temple Ai Lang tell of her birth-moon, also hour and
place of birthment.

He answer thus: The right way leads forward; the wrong way backward.
Unto your choice bring wisdom. Within four angles of prominence lies
your life. Leo rising, Cancer culminating. To your house Mars brings
trouble but Venus overrules. You will bear a man child of exceeding
greatness. Art is your talent; your hands your best possessions. See to
it that you use them wisely.

Ai Lang give promise of wisdom and we make getaway unto Miss Sterling
and Bing Ding.

Up yet another stone steps we mount to the highest Temple of all, set
like a star in clouds at top of mountain - the Temple of Dreams. Inside
of Temple most wonderful but at entrance of uttermost darkness. One step
- two step I take alone (only one person can make entrance at one time)
then comes light, soft like flush of dawn. Grows brighter, most bright,
until over all things the Spirit of Fire spreads its mantle of red. I
walk on, each step in changing light; Orange, Yellow, Blue, Green and
Violet. At last I make stand at foot of rainbow before the High Priest
of the Temple. Strange, most strange! Last night I dream of rainbow. I
speak unto the Priest my dream. He make interpretation as follows: The
rainbow you beheld in sleep is an omen of good promise. Likewise the
street in which you walked in fear and darkness for Success crowns him
who works to win. The violets you gathered at end of street were
Happiness, Fame and Riches. All these shall be yours if you break not
the string of Pearls that are entwined about your neck. Should one Pearl
loosen and fall into space, Sorrow and Sadness shall be your portion.
Beware of accidents unto the Pearls.

Much troubled, with hand to Pearls lest Misfortune come up with me - for
clasp of necklace is of weakness - I make return through rainbow into
world outside.

"The shadows are growing," Miss Sterling say. "Come, we must get down
the mountain to to the boats at once!"

Tonight after we reach Compound, I cut out dinner and make anointment of
hair, also stir my stumps to compose Poem. Time - five of hours - ten of
moments. I have much hunger.

He sits in the belfry tower,
Tolling the soft bell of Dreams.
Four times he rings it each hour,
Heaven with sound of it teems.
Moons long past the Spirits said:
"For untold Sins you must pay,
Morning's gold but Evening's red,
Your crimes must be paid each day."
Worn and dark is He and old.
On his soul his Sins have weighed.
Twenty-five years He has tolled,
Surely the price He has paid.

This morning at Ten of the clock we march by two's and two's into
Chapel, Honored President and Teachers leading. Cui Ai adorned in light
blue silk following. Tomorrow she marries. Today, Miss Powers trim
Chapel and make for Cui Ai alone, Graduating Exercises most scrumptious.

First come little welcome speech of our Honored President then Cui Ai
arise and speak Essay on Faith in our beloved Neuchang dialect. Sit
down, and Chinese girls sing in chorus "Wings of Faith." Again Cui Ai
arise and speak Essay on Hope in Classical Chinese. Sit down, and our
Adorable Miss Sterling sing solo, "Keep on Hoping." Yet again Cui Ai
arise and speak Essay on Charity, this time in English. Yet again sit
down, and Chinese girls sing chorus of "Charity."

Miss Powers make speechings of presentations and unto Cui Ai give
Diploma of Excellency. All is finished.

Cui Ai's Eager Betrothed, also Beauteous Mother and Sisters and Brothers
also much beauteous Flowers make arrival upon platform at same time. All
is most merry and of good fortune, and our sorrow that Cui Ai is not to
wait for the graduation of the class, is now turned to joyfulness.

Later, we go with Cui Ai to gaze upon her jewels and fine clothings. Her
No. 1 Chest of red lacquer holds many garments of fine silk of soft
warmth and richness. In the tray, numberless bracelets, hair-pins,
brooches and other ornaments have place.

No. 2 Chest, also of red lacquer, contain clothing more ordinary and
household linens most plenteous.

All the time Cui Ai showing Chests, not down in the mouth but having
smilings.

By and by I say, "Why do you look happy, Cui Ai? Why do you not make
cryings? It is our custom."

Cui Ai make response: "Because of our dear Miss Sterling. She say it is
of uttermost foolishness to make marriage and cryings at same time. It
is not the American way to so do. American lady make first marriage, no
cryings, sometimes later make cryings, but not always. Also I have great
and copious joys for in my house of littleness I am to live unto myself
and husband alone, not with Able Mother-in-law."

We wonder at the manifold good fortune of Cui Ai. It is not to believe
that she live not in house of Able Mother-in-law. I have much doubtings.

I return unto my room and will to compose Poem on - "What is House
without Mother-in-law?" but Poem no come out. I am floored with
completeness. Six bells ring but I go not. Again I make anointment of
hair and cut out dinner. I find book of rhyme-words and choose this list
- "Air-fare, Where-wear, Prayer-ensnare." At the once I become up to
snuff and Poem come unto me of so great quickness I have double joyings:
Firstly, that Poem is of everlastingness of length; lastly, that with my
rhyme-book, I can now become on to the job of Genius. Poem take of time,
three of hours; of moments, four. I give of name unto Poem:

"The Three Graces."

Long New Moons ago, Three Graces most fair,
Dwelt under one roof. And combing long hair,
Made wishes to ride in Red Wedding Chair,
Enwrapted in Red Veil; and Wedding Dress wear.

Most ancient was Faith, with belief that by prayer
A Husband would come, appearing in air.
Sun-time and Moon-time she'd pray, then declare:
"He'll be here tonight; our roof-tree to share."

Miss Hope was a Grace without any care,
Hoping a Husband to her would repair;
Her thinks troubled not. She hoped he'd be there,
But how he would come was not her affair.

Charity said: "Each our part we must bear,
If we are to Marry. Men quickly scare.
We must decide on the Time, Who and Where.
Get up and get busy; Each, Do and Dare."

Each Grace went her way a riding her mare.
Hope rode on Hopings. Miss Faith rode her Prayer.
Still they ride on and at Charity glare;
Her Wedding took place 'mid trumpetings blare.

The Moral is plain and not at all rare.
Just praying and hoping failed for that pair.
Be Up and Be Doing. Yourself never Tare,
If ever a Husband you wish to ensnare.

With the shining of the Sun while yet the Moon has not gone to sleep, we
six Chinese girls of the graduating class to which Cui Ai once belonged
and now belongs not, come unto her room to adorn her for her marriage.

We have friendly quarrellings over the red slippers of so great
smallness, which she has made herself - as to who shall place them on
her tiny feet - also we snatch at hair-pins and bracelets, to be No. 1
aid at dressings.

Cui Ai pays scanty heed to the admonitions which her paid attendant is
all time speeching unto her, but is full of cheerfulness at which we
have much marvelings. At last, attendant place red wedding-veil on head
and we fasten many brooches upon red wedding-gown. Over the bride's
small hands Bing Ding slips jade bracelets and all is in placement.

The Mistress of Ceremonies (Miss Powers) enters and taking Cui Ai by
hand, leads her into garden; we follow at distance of most
respectfulness. Down the path they walk, past the wonderful red chair
all of one blossom, even the poles covered with vines and flowers, and
up the Chapel steps.

Inside Chapel, Miss Powers lead Cui Ai to altar where wait Groom and
Minister, while Miss Sterling all time play Wedding March of Honorable
Mendelssohn.

Outside Chapel, Chinese band play and friends fire crackers with so
great noisesomeness that we can but hear Minister's word like
whisperings. Whisperings cease, and Bride and Groom make proceedings
down aisle side by side; Miss Powers at back, while Miss Sterling play
Wedding March from Honorable Lohengrin.

Chinese crackers increase in noisesomeness. Groom puts Bride in her
chair of beauty and takes his own chair of plainness behind her.

The Wedding Procession proceeds. At head comes Bride with her red
lacquer Chests, Boxes, Bathtubs and Household utensils, each borne on
poles by Coolies. Following these are hanging shelves, one upon the
other, all suspended by poles carried by four bearers, each shelf
containing some sweet or cakes. The lantern bearers with lanterns of
uttermost gorgeousness come next, then follow the Groom's chair and his
men friends. Also many pyramids of beauteous flowers. Of a truth Cui
Ai's Procession of Marriage is most magnificent.

To the house of newness and littleness all in the Procession march on,
but we go not until the evening of the sixth day.

When Procession make arrival at house of Groom, men friends enter in and
servants at the once begin to pass foods. Upon each tray must friends
place coins wrapped in red paper, for this is a custom that all men must
observe.

All evening must Bride and Groom entertain guests; this time Cui Ai make
introduction of so great foreign entertainments men cannot to make fun
of poor, little Bride as before.

After I look see Marriage Procession I return unto my room and try to
compose Poem of Wedding, but no Poem come out. One hour - Two hour -
Three hour - then I crawl into my Mieng, a blooming idiot, for unto me
has Poem given the go-by.

Three days later Cui Ai make return unto College. With her comes her
husband of newness; to them our Honored President give of feast. All
graduating Class present. Cui Ai possess looks of happiness; husband
possess looks of uncomfortableness. American friend of Miss Sterling
say, "Gloomy Gus!" Miss Sterling laugh and say, "Oh, no, just too many
ladies present." I think I care not for Gloomy Gus husband; too much
troubles.

At feast I partake little of eats. At the once I get a move on and safe
within my room make yet again anointments of hair that I may to compose
Poem. Time, two of hours. One of moments.

As a Genius! am but a jest,
As a Poet, not one of the best,
For from North, South, the East and the West,
All agree that they wish would rest.

Tonight have I become a Genius-Poet for finality, for tomorrow we
graduate. Therefore will all Friendly Ones in reading of these pages
have rememberings of that of which I before make statement - "That
the business of Genius has been thrust upon me, who have no Ancestors
of Geniuses - no Longevity of Hair - no Biliousness of Character" -
and excusings give unto me, a made - alas - not birthed GENIUS.



Here Conclude the End With Much Gaining of English. That Class Book Be
Birthed Into Complete Completeness We Give of Thanks, Through Ai Lang
Our Unworthy Artist and Bing Ding Our Also Unworthy Biographer, Unto
Paul, The Elder and His Company of Honorables. Second Thankings Unto
Herman A. Funke Who, During the Seveneth Moon (August) of the Year in
America, 1916, Conduct Book Through Press - Tomoye - Which is Situate in
City of San Francisco




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, SEVEN MAIDS OF FAR CATHAY ***

This file should be named 6345.txt or 6345.zip

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext04 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext04

Or /etext03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

