Project Gutenberg's The Gospel of Matthew for Readers, by Lightheart

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **

Title: The Gospel of Matthew for Readers

Author: Lightheart

Posting Date: August 21, 2012 [EBook #6356]
Release Date: August, 2004
First Posted: November 29, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOSPEL OF MATTHEW FOR READERS ***














Copyright (C) 2002 by Lightheart.



The Gospel of Matthew for Readers

Editor's Preface

What is God's will for us? The answer can be found in the pages of the
Gospel of Matthew, a rich source of information detailing the Son of
God's instructions from Our Father to us. Here we learn, through Jesus'
teachings and actions, what we must keep of the old. We find what must
be replaced. We see what has been fulfilled and has come full circle.
We discover the new material and the new message. The Gospel of Matthew
holds out the keys to "this generation's" entry into the kingdom of
heaven ... if we have ears to hear and eyes to see.

This edition of the Gospel of Matthew is designed for easy reading and
is presented in chapter and paragraph style. The first chapter begins
with the birth of Jesus rather than the geneological listing which can
easily be found at the beginning of other editions.
edited by Lightheart
PracticeGodsPresence.com

1
The birth of Jesus Christ was thus: When Mary, His mother, was espoused
to Joseph, and before they came together, she was found with child of
the Holy Spirit. Joseph, a just man, not willing to make her a public
example, decided to put her away privately. But while he thought about
these things an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said,
Joseph, thou son of David, do not fear to take Mary as thy wife. The
one who is conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit. She shall bring
forth a son and thou shall call Him Jesus. He will save His people from
their sins.

All this was done so that what was spoken of the Lord by the prophet
might be fulfilled: Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall
bring forth a son, and they shall call His name Emmanuel, God with us.
Then Joseph awoke and did as the angel of the Lord told him and took
unto him his wife. He knew her not until she brought forth her
firstborn son, Jesus.

2
When Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judaea, in the days of King Herod,
wise men from the east went to Jerusalem. They said, Where is He that
is born King of the Jews for we have seen His star in the east and go
to worship Him. When Herod heard these things, he was troubled as was
all Jerusalem. Herod gathered all the chief priests and scribes
together and demanded to know where Christ would be born. They said, In
Bethlehem of Judaea. It is written by the prophet: And thou Bethlehem,
in the land of Juda, the least among the princes of Juda, yet out of
thee shall come a Governor that shall rule my people.

Herod called the wise men to enquire about the time the star would
appear. He sent them to Bethlehem and said, Go and search diligently
for the young child. When ye have found Him bring me word that I may
come and worship Him also. After they met with the king they departed;
and, lo, the star which they saw in the east went before them until it
stood over the young child.

When they saw the star they rejoiced. The wise men came to the place
and saw the young child with Mary, His mother. They bowed down and
worshipped Him. They presented Him with gifts of gold, and frankincense
and myrrh. Since they were warned by God in a dream that they should
not return to Herod, they departed into their own country by another
way.

After they departed, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in
a dream and said, Arise and take the young child and His mother and
flee into Egypt. Stay there until I bring thee word for Herod will seek
the young child to destroy Him. Joseph took the young child and His
mother, by night, and departed into Egypt. There they remained until
the death of Herod. This was so it might be fulfilled what was spoken
of the Lord by the prophet: Out of Egypt have I called my son.

Herod realized he was mocked by the wise men and was exceedingly
wrathful. He ordered that all the children that were in Bethlehem and
in all the coasts two years old and under be slayed. This was based on
what he was told by the wise men. Then that which was spoken by Jeremy
the prophet was fulfilled: In Rama there was heard the sound of
lamentation, weeping, and great mourning. Rachel was weeping for her
children and would not be comforted because they are no longer.

When Herod died an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in
Egypt. The angel said, Arise and take the young child and His mother
and go into the land of Israel. They are now dead who sought the young
child's life. Joseph took the young child and His mother and started
toward Israel. Along the way Joseph heard that Archelaus reigned in
Judaea in the place of his father, Herod. Joseph was afraid to go
there. Despite being warned by God in a dream, he turned toward
Galilee. He came to dwell in a city called Nazareth that it might be
fulfilled what was spoken by the prophets: He shall be called a
Nazarene.

3
In those days John the Baptist preached in the wilderness of Judaea. He
message was, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. John is the
one that was spoken of by the prophet Esaias: The voice of one crying
in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord. Make His paths
straight.

The same John wore camel's hair and a leathern girdle around his loins.
His food was locusts and wild honey. He went out to Jerusalem. all
Judaea, and all the region round Jordan. Many people were baptized by
him and confessed their sins.

But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to his
baptism, he said to them, O generation of vipers, who has warned you to
flee from the wrath to come? Bring forth fruits fit for repentance. Do
not say, We have Abraham for our father, because I say to you, God is
able  to raise up children to Abraham with these stones. The axe is now
laid to the root of the trees. Every tree which does not bring forth
good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.

I baptize you with water for repentance but He that comes after me is
mightier than I. His shoes I am not worthy to bear. He shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost and with the fire whose fan is in His hand. He
will throughly purge His floor and gather His wheat into the garner. He
will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.

When Jesus came from Galilee to Jordan to be baptized by him, John
forbad Him. He said, Why come to me? I should be baptized by thee.
Jesus answered, For now, suffer it to be so because it becomes us to
fulfill all righteousness.

When Jesus was baptized He came up out of the water and the heavens
opened to Him. John saw the Spirit of God descend like a dove and light
upon Him. A voice from heaven said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am
well pleased.

4
Then Jesus was led by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by
the devil. After He fasted forty days and forty nights He was hungry.
The tempter came to Him and said, If thou be the Son of God, command
that these stones be made bread. Jesus answered, It is written, Man
shall not live by bread alone but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God. The devil then took Him up into the holy city and sat
Him on a pinnacle of the temple. He said, If thou be the Son of God,
cast thyself down, for it is written, He shall give His angels charge
concerning thee and in their hands they shall bear thee up lest at any
time thou dash thy foot against a stone. Jesus countered Him saying, It
is also written, Thou shalt not test the Lord thy God.

Next, the devil took Him up into an exceedingly high mountain. He
showed Him the kingdoms of the world in all their glory. He said, All
these things I will give thee if thou will bow down and worship me.
Then Jesus said, Get thee hence, Satan, for it is written, Thou shalt
worship the Lord thy God and Him only shalt thou serve. Then the devil
left Him. And, behold, angels came and ministered to Him.

When Jesus heard that John was cast into prison, He departed into
Galilee. And, leaving Nazareth, He dwelt in Capernaum on the sea coast,
in the borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim. This He did so that what was
spoken by Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled: In the land of
Zabulon, and the land of Nephthalim by the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee
of the Gentiles, the people which sat in darkness saw great light. And
to those who sat in the region and shadow of death, light is sprung up.
From this time forward Jesus began His teaching of repentance because
the kingdom of God is at hand.

As Jesus walked by the sea of Galilee, He saw Simon, called Peter, and
Andrew, his brother. They were fishers and were casting a net into the
sea. He said to them, Follow me and I will make you fishers of men.
They left their nets and followed Him.

Going on from there, Jesus saw two other brethren, James, the son of
Zebedee, and John. They were in a boat, mending their nets, with
Zebedee, their father. Jesus called them and they immediately left the
boat and their father and followed Him. Then Jesus went all about
Galilee, teaching in the synagogues, preaching the gospel of the
kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness and disease among the
people.

His fame spread throughout all Syria. They brought to Him sick people
who were taken with diverse diseases, torments, and those who were
possessed with devils. They brought those who were lunatic, and those
who had palsy. He healed them. Great multitudes of people from Galilee,
and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judaea, and from
beyond Jordan followed Him.
5
Seeing the multitudes, He went up into a mountain and sat. His
disciples came and He taught them: Blessed are the poor in spirit for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn for they
shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the
earth. Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness for
they shall be filled.

Blessed are the merciful for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the
pure of heart for they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers for
they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are they who are
persecuted for righteousness' sake for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are ye when men revile and persecute you, and say all manner of
evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceedingly glad.
Great is your reward in heaven. And, likewise, they persecuted the
prophets who were before you.

Ye are the salt of the earth. If the salt loses its savour it is good
for nothing except to be cast out and walked on. Ye are the light of
the world. A city that is set on a hill cannot be hidden. A candle is
not lighted to be put under a bushel, but on a candlestick. This way it
gives light to all in the house. Let your light so shine before men
that they see your good works reflecting only your Father in heaven.

Do not think that I came to destroy the law or the words of the
prophets. I did not come to destroy but to fulfill. For verily I say,
Until heaven and earth pass away, not one jot or one tittle shall pass
from the law until all is fulfilled. Whoever breaks one of these least
commandments, and teaches others to do likewise shall be called the
least in the kingdom of heaven. But whoever shall keep these least
commandments and teach them shall be called great in the kingdom of
heaven. Unless your righteousness exceeds the righteousness of the
scribes and Pharisees, there is no way ye shall enter the kingdom of
heaven.

Ye have heard it was said of old time, Thou shalt not kill; and whoever
shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment. But I say to you,
Whoever is angry with his brother shall be in danger of the judgment.
Whoever shows contempt toward his brother shall be in danger of the
council. But whosoever curses his brother is in danger of hell fire.

So, if thou bring a gift to the altar and then remember that thy
brother has something against thee, leave the gift before the altar. Be
reconciled to thy brother first. Then come back and offer thy gift.
Agree with thine adversary quickly while thou art with him; lest, at
any time, thy adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge
deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. Verily I say
unto thee, Thou shalt not come out then until all is paid.

Ye have heard it said by them of old, Thou shalt not commit adultery.
But I say, Whoever looks on a woman in lust has already committed
adultery in his heart. If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and
cast it away. It is more profitable for thee that one of thy members
should perish rather than thy whole body be cast into hell. And if thy
right hand offend thee, cut it off and cast it from thee. It is more
profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish rather than
thy whole body be cast into hell.

It has been said, Whoever puts away his wife shall give her a writing
of divorcement. But I say, Whoever puts away his wife, except for
reason of fornication, causes her to commit adultery. And whoever
marries her that is divorced commits adultery.

Also, ye have heard it said by them of old, Thou shalt not forswear
thyself but perform your oaths unto the Lord. But I say, take no oaths
at all. Do not swear by heaven because it is God's throne. Do not swear
by the earth because it is His footstool. Do not swear by Jerusalem for
it is the city of the great King. Do not swear by thy self because you
are incapable of making even one hair white or black. Let your
statement be only Yea, yes; Nay, no: for anything more than this comes
to evil.

Ye have heard it said, An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth. But I
say, Do not resist evil. Whoever strikes thee on thy right cheek, turn
the other to him also. And, if any one lawfully sues thee and takes
away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. Whoever compels thee to go
a mile, go with him two. Give to him who asks of thee. From him who
would borrow of thee, do not turn away.

Ye have heard it said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour and hate thine
enemy. But I say, Love your enemy. Bless those who curse you. Do good
to those who hate you. Pray for those who spitefully use and persecute
you.

Do this that ye may be the children of your Father in heaven. He makes
His sun rise on the evil and on the good. He sends rain on the just and
on the unjust. If ye love only those who love you, what reward have ye?
Do not even the publicans do this? And if ye greet your friends only,
what do ye do more than others? Do not even the publicans do this?
Instead be ye as perfect as your Father in heaven is perfect.

6
Take heed that ye do not do your almsgiving to be seen by others. If
so, ye have no reward from your Father in heaven. When you give, do not
sound a trumpet in the synagogues and in the streets as do the
hypocrites. They seek the glory of men. Verily, I say unto you, They
have their reward.

When you give alms, do not let thy left hand know what thy right does.
Give alms in secret and thy Father, who sees in secret, shall reward
thee openly.

When thou pray, thou shalt not be like the hypocrites. They love to
pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets so
they may be seen. Verily, I say unto you, They have their reward.

When thou pray, enter into thy closet. When thou has shut thy door,
pray to thy Father in secret. Thy Father, who sees in secret, shall
reward thee openly.

When ye pray, do not use vain repetitions like the heathen. They think
that they shall be heard for their long speaking. Be not like them.
Your Father knows what things ye need even before ye ask Him.

Pray like this: Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name. Thy
kingdom come. Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us
this day our daily bread. And forgive us our debts as we forgive our
debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For
Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever. Amen.

If ye forgive others their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also
forgive you. But if ye do not forgive others their trespasses, neither
will your Father forgive your trespasses. Moreover, when ye fast, be
not as the hypocrites. They disfigure their faces and look sad so they
may appear to others to fast. Verily, I say unto you, They have their
reward.

However, when thou fast, anoint thy head and wash thy face so that thou
not appear to fast. Keep secret except unto thy Father, who is in
secret, and thy Father shall reward thee openly.

Lay not up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust
corrupts, and where thieves break in and steal. Instead, lay up
treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust corrupts, nor thieves
can break in and steal. For, where your treasure is, there, also, will
be your heart.

The light of the body is the eye. If thine eye be single, thy whole
body shall be full of light. But, if thine eye be evil, thy whole body
shall be full of darkness. And, if the light that is in thee becomes
darkness, how much greater will be that darkness!

No man can serve two masters. He will either hate the one and love the
other, or he will hold to the one and despise the other. Ye cannot
serve God and mammon. Therefore, I say unto you, Take no concern for
your life: what ye shall eat, what ye shall drink; nor for your body:
what ye shall put on. Is not life more than food and the body more than
raiment?  Behold the fowls of the air. They sow not, and neither do
they reap nor gather into barns. Yet, your heavenly Father feeds them.
Are ye not worth as much as they are? And, who of you, by worrying, can
add one cubit to his stature? So why take thought for raiment?

Consider the lilies of the field and how they grow. They toil not and
neither do they spin. Even Solomon, in all his glory, was not arrayed
like one of them. So, if God so clothes the grass of the field, which
today is here and tomorrow is cast into the oven, shall He not clothe
you even more, O ye of little faith?

So, take no concern by saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we
drink? or, How shall we be clothed? Your heavenly Father knows that ye
need all these things. Instead, seek ye first the kingdom of God and
His righteousness. Then all these things shall be added unto you. Take
no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall take care of itself.
The cares of today are sufficient for today.

7
Judge not that ye be not judged, for with what judgment ye judge, ye
shall be judged. And with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to
you again.

Why behold the mote in thy brother's eye, but not consider the beam in
thine own eye? How can you say to thy brother, Let me pull the mote out
of thine eye when, behold, a beam is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite.
First, cast out the beam from thine own eye, then thou shall see
clearly enough to cast the mote from thy brother's eye.

Do not give that which is holy to dogs. And do not cast your pearls
before swine lest they trample them under their feet and turn around
and rend you.

Ask and it shall be given you. Seek and ye shall find. Knock and it
shall be opened to you. Who of you is there who, if his son asks for
bread, will give him a stone? Or, if he asks for a fish, will give him
a serpent? If ye, then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your
children, how much more shall your Father in heaven give good things to
those who ask Him? Therefore, all things ye would have others do to
you, do so to them. This is the law and the meaning of the prophets.

Enter in at the strait gate. Wide is the gate and broad is the way that
leads to destruction. Many go in that way. Because the gate is strait
and the way that leads to life is narrow, there are few who find it.

Beware of false prophets who come to you in sheep's clothing but are
inwardly ravenous wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men
gather grapes from thorns, or figs from thistles? No, every good tree
brings forth good fruit. A corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. A good
tree cannot bring forth evil fruit. A corrupt tree cannot bring forth
good fruit. Every tree that does not bring forth good fruit is hewn
down and cast into the fire. So, by their fruits ye shall know them.

Now, not every one that says to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Only he who does the will of my Father in heaven
shall enter. Many will say to me, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in
thy name? In thy name have we not cast out devils? And, in thy name,
have we not done many wonderful works? Then will I say to them, I never
knew you. Depart from me, ye that work iniquity.

Whoever hears these sayings and does them, I liken to a wise man who
built his house upon a rock. When the rain descended, and the floods
came, and the winds blew and beat upon the house, it did not fall
because it was founded upon a rock.

Whoever hears these sayings and does not do them I liken to a foolish
man who built his house upon the sand. When the rain descended, and the
floods came, and the winds blew and beat upon that house, it fell. And
a great fall it was.

When Jesus finished these sayings, people were astonished at His
doctrine because He taught as one having authority different from the
scribes.

8
When He came down from the mountain, great multitudes followed Him.
And, behold, there came a leper who worshipped Him, saying, Lord, if
Thou will, Thou can make me clean. Jesus put out His hand, touched him,
and said, Be thou clean. Immediately his leprosy was cleansed. Then
Jesus said to him, See that thou tell no man. Go thy way, show thyself
to the priest and offer the gift that Moses commanded for a testimony.

Then, when Jesus was in Capernaum, a centurion beseeched Him saying,
Lord, my servant lies at home sick with palsy and grievously tormented.
Jesus said to him, I will come and heal him. The centurion answered,
Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof, but only
give the word and my servant shall be healed. I am a man of authority,
understand commands, and have soldiers under me. I command this man,
Go, and he goes. To another I say, Come, and he comes. I direct my
servant to do this, and he does it.

When Jesus heard this, He marvelled and said to those who followed,
Verily, I say unto you, I have not found such great faith anywhere, no,
not even in Israel. And I say to you, Many shall come from the east and
west and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the
kingdom of heaven. But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out
into darkness. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Jesus said
to the centurion, Go thy way. As thou has believed, so be it done unto
thee. And the servant was healed that same hour.

When Jesus went to Peter's house, He saw Peter's wife's mother laid
sick with a fever. He touched her hand and the fever left her. She
arose and ministered to them. That evening they brought to Him many
that were possessed with devils and He cast out the spirits with His
word. He healed all who were sick so that it might be fulfilled what
was spoken by Esaias the prophet: He took our infirmities and bore our
sicknesses.

Jesus saw great multitudes gathering. He decided they should depart to
the other side of the water. A scribe approached Him and said, Master,
I will follow wherever thou go. Jesus only replied, The foxes have
holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man has no
place to lay His head. Another came to Him and said, Lord, let me first
go and bury my father. But Jesus replied, Follow me and let the dead
bury their dead. Then they got in a boat and started for the other
side.

Behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea. It was so great that
the boat was covered with the waves. Jesus was asleep. His disciples
woke Him and said, Lord, save us. We will perish. Jesus replied, Why
are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Then He got up and rebuked the
winds and the sea. There was a great calm. The disciples marvelled and
said, What kind of man is this who even the winds and the sea obey!

On the other side they came into the country of the Gergesenes. There
He met two men coming out of the tombs who were possessed with devils
so fierce that no man dared pass them. They cried out, What have we to
do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? Art thou come here to torment us
before the time?

At a distance from them was a herd of swine. The devils said to Him, If
thou cast us out, suffer us to go into the herd of swine. Jesus said to
them, Go. When they came out of the men, they went into the herd of
swine. Behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently down a steep place
into the sea and perished in the waters. The herders who kept them fled
into the city and told everything including what happened to those
possessed by the devils. Then the whole city came out to see Jesus and,
when they saw Him, they besought Him to depart from their coasts.

9
He took a boat to His own city. There they brought to Him a man with
palsy who was lying on a bed. Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the
sick man; Son, be of good cheer; thy sins are forgiven thee.

Behold, certain of the scribes said, This man blasphemes. And, Jesus
knowing their thoughts said, Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts? Is
it easier to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee or Arise and walk? So ye
may know that the Son of man has power on earth to forgive sins, (then
He said to the sick man) Arise, take up thy bed and go to thy house.
The man did get up and went to his house. When the multitude saw it,
they marvelled and glorified God who had given such power.

When Jesus left there He saw a man sitting at the receipt of custom. He
said to him, Follow me. And he arose and followed Him. As Jesus sat at
dinner, many publicans and sinners came and sat down with Him and His
disciples. When the Pharisees saw it, they said to His disciples, Why
does your master eat with publicans and sinners? When Jesus heard this,
He said, Those who are well do not need a physician, but those who are
sick do. Go and learn what that means. I will have mercy and not
revenge because I have not come to call the righteous, but to call
sinners to repentance.

Then John's disciples came to Him and asked, Why do we and the
Pharisees often fast, but thy disciples do not fast? Jesus said to
them, Can the children of the bridechamber mourn as long as the
bridegroom is with them? The day will come when the bridegroom will be
taken from them and then they will fast.

No man uses a piece of new cloth to patch an old garment for that which
is put in to cover the space takes from the garment and the rent is
worse than before. Neither do men put new wine into old bottles: else
the bottles break, the wine runs out and the bottles perish. They put
new wine into new bottles and both are preserved. While He spoke these
things there came a certain ruler who worshipped Him and said, My
daughter is almost now dead, but come and lay thy hand upon her and she
shall live. Jesus arose and followed him, and His disciples came along
also.

On the way, a woman who was diseased with an issue of blood for twelve
years came up behind Him. She touched the hem of His garment because
she said within herself, If I may but touch His garment I shall be
healed. Jesus turned around, and when He saw her, He said, Daughter, be
of good comfort; thy faith has made thee whole. The woman was healed
from that hour.

Finally, when Jesus arrived at the ruler's house, He saw many mourners.
He said to them, Stand aside. The maid is not dead but sleeps. They
laughed Him to scorn. But when the people moved aside, He went in, took
her by the hand, and she arose. This news spread abroad into all that
land.

When Jesus left there, two blind men followed Him. They cried, Thou son
of David, have mercy on us. When He entered a house, the blind men came
to Him. Jesus said to them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? They
said to Him, Yea, Lord. Then He touched their eyes and said, According
to your faith be it done unto you. Their eyes were opened. Then Jesus
charged them to make sure that no man knew of this. But, after they
departed, they spread His fame all around that country.

As they were leaving that place a mute man possessed with a devil was
brought to Jesus. When the devil was cast out, the man could then
speak. The multitude marvelled and said nothing like it was ever before
seen in Israel. But the Pharisees said, He casts out devils through the
prince of the devils.

Jesus went to all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues
and preaching the gospel of the kingdom. He healed every kind of
sickness and disease among the people. But when He saw the crowds, He
was moved with compassion on them because they fainted and were
scattered like sheep without a shepherd. Then He said to His disciples,
The harvest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are few. Pray to the
Lord so He will send forth laborers to His harvest.

10
Jesus called together His twelve disciples and gave them power to cast
out unclean spirits and to heal all manner of sickness and disease. The
names of the twelve apostles are these; Simon, who is called Peter,
Andrew, his brother; James the son of Zebedee, John his brother;
Philip; Bartholomew; Thomas; the publican; James the son of Alphaeus;
Lebbaeus, whose surname was Thaddaeus; Simon the Canaanite; and Judas
Iscariot, who also betrayed Him.

These twelve Jesus sent forth and commanded them: Go not into the way
of the Gentiles or into any city of the Samaritans. Rather, go to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel. As ye go, preach that the kingdom of
heaven is at hand. Heal the sick. Cleanse the lepers. Raise the dead.
Cast out devils. Freely ye have received, freely give.

Provide neither gold nor silver nor brass in your purses. Take no scrip
for your journey. Neither take two coats, nor shoes, nor staves because
the workman is worthy of his food. Into whatever city or town ye enter,
enquire who in it is worthy. Abide there until ye go on. When ye come
into a house, salute it. If the house is worthy, let your peace come
upon it. If it is not worthy, let your peace return to you. Whoever
shall not receive you or hear your words, when ye leave that house or
city, shake the dust from your feet. Verily I say unto you, It shall be
more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of
judgment than for that city.

Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves. Be wise as
serpents and harmless as doves. Beware of men. They will deliver you up
to the councils. They will scourge you in their synagogues. Ye shall be
brought before governors and kings for a testimony against them and the
Gentiles because of me. But when they deliver you up, do not worry how
or what ye shall speak. It will be given you at the time ye speak
because it is not ye that will speak, but the Spirit of your Father
which speaks through you.

Also be aware that a brother shall deliver up a brother to death, and a
father the child. Children shall rise up against their parents and
cause them to be put to death. Ye shall be hated of all men for my
name's sake. But he that endures to the end shall be saved. When they
persecute you in one city, flee to another.

Verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone to all the cities of
Israel before the Son comes. The disciple is not above his master, nor
the servant above his lord. It is enough for the disciple that he be as
his master, and the servant as his lord. If they have called the master
of the house, Beelzebub, how much more shall they call those of God's
household?

Fear them not. There is nothing covered that shall not be revealed; and
nothing hid that shall not be known. What I tell you in darkness, speak
ye in light. And what ye hear in the ear, preach that upon the
housetops. Fear not those who kill the body but are not able to kill
the soul. Instead, fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body
in hell.

Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? Yet not one of them falls to
the ground without your Father knowing. The very hairs of your head are
all numbered by Him. Fear not because ye are of more value than many
sparrows. Whoever confesses me before men, I will confess him before my
Father in heaven. Whoever denies me before men, I will deny him before
my Father in heaven.

Think not that I came to earth to send peace. I came not to send peace,
but a sword. My coming will set a man against his father, and a
daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her
mother-in-law. A man's foes shall be those of his own household.

He that loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me. He
that loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me. And he
that does not take up his cross and follow me, is not worthy of me.

He that finds his life shall lose it. He that loses his life for my
sake shall find it. He that receives you receives me, and he that
receives me receives Him that sent me. He that receives a prophet in
the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet's reward. He that
receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a
righteous man's reward. And whoever shall give to one of the little
ones a cup of cold water to drink in the name of a disciple, he shall
never lose his reward.

11
When Jesus finished instructing His twelve disciples, He departed to
teach and preach in their cities. When John, who was in prison, heard
of the works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples. They asked Jesus,
Art thou He that should come or do we look for another? Jesus answered,
Go and show John those things which ye hear and see. The blind receive
their sight. The lame walk. The lepers are cleansed. The deaf hear. The
dead are raised up. And the poor have the gospel preached to them.
Blessed is he, who shall not be offended in me.

As they departed, Jesus spoke to the crowds concerning John saying,
What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the
wind? What went ye out to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold,
they that wear soft clothing are in kings' houses. What went ye out to
see? A prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and he is more than a prophet.
This is he of whom it is written: Behold, I send my messenger before
thy face who shall prepare the way before thee.

Verily I say unto you, Among those born of woman there has not risen
one greater than John the Baptist who would make himself least in the
kingdom of heaven. From the days of John the Baptist until now, the
kingdom of heaven suffered violence and the violent took it by force.
All the prophets and the law prophesied of John. If ye will receive it,
this is Elias, who was to come. He that has ears to hear, let him hear.


But how shall I liken this generation? It is like children sitting in
the markets and calling unto their fellows saying, We have piped to you
and ye have not danced. We have mourned you and ye have not lamented.
John came neither eating nor drinking and they say he had a devil. The
Son of man came eating and drinking and they say he is a gluttonous
man, a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners. But wisdom shall
be justified of her children.

Then He began to upbraid the cities where most of His mighty works were
done because they did not repent. Woe unto thee, Chorazin! Woe unto
thee, Bethsaida! If the mighty works which were done in you had been
done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth
and ashes. But I say to you, It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and
Sidon at the day of judgment than for you. And Capernaum, exalted unto
heaven, shall be brought down to hell. If the mighty works which have
been done in Capernaum had been done in Sodom, it would have remained
until this day. But I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the
land of Sodom in the day of judgment than for thee.

Then Jesus prayed aloud: I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and
earth, because thou has hid these things from the wise and prudent and
revealed them to babes. It is so, Father, for it seemed good in thy
sight.

All things are delivered to me by my Father. No man knows the Son but
the Father. Neither knows any man the Father except the Son. He is
revealed to whomever the Son will reveal Him.

Come to me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden and I will give you
rest. Take up my yoke and learn from me. I am meek and lowly in heart.
Ye shall find rest for your souls because my yoke is easy and my burden
is light.

12
It was a sabbath day when Jesus and His disciples passed through a
cornfield. His disciples were hungry and began to pluck ears of corn to
eat. When the Pharisees saw it, they said to Jesus, Behold, thy
disciples do that which is not lawful to do on the sabbath day. But
Jesus answered them, Have ye not read what David did when he was
hungry? He and those who were with him entered into the house of God
and ate the showbread. This was not lawful for him to eat, nor for
those with him because the bread was only for the priests.

And, have ye not read in the law how on the sabbath days the priests in
the temple profane the sabbath and are blameless? But I say unto you,
Here is one greater than the temple. If ye knew what this meant, ye
would not have condemned the guiltless because the Son of man is Lord
even of the sabbath day.

When Jesus went into the synagogue He was met by a man who had a
withered hand. So that they might accuse Jesus, the Pharisees asked
Him, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day? Jesus replied, What man
is there among you who has one sheep and, if it falls into a pit on the
sabbath day, will not lay hold on it and lift it out? How much more is
a man worth than a sheep? Therefore, it is lawful to do good on the
sabbath day. Jesus turned to the man and said, Stretch forth thine
hand. The man stretched it forth and it was restored, whole and like
his other hand.

Then the Pharisees left and held a council about how they might destroy
Jesus. But when Jesus knew this, He departed from there. Great
multitudes followed Him and He healed them all. He charged them that
they should not make Him known. This was done to fulfill what was
spoken by Esaias the prophet: Behold my servant, whom I have chosen; my
beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased. I will put my spirit upon Him
and He shall show judgment to the Gentiles. He shall not strive, nor
cry; neither shall any man hear His voice in the streets. A bruised
reed shall He not break, and smoking flax shall He not quench till He
send forth judgment unto victory. And in His name the Gentiles shall
trust.

Then a blind and mute man who was possessed with a devil, was brought
to Him. Jesus healed him, and, to such an extent, that he both spoke
and saw. All the people were amazed and said, Is not this the son of
David? But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, This one casts out
devils by Beelzebub, the prince of the devils.

Jesus knew their thoughts and said, Every kingdom divided against
itself is brought to desolation. Every city or house divided against
itself shall not stand. If Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against
himself. How, then, shall his kingdom stand?

If I, by Beelzebub, cast out devils, by whom do your children cast them
out? Therefore, they shall be your judges. But, if I cast out devils by
the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God is come unto you. And, if
not, then how can someone enter into a strong man's house and spoil his
goods unless he first bind the strong man? Only then is he able to
spoil his house.

He that is not with me is against me. He that gathers not with me
scatters abroad. So I say to you, All manner of sin and blasphemy
against men shall be forgiven, but blasphemy against the Holy Ghost
shall not be forgiven.

Whoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven Him.
But whoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven
Him; not in this world and not in the world to come. Either make the
tree good and its fruit good; or else make the tree corrupt and its
fruit corrupt; for the tree is known by its fruit.

O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? Out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. A good man, out of the
good treasure of the heart, brings forth good things. An evil man, out
of the evil of the heart, brings forth evil things.

I say to you, For every idle word that a man speaks, he shall account
for it in the day of judgment. By thy words thou shall be justified and
by thy words thou shall be condemned.

Then, some of the scribes and Pharisees said, Master, we want to see a
sign from thee. But Jesus answered, An evil and adulterous generation
seeks after a sign. There shall be no sign given except the sign of the
prophet Jonas. Just as Jonas was three days and three nights in the
whale's belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights
in the heart of the earth.

The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment of this generation and shall
condemn it. This is so because they repented at the preaching of Jonas.
Behold, one greater than Jonas is here. The queen of the south shall
rise up in the judgment of this generation and shall condemn it. She
came from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of
Solomon and, behold, one greater than Solomon is here.

When an unclean spirit has left a man, he wanders through dry places,
seeking rest, and finds none. Then the unclean spirit says, I will
return to the house from which I came. When he comes, he finds it
empty, swept, and garnished. Then he returns with seven other spirits
more wicked than himself. They go back into the man and dwell there.
Then the last state of that man is worse than the first. This is how it
shall be with this wicked generation.

While Jesus continued to talk to the people, His mother and His
brethren stood outside and requested to speak with Him. Someone
reported this to Him saying, Behold, thy mother and brethren are
outside and desire to speak with thee. But Jesus addressed the one that
told Him by saying, Who is my mother and who are my brethren? Then He
stretched forth His hand toward His disciples and said, Behold, my
mother and my brethren! Whoever shall do the will of my Father in
heaven is my brother, and sister, and mother.

13
That same day Jesus sat by the sea. Great multitudes gathered. He had
to get into a boat and sit while the whole multitude stood on the
shore. Then He taught them in parables.

Jesus said, Behold, a sower went forth to sow seed. When he sowed, some
seeds fell by the wayside and the birds came and devoured them. Some
fell upon stony places where there was not much earth. They sprang up
but they had no deep roots. So, when the sun was up, they were scorched
and withered away. Also, some of the seeds fell among thorns. The
thorns sprang up and choked them. Yet other seeds fell on good ground.
These brought forth fruit, some a hundredfold, some sixtyfold, some
thirtyfold. Who has ears to hear, let him hear.

The disciples asked Jesus, Why do you speak to them in parables? He
answered, Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given. For whoever has
understanding, more shall be given him and he shall have abundance. But
whoever does not have understanding, what little he has shall be taken
away from him. Therefore, I speak to them in parables because, not
seeing and not hearing, they do not understand.

Also, in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias: By hearing ye shall
hear and shall not understand. And by seeing ye shall see and shall not
perceive. For the people's hearts are hardened. Their ears are dull of
hearing. They have closed their eyes. They do not see or hear for fear
they will be converted and have to change their hearts.

But blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear.
Many prophets and righteous men have desired to see the things which ye
see and they have not seen them. They have desired to hear the things
which ye hear, and have not heard them. So, again, listen to the
parable of the sower.

When any one hears the word of the kingdom and does not understand it,
the wicked one snatches away all that was sown in his heart. This is
the one who received seed by the wayside. Now he that received the seed
in the stony places, received the word with joy. But he has no deep
root and endures only for a while. When tribulation or persecution
arises he is uprooted. Now the one that received seed among the thorns
hears the word but is too much ensnared by things of this world and the
deceitfulness of riches. The understanding of the word is choked out
and he becomes unfruitful. Finally, the one that received seed in the
good ground is he that hears the word, understands it, and bears fruit.
He brings forth a hundredfold or sixty or thirty.

He spoke another parable saying, The kingdom of heaven is like a man
who sowed good seed in his field. But, during the night, his enemy came
and sowed weeds among the wheat then slipped away. When the blades
sprang up and brought forth fruit weeds appeared also. The
householder's servants came to him and asked, Sir, did thou not sow
good seed in the field? Where did the tares come from? The householder
answered, An enemy has done this. The servants then asked, Shall we go
and pull them up? But he said, Nay; lest while ye gather up the tares,
ye shall uproot the wheat with them. Let both grow together until the
harvest. Then, at harvest time, I will say to the reapers, First gather
together the weeds and bind them in bundles. These tares shall ye burn
up. Then the wheat is to go in the shelter.

Jesus told another parable, The kingdom of heaven is like a grain of
mustard seed. A man sowed it in his field. Now this, indeed, is the
least of all seeds. However, when it is grown, it is the largest among
all the herbs. It grows like a tree so the birds of the air can come
and lodge in its branches.

Another parable: The kingdom of heaven is like leaven. A woman took a
little, hid it in three measures of meal and, at last, all was
leavened. All these things Jesus spoke in parables to the multitude.
Thus it might be fulfilled what was spoken by the prophet: I will open
my mouth in parables. I will utter things which have been kept secret
from the foundation of the world.

Then Jesus sent the multitude away and went inside. His disciples came
to Him and said, Explain to us the parable of the tares in the field.
Jesus answered and said, He that sows the good seed is the Son of man.
The field is the world. The good seed are the children of the kingdom.
The weeds are the children of the wicked one. The enemy that sowed them
is the devil. The harvest is the end of the world. The reapers are the
angels. As the tares are gathered and burned in the fire; so shall it
be in the end of this world. The Son of man shall send forth His
angels. They shall clear out of His kingdom all that offends and does
iniquity and cast it into a furnace. There shall be wailing and
gnashing of teeth. Then the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in
the kingdom of their Father. Whoever has ears to hear, let him hear.

Again, the kingdom of heaven is like treasure hidden in a field. When a
man discovers it, he buries it again. Then joyfully he goes and sells
all that he has to buy that field. Again, the kingdom of heaven is like
a merchant seeking good pearls. When he finds even one pearl of great
price, he goes and sells all he has to buy it.

And the kingdom of heaven is like a net that was cast into the sea to
gather every kind of fish. When it was full, they drew the net to
shore. The good they gathered into vessels. But they cast the bad away.
So shall it be at the end of the world. The angels shall come and sever
the wicked from the just and cast them into the furnace where there
shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

Jesus asked, Have ye understood all these things? They said, Yea, Lord.
Then He said, Therefore, every scribe who is instructed about the
kingdom of heaven is like a householder who brings forth out of his
treasure things both new and old.

Jesus went into His own country. He taught in the synagogue. The people
were astonished and said, Whence has He this wisdom and these mighty
works? Is this not the carpenter's son? Is His mother not called Mary
and His brethren, James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas? Are His
sisters not here with us? Where did this man get all these things?

They were offended by Him. Jesus told them that a prophet is not
without honor except in His own country and in His own house. He did
not do many mighty works there because of their unbelief.

14
At that time Herod heard of the fame of Jesus. He said to his servants,
This is John the Baptist. He is risen from the dead and mighty works
show forth in him.

Herod had imprisoned John for the sake of Herodia, his brother Philip's
wife. He did this because John told Herod that it was not lawful for
Herod to have her. He would have immediately put John to death but
Herod feared the multitude, who counted John as a prophet.

But when Herod's birthday was celebrated, Herodias' daughter danced and
greatly pleased Herod. He promised, with an oath, to give her whatever
she asked. Having previously been instructed by her mother, she said,
Give me John the Baptist's head on a charger. Herod was sorry. However,
for the oath's sake and those who sat at dinner with him, he commanded
it be given her. He had John beheaded in prison. Then his head was
brought on a charger, presented to her, and she brought it to her
mother. Then John's disciples came, took up the body, buried it, and
reported it to Jesus.

When Jesus heard, He departed from there by boat to a desert place.
When the people heard this, they followed Him on foot out of the
cities. As Jesus went forth He saw a great multitude. He was moved with
compassion toward them and He healed their sick. When it was evening,
His disciples came to Him and said, This is a desert place and it is
late. Send the multitude away so they may go into the villages and buy
food. But Jesus said, They need not depart. Give them food to eat. They
said, We have only five loaves and two fish. Jesus said, Bring them to
me.

He told the multitude to sit down on the grass. He took the five loaves
and the two fish, and, looking up to heaven, He blessed it. Then He
broke and gave the loaves to His disciples, and the disciples gave them
to the multitude. They all ate and were full. Afterwards, they took up
the fragments that remained, twelve baskets full. Those who had eaten
numbered about five thousand men, in addition to women and children.

Immediately, Jesus instructed His disciples to get into a boat and go
ahead of Him to the other side. After He sent the multitude away, He
went up into a mountain to pray. When evening came He was there alone.
But the boat was now in the midst of the sea and tossed with waves by
the strong wind. In the fourth watch of the night, the disciples saw
Jesus walking toward them on the sea. They were afraid and said, It is
a spirit. They cried out for fear. But Jesus said, Be of good cheer. It
is I. Be not afraid.

Peter answered and said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on
the water. Jesus said, Come. Peter got out of the boat and walked on
the water toward Jesus.  But when he saw the wind, he became afraid and
immediately began to sink. He cried, Lord, save me. Jesus stretched out
His hand, caught Peter, and said, O thou of little faith. Why did thou
doubt?

When they got into the boat the wind ceased. Then those who were in the
boat came and worshipped Jesus. They said, Surely thou art the Son of
God. Then they reached the land of Gennesaret. When the people there
had knowledge of Him, they sent word all around the country. They
brought to Jesus all who were diseased. They besought Him that they
might only touch the hem of His garment. And all who touched His
garment were made perfectly whole.

15
Then scribes and Pharisees from Jerusalem came to Jesus. They asked,
Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? They do
not wash their hands when they eat bread. Jesus answered, Why do ye
also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition? God
commanded: Honor thy father and mother. Let him be put to death who
curses father or mother. But ye say that whoever says to his father or
mother that it is a gift by whatever thou might profit by me,
dishonoring the father or mother, shall be free. Your tradition has
made the commandment of God useless.

Ye hypocrites. Well did Esaias prophesy: This people draw nigh unto me
with their mouth, and honor me with their lips. But their hearts are
far from me. In vain do they worship me. They teach the commandments of
men as doctrines.

Jesus then called the multitude and said, Hear and understand. Nothing
that goes into the mouth defiles a man. But that which comes out of the
mouth defiles a man. His disciples approached him and said, Know thou
that the Pharisees were offended after they heard these words? Jesus
said, Every plant that was not planted by my heavenly Father shall be
uprooted. Let them alone. They are blind leaders of the blind. If the
blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.

Next, Peter approached Him and said, Explain the parable to us. Jesus
replied, Are ye still without understanding? Do ye not yet understand
that whatever goes in at the mouth goes into the belly and is expelled.
But those things which come out of the mouth come from the heart. They
defile the man because out of the heart come evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, and blasphemies. These
are the things that defile a man. To eat with unwashed hands does not
defile a man.

Then Jesus went into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon. A woman of Canaan
came to Him and said, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David. My
daughter is grievously tormented with a devil. Jesus said not a word to
her. Finally, His disciples came and said, Send her away for she cries
after us. Jesus replied, I am not here for the lost sheep of the house
of Israel only.

She came forward and worshipped Him. She said, Lord, help me. He
answered, It is not fit to take the children's bread and cast it to
dogs. She answered, True, Lord. Yet dogs eat the crumbs that fall from
their masters' table. Jesus said to her, O woman, great is thy faith.
Be it done unto thee as thou wilt. So her daughter was made whole from
that very hour.

Jesus left and went near the sea of Galilee where He went up into a
mountain to rest. Soon, great multitudes came to Him. They brought
those who were lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others. They placed
them at Jesus' feet and He healed them. The multitude wondered when
they saw the dumb speaking, the maimed made whole, the lame walking,
and the blind seeing. They glorified the God of Israel.

Jesus called His disciples aside and said, I have compassion on the
multitude because they have been with me three days and have nothing to
eat. I will not send them away hungry lest they faint on the way. His
disciples said, Where should we find enough bread in the wilderness to
fill so great a multitude? Jesus asked them, How many loaves have ye?
They said, Seven and a few little fish.

Jesus commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground. He took the
seven loaves and the fish and gave thanks. He broke them and gave them
to His disciples and the disciples gave them to the multitude. They all
ate and were full. They took up the food that was left, seven baskets
full. Those who ate were four thousand men, besides women and children.
Then Jesus sent away the multitude and took a boat to the coasts of
Magdala.

16
The Pharisees and the Sadducees came and, testing Jesus, asked Him to
show them a sign from heaven. He answered and said, When it is evening,
ye say it will be fair weather because the sky is red. In the morning,
ye say it will be foul weather because the sky is red.

O ye hypocrites. Ye can discern the face of the sky but cannot discern
the signs of the times! It is a wicked and adulterous generation that
seeks a sign. There shall be no sign given except the sign of the
prophet, Jonas. Then He left them, and departed to the other side.

Jesus uttered, Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and
of the Sadducees. The disciples thought He referred to their not
remembering to bring bread along with them. When Jesus perceived this,
He said, O ye of little faith, why do you concern yourselves because ye
have brought no bread? Do ye not yet understand or remember the five
loaves for the five thousand and how many baskets of leftovers ye took
up? Do ye not remember the seven loaves for the four thousand and how
many baskets of leftovers ye took up?

How is it that ye do not understand that I spoke not about the leaven
of bread but that ye should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and
of the Sadducees? Then they understood that the leaven was the doctrine
and teachings of the Pharisees and the Sadducees.

When Jesus came to the coast of Caesarea Philippi, He asked His
disciples, Who do men say that I, the Son of man, am? They answered,
Some say that thou art John the Baptist. Some say Elias. Others say
Jeremias or one of the prophets.

Then Jesus asked them, But who do ye say that I am? Simon Peter spoke
up, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. Jesus answered and
said, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood has not
revealed it to thee, but my Father which is in heaven.

I say also unto thee, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build
my church. The gates of hell shall not prevail against it. I will give
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Whatsoever thou shalt bind on
earth, shall be bound in heaven. Whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth,
shall be loosed in heaven. Then He charged His disciples to tell no man
that He was Jesus the Christ.

From that time forward Jesus instructed His disciples about how He
must go into Jerusalem and suffer many things at the hands of the
elders, chief priests, and scribes. He told them He would be killed and
be raised again on the third day. Peter began to rebuke Him and said,
Far be it from thee, Lord. This shall not be. Jesus turned quickly,
stopped Peter, and said, Get thee behind me, Satan. Thou art an offence
to me. Thou savor not the things of God, but those of men.

Then Jesus said to His disciples, If any man will come after me, let
him deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me. Whoever saves his
life shall lose it. Whoever loses his life, for my sake, shall find it.

What is a man profited if he gains the whole world and loses his own
soul? What can a man give in exchange for his soul? The Son of man
shall come in the glory of His Father, with His angels and shall reward
every man according to his works. Verily, I say unto you, there are
some standing here who shall not taste death until they see the Son of
man coming in His kingdom.

17
After six days Jesus took Peter, James and his brother, John up into a
high mountain. Here Jesus was transfigured before them. His face shone
as bright as the sun. His raiment was as white as pure light. And,
behold, Moses and Elias appeared and talked with Him.

Peter then said, Lord, it is good for us to be here. If thou wilt, let
us make three tabernacles; one for thee, one for Moses, and one for
Elias. But, as he was speaking, a bright cloud overshadowed them. From
the cloud, a voice said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased. Hear ye Him.

When the disciples heard, they fell on their faces and were afraid.
Then Jesus came, touched them, and said, Arise. Be not afraid. When
they looked up they saw no one but Jesus. As they came down from the
mountain, Jesus charged them to tell no one what they witnessed until
the Son of man had risen from the dead.

His disciples asked Him, Why, then, do the scribes say that Elias must
come first? Jesus answered, Elias comes first and restores all things.
But I tell you that Elias has already come. They knew him not and
caused him to suffer at their hands. Likewise, the Son of man shall
also suffer of them. Then the disciples understood that Jesus meant
John the Baptist.

As they approached the multitude, a man came up to Jesus. Kneeling
down, the man said, Lord, have mercy on my son. He is lunatic and
greatly vexed. He often falls into the fire and into the water. I
brought my son to thy disciples but they could not cure him.

Jesus said, O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be
with you? How long shall I suffer you? Bring the boy here to me. When
Jesus rebuked the devil, he departed out of the child and the boy was
cured from that very hour.

The disciples took Jesus aside and asked, Why could we not cast the
devil out? Jesus answered, Because of your unbelief. Verily, I say unto
you, if ye have the faith of a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say to
this mountain, Move yonder and it shall move. Nothing shall be
impossible. This kind of devil goes out only after much strengthening
of faith by prayer and fasting.

During their time in Galilee, Jesus told all His disciples, The Son of
man shall be betrayed into the hands of men. They shall kill Him and,
on the third day, He shall be raised again. The disciples felt great
sorrow.

When they arrived at Capernaum, those who collected tribute money came
to Peter and questioned him saying, Does your master pay tribute? Peter
said, Yes.

When Peter came into the house, Jesus stopped him and said, What think
thou, Simon? Should the kings of the earth take custom or tribute of
their own children or of strangers? Peter replied, Of strangers. Jesus
said, So then, the children are free.

Then Jesus added, Nonetheless, so we do not offend them, go to the sea,
cast a hook, and take up the first fish that comes up. In his mouth
thou shalt find a coin. Take that and give it to those who collect the
tribute money for me and thee.

18
At the same time the disciples came to Jesus and asked, Who is the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven? Jesus called a little child to Him,
set him in the midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto you, Unless
you are converted and become as little children, ye shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever, therefore, shall humble himself
like this little child, is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

Whoever shall receive a little child in my name receives me. But
whoever offends one of these little ones who believe in me, it would be
better for him that a millstone were hung around his neck and he drown
in the deep of the sea.

Woe unto the world because of offences! It must needs be that offences
come; but woe to the one by whom the offence comes! Therefore, if thy
hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off and cast them from thee. It
is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather than
having two hands or two feet to be cast into everlasting fire. And if
thine eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee. It is better
for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather than having two eyes
to be cast into hell fire. Take heed that ye despise not one of these
little ones; for I say unto you, In heaven their angels always look
upon the face of my Father.

The Son of man is here to save that which was lost. How think ye? If a
man has a hundred sheep, and one of them is gone astray, does he not
leave the ninety and nine and go into the mountains to seek the one
gone astray? And if he find it, he rejoices more over that sheep than
of the ninety and nine which did not stray. So, it is not the will of
your Father in heaven that one of these little ones should perish.

If thy brother trespasses against thee, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone. If he will hear thee, thou has gained thy
brother. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two
more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be
established. If he neglects to hear them, tell it to the church. But if
he neglects to hear the church, let him be treated as a heathen and a
publican.

Whatever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. Whatever ye
shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. If two of you shall
agree on earth as touching anything that they shall ask, it shall be
done for them by my Father in heaven. For where two or three are
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.

Then Peter came to Him and said, Lord, how often shall my brother sin
against me and I forgive him? Until seven times? Jesus replied, I say
unto thee, not until seven times but until seventy times seven.

The kingdom of heaven is like a king who took an account of his
servants. When he began to reckon, one was brought to him who owed him
ten thousand talents. But since he was unable to pay, his lord
commanded him to be sold, along with his wife, and children, and all
that he had, and payment to be made. The servant fell down and
worshipped him saying, Lord, have patience with me and I will pay thee
all. Then the lord of that servant was moved with compassion, loosed
him, and forgave him the debt.

This same servant left and met one of his fellowservants who owed him a
small sum. He laid hands on him and took him by the throat saying, Pay
me what thou owe. The fellowservant fell down at his feet and besought
him saying, have patience with me and I will pay thee all. But he would
not. He cast him into prison until the debt was paid. When the rest of
the servants saw what was done, they were very sorry, and went to their
lord and told him everything.

Then the servant's lord called him and said, O, thou wicked servant! I
forgave thee all that debt because thou desired it of me. Should not
thou also have had compassion on thy fellowservant as I had pity on
thee? His lord was angry and delivered him to the tormentors until he
paid all that was due. So also shall my heavenly Father do to you if ye
do not forgive other's trespasses.

19
It came to pass, when Jesus had finished these sayings, He departed
from Galilee and came into the coasts of Judaea beyond Jordan. Great
multitudes followed Him and He healed many there. The Pharisees also
came to test Him. They questioned Him saying, Is it lawful for a man to
put away his wife for every cause?

Jesus answered, have ye not read that He who made them at the beginning
made them male and female, and said, For this cause shall a man leave
father and mother and shall cleave to his wife. The two shall be one?
Therefore, they are no longer two but one flesh. What God has joined
together, let no man put asunder.

They said, Why, then, did Moses allow a writing of divorcement to put a
wife away? Jesus said, Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts,
suffered you to put away your wives. But, from the beginning, it was
not so. I say to you, Whoever shall put away his wife, except it be for
fornication, and shall marry another, commits adultery. Whoever marries
her who is put away also commits adultery.

His disciples said, If the case of the man be so with his wife, it is
not good to marry. Jesus said, All men cannot receive this saying,
except those to whom this saying is given. There are some eunuchs who
were so born from their mother's womb. There are some eunuchs who were
made eunuchs by men. And there are eunuchs who have made themselves
eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake. He that is able to receive
it, let him receive it.

Then little children were brought to Him that He might put His hands on
them and pray. When the disciples rebuked them Jesus said, Allow these
little children and do not forbid them to come to me; for of such is
the kingdom of heaven. Jesus laid His hands on them, and then departed.

Behold, a young man came to Him and asked, Good Master, what shall I do
that I may have eternal life? He said to him, Why call me good? There
is none good but one, and that is God. But if thou wilt enter into
life, keep the commandments. The young man asked, Which? Jesus said,
Thou shalt not murder. Thou shalt not commit adultery. Thou shalt not
steal. Thou shalt not bear false witness. Honour thy father and thy
mother. Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.

The young man said, All these things I have kept from my youth up. What
do I yet lack? Jesus answered, If thou will be perfect, go and sell
what you have and give to the poor. Thou shalt have treasure in heaven.
Then come and follow me. But when the young man heard that saying he
went away sorrowful because he had many possessions.

Then said Jesus to His disciples, Hardly a rich man shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven. It is easier for a camel to go through the eye
of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. When
His disciples heard this they were greatly amazed. They asked, Who,
then, can be saved? Jesus beheld them and said, With men it is
impossible; but with God all things are possible.

Peter asked, Behold, we have forsaken all and followed thee. What shall
we have? Jesus said, Verily, at the regeneration, when the Son of man
shall sit in the throne of His glory, ye who have followed me shall
also sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

Everyone who has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father,
or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name's sake, shall
receive a hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life. But many
that are first shall be last; and the last shall be first.

20
The kingdom of heaven is like a householder who went out early in the
morning to hire laborers for his vineyard. When he had agreed with the
laborers for a coin a day, he sent them into his vineyard. Then, about
the third hour he went out and saw others standing idle in the
marketplace. He said to them, Go ye also into my vineyard and whatever
is right I will give you.

He went out again about the sixth and the ninth hour and did the same.
About the eleventh hour he went out, found others standing idle, and
said, Why stand ye here all the day idle? They answered, Because no man
has hired us. He then replied, Go ye also into the vineyard and
whatever is right you shall receive.

When evening came, the lord of the vineyard said to his steward, Call
the laborers and give them their pay, beginning from the last unto the
first. When those who were hired about the eleventh hour came, every
man received a coin. But when the first came, supposing they should
receive more, they each also received a coin. When they received it,
they murmured against the good man of the house and said, These last
have worked but one hour and thou has made them equal to those of us
who have borne the burden and heat of the day.

He answered one of them and said, Friend, I do thee no wrong. Did thou
not agree with me for a coin? Take what is thine and go thy way. I will
give to the last the same as I give to thee. Is it not lawful for me to
do what I will with my own coins? Must you see evil in my goodness?

So, the last shall be first, and the first last: for many are called,
but few are chosen. Then Jesus, going up to Jerusalem, took the twelve
disciples aside and said, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem where the Son
of man shall be betrayed unto the chief priests and scribes. They will
condemn Him to death. They will deliver Him to the Gentiles to mock,
scourge, and crucify Him. And on the third day He shall rise again.

The mother of the sons of Zebedee and her sons, James and John,
approached Jesus. She praised Him, desiring something of Him. He said
to her, What wilt thou? She replied, Grant that my two sons may sit,
one on thy right hand, and the other on thy left, in thy kingdom. But
Jesus answered, Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the
cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I
am baptized with?

They said to Him, We are able. And Jesus said, Ye shall drink indeed of
my cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with; but
to sit on my right hand or on my left is not mine to give. It shall be
given to them for whom it is prepared by my Father.

When the remaining ten heard this they were moved with indignation
against the two brethren. But Jesus called them to Him and said, Ye
know that the princes of worldliness and ambition influence them. But
it shall not be so among you. Whoever will be great among you, let him
be your minister. Whoever will be chief among you, let him be your
servant. Likewise, the Son of man came not to be ministered to, but to
minister, and to give His life as a ransom for many.

When they departed from Jericho a great multitude followed. Behold,
when they heard that Jesus passed by, two blind men who were sitting by
the wayside cried out, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou son of David. The
multitude rebuked them and told them to keep quiet. But they cried
more, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou son of David.

Jesus stood still and said to them, What shall I do for you? They
answered, Lord, that our eyes may be opened. Jesus had compassion and
touched their eyes. Immediately they received their sight and they
followed Him.

21
As they drew close to Jerusalem, they came to Bethphage by the mount of
Olives. Jesus sent two disciples ahead and said, Go into the village
and ye shall find tied there an ass with her colt. Untie them and bring
them to me. If a man says anything to you, say, The Lord has need of
them and, straightway, he will send them. All this was done so this
saying of the prophet might be fulfilled: Tell ye the daughter of Sion,
Behold, thy King cometh unto thee, meek, and sitting upon a colt, the
foal of an ass.

The disciples did as Jesus directed. They brought the ass and the colt
and set Jesus thereupon. A multitude spread out their garments and
others cut down tree branches and lined the way. They cried out,
Hosanna to the son of David. Blessed is He that comes in the name of
the Lord. Hosanna in the highest. When Jesus came into Jerusalem, all
the city was stirred. They asked, Who is this? The multitude said, This
is Jesus the prophet from Nazareth of Galilee.

Jesus went into the temple of God and cast out all who bought and sold.
He overthrew the tables of the moneychangers and the seats of those who
sold doves. He said to them, It is written that my house shall be
called a house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves.

The blind and the lame came to Him in the temple and He healed them.
When the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things Jesus did
and heard the children crying out in the temple, Hosanna to the son of
David; they were greatly displeased. They said to Him, Hear thou what
they are saying? Jesus answered, Yea. Have ye never read, Out of the
mouth of babes comes perfect praise? Then He left them and went into
Bethany where He lodged that night.

In the morning Jesus, being very hungry, started out to return to the
city. On His way He saw a fig tree. As He came to it He found nothing
on it but leaves. He said, Let no fruit ever grow on thee. The fig tree
withered away.

When the disciples saw this, they marvelled and said, How quickly the
fig tree withered away! Jesus answered, If ye have faith, and doubt
not, ye shall not only do this that was done to the fig tree, but also,
if ye shall say to this mountain, Be thou removed and cast into the
sea; it shall be done. The things ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye
shall receive.

Then He went into the temple. The chief priests and the elders of the
people came to Him as He was teaching and asked, By what authority do
you do these things? Who gave thee this authority?

Jesus replied, I, in turn, will ask you one thing, which, if ye can
tell me, I will tell you by what authority I do these things. Did the
baptism of John come from heaven or from man?

They reasoned among themselves and said, If we say, From heaven; He
will ask us, Why did ye not then believe him? But if we say, From man;
we fear the people for they hold John as a prophet.

Finally they said to Jesus, We cannot tell. Jesus responded, Neither,
then, do I tell you by what authority I do these things.

Hear this. A man had two sons. He came to the first and said, Son,
today go to work in my vineyard. The son answered, I will not. But,
afterward he repented and went to work. Then the man went to the second
son and said the same thing. The second son said, I will go, sir;  but
he did not go. Which of these two did the will of his father? They
answered, The first son.

Jesus said, Verily I say, The publicans and the harlots enter the
kingdom of God before you. John came to you in the way of righteousness
and ye believed him not. But the publicans and the harlots believed
him. And ye, even after ye had seen, did not repent that ye believed
him.

Hear another parable: There was a householder who planted a vineyard.
He hedged it all around, dug a winepress in it, and built a tower. Then
he rented it out to husbandsmen and went abroad. When the time of the
harvest drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandsmen to receive
the fruits of it. The husbandsmen took his servants, beat one, stoned
one, and killed another. Next, he sent more servants than the first
time. They did to them the same thing. Finally, he sent his son,
saying, They will respect my son. But when the husbandsmen saw the son,
they said, This is the heir. Let us kill him and seize his inheritance.
So they caught him, cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him. When,
therefore, the lord of the vineyard comes, what will he do to these
husbandsmen?

They said to Jesus, He will destroy these miserable and wicked men and
he will rent out his vineyard to others who will render him the fruits
in their seasons.

Jesus said, Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone which the
builders rejected is the same that has become the cornerstone; this is
the Lord's doing and it is marvellous in our eyes? I tell you, The
kingdom of God shall be taken from you and given to a nation that
brings forth its fruits. Whoever falls on this stone shall be broken.
On whomever this stone falls, he will be ground into powder.

When the chief priests and Pharisees heard these parables, they saw
that Jesus spoke about them. But when they thought of laying hands on
Him, they feared the multitude because they took Jesus for a prophet.

22
Jesus related more parables. He said, The kingdom of heaven is like a
king who arranged a marriage feast for his son. He sent his servants
forth to call those who were invited to the wedding but they did not
come. He sent other servants to say, Dinner is prepared. The king's
oxen and fatlings are killed. Everything is ready. Come to the
marriage. Those who were invited made light of it and went their ways.
One went out to his farm. Another attended to his merchandise. The
others took the king's servants, treated them spitefully, and then slew
them.

When the king heard this he was outraged. He sent out his armies to
destroy the murderers and burn their city. Then he said to his
servants, The wedding is ready, but those who were invited were not
worthy. Go into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, invite them
to the marriage feast. These servants went out and gathered together
all those they found, both bad and good, and the wedding was furnished
with guests.

Then, the king came in to greet the guests. He spotted a man who did
not wear the wedding garment that was provided. The king said to him,
Friend, why did you come in here without the wedding garment? The man
made no answer. So the king told his servants, Bind him hand and foot.
Then take him away and cast him into outer darkness. There shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth, for many are called but few are chosen.

Then the Pharisees met to discuss how they might trap Jesus in His
words. They sent some of their people along with the herodians to
question Jesus. They said, Master, we know that thou art true and teach
the way of God in truth. Tell us, therefore, what thou think. Is it
lawful to give tribute to Caesar or not?

Jesus, perceiving their wicked motive, said, Why test me, ye
hypocrites? Show me the tribute money. They brought a coin to Him.
Jesus asked, Whose image and superscription is this? They said,
Caesar's. Jesus said, Render, therefore, unto Caesar the things which
are Caesar's; and to God the things that are God's. When they heard
these words, they marvelled, and left Him to go their way.

The same day the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came to
Him and asked, Master, Moses said if a man dies and has no children,
his brother shall marry his wife and raise up seed unto his brother.
Now there were with us seven brethren: and the first, when he married a
wife, deceased, and, having no issue, left his wife unto his brother.
Likewise, the second also, and the third, up to the seventh brother.
Then, finally the woman died also. Now, according to the resurrection,
whose wife shall she be of the seven since they all had her?

Jesus said, Ye err. You do not know the scriptures nor the power of
God. In the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage,
but are as the angels of God in heaven. Concerning the resurrection of
the dead, have ye not read: I am the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living.

When the multitude heard this, they were astonished at His doctrine.
But when the Pharisees heard that Jesus put the Sadducees to silence,
they gathered together. One of them, a lawyer, tested Jesus with this
question, Master, which is the great commandment in the law? Jesus
answered, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great
commandment. And the second is like it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour
as thyself. On these two commandments rests all the law and the
prophets.

While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them, What
think ye of Christ? Whose son is He? They said, The son of David. Jesus
then asked, How, then, does David, in spirit, call him Lord, saying,
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand till I make thine
enemies thy footstool? If David calls him Lord, how is he his son? No
man was able to answer a word, nor dare any man from that day forth ask
Jesus any more questions.

23
Then Jesus spoke to the crowd and to His followers. He said, The
scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses' place. Whatsoever they bid you
to observe and do, ye shall observe and do. But do not follow after
their works because what they say, they do not do themselves. They bind
heavy burdens, grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders.
But they, themselves, will not even lay so much as a finger on one of
them. All their works they do for show to other men. They love the
uppermost rooms at feasts and the chief seats in the synagogues. They
like greetings in the markets and to be called out to, Rabbi, Rabbi.

But be ye not called Rabbi. Only one is your teacher, even Christ; and
ye are all brethren. Call no man on earth your father, for only one is
your Father, which is in heaven. Neither be ye called masters, for only
one is your Master, even Christ. Also, he that is greatest among you
shall be your servant. Whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased;
and he that shall be humbled shall be exalted.

But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees. Hypocrites! Ye shut men out of
the kingdom of heaven, ye enter not in yourselves, and you do not allow
others to attempt to enter in. Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees.
Hypocrites! Ye devour widows' houses and, for a pretence, make long
prayers. Therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees. Hypocrites! Ye venture over sea
and land for one proselyte and, when he is made, ye make him twofold
more the child of hell than yourselves. Woe unto you, ye blind guides
who say, Whosoever shall swear by the temple, is worth nothing; but
whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, makes a good pledge!
Ye fools and blind men. What is greater, the gold or the temple that
sanctifies the gold?

And ye say, Whosoever shall swear by the altar, is worth nothing; but
whosoever swears by the gift that is upon it, is worthy of praise. Ye
fools and blind men. What is greater, the gift, or the altar that
sanctifies the gift? Whoso, therefore, shall swear by the altar, swears
by it and by all things upon it. And whoso shall swear by the temple,
swears by it and by Him that dwells therein. And He that shall swear by
heaven, swears by the throne of God and by Him that sits thereon.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees. Hypocrites! Ye pay tithe of mint
and anise and cummin, but ye have ignored the weightier matters of the
law; judgment, mercy, and faith. Ye blind guides who strain from your
drink a gnat and swallow a camel.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees. Hypocrites! Ye make the outside of
the cup and platter clean, but inside they are full of extortion and
excess. Thou blind Pharisee. Cleanse first that which is inside the cup
and platter so the outside may be clean also.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees. Hypocrites! Ye are like whited
sepulchres, which appear beautiful on the outside, but inside are full
of dead men's bones and uncleanness. Even if ye also outwardly appear
righteous unto men, inside ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees. Hypocrites! Ye build the tombs for
the prophets and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous. Ye say, If we
had lived in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers
with them in the blood of the prophets. Be witnesses unto yourselves.
Ye are the children of those who killed the prophets and ye measure up
to your fathers.

Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation
of hell? I send prophets,  wise men, and scribes. Some of them ye shall
kill and crucify. Some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues and
persecute them from city to city. On your hands shall be the blood of
all the righteous shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel
to the blood of Zacharias, son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the
temple and the altar. All these things shall come upon this generation.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killed the prophets, and stoned those
sent to thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together,
even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not
have it! Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. Ye shall not see
me again until ye shall say, Blessed is He who comes in the name of the
Lord.

24
Jesus went outside and His disciples came to show Him the buildings of
the temple. Jesus said, Take note of all these things. There shall not
be left here one stone upon another that shall not be thrown down. On
the mount of Olives, the disciples said, Tell us, when will these
things happen? What shall be the sign of Thy coming and of the end of
the world?

Jesus answered, Take heed that no man deceive you. Many shall come in
my name, saying, I am Christ and they shall deceive many. Ye shall hear
of wars and rumours of wars. See that ye are not troubled. All these
things must come to pass but the end is not come yet. Nation shall rise
against nation and kingdom against kingdom. There shall be famines,
pestilence, and earthquakes in divers places.

All these are the beginning of sorrows. They will deliver you up to be
afflicted. They shall kill you. Ye shall be hated by all nations for my
name's sake. Many will be offended and will betray and hate one
another. False prophets shall arise and deceive. And, because iniquity
shall abound, the love of many will wax cold. But those who endure unto
the end shall be saved.

This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached all around the world as a
witness to all nations. Then the end shall come. When ye see the
abomination of desolation spoken of by the prophet, Daniel, stand in
the holy place; understand the prophecy.

Let those who are in Judaea flee into the mountains. Let him stay who
is on the housetop and not come down to take anything out of his house.
Neither let he who is in the field return to get his clothing. Woe unto
the women who are with child.

Pray that your flight be not in the winter or on the sabbath day. There
shall be great tribulation, such as was not seen from the beginning of
the world until now and will never be seen again. Unless those days are
numbered, no flesh shall be saved. But, for the elect's sake, those
days shall be numbered.

Thus, if any man shall say to you, Lo, here is Christ, or there He is;
believe it not. There shall arise false Christs and false prophets.
They will show great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it be
possible, they will deceive the very elect.

Behold, I tell you all this beforehand. So, if they say to you, Behold,
He is in the desert, do not go forth. Or, behold, He is in the secret
chambers, believe it not. For, just as the lightning comes out of the
east and shines over unto the west, so also shall be the coming of the
Son of man.

Immediately after the tribulation of those days the sun will be
darkened. The moon will not reflect light. The stars will fall from
heaven. The powers of the heavens shall be shaken. All the people of
the earth shall mourn.

Then the sign of the Son of man will appear. They shall see Him coming
in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. He shall send His
angels with a great sound of a trumpet. His angels will gather together
His elect from the four winds and from one end of heaven to the other.

Now learn a parable about the fig tree. When its branch is yet tender
and puts forth leaves, ye know that summer is near. So, likewise, when
ye see all these things, know what is near.

This generation shall not pass away until all these things are
fulfilled. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not
pass away. But, of the day and the hour no man knows, no, not the
angels of heaven, but only my Father.

The coming of the Son of man shall be like in the days of Noah. Before
the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in
marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark. They knew
nothing until the flood came and took them all away. So shall also be
the coming of the Son of man.

At that time, two shall be in the field. One shall be taken and the
other left. Two women shall be grinding at the mill. One shall be taken
and the other left. Watch, for ye know not what hour your Lord comes.

Know this, If the good man of the house had known in what watch the
thief would come, he would have guarded and would not have suffered his
house to be broken into. Therefore, be ready. At an hour that ye think
the Son of man will not come, then He will come.

It is a faithful and wise servant who, his lord having given him charge
over the household, prepares the foods in due season. Blessed is that
servant who, when his lord arrives, shall find him doing so. He shall
make the servant ruler over all his goods.

It is an evil servant who says, My lord delays his coming so I shall
take advantage. He smites his fellowservants and eats and drinks until
drunken. The lord of that servant shall come in a day when the servant
does not expect him. At a time when the servant is unaware, he shall be
cut asunder and thrown out with the hypocrites. There shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth.

25
The kingdom of heaven is likened unto ten virgins who took their lamps
and went to meet the bridegroom. Five of them were wise. Five were
foolish. The foolish took their lamps but no extra oil with them. The
wise took oil in their vessels along with their lamps. While the
bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered. At midnight there was a cry,
Behold, the bridegroom is coming. Go out to meet Him.

All the virgins arose and trimmed their lamps. The foolish said to the
wise, Give us some of your oil for our lamps are gone out. But the wise
answered, No, there will be not enough for us and you. Go to them that
sell oil and buy some.

While they went to buy the oil, the bridegroom came. Those who were
ready went in with him to the marriage and the door was shut. Much
later, the other virgins arrived and called, Lord, Lord, open the door
to us. But He answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I do not know
you. Watch, therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein
the Son of man comes.

The kingdom of heaven is like a man who travels into a far country.
Before he leaves he calls his servants and turns his goods over to
them. To one he gives five talents. To another he gives two talents. To
another he gives one. He gives to every man according to his ability.

The servant who received the five talents traded and made another five
talents. He who received two, gained another two. But the servant that
received one, dug a hole in the earth and hid his lord's money.

After a long time, the lord returned from his journey and reckoned with
his servants. He who received five talents came and brought another
five talents. He said, Lord, thou delivered five talents to me. Behold,
I have gained five more talents besides them. His lord said, Well done.
Thou has been faithful over a few things so I will make thee ruler over
many things. Enter into the joy of thy lord!

He who received two talents came and said, Lord, thou delivered to me
two talents. Behold, I have gained two more talents beside them. His
lord said, Well done. Thou has been faithful over a few things. I will
make thee ruler over many things. Enter into the joy of thy lord!

Then the servant who received the one talent came and said, Lord, I
know that thou art a hard man who reaps where he has not sown and
gathers where he has not toiled. I was afraid, so I hid thy talent in
the earth. Here, now thou has what is thine.

His lord cried, Thou wicked and slothful servant. Thou knew that I reap
where I sow not and gather where I do not toil. Thou ought to have, at
least, put my money out to the exchangers so, upon my return, I should
have received my own money with interest. Take the talent and give it
to the one who has ten talents.

To the one who uses his talent wisely, more shall be given, and he
shall have abundance. But to the one who does not, any talent he has
shall be taken away. The unprofitable servant shall be cast into outer
darkness. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

When the Son of man comes with His holy angels, He shall sit upon the
throne of His glory. Before Him shall be gathered all nations. He shall
separate them one from another as a shepherd divides his sheep from his
goats. He shall set the sheep on His right hand, and the goats on the
left.

Then the King shall say to those on His right, Come, ye blessed of my
Father. Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world. For I was hungry and ye gave me food. I was thirsty and ye gave
me drink. I was a stranger and ye took me in. I was naked and ye
clothed me. I was sick and ye visited me. I was in prison and ye came
to me.

Then the righteous shall ask Him, Lord, when did we see thee hungry and
feed thee? Or thirsty and gave thee drink? When did we see thee a
stranger and take thee in? Or naked and clothe thee? When did we see
thee sick, or in prison and come to thee? The King shall answer,
Verily, I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least
of my brethren, ye have done it to me.

Then He shall say to those on the left, Depart from me into the
everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels. I was hungry
and ye gave me no food. I was thirsty and ye gave me no drink. I was a
stranger and ye did not take me in. I was naked and ye did not clothe
me. I was sick and in prison and ye did not visit me.

Then they shall also ask Him, Lord, when did we see thee hungry or
thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and not
minister unto thee? He shall answer them, Inasmuch as ye did not do
these things to one of the least of my brethren, ye did not do it to
me. These shall go to everlasting punishment. And the righteous shall
have life eternal.

26
It came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings He said to
His disciples, In two days is the feast of the passover. The Son of man
will be betrayed and crucified.

At the same time the chief priests, scribes, and elders of the people
held a meeting in the palace of the high priest, Caiaphas. They
discussed how they might take Jesus by stealth and kill Him. But they
said, It cannot happen on the feast day lest there be an uproar among
the people.

Jesus was now in Bethany at the house of Simon the leper. There He was
approached by a woman carrying an alabaster box containing very
precious ointment. She, then, annointed His head as He sat at dinner.

When His disciples saw it they were indignant and said, To what purpose
is this waste? This ointment could have been sold for much and the
money given to the poor. When Jesus overheard them He said, Why bother
this woman? She has wrought a good work upon me. The poor ye have
always with you; but me ye have not always. In annointing me, she
prepared me for my burial. Anywhere in the world this gospel is
preached it shall also be told what this woman has done.

Then, one of the twelve, Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests. He
asked, What will ye give me if I will deliver Jesus unto you? They
agreed on thirty pieces of silver and, from that time, Judas looked for
an opportunity to betray Him.

On the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples came to
Jesus and asked, Where shall we prepare for thee to eat the passover?
Jesus told them to go into the city to a certain man and tell him that
the Master says His time is at hand. Tell this man that He will keep
the passover there with His disciples. Then the disciples did as Jesus
had appointed and they prepared the passover.

When it was evening, Jesus sat down with the twelve. While they ate He
said, Verily I say unto you, one of you shall betray me. The disciples
heard this with great sorrow and, all at the same time uttered, Lord,
is it me? Jesus only said, He that dips his hand in the dish with me
shall betray me.

It is written: Woe unto the one by whom the Son of man is betrayed! It
had been better for him if he had not been born. Then Judas, who
betrayed Him, asked, Master, is it me? Jesus turned to him and quietly
said, Thou has said right.

While they ate, Jesus took up the bread and blessed it. He then broke
it and gave it to the disciples saying, Take this and eat for this is
my body. Then He took the cup and gave thanks. He passed it to them
saying, Drink ye all from this for this is my blood of the new
testament which is shed for many for the remission of sins. I say unto
you, I will not drink again of this fruit of the vine until that day
when I drink it with you in my Father's kingdom. Following the meal,
they sang hymns and went out into the mount of Olives.

Jesus said to the disciples, Ye shall all be offended this night
because of me for it is written: I will smite the shepherd, and the
sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad. But, after I am risen
again, I will go before you into Galilee.

Peter said to Him, Though all men shall be offended because of thee, I
will never be offended. Jesus answered Peter, This night, before the
cock crows, thou shalt deny me thrice. Peter replied, Though I should
die with thee, I will not deny thee. Then all the disciples said the
same.

Jesus took them into a place called Gethsemane and said, Sit here while
I go yonder to pray. He took Peter and the two sons of Zebedee with
Him. He said to these three, My soul is exceedingly sorrowful and heavy
unto death. Stay here and watch with me.

He went off a little farther and fell on His face. Jesus prayed,
saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.
Nevertheless, be it not as I will, but as Thou wilt.

Then He went to the three disciples and found them asleep. He said to
Peter, Could ye not watch with me one hour? Watch and pray so ye do not
give in to this temptation again because, while the spirit may be
willing, the flesh is weak.

He went away a second time and prayed, saying, O my Father, if this cup
may not pass away from me unless I drink it, then Thy will be done.
Returning to the three, He, again, found that they had been asleep for
their eyes were heavy. He left them and went to pray a third time,
saying the same words.

When Jesus went back to all the disciples He said, Behold, the hour is
at hand. The Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. The one
who betrays me is at hand.

While He spoke, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came with a great
multitude. They were armed with swords and staves from the chief
priests and elders of the people. Judas had agreed on a sign saying,
Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is He. Hold Him fast. Judas
approached Jesus, greeted Him; then kissed Him. Jesus said to him,
Friend, wherefore art thou come? Then they came and took hold of Jesus.

Behold, one who was with Jesus drew his sword, and, striking out at one
of the high priest's servants, smote off his ear. Jesus said to him,
Put thy sword back into its place. All who take to the sword shall
perish by the sword. Think thou that I cannot pray to my Father and He
shall give me more than twelve legions of angels? But, then, how shall
the scriptures be fulfilled that this is the way it must be?

Jesus said to this multitude, Do ye come at me as against a thief with
swords and staves to take me? Daily I sat with you teaching in the
temple and ye did not lay hold of me. This was done so the scriptures
of the prophets might be fulfilled.

When they took hold of Jesus, all the disciples left Him and fled. They
led Him away to Caiaphas the high priest where the scribes and elders
were assembled. But Peter followed far behind to the high priest's
palace. He went in and sat with the servants.

The chief priests, elders, and all the council sought false witness
against Jesus in order to put Him to death. At last, two false
witnesses came and said, This one said He was able to destroy the
temple of God and build it up again in three days.

The high priest arose and said to Jesus, Answerest thou nothing? What
is it that they witness against thee? But Jesus said nothing. Then the
high priest said to Him, I adjure thee, by the living God, tell us
whether thou are the Christ, the Son of God. Jesus replied, Thou has
said so. I say unto you, hereafter, ye shall see the Son of man sitting
on the right hand of power and appearing in the clouds of heaven.

Then the high priest cried, He has spoken blasphemy. What further need
have we of witnesses? Behold, now ye have heard His blasphemy. What
think ye? They answered, He is guilty of death. Then they spit in His
face. Others struck Him with the palms of their hands and said,
Prophesy unto us, thou Christ, Who is he that struck thee?

During this, Peter sat outside the palace. A damsel came up to him and
said, Thou also was with Jesus of Galilee. But Peter denied this and he
went out on the porch. Another maid saw him and said to the others
standing there, This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth. Peter
denied this with an oath and said, I do not know the man.

Later, one of the bystanders came up to Peter and said, Surely, by thy
voice I know thou art one of them. Peter began to curse and swear and
said, I know not the man. Then the cock crowed. Peter remembered the
words of Jesus to him: Before the cock crows, thou shall deny me
thrice. He went out and wept bitterly.

27
The next morning all the chief priests and elders met concerning Jesus.
They agreed to put Him to death. They bound Him, led Him away, and
delivered Him to Pontius Pilate, the governor.

When Judas realized that Jesus was condemned, he repented. He took the
thirty pieces of silver back to the chief priests and elders. He said,
I have sinned. I have betrayed the innocent. They retorted, What is
that to us? So Judas cast down the pieces of silver in the temple.
Immediately he went away and hung himself.

At the same time, the chief priests took up the silver pieces and said,
It is not lawful to put this into the treasury because it is blood
money. After they took counsel, they bought the potter's field for the
burial of strangers, which became known as The Field of Blood. The
prophecy of Jeremy was fulfilled: They took the thirty pieces of
silver, the price for Him that was valued of the children of Israel,
and gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord appointed.

Jesus now stood before Pilate, the governor. Pilate asked Him, Art thou
the King of the Jews? Jesus replied, Thou sayest so. When Jesus was
accused by the chief priests and elders, He answered nothing. Then
Pilate asked Him, Hearest thou the things they witness against thee?
Jesus said never a word. At this the governor marvelled greatly.

The custom at the passover feast was for the governor to release a
prisoner of the people's choosing. A notable prisoner named Barabbas
was in the prison. Therefore, when the people were gathered together,
Pilate said, Whom will ye that I release, Barabbas or Jesus, who is
called Christ?

While he was seated on the judgment seat, Pilate's wife sent a message
to him that said, Have nothing to do with that just man. Today I have
suffered many things in a dream because of Him. But the chief priests
and elders persuaded the multitude to choose Barabbas and destroy
Jesus.

When Pilate, the governor, asked which of the two they chose they said,
Barabbas. Pilate asked, What shall I do then with Jesus who is called
Christ? They all said, Let Him be crucified.

The governor asked, Why, what evil has He done? But they cried out the
more and shouted, Let Him be crucified. Pilate realized he could not
prevail without making a tumult among the people. So he took water,
washed his hands before the multitude, and said, I am innocent of the
blood of this just person. See ye to it. The people said, His blood be
on us, and on our children. Then Pilate released Barabbas. He had Jesus
scourged and delivered Him to be crucified.

Pilate's soldiers took Jesus into the common hall where the whole band
of soldiers gathered around Him. They stripped Him and put a scarlet
robe on Him. They platted a crown of thorns and put it on His head.
Then they put a reed in His right hand. Bowing down, they mocked Him
saying, Hail, King of the Jews! They spit on Him, took the reed, and
struck Him on the head. As they were leading Him away to be crucified,
they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name, and compelled him to carry
the cross for Jesus.

They took Him to a place called Golgotha, or the place of a skull.
There they gave Him vinegar to drink mixed with gall. When Jesus tasted
it, He would not drink it. They crucified Him and parted out His
garments by casting lots. Thus the prophecy was fulfilled: They parted
my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots. Then
the soldiers placed a written accusation over His head. It read: This
Is Jesus, The King Of The Jews.

Two thieves were crucified alongside Jesus, one on His right hand and
the other on His left. As people passed by they reviled Him and called
out: Thou that destroys the temple and builds it again in three days,
save thyself. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross.

The chief priests, along with the scribes and elders, mocked Him. They
said, He saved others but He cannot save Himself. If He is the King of
Israel, let Him come down from the cross and we will believe Him. He
trusts in God. Let God deliver Him now, if God will have Him, for He
said, I am the Son of God.

From the sixth until the ninth hour there was darkness over all the
land. At about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, Eli, Eli,
lama sabachthani? My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?

When some of those standing by heard this, they said, This man calls
for Elias. Presently, one of them ran to get a sponge. He filled it
with vinegar, put it on a reed, and gave it to Jesus to drink. The rest
said, Leave it alone. Let us see whether Elias will come to save Him.
Then Jesus cried again in a loud voice and yielded Himself up.

Behold, the veil of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom. The
earth shook and the rocks split apart. Graves were opened. The bodies
of many saints who slept rose up and, after His resurrection, went into
the holy city and appeared to many. When the centurions who were
watching Jesus saw the earthquake and the things that were done, they
became afraid and said, Truly this was the Son of God.

Many of the women who followed Jesus of Galilee and ministered to Him
were there looking on. Among them was Mary Magdalene; another Mary; and
the mother of Zebedee's children. When evening came, a rich man of
Arimathaea, named Joseph, who was also Jesus' disciple arrived. He went
to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.

When Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth
and laid it in his own new tomb which was hewn out of rock. He rolled a
great stone across the door of the sepulchre and departed. Mary
Magdalene and the other Mary sat alongside the sepulchre.

The next day following the day of the preparation, the chief priests
and Pharisees went to Pilate and said, Sir, that deceiver, while he was
yet alive, said that, in three days, He would rise up again. Command
that the sepulchre be made secure until the third day lest His
disciples come by night, steal Him away, and tell the people that He is
risen from the dead. Then the last error will be worse than the first.

Pilate said to them, Ye have a watch. Go your way. Make it as secure as
ye can. The chief priests and the Pharisees went and made the sepulchre
secure by sealing the stone and setting guards to watch.

28
After the sabbath, near dawn of the first day of the week, Mary
Magdalene and the other Mary came to the sepulchre. Behold, there was a
great earthquake. An angel of the Lord descended from heaven, came and
rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it. His countenance
was like lightning with raiment white as snow. The guards shook with
fear of Him and became as dead men.

The angel said to the women, Fear not for I know that ye seek Jesus who
was crucified. He is not here for, as He said, He is risen. Come, see
the place where the Lord lay. Then go quickly and tell His disciples
that He is risen from the dead. Behold, He goes before you into
Galilee. There ye shall see Him. Lo, I have told you.

The women quickly left the sepulchre filled with both fear and great
joy. They ran to bring word to Jesus' disciples. As they went along
Jesus met them and greeted them. They went to Him, held Him by the
feet, and worshipped Him. Then Jesus said to them, Be not afraid. Go
and tell my brethren to go into Galilee and there they shall see me.

Some of the guards on watch went into the city and told the chief
priests the things that were done. After an assembly of the elders the
soldiers were offered a large amount of money to say that Jesus'
disciples came by night and stole Him away while they slept. The
soldiers were assured they would be protected if this came to the
governor's ears. They took the money and did as they were told. This
report is common among the Jews until this day.

The eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain appointed by
Jesus. When they saw Him, they worshipped Him. Jesus came to them and
said, All power is given to me in heaven and on earth. Go and teach all
nations. Baptize them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. Teach them to observe all the things I have commanded
you.

I am with you always, even unto the end of the world.

Amen.

---------------
11-2002
edited by Lightheart
PracticeGodsPresence.com










End of Project Gutenberg's The Gospel of Matthew for Readers, by Lightheart

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOSPEL OF MATTHEW FOR READERS ***

***** This file should be named 6356.txt or 6356.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/5/6356/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
