The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gospel of Luke for Readers, by Lightheart

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **

Title: The Gospel of Luke for Readers

Author: Lightheart

Posting Date: August 21, 2012 [EBook #6529]
Release Date: September, 2004
First Posted: December 25, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOSPEL OF LUKE FOR READERS ***














Copyright (C) 2002 by Lightheart.


                     www.PracticeGodsPresence.com
                          The Gospel of Luke
______________________________________________________________________

1.       Forasmuch as many eyewitnesses and ministers of the word have
set forth and delivered to us a declaration of those things which are
most surely believed among us, it seemed good to me also, having had
perfect understanding of these things from the very beginning, to
write to you, most excellent Theophilus, in order that thou might know
the certainty of the things thou has been instructed.

In the days of Herod, the king of Judaea, there was a priest named
Zacharias, of the course of Abia. His wife was of the daughters of
Aaron, and her name was Elisabeth. They were both righteous before
God, walking blamelessly in all the commandments and ordinances of the
Lord. They had no child because Elisabeth was barren. They were both
well up in years.

According to the custom of the priest's office, his lot, while he
executed his duty before God, was to burn incense when he went into
the temple of the Lord. The multitude gathered outside to pray during
the time of incense.

There appeared to him an angel of the Lord standing on the right side
of the altar of incense. When Zacharias saw him, he was troubled and
fell down in fear. But the angel said to him, Fear not, Zacharias: for
thy prayer is heard. Thy wife, Elisabeth, shall bear thee a son and
thou shall name him John. You shall have joy and gladness and many
will rejoice at his birth. He shall be great in the sight of the Lord.
He shall not drink wine or strong drink; and he shall be filled with
the Holy Ghost, even from his mother's womb.

He shall turn many of the children of Israel to the Lord, their God.
He shall go in the spirit and power of Elias to turn the hearts of the
fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the
just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.

Zacharias said to the angel, How shall I know this? I am an old man,
and my wife an old woman. The angel said to him, I am Gabriel, who
stands in the presence of God; and am sent to speak to thee, and to
show thee these glad tidings. Behold, thou shall be dumb and unable to
speak until the day these things are performed because thou believe
not my words which shall be fulfilled in their season.

The people waited for Zacharias, and marvelled that he tarried so long
in the temple. When he came out, he could not speak to them. They
perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple for he beckoned to
them and remained speechless.

It came to pass, that, as soon as the days of his official duties were
accomplished, he went home. His wife, Elisabeth, conceived, and hid
herself for five months. She said, Thus has the Lord now done for me
that which takes away my reproach among others.

In the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a city of
Galilee, named Nazareth. The angel appeared to a virgin named Mary and
espoused to Joseph, of the house of David. He said to her, Hail, thou
that art highly favored. The Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou among
women. When she saw him, she was troubled by his words.

Then the angel said to her, Fear not, Mary, for thou has found favor
with God. Thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and
shall call His name Jesus. He shall be great and shall be called the
Son of the Highest. The Lord God shall give Him the throne of His
father David. He shall reign over the house of Jacob forever. And, of
His kingdom there shall be no end.

Then Mary said to the angel, How shall this be since I know not a man?
The angel answered, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power
of the Highest shall overshadow thee so the holiness that is born of
thee shall be called the Son of God. And behold, thy cousin,
Elisabeth, has conceived a son in her old age. It is the sixth month
with her who was once thought barren. With God nothing is impossible.
Mary said, Behold, the handmaid of the Lord. Be it done according to
thy word. Then the angel departed from her.

Mary arose with haste and went to a city of Juda in the hill country.
Here she entered the house of Zacharias, and saluted Elisabeth. When
Elisabeth heard this salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb
and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost. She spoke out with a
loud voice, Blessed art thou among women and blessed is the fruit of
thy womb. How is it that the mother of my Lord should come to me? As
soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in my ears, the babe
leaped in my womb for joy. Blessed is she that believed for there
shall be a demonstration of those things which were told her by the
Lord.

Mary said, My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced
in God my Savior. He has regarded the low estate of His handmaiden
and, henceforth, all generations shall call me blessed. He that is
mighty has done great things to me. Holy is His name. His mercy is on
them that fear Him from generation to generation.

He has shown strength with His arm; He has scattered the proud in the
imagination of their hearts. He has put down the mighty from their
thrones, and exalted those of low degree. He has filled the hungry
with good things; and the rich He has sent away empty. He has helped
His servant Israel, in remembrance of His mercy; as He spoke to our
fathers, to Abraham, and to His seed forever.

Mary stayed with her cousin, Elisabeth about three months, then
returned to her own house. Elisabeth's time came that she should be
delivered; and she brought forth a son. Her neighbors and her cousins
heard how the Lord had showed great mercy on her; and they rejoiced
with her.

On the eighth day they came to circumcise the child. They called him
Zacharias after the name of his father. But his mother said, No. He
shall be called John. And they said to her, There is none of thy
kindred that is called by this name. Then they made signs to his
father asking how he would have him called. He asked for a writing
table, and wrote, His name is John. Then Zacharias' mouth was opened
immediately, his tongue loosed, and he spoke and praised God.

This news was carried throughout all the hill country of Judaea. All
who heard were filled with wonder at what kind of child this would be!
And the hand of the Lord was with him.

His father, Zacharias, was filled with the Holy Ghost and prophesied,
Blessed be the Lord, God of Israel; for He has visited and redeemed
His people, He has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house
of His servant, David; as He spoke by the mouth of His holy prophets,
which have been since the world began: That we should be saved from
our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us; to perform the
mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember His holy covenant; the
oath which He swore to our father, Abraham, that He would grant us,
being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, to serve Him without
fear, in holiness and righteousness, all the days of our life.

And thou, child, shall be called the prophet of the Highest, for thou
shall go before the face of the Lord to prepare His ways; to give
knowledge of salvation to His people by the remission of their sins,
through the tender mercy of our God; whereby the dayspring from on
high has visited us to give light to those who sit in darkness and in
the shadow of death, to guide our feet in the way of peace.

The child grew and became strong in spirit. He was in the desert until
the day of his showing to Israel.

2        A decree went out from Caesar Augustus. According to the
decree every man was to go to his own city to be taxed. Because he was
of the house and lineage of David, Joseph went up from Nazareth in
Galilee, to the city of Bethlehem in Judaea to be taxed. With him was
Mary, his espoused wife, who was great with child. While they were
there, the time came for her to be delivered. She brought forth her
firstborn son, wrapped Him in swaddling clothes, and laid Him in a
manger because there was no room for them in the inn.

In the same country shepherds were in the field keeping watch over
their flock by night. Lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them and the
glory of the Lord shone about them. They became afraid. And the angel
said to them, Fear not. Behold, I bring you good tidings which shall
be great joy to all people. A Savior, Christ the Lord, is born this
day in the city of David. Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling
clothes, lying in a manger. Then there also appeared a heavenly host
praising God. They said, Glory to God in the highest and, on earth,
peace and good will toward men.

The shepherds said, Let us go to Bethlehem and see what has come to
pass which the Lord has made known to us. They went with haste and
found Mary, and Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger.

When they saw, they made it known abroad what was told them concerning
this child. Those who heard, wondered at what they were told. But Mary
kept all these things and pondered them in her heart. The shepherds
returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had
heard and seen, as it was told to them.

When eight days were completed for the circumcising of the child, His
name was called Jesus, which was so named by the angel before He was
conceived in the womb. When the days of the purification according to
the law of Moses were accomplished, they brought Jesus to Jerusalem to
present Him to the Lord, as it is written in the law: Every male that
opens the womb shall be called holy to the Lord. And, also according
to law of the Lord, they offered the sacrifice: a pair of turtledoves,
or two young pigeons.

There was a man in Jerusalem, named Simeon. He was a just and devout
man, waiting for the consolation of Israel. The Holy Ghost was upon
him and revealed to him that he should not see death before he had
seen the Lord's Christ.

He came by the Spirit into the temple. When the parents brought in the
child Jesus, Simeon took Him up in his arms, blessed God, and said,
Lord, now let thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word, for
my eyes have seen thy salvation which thou has prepared before the
face of all people; a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of
thy people, Israel.

Joseph and Mary marvelled at the things which were spoken of Him.
Simeon blessed them, and said to His mother, Mary, Behold, this child
is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel; and for a sign
which will be spoken against. A sword shall pierce thy soul that the
thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.

Then a prophetess also spoke of Him. Anna was the daughter of Phanuel,
of the tribe of Aser. She was an aged widow who, for fourscore and
four years, did not leave the temple and served God with fasting and
prayer night and day. She gave thanks to the Lord, and spoke of Him to
those in Jerusalem who awaited redemption.

When they had performed all that was required according to the law of
the Lord, they returned to their own city of Nazareth in Galilee. The
child grew, became strong in spirit, and was filled with wisdom and
the grace of God.

Every year His parents went to Jerusalem at the feast of the passover.
When He was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem after the
custom of the feast. When they had fulfilled the days, they returned,
but the child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem. Joseph and His mother
did not know of it. Supposing Him to have been in the caravan, at the
end of the first day's journey, they sought Him among their kinsfolk
and acquaintances. When they did not find Him, they turned back toward
Jerusalem to find Him.

After three days, they found Him in the temple. He was sitting in the
midst of the doctors, listening to them and asking them questions.
Those who heard Him were astonished at His understanding and answers.

When His parents saw Him, they were amazed. His mother said to Him,
Son, why has thou done this to us? Thy father and I have been very
worried. He said, How is it that ye sought me? Do you not know that I
must be about my Father's business? But they did not understand what
He said to them. Then He went with them to Nazareth and was obedient
to them; but His mother kept all this in her heart. Jesus increased in
wisdom, in stature, and in favor with God and man.

3       It was the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar.
Pontius Pilate was governor of Judaea; Herod was tetrarch of Galilee;
and his brother, Philip, was tetrarch of Ituraea and the region of
Trachonitis; and Lysanias was tetrarch of Abilene. Annas and Caiaphas
were the high priests.

The word of God came to John the son of Zacharias when he was in the
wilderness. He went into all the country around Jordan, preaching the
baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. This was according to
what is written in the book of Esaias the prophet: The voice of one
crying in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord, make His paths
straight. Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill
shall be brought low; and the crooked shall be made straight, and the
rough ways shall be made smooth; and all flesh shall see the salvation
of God.

John said to the multitude that came to be baptized by him, O
generation of vipers, who has warned you to flee from the wrath to
come? Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance. Stop saying to
yourselves, We have our father, Abraham: for I tell you, God is able
to raise up children to Abraham from these stones. Now the axe is laid
to the root of the trees. Every tree which does not bring forth good
fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.

The people asked him, What shall we do? He answered, He that has two
coats, let him give it to him that has none. He that has food, let him
do likewise. The publicans who came to him to be baptized also asked,
Master, what shall we do? He said to them, Exact no more than that
which is appointed you. The soldiers, likewise, asked, What shall we
do? He said, Do violence to no man, do not accuse anyone falsely; and
be content with your wages.

People lived in expectation and wondered whether he was the Christ.
John answered by saying to them all, I baptize you with water; but one
mightier than I comes, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to
unloose. He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with a fire
whose fan is in His hand. He will thoroughly purge His floor. He will
gather the wheat into His garner; but He will burn the chaff with fire
unquenchable.

Herod, the tetrarch, had been reproved by John on account of Herodias,
his brother Philip's wife and for all the evils which Herod had done.
Herod held this against him. Then, when Herod heard what John was
saying, he had John imprisoned.

When Jesus, also being baptized, was praying, the heaven opened and
the Holy Ghost, in a bodily shape like a dove, descended upon Him. A
voice came from heaven which said, Thou art my beloved Son. In thee I
am well pleased.

Jesus was about thirty years of age, the son of Joseph, which was the
son of Heli, the son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi, which was
the son of Melchi, the son of Janna, which was the son of Joseph, son
of Mattathias, which was the son of Amos, the son of Naum, the son of
Esli, which was the son of Nagge, the son of Maath, which was the son
of Mattathias, the son of Semei, the son of Joseph, the son of Juda.

Juda was the son of Joanna, which was the son of Rhesa, which was the
son of Zorobabel, which was the son of Salathiel, which was the son of
Neri, the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, son of Cosam, son of
Elmodam, which was the son of Er, the son of Jose, son of Eliezer,
which was the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, son of Levi.

Levi was the son of Simeon, which was the son of Juda, which was the
son of Joseph, which was the son of Jonan, which was the son of
Eliakim, the son of Melea, which was the son of Menan, which was the
son of Mattatha, which was the son of Nathan, which was the son of
David, the son of Jesse, son of Obed, which was the son of Booz, which
was the son of Salmon.

Salmon was the son of Naasson, son of Aminadab, which was the son of
Aram, which was the son of Esrom, the son of Phares, son of Juda, the
son of Jacob, which was the son of Isaac.

Isaac was the son of Abraham, the son of Thara, son of Nachor, which
was the son of Saruch, the son of Ragau, son of Phalec, which was the
son of Heber, the son of Sala, son of Cainan, which was the son of
Arphaxad, the son of Sem, son of Noah.

Noah was the son of Lamech, which was the son of Mathusala, which was
the son of Enoch, which was the son of Jared, the son of Maleleel, son
of Cainan, which was the son of Enos, which was the son of Seth, which
was the son of Adam, which was the son of God.

4       Filled with the Holy Ghost, Jesus returned from Jordan and was
led by the Spirit into the wilderness. For forty days He was tempted
by the devil. During this time He ate nothing and, when His fasting
ended, He was hungry.

The devil said to him, If thou be the Son of God, command this stone
to be made bread. Jesus answered, It is written: Man shall not live by
bread alone, but by every word of God.

The devil, then, took Him up into a high mountain and showed Him all
the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time. The devil said to Him,
I give thee the power and glory of all this that is mine and to
whomever I give it. If thou will worship me, all shall be thine. Jesus
said to him, Get thee behind me, Satan. It is written: Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shall thou serve.

The devil brought Him to Jerusalem, set Him on a pinnacle of the
temple and said, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down from
here. It is written: He shall give His angels charge over thee, to
keep thee, and, in their hands, they shall bear thee up lest at any
time thou dash thy foot against a stone. Jesus said, Thou shall not
tempt the Lord thy God.

When the devil had ended all the temptation, He departed from Him for
a season. Jesus returned to Galilee in the power of the Spirit. His
fame spread throughout all the region. He taught in the synagogues and
was glorified by all.

Jesus went to Nazareth, where He had been brought up. As was His
custom, He went into the synagogue on the sabbath day and stood up to
read. He was given the book of the prophet Esaias. When He opened the
book, He found the place where it was written: The Spirit of the Lord
is upon me, because He has anointed me to preach the gospel to the
poor; He has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance
to the captives, recover sight to the blind, to set at liberty those
who are bruised, and to preach the acceptable year of the Lord.

He closed the book, returned it, and sat down. The eyes of all who
were in the synagogue were fastened on Him. Jesus said to them, This
day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears.

All bore Him witness and wondered at the gracious words which
proceeded from His mouth. They said, Is this not Joseph's son? He said
to them, Ye will surely say to me this proverb, Physician, heal
thyself. Whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in
thy country.

And He said, No prophet is accepted in his own country. But I tell
you, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias, when the heaven
was shut up three years and six months, when great famine was
throughout all the land; but to none of them was Elias sent, except to
Sarepta, a city of Sidon, to a woman who was a widow. Many lepers were
in Israel in the time of Eliseus the prophet; and none of them was
cleansed, except Naaman the Syrian.

When they heard these things, all who were in the synagogue were
filled with wrath. They rose up and pushed Him out of the city. They
drove Him to the top of the hill upon which their city was built so
they might cast Him down headlong. But, passing through the midst of
them, He went His way.

Jesus went on to Capernaum in Galilee, and taught them on the sabbath
days. They were astonished at His doctrine for His word was powerful.
There was a man in the synagogue who had a spirit of an unclean devil
which cried out with a loud voice, Let us alone; what have we to do
with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy us? I know
who thou art; the Holy One of God.

Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him. When
the devil had thrown him in the midst, he came out of him. The people
were amazed and said, What words are these! With authority and power
He commands the unclean spirits and they come out. His fame went out
into every corner of that country.

Jesus went out of the synagogue and entered Simon's house. Simon's
wife's mother had a serious fever and they besought Him to help her.
Jesus stood over her, rebuked the fever, and it left her. Immediately
she arose and ministered to them.

Now when the sun was setting, many who were sick with divers diseases
were brought to Him. He laid His hands on every one of them and healed
them. Devils came out of many, crying out, and saying, Thou art
Christ, the Son of God. Jesus rebuked and silenced them because they
knew that He was Christ.

When it was day, He left and went into a desert place. The people
looked for Him. When they found Him, they tried to prevent Him from
departing from them. But Jesus said to them, I must preach the kingdom
of God to other cities also. This is why I was sent. And He preached
in the synagogues of Galilee.

5       As the people pressed upon Him to hear the word of God, He
stood by the lake of Gennesaret. He saw two ships standing by the
lake. The fishermen were gone out of them and were washing their nets.
He entered one of the ships, which was Simon's, and requested that he
thrust out a little from the land. Then He sat down and taught the
people from the ship.

When He finished speaking, He said to Simon, Launch out into the deep
and let down your nets. Simon said to Him, Master, we have toiled all
night and have taken nothing. Nevertheless, at thy word, I will let
down the net.

When he and his crew had this done, they enclosed a great multitude of
fish and their net broke. They beckoned to their partners, who were in
another ship, to come and help them. They came and filled both the
ships so full that they began to sink.

When Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus' knees and said, Depart
from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord. James and John, the sons of
Zebedee, who were partners with Simon, and all those who were with
them, were astonished at the great number of fish. Jesus said to
Simon, Fear not. From now on, thou shall catch men. When they landed
the fishing boats, they left everything and followed Him.

It came to pass, when He was in a certain city, a man, full of
leprosy, on seeing Jesus, fell before Him and said, Lord, if thou
will, thou can make me clean. Jesus stretched out His hand, touched
him, and said, I will. Be thou clean. Immediately the leprosy left the
man. Jesus then directed him to tell no one about this. He said, Go
and show thyself to the priest. Offer for thy cleansing, according to
Moses command, for a testimony to them.

Nonetheless, His fame was spread even more abroad. Great multitudes
gathered to hear and be healed of their infirmities by Him. Jesus
withdrew Himself into the wilderness to pray.

One day He was teaching and the power of the Lord to heal was upon
Him. There were gathered people that had come out of every town of
Galilee, and Judaea, and Jerusalem. Pharisees and doctors of the law
sat among them.

Men approached carrying a bed with a man who had a palsy. They looked
for a way to bring him in and lay him before Jesus. When they could
not find a way to bring him in because of the multitude, they went
upon the housetop and lowered him down on his couch through the tiling
and into the midst of where Jesus stood. When Jesus saw their faith,
He said, Son, thy sins are forgiven thee.

The scribes and the Pharisees began to question, saying, Who is this
who speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone? When
Jesus perceived their thoughts, He said to them, Why question in your
hearts whether it is easier to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee; or, to
say, Rise up and walk? That ye may know that the Son of man has power
on earth to forgive sins, (He said to the sick man), Arise. Take up
thy couch and go to your home. Immediately he rose up before them,
took up that upon which he lay, and departed to his own house,
glorifying God. They were all amazed and glorified God, and were
filled with fear, saying, We have seen strange things today.

After these things, He went forth and saw a publican named Levi who
was sitting at the receipt of custom. He said to him, Follow me. And
he left all, rose up, and followed Him. Levi made Him a great feast in
his own house. There was a large company of publicans and others that
sat down with them.

The scribes and Pharisees murmured against His disciples, saying, Why
do ye eat and drink with publicans and sinners? Jesus answered and
said to them, Those who are whole do not need a physician; but they
that are sick do. I came not to call the righteous, but to call
sinners to repentance.

Then they said to Him, Why do the disciples of John fast often and
make prayers, and likewise the disciples of the Pharisees; but your
disciples eat and drink? Jesus said to them, Can ye make the children
of the bridechamber fast while the bridegroom is with them? The days
will come when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them. Then they
shall fast.

He spoke also a parable to them. No man puts a piece of a new garment
on an old one; if he does, the new makes a rent, and the piece that
was taken out of the new does not match the old. And no man puts new
wine into old bottles; else the new wine will burst the bottles, be
spilled, and the bottles shall perish. But new wine must be put into
new bottles; and both are preserved. No man, having drunk old wine,
straightway desires new, because he says, The old is better.

6       It came to pass that on the second sabbath after the first,
Jesus passed through corn fields; and His disciples plucked ears of
corn to eat, rubbing them in their hands. Certain of the Pharisees
said to them, Why do ye do that which is not lawful on the sabbath
days?

Jesus answering them said, Have ye not read what David did, when he
and those who were with him were hungry? How he went into the house of
God, took the showbread to eat, and also gave it to those who were
with him; which is not lawful to eat and is only for the priests?
Jesus said to them, The Son of man is also Lord of the sabbath.

It came to pass on another sabbath, He entered the synagogue and
taught. There was a man whose right hand was withered. The scribes and
Pharisees watched whether He would heal on the sabbath day so they
might find an accusation against Him.

Jesus knew their intentions and said to the man with the withered
hand, Rise up. Stand forth in the midst. The man arose and stood
forth. Then Jesus said to them, I will ask you one thing; Is it lawful
on the sabbath days to do good, or to do evil? To save life, or to
destroy it? Then looking around at them, He said to the man, Stretch
forth thy hand. As the man did so, his hand was restored whole as the
other. They were filled with anger and discussed what they might do to
Jesus.

It came to pass in those days, Jesus went up into a mountain to pray.
He continued all night in prayer to God. When it was day, He called to
Him His disciples and, of them, He chose twelve whom He also named
apostles:

Simon (whom He also named Peter); Andrew, his brother; James and John;
Philip and Bartholomew; Matthew and Thomas; James, the son of
Alphaeus; and Simon called Zelotes; Judas, the brother of James; and
Judas Iscariot, who also was the traitor.

Jesus came down with the company of His disciples and stood in the
plain. There was now gathered a great multitude of people out of all
Judaea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, who
came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases and unclean
spirits. The whole multitude sought to touch Him because virtue flowed
out of Him and healed them all.

Jesus lifted His eyes to His disciples and said, Blessed are you who
are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are who who are
hungry, for you shall be filled. Blessed are you who weep, for you
shall laugh. Blessed are you when others hate you, separate you from
their company, reproach you, and denounce your name as evil for the
Son of man's sake. Rejoice in that day and leap for joy! Your reward
in heaven is great. Their fathers treated the prophets the same way.

But woe to you who are rich! You have already received your
consolation. Woe to you who are full! Later you be hungry. Woe to you
who now laugh! You will mourn and weep. Woe to you, when everyone
speaks well of you, because the ancestors treated the false prophets
in the same way.

I say to you who hear, Love your enemies. Do good to those who hate
you. Bless them that curse you. Pray for those who use you and treat
you badly. To one who strikes you on the one cheek, offer also the
other. To one who takes away your cloak let him take away your coat
also. Give to everyone who asks. From one who takes your goods do not
ask for them back. Do to others as you would have them do to you.

If ye love only those who love you, what thanks have ye? Sinners also
love those who love them. If ye do good only to those who do good to
you, what thanks have ye? Sinners do even the same also. And if ye
lend only to those from whom ye expect to receive back, what thanks
have ye? Sinners also lend to sinners to receive as much again.

But love your enemies, do good, and lend, expecting nothing in return
and your reward shall be great. Ye shall be the children of the
Highest for He is kind to the unthankful and to the evil. Be ye
therefore merciful as your Father also is merciful.

Judge not, and ye shall not be judged. Condemn not, and ye shall not
be condemned. Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven. Give, and it shall be
given to you; good measure, pressed down, shaken together and running
over shall men give into your bosom. With the same measure that ye
mete it shall be measured to you again.

Jesus spoke a parable to them, Can the blind lead the blind? Shall
they not both fall into the ditch? The disciple is not above his
master; but everyone that is perfect shall be as his master.

And why behold the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but not perceive
the beam that is in thine own eye? How can you say to your brother,
Brother, let me pull out the mote that is in thine eye, when thou
thyself does not see the beam that is in thine own eye? Thou
hypocrite, first cast out the beam from your own eye, and only then
shall thou see clearly enough to pull out the mote in thy brother's
eye.

For a good tree does not bring forth corrupt fruit; and a corrupt tree
does not bring forth good fruit. Every tree is known by its own fruit.
Of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a bramble bush do they gather
grapes.

A good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth that
which is good. An evil man, out of the evil of his heart, brings forth
that which is evil. Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speaks.

And why call me, Lord, Lord, and not do the things I say? Whoever
comes to me, hears my sayings, and does them, I will tell you who he
is like: He is like a man who built a house on a deep foundation of
rock. When the flood arose, the stream beat vehemently on that house
and could not shake it for it was founded upon a rock.

But he that hears and does not do the things I say is like a man that
is without a foundation for he built a house upon the earth against
which the stream beat vehemently. Immediately it fell and the ruin of
that house was great.

7       Jesus then went into Capernaum. A centurion whose servant was
dear to him, was sick and ready to die. When the centurion heard of
Jesus, he sent the elders of the Jews to Him, beseeching that Jesus
come and heal his servant. Those who came to Jesus on the centurion's
behalf said he was a worthy man who loved the nation and had built a
synagogue.

Jesus went with them and, when he was not far from the house, the
centurion sent friends to say, Lord, do not trouble thyself. I am not
worthy that thou should enter under my roof. Neither did I think
myself worthy to come to thee. Only say in a word, and my servant
shall be healed. For I also am a man set under authority. And I have
soldiers under me. I say to one, Go, and he goes; and to another,
Come, and he comes. And to my servant I say, Do this, and he does it.

When Jesus heard this, He marvelled. He turned around and said to the
people that followed Him, I have not found such great faith anywhere
in Israel. When those who came to Jesus on behalf of the centurion
returned to the house they found the servant healed.

The next day Jesus went to a city called Nain. His disciples and many
people were with Him. When He got near the gate of the city, a dead
man was being carried out. He had been the only son of a widow and
many people of the city were with her. When the Lord saw her, He had
compassion and said to her, Weep not. Then Jesus went over and touched
the bier. Those who bore him stood still. Then Jesus said, Young man,
I say to thee, Arise.

The young man that was dead sat up and began to speak and Jesus
delivered him to his mother. And there came a fear on all and they
glorified God, saying, A great prophet is risen up among us. God has
visited His people. This story of Him went forth throughout all
Judaea, and all the surrounding region.

When the disciples of John told him of these things, John sent two of
them to Jesus to ask, Art thou He that should come or do we look for
another? At the same time Jesus cured many of their infirmities and
plagues, and of evil spirits; and to many that were blind He gave
sight. Then Jesus said to John's disciples, Go and tell John the
things ye have seen and heard; how the blind see, the lame walk, the
lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and to the
poor the gospel is preached. Blessed is he, who shall not be offended
in me.

Jesus then told the people about John. He said, What went ye out into
the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind? What went ye out
to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, those who are
gorgeously apparelled and live delicately are in kings' courts.

But what went ye out to see? A prophet? Yes, I say to you, and much
more than a prophet. This is he, of whom it is written: Behold, I send
my messenger, who shall prepare thy way before thee. And, I say to
you, Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet
than John the Baptist, only he that is least in the kingdom of God is
greater than he. All the people that heard Him, even the publicans,
who received the baptism of John, justified God. But the Pharisees and
lawyers rejected the counsel of God and were not baptized by him.

The Lord said, Those of this generation are like children sitting in
the marketplace, and, calling one to another, saying, We have piped to
you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned to you, and ye have not
wept. For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking
wine; and ye say, He has a devil. The Son of man is come eating and
drinking; and ye say, Behold a gluttonous man, and a winebibber, a
friend of publicans and sinners! But wisdom is justified of all her
children.

One of the Pharisees invited Him to eat with him. Jesus went into the
Pharisee's house and sat down. When a woman in the city, who was a
sinner, heard that Jesus ate at the Pharisee's house, she came with an
alabaster box of ointment and stood behind Him at His feet. She was
weeping, and began to wash His feet with tears, and wipe them with her
hair. She kissed His feet and anointed them with the ointment.

When the Pharisee who invited Him saw it, he said to himself, If this
man were a prophet, he would have known who and what kind of woman
this is that touches Him. She is a sinner. Then Jesus turned and said,
Simon, I have something to say to thee. And he said, Master, say on.

Jesus began, There was a creditor who had two debtors. One owed five
hundred coins, and the other fifty. When they had nothing to pay, he
freely forgave them both. Tell me, therefore, which of them will love
him most? Simon answered and said, I suppose it would be he whom he
forgave most. Jesus said, Thou has rightly judged.

Jesus turned to the woman, and said to Simon, See this woman? When I
entered your house, you gave me no water for my feet. But she has
washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head.
When I entered your house, you gave me no kiss. But this woman, since
the time I came in, has not ceased to kiss my feet. You did not anoint
my head with oil. But this woman has anointed my feet with ointment.

So I say to thee, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven for she loved
much; but to whom little is forgiven, the same loves little. Jesus
said to her, Thy sins are forgiven. Those who sat at supper with Him
began to wonder, Who is this that forgives sins also? Then Jesus said
to the woman, Thy faith has saved thee; go in peace.

8       Afterward, He went throughout every city and village,
preaching and showing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God, and the
twelve were with Him. A woman, Mary called Magdalene, who had been
healed of evil spirits and out of whom went seven devils; and Joanna,
the wife of Herod's steward, Chuza; and Susanna; and many others
provided for and ministered to Him.

When people from many towns were gathered together, He told them a
parable. A sower went out to sow his seed. As he sowed, some fell by
the wayside. It was trodden down and the fowls of the air devoured it.
Some of the seed fell upon rock. As soon as it sprang up, it withered
away because it lacked moisture. Some of the seed fell among thorns.
The thorns sprang up with it, and choked it. Other seed fell on good
ground. It sprang up and bore fruit a hundredfold. Then He finished by
saying, He who has ears to hear, let him hear.

His disciples asked Him, What might this parable mean? He said, To you
it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God. But, to
others, it is given in parables that looking, they might not see, and
hearing, they might not understand.

Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God. Those by the
wayside are they that hear; then the devil comes and takes the word
out of their hearts, lest they should believe and be saved. Those on
the rock are they, who, when they hear, receive the word with joy.
They have no root. For a while they believe but in time of temptation
they fall away.

The seed which fell among thorns are they, who, when they have heard,
they go forth. But they are choked with cares and riches and pleasures
of this life; and they bring no fruit to perfection. The seed on the
good ground are they, who with an honest and good heart, have heard
the word. They keep it and bring forth fruit with patience.

No man, when he has lighted a candle, covers it with a vessel, or puts
it under a bed. Instead he sets it on a candlestick so those who enter
in may see the light. Nothing is secret that shall not be made
manifest and nothing is hidden that shall not be known and come to
light. Take heed how ye hear: for whoever has understanding, to him
more shall be given; and whoever has not, from him shall be taken even
that which he seems to have.

Then His mother and His brothers came but could not get near Him
through the press of the multitude. Someone said to Him, Thy mother
and thy brethren stand outside desiring to see thee. Jesus said to all
those gathered, My mother and my brethren are those who hear the word
of God, and do it.

Now it came to pass. Jesus went into a ship with His disciples. He
said, Let us go over to the other side of the lake. They launched
forth. As they sailed Jesus fell asleep. There came a windstorm on the
lake. The ship filled up with water, and they were in jeopardy. They
came and woke Him and said, Master, master, we perish. Jesus arose and
rebuked the wind and the raging water. The storm ceased and there was
a calm. He said to them, Where is your faith? They wondered, What kind
of man is this! He even commands the winds and water and they obey
Him.

They arrived at the country of the Gadarenes, which is over against
Galilee. Outside the city, a man who had devils for a long time
approached Him. He wore no clothes and had no house but lived in the
tombs. Oftentimes he was kept bound with chains and in fetters; but he
broke the bands, and was driven by the devil into the wilderness.

When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell down before Him. Jesus
commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man. With a loud voice
the man said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God most
high? I beseech thee, torment me not. Then Jesus asked him, What is
thy name? He said it was Legion, because many devils were entered into
him. They besought Jesus not to command them to go out into the nearby
deep water.

There was a herd of swine feeding on the mountain. The devils besought
Jesus to let them enter into the swine. Jesus allowed them. When the
devils went out of the man and entered the swine the herd ran
violently down a steep place into the lake and were choked.

When those who fed them saw what was done, they fled into the city and
told what happened. Many went out to see what was done. They came to
Jesus and found the man out of whom the devils departed. He was
sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed, and in his right mind. The
people were afraid. Those who saw it explained how the man possessed
with the devils was healed. Then the whole multitude of the country
around the Gadarenes besought Jesus to leave.

Jesus went back to the boat. The man who had been possessed by the
devils asked to go with Him. But Jesus sent him away. He said, Return
to thine own house and show the great things God has done for thee.
The man went his way and told the whole city the great things Jesus
had done.

It came to pass that Jesus returned and the people gladly received
Him. They were all waiting for Him. There came a man named Jairus. He
was a ruler of the synagogue. He fell down at Jesus' feet and besought
Him to come to his house. His only daughter, about twelve years of
age, lay dying. As Jesus started out, the people thronged Him.

A woman who had an issue of blood for twelve years and who had spent
all her living on physicians who were unable to heal her, came up
behind Him, and touched the border of His garment. Immediately her
issue of blood ceased. Jesus said, Who touched me? When all denied,
Peter and those with him said, Master, the multitude throng thee and
press thee, and you ask, Who touched me? Jesus said, Somebody has
touched me for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me.

When the woman felt she could not hide, she came trembling and,
falling down before Him, she declared to Him before all the people why
she had touched Him, and how she was healed immediately. Jesus said to
her, Daughter, be of good comfort. Thy faith has made thee whole. Go
in peace.

While He yet spoke, there came a messenger from the ruler of the
synagogue's house. He said, Thy daughter is dead. Do not trouble the
Master. But when Jesus heard it, He said, Fear not. Only believe and
she shall be made whole.

When He got to the house, He allowed no one to go in, except Peter,
James, John, and the father and the mother of the maiden. All wept but
He said, Weep not. She is not dead, but sleeps. Those gathered outside
laughed Him to scorn, knowing that she was dead. He put them all out,
and took her by the hand, and said, Maid, arise.

Her spirit returned and she arose straightway. Then He told them to
give her food. Her parents were astonished, but He charged them that
they tell no one what was done.

9       Then He called His twelve disciples together, and gave them
power and authority over all devils and to cure diseases. He sent them
to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the sick. Jesus said to
them, Take nothing for your journey, neither staves, nor scrip, nor
bread, nor money; neither take two coats.

Whatever house ye enter, abide and depart from there. Whoever will not
receive you, when ye leave that city, shake off the very dust from
your feet as a testimony against them. They departed and went through
the towns, preaching the gospel and healing everywhere.

Herod, the tetrarch, heard about all this. He was perplexed because
some people said it was John the Baptist risen from the dead; and some
said Elias had appeared. Others said that one of the prophets of old
was risen again. Herod said, I have beheaded John so who is this of
whom I hear so much? He wanted to see Him.

When they returned, the apostles told Jesus all that they had done. He
took them and went into a private desert place that belonged to the
city of Bethsaida. But people soon found out and followed Him. Jesus
received them. He spoke to them of the kingdom of God and healed those
who had need of healing.

When the day began to wear away, the twelve came and said to Him, Send
the multitude away so they may go into the towns and country nearby to
find lodging and get food.

But He said to them, Give ye them to eat. They answered, We have no
more than five loaves and two fish unless we go and buy meat for all
these people, about five thousand men.

He said to His disciples, Have them sit down in groups of fifty. Then
He took the five loaves and two fish, and, looking up to heaven, He
blessed them. He broke them and gave them to the disciples to set
before the multitude. They all ate and were full. And twelve baskets
of fragmants that remained were taken up.

It came to pass, as Jesus was alone praying, His disciples were nearby
and He asked them, Whom do the people say that I am? They answered and
said, John the Baptist; but some say, Elias; and others say, one of
the prophets of old is risen again.

He said to them, But who do you say that I am? Peter spoke up and
said, The Christ of God. Jesus charged them to tell no one of this. He
said, The Son of man must suffer many things; and be rejected by the
elders, chief priests, and scribes; and be slain; and be raised on the
third day.

Then He said, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself,
take up his cross daily, and follow me. Whoever will save his life
shall lose it. Whoever will lose his life for my sake, shall save it.
For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and lose
himself, or be cast away?

Whoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, the Son of man shall
also be ashamed of him when He comes in His own glory, and in His
Father's, and of the holy angels. I tell you, there are some standing
here now, who shall not taste of death until they see the kingdom of
God.

About eight days after these sayings, He took Peter, John, and James
and went up into a mountain to pray. As He prayed, His whole
appearance was altered. His raiment was white and glistering. And
there talked with Him two men, Moses and Elias, who appeared in glory
and spoke of His decease which He should accomplish at Jerusalem.

Peter and those with him became heavy with sleep. When they awoke,
they saw His glory and the two men that stood with Him. Later, as they
departed from Him, Peter, not knowing what to say, said to Jesus,
Master, it is good for us to be here. Let us make three tabernacles;
one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias.

But while Peter spoke, a cloud overshadowed them and they became
afraid. Then there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my
beloved Son. Hear Him. When the voice was past, Jesus was alone. They
kept it close and told no man any of those things which they had seen.

The next day, when they came down from the hill, many people met Him.
A man in the group cried out, Master, I beseech thee, look upon my
son. He is my only child. A spirit takes him and, suddenly, he cries
out. It tears and bruises him so that he foams and hardly departs from
him. I besought thy disciples to cast him out but they could not.

Jesus said, O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be
with you, and suffer you? Bring thy son here. As the boy approached,
the devil threw him down and tore him. Jesus rebuked the unclean
spirit. He healed the child and delivered him again to his father.

All were amazed at the mighty power of God. Jesus said to His
disciples, Let these words sink down into your ears: The Son of man
shall be delivered into the hands of men. But they did not understand
this. It was hid from them that they did not perceive it and they
feared asking Him about the saying.

Then there arose a discussion among them about which of them should be
the greatest. Jesus, perceiving the thought of their heart, took a
child, and set the child next to Him. He said, Whoever shall receive
this child in my name receives me. Whoever shall receive me, receives
Him that sent me: for he that is least among you all shall be great.

John said, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy name. We
forbad him because he does not follow with us. Jesus said to him,
Forbid him not: for he that is not against us is for us.

And it came to pass, when the time came that Jesus should be received
up, He stedfastly set His face toward Jerusalem. He sent messengers
ahead and they entered into a village of the Samaritans to make a way
for Him. But they did not receive Him because He was heading to
Jerusalem.

When His disciples, James and John, saw this, they said, Lord, if you
will, command that we send fire to come down from heaven and consume
them as Elias did? Jesus turned and rebuked them. He said, Ye know not
what manner of spirit ye are of. The Son of man is not come to destroy
men's lives, but to save them. And they went to another village.

As they went along, a man said, Lord, I will follow wherever you go.
Jesus replied, Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests; but
the Son of man has nowhere to lay His head. To another, Jesus said,
Follow me. But the man said, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my
father. Jesus said to him, Let the dead bury their dead but you go and
preach the kingdom of God.

Then another man said, Lord, I will follow thee; but let me first go
bid farewell to those at my house. Jesus said, No man, having put his
hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.

10       After this the Lord appointed seventy others to go ahead of
Him, two by two, to the places He would visit. He said to them, The
harvest truly is great, but the laborers are few. Ask the master to
send forth more laborers into his harvest.

Now, go your way. Behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves.
Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes; and salute no one along the
way.

Into whatever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house. If
the Son of peace is there, your peace shall rest upon it; if not, it
shall return to you. Remain in the same house, eating and drinking
such things as they give; for the laborer is worthy of his hire. Do
not go from house to house.

And into whatever city ye enter, from those who receive you, eat such
things as are set before you. Heal the sick therein, and say to them,
The kingdom of God is come near you.

But, into whatever city ye enter where they do not receive you, go out
into the streets of the same, and say, Even the very dust of your
city, which cleaves to us, we wipe off against you and, be ye sure of
this, the kingdom of God is come near to you. But I say to you, it
shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom, than for that city.

Woe to thee, Chorazin! woe to thee, Bethsaida! If the mighty works had
been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in you, they would
have, long ago repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. But it shall
be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment than for you. And
Capernaum, exalted to heaven, shall be thrust down to hell. He that
hears you hears me; and he that despises you despises me. He that
despises me despises Him that sent me.

The seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are
subject to us through thy name. Jesus said to them, I beheld Satan as
lightning falls from heaven. Behold, I give you power to tread on
serpents, and scorpions, and all of the enemy. Nothing shall, in any
way, hurt you. However, do not rejoice that the spirits are subject to
you; but rejoice because your names are written in heaven.

In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit and said, I thank thee, O
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou has hid these things from
the wise and prudent, and revealed them to babes and, moreso, Father,
for it seemed good in thy sight.

All things are delivered to me by my Father. No man knows who the Son
is, but the Father; and who the Father is, but the Son, and He to whom
the Son will reveal Him.

Jesus turned to His disciples, and said privately, Blessed are the
eyes that see the things that ye see. Many prophets and kings have
desired to see these things ye see and have not seen them; and to hear
the things ye hear and have not heard them.

Then a lawyer stood up and tested Him, saying, Master, what shall I do
to inherit eternal life? Jesus said to him, What is written in the
law? How readest thou? The lawyer answered, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbor as thyself.

Jesus said to him, Thou has answered right. Do this and you shall have
life. Then, wanting to justify himself, the lawyer asked Jesus, And
who is my neighbor? Jesus answered this way, A certain man went down
from Jerusalem to Jericho and fell among thieves who stripped him,
wounded him, and left him half dead. By chance, a priest came by. When
he saw him, he crossed to the other side. Then, likewise, a Levite
came by and looked at him. He also passed by on the other side.

Finally a Samaritan came up and, when he saw him, he had compassion
and went to him. He bound up his wounds, pouring oil and wine, and set
him on his own beast. He brought him to an inn and took care of him.

When he departed the next morning, he took out some money, gave it to
the host, and said, Take care of him. Whatever more you spend, I will
repay you on my way back.

Now which of these three, do you think, was a neighbor to the man who
fell among the thieves? The lawyer answered, He that showed mercy on
him. Then Jesus said to him, Go, and do thou likewise.

Later they came to a village where a woman named Martha received Him
into her house. She had a sister, Mary, who also sat at Jesus' feet
and heard His word.

Martha was concerned about the serving of the meal. She came to Jesus
and said, Lord, do you not care that my sister has left me to serve
alone? Tell her to help me. But Jesus said to her, Martha, Martha,
thou art concerned and troubled about so many things. But only one
thing is needful and Mary has chosen that good part which shall not be
taken away from her.

11        After Jesus finished some time in prayer, one of His
disciples said, Lord, teach us to pray as John taught his disciples.
He said to them, When ye pray, say, Our Father who art in heaven,
Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done on earth as
in heaven. Give us, day by day, our daily bread. Forgive our sins; for
we also forgive every one that is indebted to us. Let us not fall into
temptation; but deliver us from evil.

Jesus said to them, Which of you shall have a friend, and go to him at
midnight, and say, Friend, lend me three loaves. A friend of mine has
come to me, and I have nothing to feed him and, from inside he calls
out, Do not bother me. The door is shut and my children are all asleep
in bed and I cannot get up and give you anything?

I tell you, Though he might not get up for another, because he is your
friend and because of your circumstances, he will get up and give you
as much as you need.

So, ask, and it shall be given you; seek and you will find; knock and
it shall be opened to you. For every friend that asks, receives; and
he that seeks, finds; and to the one that knocks, it shall be opened.

If your son asks for bread, will you give him a stone? If he asks for
a fish, will you give him a serpent instead of a fish? Or if he asks
for an egg, will you offer him a scorpion?

If you, who are sinners, know how to give good gifts to your children,
how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those
who ask Him?

It came to pass, Jesus cast out a devil from a man who previously had
been unable to speak. When the devil was gone and the man spoke; the
people wondered. But some of them said, He casts out devils by the
power of Beelzebub, the chief of the devils. Other people wanted to
test Him and wanted Him to produce a sign from heaven.

Jesus knew their thoughts. He said, Every kingdom divided against
itself is brought to destruction; and a house divided against a house
falls. If Satan is also divided against himself, how shall his kingdom
stand?

You say that I cast out devils through Beelzebub. If I, by Beelzebub,
cast out devils, by whom do your sons cast them out? So judge by them.
However, I cast out devils with the finger of God, so, do not doubt
that the kingdom of God is upon you.

When a strong man is properly armed, he keeps his palace and his goods
are in peace. But when a man stronger than he comes upon him and
overcomes him, the stronger takes all the armor in which he trusted,
then divides his goods. One who is not with me is against me, and one
who does not gather with me, scatters.

When an unclean spirit leaves a man, he walks through barren places.
He seeks rest but can find none. Then the unclean spirit says, I will
return to the house out of which I came. When he goes back, he finds
it swept and garnished. So he goes and gathers together seven spirits
more wicked than himself. They enter in and dwell there; and the last
state of that man is worse than the first.

As He spoke these things, a woman in the crowd lifted up her voice and
said to Him, Blessed is the womb that bore thee, and the paps which
thou has sucked. But He said, Yes, but it is better to say, Blessed
are they that hear the word of God and keep it.

The crowd drew closer together. Jesus said to them, This is an evil
generation. They seek a sign but no sign will be given except the sign
of Jonas the prophet.

As Jonas was a sign to the Ninevites, so shall the Son of man be to
this generation. The queen of the south will rise up in judgment of
this generation. She will condemn them for she came from the utmost
parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, behold, one
greater than Solomon is here. The men of Nineve will rise up in
judgment with this generation and shall condemn it, for they repented
at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, one greater than Jonas is
here.

No one with a lighted candle, puts it in a secret place or under a
bushel. It is put on a candlestick so those who come in may see the
light. The light of the body is the eye. When your eye is single, your
whole body is also full of light. But when your eye is evil, your body
is full of darkness.

Take heed, therefore, that the light that is in you be not darkness.
If thy whole body is full of light, with no dark parts, the whole
shall be full of light, and, like the bright shining of a candle, it
gives off the light.

Later, a Pharisee who had invited Him to dinner marvelled that He had
not first washed before sitting at the meal. Jesus said to him, You
Pharisees make the outside of the cup and the platter clean; but
inside they are full of poison and wickedness. Fools, did not He who
made what is on the outside, make what is inside also? Give of what
you have, then all things will be clean to you.

But woe to you, Pharisees! You tithe mint and rue and all kinds of
herbs, and ignore judgment and the love of God. These you ought to
have done without ignoring the others also.

Woe to you, Pharisees! You love the best seats in the synagogues, and
greetings in the markets. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! You are as empty as graves that others walk over and do
not see.

One of the lawyers said, Master, in saying this you reproach us also.
Jesus said, Woe to you also, ye lawyers! You load men with unbearable
burdens and you yourselves do not so much as lay a finger on one of
these burdens.

Woe to you! You build shrines to the prophets and your fathers killed
them. You bear witness that you sanction the deeds of your fathers,
for they killed them and you build their shrines.

The wisdom of God said: I will send them prophets and apostles. Some
of them they shall slay and persecute that the blood of all the
prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the world, may be
required of this generation. The blood of Abel to the blood of
Zacharias which perished between the altar and the temple shall be
required of this generation.

Woe to you, lawyers! You have taken away the key of knowledge. You
entered not in yourselves but prevented any others from entering in.
And, as He said these things to them, the scribes and the Pharisees
began to urge and provoke Him to speak of many things. They were
laying in wait and trying to catch something He said that they could
use against Him.

12       Later, Jesus drew His disciples together and taught them
saying, Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
There is nothing covered that shall not be revealed; nor hidden that
shall not be known. Therefore, whatever ye have spoken in darkness
shall be heard in the light; and that which ye have whispered shall be
proclaimed upon the housetops. My friends, Be not afraid of those who
kill the body because, after that, there is no more they can do. But I
will forewarn you who to fear. Fear the one who, after he has killed,
has power to cast you into hell. Yes, fear him.

Are not five sparrows sold for two small coins and not one of them is
forgotten by God? Even the very hairs of your head are all numbered by
Him. Fear not, then, because you are of more value than many sparrows.

Also, I tell you, Whoever confesses me before men, the Son of man will
also confess before the angels of God. But he that denies me before
men shall be denied before the angels of God. Whoever speaks a word
against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him. But whoever
blasphemes against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven.

Now, when they bring you to the synagogues, and before magistrates and
powers, take no thought how or what ye shall answer, or what ye shall
say. The Holy Ghost shall tell you what to say on the spot.

One of the group said, Master, tell my brother to divide the
inheritance with me. Jesus replied, Who made me a judge or a divider
over you? Take heed, and beware of covetousness. A man's life does not
consist of the abundance of things he possesses.

Then Jesus spoke a parable to them. He said, The ground of a rich man
yielded a plentiful harvest. He wondered and said, What shall I do? I
have no room to store my fruit. Finally he said, I will pull down my
barns and build larger ones and there will I store my fruit and all my
goods. I will say to my soul, Thou has enough goods laid up to last
many years. It is time to take ease; eat, drink, and be merry. But God
said to him, Thou fool, tonight thy soul shall be required of thee;
then to whom shall all those things belong which thou has stored away?
So it is with whoever lays up treasure for himself and is not rich
toward God.

Jesus said to His disciples, Therefore, take no thought for your life,
what ye shall eat; or for the body, what ye shall put on. Life is more
than meat, and the body is more than raiment.

Consider the ravens. They neither sow nor reap. They have no
storehouse or barn. God feeds them. How much better than the fowls are
ye? And who of you, by thinking or reasoning, can add to his stature
one cubit? If you are not able to do that which is so little, why take
thought for the rest?

Consider the lilies and how they grow! They toil not, they spin not;
and yet, I say to you, Solomon, in all his glory, was not arrayed like
one of these. If God, then, so clothes the grass, which is today in
the field and tomorrow cast into the oven; how much more will He
clothe you, O ye of little faith?

Seek not what ye shall eat or drink. Neither be of a doubtful mind.
For these same things do all the nations of the world seek after, and
your Father knows that ye have need of these things. Instead, seek ye
the kingdom of God and all these things shall be added to you.

Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give
you the kingdom. Sell what you have and give alms. Provide yourselves
with purses that do not wear out, a treasure in the heavens that does
not fail, where no thief approaches, nor moth corrupts. For where your
treasure is, there will your heart be also.

Let your loins be girded about and your lights kept burning. Be like
those who wait for their lord to return from the wedding that, when he
comes and knocks, they are ready to welcome him instantly. Blessed are
those servants, who, when the lord comes, He finds ready and waiting.

And consider this, if the good man of the house had known what hour
the thief would come, he would have watched, and not suffered his
house to be broken into. So, be ready because the Son of man comes at
an hour when you think not.

Then Peter said to Him, Lord, will you speak more about this parable
to us, or even to all? The Lord said, Who, then, is that faithful and
wise steward whom his lord shall make ruler over his household to
justly give out the portions of meat in due season? Blessed is that
servant whom his lord, when he comes, shall find already doing so. I
tell you, he will make him ruler over all that he has.

But if a servant says in his heart, My lord delays his coming; and so
begins to beat the menservants and maidens, and to eat and drink to
excess; the lord of that servant will come in a day when the servant
does not look for him and at an hour when he is not aware. His lord
will cast him aside and appoint him his portion with the unbelievers.
That servant, who knew his lord's will but did not prepare or act
according to his lord's will, shall be beaten with many stripes.

But he that did not know and committed things worthy of stripes, shall
be beaten lightly. To whomever much is given, of him much is required.
To whomever much is entrusted, of him even much more will be demanded.

I came to set the earth on fire; and I wish it was already kindled.
But I have a baptism to be baptized with; and am I bound until it is
accomplished!

Do you suppose that I came to give peace on earth? I tell you, No; but
rather division. From now on there shall be five in one house divided,
three against two, and two against three. The father shall be divided
against the son, and the son against the father; the mother against
the daughter, and the daughter against the mother; the mother in law
against her daughter in law, and the daughter in law against her
mother in law.

Then Jesus said to the people, When ye see a cloud rise out of the
west, ye say, A shower is coming; and so it is. When ye see the south
wind blow, ye say, It is going to be hot; and it comes to pass. Ye
hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky and of the earth; but
how is it that ye do not discern this time? And why do you not judge,
within yourselves, what is right?

When you go with your adversary to court, settle along the way so you
may be delivered from him; lest he hale thee to the judge, and the
judge deliver thee to the officer, and the officer cast thee into
prison. You will not leave there until you have paid every last cent.

13       Among those present were some who said that Pilate mingled
blood of the Galilaeans with their sacrifices. Jesus said to them, Do
you suppose these Galilaeans were sinners above all other Galilaeans
because they suffered such things? I tell you, No: but, unless you
repent, you shall all likewise perish. Or the eighteen upon whom the
tower in Siloam fell and killed; do you think they were sinners above
all men who lived in Jerusalem? I tell you again, No: but, unless you
repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

Jesus told this parable. A man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard.
He came out to get some fruit and found none. He said to the dresser
of his vineyard, Behold, for three years I have come seeking fruit on
this fig tree and found none. Cut it down; why have it take up space?
His dresser said to him, Lord, let it alone this year also, until I
dig around it and fertilize it. If it bears fruit, all is well, and,
if not, then afterward it shall be cut down.

He was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath. He saw a
woman who, for eighteen years, had been bowed over and could not stand
upright. When Jesus recognized her, He called her to Him, and said,
Woman, thou art loosed from this infirmity. He laid His hands on her
and, immediately she was made straight, and glorified God.

The ruler of the synagogue, filled with indignation because Jesus had
healed on the sabbath day, said to the people, There are six days in
which men ought to work. On those days, therefore, come and be healed,
and not on the sabbath day.

The Lord said to the ruler of the synagogue, Thou hypocrite, does not
each one of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall,
and lead him to be watered? Here is a woman, a daughter of Abraham,
whom Satan has bound for eighteen years. Should she not be loosed from
this bond on the sabbath day? Upon saying this, Jesus' adversaries
were ashamed and the rest of the people rejoiced for all the glorious
things that were done by Him.

Then He said, I will tell you what the the Kingdom of God is like. It
is like a grain of mustard seed, which was cast into a garden. It grew
up and turned into such a great tree that the fowls of the air lodged
in its branches. And He said, The kingdom of God is like leaven that
is put in a few small measures of meal and, in a while, the whole
batch is leavened.

Journeying toward Jerusalem, Jesus stopped and taught in many cities
and villages along the way. And a follower came forward and asked,
Lord, are there only a few that can be saved? Jesus looked out on the
group and replied, Strive to enter in at the strait gate. Many, I tell
you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

Once the master of the house is risen up, the door is closed. From
outside you will knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open the door
to us; but He will answer, I do not know who you are.

Then you will say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou
has taught in our streets. But He shall say, I tell you, I do not know
you; depart from me, all you workers of iniquity. There shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth when ye see Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, and you are left
outside.

They shall come from the east, the west, the north, and the south, and
shall sit down in the kingdom of God. And, behold, the last shall be
first, and the first shall be last.

Then one of the Pharisees said to Him, Get out. Leave here for Herod
will kill thee. Jesus said, Go and tell that fox, Behold, I cast out
devils and I do cures today and tomorrow, and the third day I shall be
perfected. Nevertheless, I must walk today and tomorrow and the day
following for it cannot be that a prophet perish anywhere but
Jerusalem.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which kills the prophets, and stones those who
are sent to thee; how often would I have gathered thy children
together, as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, and ye would not
have it! Behold, your house is left desolate and, verily I say to you,
Ye shall not see me until the time comes when ye say, Blessed is He
that comes in the name of the Lord.

14       It came to pass, Jesus went to eat at the house of one of the
chief Pharisees on the sabbath day. A man was there who had the
dropsy. Jesus, observing that He was being carefully watched, said to
the lawyers and Pharisees, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day?
They held their peace.

Jesus healed the afflicted man and then said, Which of you shall have
an ass or an ox fall into a pit and will not straightway pull him out
on the sabbath day? Again, they could not answer Him.

Jesus told a parable. He said, When you are invited to a wedding, do
not sit down in the highest room; lest one more honorable than you has
been invited. The host would have to come and tell you the room was
for someone else and, with shame, you move to the lowest room.
Instead, sit down in the lowest room. Then the host may come to you
and say, Friend, go up higher. You will, then, have the respect of the
other guests. Whoever exalts himself shall be abased; and he who
humbles himself shall be exalted.

Then Jesus said to his host, When you make a dinner or a supper, do
not call your friends, or your brethren, or kinsmen, or rich
neighbors; lest they also invite you in return, and you incur an
obligation. When you make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the
lame, the blind. You will be blessed because they cannot repay you;
you will be repaid at the resurrection of the just.

When one of them that sat at the table with Jesus heard these things,
he said, Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God.
Then Jesus told another parable.

He said, A man made a great supper and invited many people. When it
was supper time he sent his servant to say to those who were invited,
Come. All things are now ready. One after another, each one made an
excuse. The first said, I have bought some land and I must go to see
it. Please have me excused. Another said, I just purchased five yoke
of oxen and I must go to claim them. Please have me excused. Another
said, I have just married and cannot come.

The servant returned and reported these things to his lord. Then the
master of the house became angry and said, Go out into the streets and
lanes of the city. Gather the poor, the maimed, the halt, and the
blind and bring them here.

The servant returned and said, Lord, it is done as you commanded, and
there is still room. The lord said, Go out, then, into all the
highways and compel them to come in so my house may be filled. For I
say to you, None of those who were invited shall taste of my supper.

Now there were great multitudes that followed along with Jesus. He
turned around and said to them, If any man comes to me, and does not
forsake his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren,
and sisters, yes, and his own life, he cannot be my disciple. Whoever
does not bear his cross and come after me, cannot be my disciple.

Which of you, intending to build a tower, does not first sit down and
count the cost, to see whether you have what is needed to finish it?
Lest, after you have laid the foundation, and are not able to finish
it, all that behold it begin to mock you and say, This man began to
build but was not able to finish.

Or what king, contemplating war against another king, does not first
sit and consult whether he is able, with ten thousand, to meet him
that comes against him with twenty thousand? If not, while the other
is yet a great way off, he sends his ambassadors to discuss conditions
of peace.

So likewise, any of you that does not forsake all he has, cannot be my
disciple. Salt is good: but if the salt has lost its savour, with what
can it be seasoned? It is not fit for the land, yet not ready for the
dunghill; so men cast it aside. He that has ears to hear, let him
hear.

15       Seeing how Jesus was often surrounded by publicans and
sinners who listened closely to his sayings, the Pharisees and scribes
murmured, This man receives sinners and even eats with them. Thus,
Jesus spoke another parable.

He said, What man of you, having a hundred sheep, if he loses one of
them, does not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and search
for the one that is lost until he finds it? And when he has found it,
he lays it on his shoulders, rejoicing. When he comes home, he calls
his friends and neighbors together, saying, Rejoice with me. I have
found my sheep which was lost. I say to you, there is more joy in
heaven over one sinner that repents, than over ninety and nine just
persons who need no repentance.

What woman, having ten pieces of silver, if she loses one piece, does
not light a candle, sweep the house, and seek diligently until she
finds it? And when she has found it, she calls her friends and her
neighbors together, saying, Rejoice with me. I have found the piece
that was lost. I say to you, there is joy in the presence of the
angels of God over one sinner that repents.

And He said, A man had two sons. The younger of them said to his
father, Father, give me the portion of my inheritance. The father gave
him his portion and the younger son journeyed into a far country.

After he spent everything on riotous living and had nothing left,
there arose a mighty famine in that land. He began to be in want and
the only work he could get was feeding swine in a countryman's field.
And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine
ate because he had nothing to eat.

When he came to his senses, he said, How many of my father's hired
servants have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger! I
will arise and go to my father, and will say to him, Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee. I am no longer worthy to be
called thy son; but make me one of thy hired servants.

He arose and went to his father. But when he was yet a great way off,
his father saw him and had compassion. He ran, and fell on his neck,
and kissed him. The son said to him, Father, I have sinned against
heaven, and in thy sight, and am not worthy to be called thy son.

But the father said to his servants, Bring out the best robe and put
it on him. Put a ring on his hand and shoes on his feet. Butcher the
fatted calf. Let us eat and be merry for my son was dead and is alive
again; he was lost, and is found. And they began to celebrate.

The elder son was in the field. As he drew near the house, he heard
music and dancing. He called one of the servants and asked what these
things meant. The servant said, Thy brother is home and thy father has
killed the fatted calf because he has received him safe and sound.

The elder son was angry and would not go inside. His father came out
and entreated him; but he said to his father, Lo, these many years I
have served thee. I have never once disobeyed you. Yet, you never gave
me a fatted calf that I might make merry with my friends. But, as soon
as he came home, who wasted all you gave him on harlots, you kill a
fatted calf for him.

The father said to him, Son, you are always with me, and all that I
have is yours. It was fitting for us to celebrate and be glad for
this, thy brother, was dead, and is alive again. He was lost and now
is found.

16       Jesus said, There was a rich man who had a steward who was
accused of wasting the rich man's goods. The master called him and
said, How is it that I hear this of thee? Give me an account of your
stewardship; for you may no longer be the steward.

The steward thought about his situation, then said to himself, I know
what to do so when I am put out of this stewardship, I will find favor
in other houses. He called on each of his lord's debtors. He said to
the first, How much do you owe to my lord? The first said, A hundred
measures of oil. He said, Take your bill and quickly write fifty. He
said to another, How much do you owe? The other said, A hundred
measures of wheat. He said, Take your bill and quickly write eighty.
And so, likewise, the steward did with all his master's debtors. When
he gave his accont, the rich man had to commend the unjust steward for
his cleverness.

The children of this world are better at dealing with their own
generation than the children of light. But, I tell you, use what you
have wisely and do good with it and you shall find favor in heavenly
houses.

The one who is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in
much. The one that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much. If
you are not trustworthy with worldly goods, who will commit to your
trust the true riches? If you have not been faithful in that which
belongs to another, who will give you what is your own? No servant can
serve two masters: either he will hate the one, and love the other; or
he will cleave to the one, and despise the other. You cannot serve God
and mammon.

The Pharisees, who were covetous, heard all these things and derided
Him. Jesus said to them, Ye are they who justify yourselves before men
but God knows your hearts. That which is highly esteemed among men is
abomination in the sight of God.

The law and the prophets lasted up until John. From that time the
kingdom of God is proclaimed and every man presses into it. Far easier
it is for heaven and earth to pass away than for one letter of the law
to fail.

Whoever puts away his wife and marries another, commits adultery.
Whoever marries a woman that has been put away from her husband
commits adultery.

There was a rich man who wore clothes of purple and fine linen, and
who dined sumptuously each day. Lying at his gate, was a poor man
named Lazarus. He was covered with sores, and often the dogs came and
licked them. He would gladly accept the crumbs which fell from the
rich man's table.

When the poor man died, he was carried by the angels into Abraham's
bosom. The rich man also died and, from hell, he lifted his eyes, in
torment, and saw Abraham far off with Lazarus at his bosom. He cried
out, Father Abraham, have mercy on me. Send Lazarus to dip the tip of
his finger in water and cool my tongue. I am tormented in this flame.

But Abraham said, Son, remember that you received your good things
during your lifetime and Lazarus got the evil things. Now he is
comforted, and you are tormented. And, beside all this, there is a
great gulf between us that cannot be crossed from either side.

Then the rich man said, Then I beg you, father, send him to my
father's house. I have five brothers. Let him testify to them so they
do not also come into this place of torment.

Abraham answered, They have Moses and the prophets. Let them hear
them. The rich man said, No, father Abraham. Only if one went to them
from the dead will they repent. Then Abraham said to him, If they do
not hear Moses and the prophets, they will not be persuaded by one who
rose from the dead.

17       Then He said to the disciples, It is certain that offences
must come: but woe to him, through whom they come! It would be better
for him that a millstone were hung around his neck and he be cast into
the sea, than to have offended one of these little ones.

Take heed: If thy brother trespasses against thee, rebuke him. If he
repents, forgive him. If he trespasses against you seven times in a
day, and seven times in a day, repents; forgive him. Then the apostles
said to the Lord, Increase our faith.

The Lord said, If you have faith even as small as a grain of mustard
seed, you can say to this tree, Be thou plucked up by the root and
planted in the sea; and it will obey you.

Who among you, when your servant comes in from plowing or feeding
cattle, will say, Go and sit down to eat? Instead, you say to him,
Wash yourself and change your clothes; prepare and serve me my supper;
and then you shall eat and drink. Does the servant deserve thanks
because he did what he was obliged to do? Likewise, when you have done
all the things which are required of you, say, I am an unprofitable
servant. I have done that which was my duty to do.

It came to pass, as Jesus continued toward Jerusalem, He passed
through the middle of Samaria and Galilee. As He went into a village,
ten lepers met Him. Standing at a distance, they lifted their voices
and said, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us. When He saw them, Jesus
said, Go show yourselves to the priests. And, it happened that, as
they went, they were cleansed.

When one of them, a Samaritan, saw that he was healed, he turned back,
and with a loud voice, glorified God. He fell down at Jesus' feet and
thanked Him. Jesus said, Were there not ten cleansed? Where are the
other nine? Of the ten, the only one to return thanks to God is the
foreigner. Jesus said to him, Arise and go thy way. Thy faith has made
thee whole.

When the Pharisees demanded to know when the kingdom of God should
come, He answered, The kingdom of God does not come by observation. No
one will say, Look here! or, look there! for, behold, the kingdom of
God is within you.

Then He said to the disciples, The days will come, when you will long
to see one of the days of the Son of man, but you will not see it.
They will say to you, See here; or, see there. Do not go after them or
follow them. For just as lightning flashes and lights the heavens from
one part to another; so also shall the Son of man be in His day.

But first you must suffer many things, and be rejected by this
generation. As it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the days
of the Son of man. People ate and drank, they married and were given
in marriage up until the day that Noah entered the ark when the flood
came and destroyed them all.

It was the same in the days of Lot. They ate and drank, bought and
sold, planted and built. But the same day that Lot left Sodom, it
rained fire and brimstone from heaven and destroyed them all.

This is how it shall be on the day when the Son of man is revealed. On
that day, he who is up on the housetop, and his belongings downstairs
in the house should not go down for them. He who is in the field
should not turn back. Remember Lot's wife.

Whoever seeks to save his life will lose it; and whoever loses his
life will save it. In that night there will be two sleeping in a bed;
one will be taken, the other will be left. Two women will be grinding
meal together; one will be taken, and the other left. Two men will be
in the field; one will be taken, and the other left. Then they asked
Him, Where, Lord? He said to them, Wherever the body is, there will
also the vultures be gathered.

18       Jesus told another parable. In a certain city, there was a
judge who feared neither God nor man. A widow in that city came to him
and said, Avenge me of my adversary. At first, the judge gave her no
attention. But afterward he said to himself, Though I do not fear God
nor man; I will avenge her because she bothers me and her continual
coming to me will wear me out.

The Lord said, Hear what the unjust judge said. Shall God not avenge
His own elect, who cry day and night to Him, though He has great
patience with them? I tell you, He will avenge them speedily.
Nevertheless, when the Son of man comes, shall He find faith on the
earth?

He spoke this parable to those who trusted in their own righteousness,
and despised others: Two men went into the temple to pray. One was a
Pharisee, and the other a publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed,
God, I thank thee that I am not like other men who are extortioners,
unjust, adulterers, or even publicans. I fast twice a week and I give
tithes of all that I possess.

The publican, standing far off, would not so much as lift his eyes to
heaven, but struck his breast, said, God be merciful to me a sinner. I
tell you, this second man went home justified, but not the first man,
for every one that exalts himself shall be abased; and he that humbles
himself shall be exalted.

Many people brought infants to Jesus that He would touch them. But
when the disciples saw the large crowd, they rebuked them. But Jesus
called them to Him and said, Let the little children come to me. Do
not forbid them for of such is the kingdom of God. Whoever shall not
receive the kingdom of God as a little child shall in no way enter
therein.

A certain ruler asked Him, Good Master, what shall I do to inherit
eternal life? Jesus said to him, Why do you call me good? No one is
good, except one, that is, God. Know the commandments. Do not commit
adultery. Do not kill. Do not steal. Do not bear false witness. Honor
thy father and thy mother.

And he said, All these commandments I have kept from my youth up. Then
Jesus said to him, Yet you lack one thing. Sell all you have and give
to the poor. You will have treasure in heaven. Then come and follow
me.

When he heard this, he was very sorrowful because he was very rich and
had many possessions. And when Jesus saw that he was very sorrowful,
He said, How difficult it is for those who have riches to enter the
kingdom of God! It is easier for a camel to go through a needle's eye,
than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.

Those who heard this asked, Who then can be saved? Jesus answered, The
things which are not possible for men are possible for God. And Peter
said, Lo, we have left all, and followed thee. Jesus said to them,
Verily I say to you, There is no one who has left house, or parents,
or brethren, or wife, or children, for the kingdom of God's sake, who
shall not receive a great reward in this present time and in life
everlasting.

Then Jesus took the twelve aside and said to them, Behold, we are
going up to Jerusalem where all things that are written by the
prophets about the Son of man will be accomplished. He shall be
delivered to the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and spitefully
treated, and spit on. They will scourge Him and put Him to death. And,
on the third day, He shall rise again.

And it came to pass, as He was near Jericho, a blind man sat begging
by the wayside. When he was told that Jesus was passing by, he cried,
Jesus, thou son of David, have mercy on me. When some told him to hold
his peace, he cried out again, Thou son of David, have mercy on me.

Jesus stopped and commanded that the blind man be brought to Him. Then
Jesus said to the man, What do you want me to do for you? The man
said, Lord, that I may receive my sight. Jesus said, Receive thy
sight. Thy faith has saved thee. And immediately he received his sight
and followed Him, glorifying God. The people, also, when they saw it,
gave praise to God.

19       In Jericho there was rich man named Zacchaeus, who was the
head of the publicans. When Jesus passed through the town, Zacchaeus
wanted to see Him. Zacchaeus was short of stature and could not see
Jesus through the press of the crowd. So he ran ahead and climbed a
tree to see Jesus as He passed by.

When Jesus came to the place, He looked up, saw him and said,
Zacchaeus, make haste and come down. Today I must abide at your house.
He hurried down from the tree and received Jesus joyfully. When the
people saw this, they all murmured and said that Jesus was gone to be
the guest of a man who is a sinner.

Then Zacchaeus said, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor. If
I have taken anything from any one by false accusation, I restore him
fourfold. Jesus said to him, Today salvation comes to this house, for
now you are also a son of Abraham. The Son of man is come to seek and
to save those who were lost.

As the people listened to these things, Jesus added a parable, because
He was now near Jerusalem and many thought that the kingdom of God
should appear immediately.

He said therefore, A nobleman went a great distance to receive for
himself a kingdom, and to return. He called his ten servants together
and delivered over to them ten talents. He said to them, Handle my
business until I return. But the citizens hated this nobleman, and
sent a message after him, saying, We will not have this man reign over
us.

After he received the kingdom, he returned and called the servants to
him for an accounting of what they had done with the talents. The
first servant said, Lord, thy talent has gained ten more. He said to
him, Very good. Because you have been faithful in this little matter,
you now have authority over ten cities. The second servant said, Lord,
the talent has gained another five. He said likewise to him, You now
have authority over five cities.

Then came another servant who said, Lord, here is your talent which I
have kept tied up in a cloth for I feared thee because thou art a hard
man. You take up what you have not laid down and reap what you have
not sown.

He said to this servant, Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee,
thou wicked servant. If you knew that I was a hard man, taking up what
I laid not down, and reaping what I did not sow, why, then, did you
not put the talents in the bank, that, on my return, I would get my
own back with interest? Give this talent to the servant who gained ten
more. To every one who has, more shall be given. And from him who has
not, even the little he has shall be taken away from him. And those
who are my enemies and say I should reign over them, bring them here
and slay them before me.

It came to pass, when Jesus was near Bethphage and Bethany not far
from Jerusalem, He called two of His disciples and said, Go into the
village over there. When you enter you will find a colt whereon no man
has ever sat. Loose him and bring him here. If any man asks you why
you untie him say, Because the Lord has need of him.

And they that were sent went their way and found everything as He had
said to them. As they were loosing the colt, the owners said to them,
Why do you loose the colt? They said, The Lord has need of him. And
they brought him to Jesus, cast their garments upon the colt, and set
Jesus thereon. And as He went, they spread their clothes in the way.
When He was near the descent of the mount of Olives, the whole
multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud
voice for all the mighty works they had seen. They called out, Blessed
be the King that comes in the name of the Lord. Peace in heaven and
glory in the highest.

Some of the Pharisees from among the multitude said to Him, Master,
rebuke thy disciples. Jesus answered, I tell you, if they held their
peace, the stones would immediately cry out.

When He was near, He beheld the city, and wept over it, saying, If
thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which
belong to thy peace! But now they are hid from your eyes. For the days
shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench about
thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, and
shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee; and
they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another; because you knew
not the time of thy visitation.

Jesus went into the temple and began to cast out those who sold and
those who bought; saying to them, It is written: My house is the house
of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves.

He taught daily in the temple. But the chief priests, scribes, and
ruler of the people sought to destroy Him, but could not find a way to
do it because all the people were very glad to hear Him.

20       One day, as Jesus taught the people in the temple and
preached the gospel, the chief priests and scribes came in with the
elders, and said to Him, Tell us by what authority you do these things
and who gives you this authority? Jesus said to them, I will ask you
something also. Tell me, the baptism of John, was it from heaven, or
of men?

They discussed it among themselves, saying, If we say, From heaven; He
will say, Why, then, did you not believe him? And if we say, Of men;
the people will stone us for they are persuaded that John was a
prophet.

Finally, they told Jesus that they could not tell where it came from.
And Jesus said to them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do
these things. Then Jesus told the people a parable.

A man planted a vineyard, then let it out to husbandmen, and he went
into a far country for a long time. At the season he sent a servant to
the husbandmen to get the fruit of the vineyard, but the husbandmen
beat him, and sent him away empty.

Again he sent another servant. They beat him also, and treated him
shamefully, and sent him away empty. And again he sent a third
servant. They wounded him and cast him out.

Then the lord of the vineyard said, What shall I do? I will send my
beloved son. They will respect him when they see him. But, when the
husbandmen saw him, they said, This is the heir. Let us kill him so
the inheritance will be ours. So they cast him out of the vineyard and
killed him.

What, therefore, shall the lord of the vineyard do to them? He shall
come and destroy these husbandmen, and shall give the vineyard to
others. When the people heard this, they said, God forbid.

Jesus looked at them and said, What is this then that is written: The
stone that the builders rejected, has become the cornerstone? Whoever
falls on that stone will be broken; but on whomever it falls, it will
grind him to powder.

The chief priests and the scribes then wanted to lay hands on Him but
they feared the people who saw clearly that He had spoken this parable
against them.

They had Him watched and they sent out spies. They looked for ways to
take hold of His words so they could deliver Him to the power and
authority of the governor. They asked Him, Master, we know that you
say and teach the way of God. Is it lawful for us to give tribute to
Caesar?

Jesus perceived their craftiness and said, Why test me? Show me a
coin. Whose image and superscription is on it? They answered and said,
Caesar's. Jesus said to them, Render, therefore, to Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's. They
marvelled at His answer and had to hold their peace.

Then some of the Sadducees, who deny the resurrection, came to Him and
said, Master, Moses wrote, If any man's brother dies, having a wife,
and he dies without children, his brother should take his wife, and
raise up seed to his brother. Now there were seven brothers. The first
took a wife and died without children. The second took her as a wife
and he died childless. The third took her; and, in like manner, all
seven. They died and left no children. Last of all the woman died
also. Now, in the resurrection, whose wife is she? Each of the seven
had her as a wife.

Jesus said to them, The children of this world marry, and are given in
marriage. But those who are worthy of obtaining that world and the
resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage,
nor can they die anymore. They are equal to the angels; and are the
children of God, being the children of the resurrection. And,
furthermore, Moses, at the bush, called the Lord the God of Abraham,
and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. He is not a God of the
dead, but of the living. All live for Him.

Then some of the scribes said, Master, thou has said well. And, after
that, they dared not ask Him any more questions. But Jesus said to
them, How can they say that Christ is David's son? David, himself,
said in the book of Psalms, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou on my
right hand until I make your enemies your footstool. David, therefore,
called him Lord, how is he, then, his son?

Then, before the multitude, He said to His disciples, Beware of the
scribes who like to walk in long robes, and love greetings in the
markets, and the highest seats in the synagogues, and the chief rooms
at feasts. They devour widows' houses, and, for a show, make long
prayers. They shall receive greater damnation.

21        Jesus watched as the rich men cast their gifts into the
treasury. Then He noticed a poor widow casting in two small coins. He
said to His disciples, this widow has cast in more than all the rest
put together. The rich have given out of their abundance, but she, out
of her poverty, cast in all the living she had.

Then some spoke about the temple and how it was adorned with golden
tones and beautiful gifts. Jesus said, As for these things which ye
behold, the days will come, when every stone shall be thrown down and
there shall not be left one stone upon another. Then His disciples
asked Him, Master, when shall these things happen? And what sign will
there be when these things shall come to pass?

Jesus said, Take heed so you are not deceived, for many shall come in
my name, saying, I am Christ. Do not go after them. When ye hear of
wars and commotions, do not be terrified for these things must first
come to pass. But the end is not yet come.

Then He said, Nation shall rise up against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom. There will be great earthquakes, famines, and pestilence in
divers places. There will be fearful sights and great signs from
heaven.

But before all these, they shall lay their hands on you, and persecute
you. They shall deliver you up to the synagogues, and into prisons,
and before kings and rulers for my name's sake. It will fall on you to
give a testimony. Settle it in your hearts not to meditate beforehand
about what ye shall answer. I will give you the words and wisdom which
your adversaries shall not be able to refute or deny.

You shall be betrayed by parents, brethren, kinsfolks, and friends;
some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye shall be hated
by all men for my name's sake. But there shall not be a hair on your
head that will perish.

In your patience carefully guard your souls, and when ye see Jerusalem
compassed with armies, then know that the desolation is near. Then let
those who are in Judaea flee to the mountains; and let those who are
in the midst of it get away; and do not let those out in the country
enter in. These are the days of vengeance, when all things that are
written will be fulfilled.

There shall be great distress in the land and wrath upon the people.
They shall fall by the sword, and shall be led away as captives into
all nations. Jerusalem shall be trodden down until the time of the
Gentiles is fulfilled.

There shall be signs in the sun, in the moon, and in the stars. The
entire earth shall be in distress, nations will be in crisis as the
sea and the waves roar. Hearts shall fail from fear and from looking
after those things that are happening on the earth, for the powers of
heaven will be shaken.

And then they shall see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power
and great glory. And when these things begin to come to pass, then
look up, and lift up your heads; for your redemption draws near.

Then Jesus told a parable. He said, Behold the fig tree, and all the
trees. When new shoots come forth, you see and, inside you know, that
summer is close at hand. So, likewise, when ye see these things come
to pass, know that the kingdom of God is near at hand. I say to you,
This generation shall not pass away, until all this is fulfilled.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.

And watch yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
self-indulgence, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and that day
comes and you are unaware and unprepared. For, as a snare, it shall
come on all who dwell on the face of the earth. Watch, therefore, and
pray always, so you may be counted worthy to escape these things that
shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man.

During the day Jesus taught in the temple. At night He went out of the
city and abode in the mount called the mount of Olives. People came to
the temple early in the morning to hear Him.

22       The feast of unleavened bread, which is called the Passover,
was near. The chief priests and scribes sought how they might kill
Him; for they feared the people. Then Satan entered into Judas
Iscariot who was one of the twelve. He approached the chief priests
and captains and said he was willing to betray Jesus to them. They
were glad and agreed to give him money. He gave a promise and then
sought an opportunity to betray Him.

Then came the day of unleavened bread, when the passover must be
killed. Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare the passover
that we may eat. They said to Him, Where do you want us to go to
prepare? Jesus said, When you enter the city, a man, bearing a pitcher
of water, will meet you, follow him into the house he enters. Say to
the good man of the house, The Master says to thee, Where is the
guestchamber where I shall eat the passover with my disciples? He
shall show you a large furnished upper room. Prepare everything there.
They went and found everything as He said to them. And there they
prepared the passover.

When the hour came, Jesus sat down with the twelve apostles. He said
to them, I have looked forward to sharing this passover with you
before I suffer, for I tell you, I will not eat again until the
kingdom of God is fulfilled. He took a cup, gave thanks, and said,
Take this, and divide it among yourselves, for I tell you, I will not
drink of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God comes.

Then He took bread, and gave thanks, and broke it, and gave it to
them, saying, This is my body which is given for you. Do this in
remembrance of me. Likewise, after supper, He took a cup, saying, This
cup is the new testament, my blood which is shed for you.

But, behold, the hand of him that betrays me is with me at the table.
The Son of man goes as it was determined, but woe to that man by whom
He is betrayed! They began to enquire among themselves, which of them
it was that could do this thing. There was also a strife among them
about which of them should be counted the greatest.

Jesus said, The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and
they that exercise authority upon them are called benefactors. But,
among you this shall not be so for he that is greatest among you, let
him be as the younger; and he that is chief, let him be as he that
serves. Which is greater, he that sits at the table or he that serves?
Is it not he that sits at the table? Yet I am among you as He that
serves.

You are the ones who have stood by me in my temptations. I appoint to
you a kingdom, as my Father has appointed to me, so you may eat and
drink at my table in my kingdom and sit on thrones judging the twelve
tribes of Israel.

The Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired to have you,
that he may sift you as wheat. But I have prayed for you, that your
faith would not fail. When you are converted, strengthen your
brothers. Peter said, Lord, I am ready to go with thee, both into
prison, and to death. And Jesus said, I tell you, Peter, the cock
shall not crow this day before you shall three times deny that you
know me.

Then He said to them, When I sent you without purse, and scrip, and
shoes, did you lack anything? And they said, Nothing. Then He said,
But now, he that has a purse let him take it, and likewise, his scrip,
and he that has no sword, let him sell his garment and buy one. For I
say to you, this that is written must yet be accomplished in me: He
was reckoned among the transgressors.

The things concerning me have an end. They said to Him, Lord, look,
here are two swords. And Jesus said to them, It is enough. He went out
and up into the mount of Olives; and His disciples followed Him.

At a certain spot He said to them, Pray that you do not enter into
temptation. He withdrew, about a stone's cast, and knelt down, and
prayed, saying, Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me;
nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done.

There appeared an angel from heaven to strengthen Him because He was
in agony. He prayed more earnestly, and His sweat was like great drops
of blood falling on the ground. When He rose up from prayer and
returned to His disciples, He found them sleeping. Jesus said to them,
Why sleep? Rise and pray lest you enter into temptation.

And while He yet spoke, a crowd appeared, and he that was called
Judas, one of the twelve, went before them and drew near to Jesus to
kiss Him. But Jesus said to him, Judas, do you betray the Son of man
with a kiss?

When the disciples saw what was going to happen, they said to Him,
Lord, shall we strike with the sword? And one of them smote the
servant of the high priest and cut off his right ear. But Jesus said,
Enough. No more of this. He touched the servant's ear and healed him.

Then Jesus said to the chief priests, and captains of the temple, and
the elders in the crowd, Why do you come out armed with staves and
swords as against a thief when I was daily with you in the temple and
you could have stretched forth your hands against me? But this is your
hour, and the power of darkness. Then they took Him, and led Him into
the high priest's house.

Peter followed from afar. As they had kindled a fire in the midst of
the hall and warmed themselves, Peter sat down among them. But a
certain maid noticed him. She looked closely at him and said, This man
was also with Him. Peter denied Him, saying, Woman, I know Him not.
After a little while another saw him and said, Thou art one of them.
Peter said, No, I am not.

About an hour later, another person said, Of a truth, this fellow was
with Him for he is a Galilaean. Peter said, I know not what thou
sayest. And immediately, while he was still speaking, the cock crowed.
The Lord turned and looked upon Peter. And Peter remembered the word
of the Lord, how He said to him, Before the cock crows, thou shalt
deny me three times. Peter went out and wept bitterly.

The men that held Jesus mocked Him, and smote Him. and when they had
blindfolded Him, they struck Him in the face, and said, Prophesy, who
is it that smote thee? And they said many other blasphemies against
Him.

As soon as it was day, the elders and the chief priests and scribes
came together. They led Him into their council, saying, Art thou the
Christ? Tell us. Jesus said, If I tell you, you will not believe, and
if I also ask you, you will not answer me or let me go. Hereafter
shall the Son of man sit on the right hand of the power of God. Then
they all said, Art thou then the Son of God? And He said to them, Ye
say that I am. Then they said, What need we of any further witness? We
ourselves have heard it from His own mouth.

23       The whole multitude arose and led Him to Pilate. They began
to accuse Him, saying, We found this man misleading the people,
opposing the tribute tax to Caesar, saying that He is Christ, a king.

Pilate asked Him, Art thou the King of the Jews? Jesus answered, Thou
sayest it. Then Pilate said to the chief priests and the people, I
find no fault in this man. They became fierce, saying, He stirs up the
people, teaching throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee to this
place. When Pilate heard of Galilee, he asked whether the man was a
Galilaean. As soon as he knew that He belonged to Herod's
jurisdiction, he sent Him to Herod, who was in Jerusalem at that time.

When Herod saw Jesus, he was exceedingly glad. Herod had wanted to see
Him for a long time because he had heard many things about Him. Herod
hoped to see some miracle done by Him. Then he asked Jesus many
questions but He answered nothing. The chief priests and scribes stood
and vehemently accused Him. Herod and his soldiers treated Him
spitefully and mocked Him. They arrayed Him in a gorgeous robe, and
sent Him back to Pilate.

Pilate and Herod, who had been bitter enemies, became friends that
day. When he had called together the chief priests and the rulers and
the people, Pilate said to them, You have brought this man to me as
one who stirs up the people, and, having examined Him before you, I
have found no fault in this man regarding those things of which you
accuse Him, nor did Herod for he sent Him back. I will, therefore,
chastise Him and release Him. (For of necessity he must release one to
them at the feast.)

They cried out all at once, saying, Away with this man. Release
Barabbas to us. Pilate therefore, wanting to release Jesus, spoke
again to them. But they cried louder, saying, Crucify Him, crucify
Him. Pilate said to them the third time, Why, what evil has He done? I
have found no cause to put Him to death. I will chastise Him and let
Him go.

Immediately and with loud voices, they demanded that He be crucified.
The voices of the chief priests prevailed and Pilate gave sentence
that it be as they demanded. He released to them Barabbas, who was in
prison for sedition and murder, and turned Jesus over to them. And as
they led Him away, they laid hold upon a man named Simon, a Cyrenian,
who was coming out of the country. They laid the cross on him to carry
for Jesus.

Many women followed Jesus, crying and lamenting. Jesus turned to them
and said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for
yourselves and your children. The days are coming, in which they shall
say, Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bore, and the
breasts that never nursed. Then they shall say to the mountains, Fall
on us; and to the hills, Cover us. For if these things happen when the
wood is green, what will happen when it is dry? There were also two
others, both criminals, who were led with Him to be put to death.

When they came to the place called Calvary, they crucified Him and the
two criminals, one on the right hand, and the other on the left. Then
Jesus said, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. They
divided His garments by casting lots. The people who stood looking on,
and the rulers with them, derided Him, saying, He saved others. Let
Him save Himself, if He is Christ, the chosen of God. And the soldiers
mocked Him, coming to Him and offering Him vinegar. They said, If thou
be the king of the Jews, save thyself. Over Him, they hung a sign
written in letters of Greek, Latin, and Hebrew: THIS IS THE KING OF
THE JEWS.

One of the criminals said to Him, If thou be Christ, save thyself and
us. But the other criminal rebuked him, saying, Have you no fear of
God for you are in the same condemnation? We have been justly
condemned for our deeds but this man has done nothing. He said to
Jesus, Lord, remember me when you come into your kingdom. And Jesus
said to him, Today you will be with me in paradise.

It was about the sixth hour. There was a darkness over all the earth
until the ninth hour. The sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple
was torn in the middle when Jesus cried out with a loud voice, Father,
into thy hands I commend my spirit, and He took His last breath.

When the centurion saw what was done, he glorified God, saying,
Certainly this was a righteous man. All the people that came together
to that sight, beholding the things which were done, returned home
beating their breasts. And the women that followed Him from Galilee,
stood far off and watched these things.

There was a just and good man named Joseph, a member of the council
who did not consent to this deed. He was from the Jewish city of
Arimathaea and was awaiting the kingdom of God. He went to Pilate and
asked for the body of Jesus. Joseph took the body down, wrapped it in
linen, and laid it in a new sepulchre that was hewn in stone. It was
the day of preparation and the sabbath was about to begin. The women
who came with Jesus from Galilee followed along. They beheld the
sepulchre and how His body was laid. They returned and prepared spices
and ointments, then rested on the sabbath day according to the
commandment.

24       On the first day of the week, very early in the morning, they
went to the sepulchre with the spices they had prepared, and certain
others were with them. They found the stone rolled away and they went
in, but did not find the body of the Lord Jesus. The women were
perplexed and, behold, two men stood by them in shining garments. In
fear, they bowed down their heads. Then the two said to them, Why do
you seek the living among the dead? He is not here, but is risen.
Remember how He spoke to you when He was yet in Galilee, saying, The
Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, be
crucified, and the third day rise again? And they remembered His
words. They left the sepulchre and told all these things to the
eleven, and to all the rest. It was Mary Magdalene; Joanna; Mary, the
mother of James; and other women that were with them who told these
things to the apostles. Their words seemed like idle tales and they
did not believe them.

Then Peter arose and ran to the sepulchre. Stooping down, he saw the
linen clothes laid by themselves and he left, wondering about what
could have happened.

That same day two of them went to a village called Emmaus, which was a
few miles from Jerusalem. They talked over the things that had
happened. And, while they were talking, Jesus drew near and walked
with them. But their eyes were prevented from recognizing Him. Jesus
said to them, What were you discussing as you walked along that made
you look so sad? One of them, whose name was Cleopas, said to Him, Are
you a stranger in Jerusalem and do not know the things that have come
to pass these days? He said to them, What things?

They said, About Jesus of Nazareth, who was a prophet mighty in deed
and word before God and all the people, and how the chief priests and
our rulers delivered Him to be condemned to death and crucified Him.
We trusted that He would redeem Israel and, besides all this, today is
the third day after these things were done. Some of the women of our
group astonished us. They went early to the sepulchre and, when they
did not find His body, they came back and said they had also seen a
vision of angels who said that He was alive. Then some of those who
were with us went to the sepulchre and found it was as the women said,
but they did not see Him.

Then He said to them, O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that
the prophets have spoken. Should the Messiah not have suffered these
things and not enter into His glory? Beginning with Moses and all the
prophets, He pointed out to them all the things in the scriptures
concerning Himself.

They drew near the village where they were going and He made as though
He would have gone further. But they said, Stay with us. It is almost
evening and the day is far spent. Jesus went in with them. As He sat
with them, He took bread, blessed it, and broke it, and gave it to
them. Their eyes were opened and they knew Him; and He vanished out of
their sight. They said to eachother, Did our hearts not burn within us
while He talked with us along the way and while He opened the
scriptures to us?

They rose up right away and returned to Jerusalem. They found the
eleven and those who were with them, saying, The Lord is risen indeed,
and has appeared to Simon. Then they told what happened to them and
how they recognized Him by the breaking of the bread.

Then, as they spoke, Jesus stood in the midst of them and said, Peace
be to you. But they were terrified and supposed they saw a spirit. But
He said to them, Why are you troubled? And why do doubts arise in your
hearts? Behold my hands and my feet. Touch me and see me; for a spirit
does not have flesh and bones as you see I have.

When He had thus spoken, He showed them His hands and His feet. And
while they were still astonished, He said to them, Have you anything
to eat? They gave Him a piece of broiled fish and a piece of a
honeycomb. He took it and ate it before them. He said, These are the
words I spoke to you while I was yet with you, that all things must be
fulfilled which were written in the law of Moses and in the prophets,
and in the psalms, concerning me.

Then He opened their understanding, that they might know the
scriptures. He said to them, Thus it is written that the Messiah would
suffer and rise from the dead on the third day and that repentance for
the forgiveness of sins should be preached in His name among all
nations, beginning from Jerusalem.

You are witnesses to these things. Behold, I send the promise of my
Father upon you. Stay in the city of Jerusalem until you are filled
with power from on high. He led them out as far as Bethany, and He
lifted up His hands, and blessed them.

While He blessed them, He was parted from them and taken up into
heaven. They worshipped Him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy,
and were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God.

Amen.
  _________________________________________________________________

                         edited by Lightheart
                    www.PracticeGodsPresence.com










End of Project Gutenberg's The Gospel of Luke for Readers, by Lightheart

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOSPEL OF LUKE FOR READERS ***

***** This file should be named 6529.txt or 6529.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/5/2/6529/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
