The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gospel of Mark for Readers, by Lightheart

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **

Title: The Gospel of Mark for Readers

Author: Lightheart

Posting Date: August 21, 2012 [EBook #6530]
Release Date: September, 2004
First Posted: December 25, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOSPEL OF MARK FOR READERS ***














Copyright (C) 2002 by Lightheart.



                     www.PracticeGodsPresence.com
                          The Gospel of Mark
______________________________________________________________________

1.        The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God;
As it is written in the prophets, Behold, I send my messenger who
shall prepare the way before thee. The voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord, make His paths straight. John
did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance
for the remission of sins. After confessing their sins many from the
land of Judaea and from Jerusalem were baptized by him in the river of
Jordan.

John was clothed with camel's hair and wore animal hides around his
loins and he ate locusts and wild honey. He preached, saying, There
comes one mightier than I, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy
to stoop down and unloose. I have baptized you with water but He shall
baptize you with the Holy Ghost.

And it came to pass in those days that Jesus came from Nazareth of
Galilee and was baptized by John in the river of Jordan. Immediately,
upon His coming up out of the water, John saw the heavens open and the
Spirit, like a dove, descend upon Him. And there came a voice from
heaven saying, Thou art my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.

The spirit drove Him into the wilderness. There, among wild beasts, He
was tempted by Satan for forty days. Then the angels ministered to
Him. Now, after that, John was put in prison and Jesus came into
Galilee. He began preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God and
saying, The time is fulfilled. The kingdom of God is at hand. Repent
and believe the gospel.

He walked by the sea of Galilee, He saw Simon and Andrew, his brother,
casting a net into the sea for they were fishermen. And Jesus said to
them, Come ye after me and I will make you fishers of men. Immediately
they left their nets and followed Him.

When He had gone on a little farther, He saw James, the son of
Zebedee, and John, his brother, in a boat mending their nets. Jesus
called them. They immediately left their father, Zebedee, in the boat
with the hired servants and went after Him.

They went into Capernaum. On the sabbath day He entered the synagogue
and taught. And they were astonished at His doctrine for He taught
them as one with authority and not as the scribes. And in their
synagogue there was a man with an unclean spirit. He cried out and
said, Let us alone. What have we to do with thee, Jesus of Nazareth?
Art thou come to destroy us? I know who thou art, the Holy One of God.
And Jesus rebuked him and said, Hold thy peace and come out of him.
And when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud voice,
he came out of him.

The people were amazed, so much so that they questioned among
themselves, saying, What is this? What new doctrine is this? He even
commands with authority the unclean spirits and they obey Him.
Immediately His fame spread throughout the region around Galilee.

After they left the synagogue, they went to the house of Simon and
Andrew. Simon's wife's mother lay sick with a fever, and presently
they told Jesus about her. He came and took her by the hand. Then He
lifted her up and, immediately, the fever left her. And she, then,
ministered to them.

That evening around sunset, many people were brought to Him who were
diseased and some who were possessed with devils. And all the city
gathered together at the door. Jesus healed many that were sick of
divers diseases. He cast out many devils and did not allow the devils
to speak because they knew Him.

The next morning, rising before dawn, He went to a solitary place to
pray. Simon and those who were with him followed. When they found Him,
they said, All men seek for thee. And Jesus said to them, Let us go on
to the next towns that I may preach there also: for therefore came I
forth.

And Jesus preached in the synagogues throughout Galilee, and cast out
devils. There came to Him a leper. Kneeling down and beseeching Him,
the leper said, If thou wilt, thou can make me clean. Jesus was moved
with compassion. He put out His hand, touched him, and said, I will.
Be thou clean.

And, as soon as He had spoken, the leprosy departed and the man was
cleansed. Jesus directly charged him to say nothing to any man. Jesus
said, Go thy way. Show thyself to the priest and offer for thy
cleansing those things which Moses commanded for a testimony to them.

But he went out and began to broadcast the matter. He said so much
that Jesus could no more openly enter the city but had to stay out in
desert places. And they came to Him from every quarter.

2        After some days Jesus entered Capernaum again and His arrival
was widely announced. The people knew that He returned to the house.
And, immediately, many gathered, so much that there was no room to
receive them, no, not so much as outside the door. Jesus preached the
word to them.

There came to Him one sick with palsy who was carried by four others.
When they could not get near Jesus because of the crowd, they
uncovered the roof above where Jesus stood. Having broken through,
they lowered down the bed wherein the sick man lay. When Jesus saw
their faith, He said to the sick man, Son, thy sins are forgiven thee.

There were certain of the scribes sitting there. They wondered, Why
does this man speak blasphemies? Who can forgive sins but God only?
When Jesus realized that they so reasoned, He said to them, Why reason
ye these things in your hearts? Whether it is easier to say to the
sick man, Thy sins are forgiven thee; or, Arise. Take up thy bed and
walk?

So that ye may know that the Son of man has power on earth to forgive
sins, (Jesus turned to the sick man and said,) I say to thee, Arise.
Take up thy bed and go thy way to thine own house. At that moment, he
arose, took up the bed, and went forth before them all. They were
amazed. They glorified God, saying, We never saw anything like this.

Jesus went to the seaside again and the multitude gathered around Him,
and He taught them. Later, He saw Levi, the son of Alphaeus, sitting
at the receipt of custom, and said to him, Follow me. And he arose and
followed Him.

And it came to pass, that, as Jesus sat at supper in Levi's house,
many publicans and sinners also joined together with Jesus and His
disciples. There now were many who followed Him. And when the scribes
and Pharisees saw Him eating with publicans and sinners, they asked
His disciples, How is it that He eats and drinks with publicans and
sinners? When Jesus heard this, He said to them, Those who are whole
have no need of a physician, only those who are sick. I came not to
call the righteous, but to call sinners to repentance.

The disciples of John and of the Pharisees came to Jesus and asked,
Why do the disciples of John and the Pharisees fast, but thy disciples
do not? And Jesus said to them, Can the children of the bridechamber
fast while the bridegroom is with them? As long as they have the
bridegroom with them, they cannot fast. But the day will come, when
the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then they shall
fast.

No man sews a piece of new cloth on an old garment: else the new piece
that filled it up takes away from the old and the rent is made worse.
And no man puts new wine into old bottles: else the new wine bursts
the bottles, the wine is spilled, and the bottles are marred. New wine
must be put into new bottles.

And it came to pass, that He went through the corn fields on the
sabbath day; and His disciples began to pluck the ears of corn as they
went along. The Pharisees said to Him, Behold, why do they do that
which is not lawful on the sabbath day? And Jesus responded, Have ye
never read what David, and they that were with him, did when they had
need and were hungry? How he went into the house of God in the days of
Abiathar, the high priest, and ate the showbread? How this was only
lawful for the priests to eat? And how David also gave it to those who
were with him? Then Jesus said to them, The sabbath was made for man,
and not man for the sabbath; therefore, the Son of man is Lord of the
sabbath also.

3        Then Jesus entered the synagogue again. Inside was a man with
a withered hand. They watched to see if Jesus would heal him on the
sabbath day so they might accuse Him. And Jesus said to the man with
the withered hand, Step Forward. Then Jesus said to them, Is it lawful
to do good on the sabbath days, or to do evil? To save life, or to
kill? But they remained silent.

Jesus looked at them with anger and was grieved for the hardness of
their hearts. He said to the man, Stretch forth thy hand. As the man
stretched it out, his hand was restored as whole as his other hand.

The Pharisees left and immediately took counsel with the Herodians
about how they might get rid of Him. But Jesus withdrew with His
disciples to the sea. A great multitude from Galilee, Judaea,
Jerusalem, Idumaea, and from beyond Jordan, and those around Tyre and
Sidon came to Him when they heard all the things He did.

Jesus told His disciples He needed to get out into a small boat lest
the multitude should throng Him. For He had healed many and many who
had plagues now pressed upon Him just to touch Him. Unclean spirits,
when they saw Him, fell down before Him and cried, Thou art the Son of
God. Jesus directly charged them that they should not make Him known.

Then Jesus went up into a mountain. He called to whom He would and
they came to Him. Here He ordained twelve to be with Him, and that He
might send forth to preach, to heal sickness, and to cast out devils.
Then He took these twelve into a house: Simon surnamed Peter; James,
the son of Zebedee, John, the brother of James (He named them
Boanerges, which is, The sons of thunder); Andrew; Philip;
Bartholomew; Matthew; Thomas; James, the son of Alphaeus; Thaddaeus;
Simon the Canaanite; and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed Him.

Then the multitude came again so that they could not eat bread
undisturbed. When His friends heard about this, they lay hold of Him
and said, This is too much. And the scribes who came down from
Jerusalem said, He has Beelzebub, and, by the prince of the devils, He
casts out devils.

Jesus called them to Him and said, How can Satan cast out Satan? And
if a kingdom be divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand. And
if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot stand. And if
Satan rise up against himself, and be divided, he cannot stand and is
finished. Nor can a man enter into a strong man's house and spoil his
goods unless he first binds up the strong man so he can then spoil his
house.

Verily I say to you, All sins shall be forgiven to the sons of men,
and blasphemies also, however they blaspheme. But he that blasphemes
against the Holy Ghost will never have forgiveness, but is in danger
of eternal damnation. He said this because they said, He has an
unclean spirit.

His brethren and His mother came and, standing outside, they called
for Him. The multitude that sat around Him said, Behold, thy mother
and thy brethren are outside and seek for thee. Jesus answered, Who is
my mother, or my brethren? Then He looked around on those who sat
about Him and said, Behold, my mother and my brethren! Whosoever shall
do the will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother.

4        Later, as Jesus was again by the seaside, there gathered a
great multitude. He entered into a boat and began to address the large
crowd on shore. He taught them many things by parables. Jesus began,
Hearken. Behold, there went out a sower of seeds. It came to pass, as
he sowed, some seed fell by the wayside. The fowls of the air came and
devoured it. Some seed fell on stony ground where there was no good
soil. It sprang up quickly. But, because it had no roots, it was
scorched by the sunlight and withered away.

Some seed fell among thorns. The thorns grew up and choked it, and it
yielded no fruit. Other seed fell on good ground. This did yield fruit
that sprang up and increased; and brought forth some thirty, some
sixty, and some a hundredfold. And Jesus finished by saying, He that
has ears to hear, let him hear.

After this, when the twelve were alone with Jesus, they asked Him
about the parable and why He told the people a parable. Jesus said to
them, To you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God.
But, to those who are without, the teachings are in parables: That
seeing they may see, and not perceive; and hearing they may hear, and
not understand; lest at any time they should be converted, and their
sins should be forgiven them.

And Jesus said to them, Know ye not this parable? The sower sows the
word. And these are the people by the wayside, where the word is sown.
When they have heard, Satan comes immediately and takes away the word
that was sown in their hearts.

And these are likewise those who are sown on stony ground. When they
have heard the word, they receive it with gladness. But they have no
root and endure only for a while. When affliction or persecution
arises for the word's sake, they are offended.

And these are also the seed sown among the thorns of the cares of this
world, the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things. All
these thorns enter in, choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful. And,
finally, are those who are sown on good ground. In hearing the word,
they receive it and bring forth fruit, some thirtyfold, some sixty,
and some a hundredfold.

Then Jesus said, Is a candle lighted to be put under a bushel, or
under a bed instead of set on a candlestick? You see, if there is
nothing hidden which shall not be manifested, then there is nothing
kept secret, which shall not be uncovered. If any man has ears to
hear, let him hear.

And He said to them, Take heed what ye hear. With what measure ye
mete, it shall be measured to you. And to you that hear, more shall be
given. For he that has, to him shall be given. He that has not, from
him shall be taken away even that which he has.

Then Jesus said, Such is the kingdom of God like a man who casts seed
into the ground. He passes nights and days, and the seed springs up
and grows, he knows not how. For the earth brings forth fruit of
herself; first the blade, then the ear, and, after that, the full ear
of corn. When the fruit is ripe, immediately he puts the sickle to it
because the harvest is come.

And He said, Whereto shall we liken the kingdom of God? With what
shall we compare it? It is like a grain of mustard seed, which, when
it is sown in the earth, it is less than all the seeds on earth. But
when it is sown, it grows up and becomes greater than all. It shoots
out branches so great that the fowls of the air may lodge under the
shadow of it. To those without, Jesus spoke in parables. He explained
all these things to His disciples when they were alone.

That evening, Jesus told His disciples that they should cross over to
the other side. And when they sent away the multitude, they took Him
even as He was in the boat. There were also other little ships. And
there arose a great storm. Wind and waves beat into the boat and it
was now full of water. Jesus was in the back part of the boat, asleep
on a pillow. They woke Him and said, Master, carest thou not that we
perish? Then Jesus arose, rebuked the wind, and said to the sea,
Peace, be still.

The wind ceased and there was a great calm. Jesus said to them, Why
are ye so fearful? How is it that ye have no faith? Then those nearby
said one to another, What kind of man is this that even the wind and
the sea obey?

5        They arrived on the other side of the sea, into the country
of the Gadarenes. When Jesus got out of the boat, He was immediately
met by a man who came out of his dwelling place in the tombs. The man
had an unclean spirit and no man could bind him. Whenever he had been
bound with fetters and chains, he plucked the chains asunder and broke
the fetters in pieces. No one could tame him and night and day he was
in the mountains or in the tombs, crying, and cutting himself with
stones.

Yet, when he saw Jesus from afar, he ran and worshipped Him. The man
cried with a loud voice, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son
of the most high God? I adjure thee by God that thou torment me not.
Jesus turned to the man saying, Come out of the man, thou unclean
spirit. Then Jesus asked, What is thy name? The man answered, My name
is Legion: for we are many. And he besought Jesus that he not send
them away out of the country.

Nearby, in the mountains, there was a great herd of swine feeding. The
devils, in one voice, said, Send us to those swine that we may enter
into them. Right away, Jesus gave them leave. The unclean spirits left
the man and entered into the swine. The herd ran violently down a
steep slope into the sea and drowned (there were about two thousand).

The swine tenders fled and told it in the city and in the country. The
people went out to see what was done. When they approached Jesus, they
saw the man that was possessed with the devil and had the legion,
sitting, clothed, and in his right mind. The people became fearful.
Those who saw it told the others how it befell the man who was
possessed, and also told about the swine. The people then begged Jesus
to leave their coasts.

When He returned to the boat, the man who had been possessed prayed
Jesus to let him stay with Him. Howbeit, Jesus suffered him not but
said, Go home to thy friends. Tell them the great things the Lord has
done for thee, and tell them He has had compassion on thee. Then the
man departed and began to tell all in Decapolis the great things Jesus
had done for him. Then all men did marvel.

After Jesus crossed again by boat to the other side, many people
gathered to Him. And, behold, there came one of the rulers of the
synagogue, Jairus by name. When he saw Jesus, he fell at His feet and
besought Him saying, My little daughter is at the point of death. I
pray thee, come and lay thy hands on her that she may be healed and
shall live. Jesus went with him and the people followed and thronged
Him.

In the crowd was a woman who had an issue of blood for twelve years.
She had been to many physicians, spent all that she had, and nothing
was bettered, but, instead, grew worse. She had heard of Jesus and,
pressing through the crowd, she came up behind Him and touched His
garment. She said, If I may but touch His clothes, I shall be whole.
After she did this the fountain of her blood was dried up and she felt
in her body that she was healed.

Presently, Jesus, knowing in Himself that virtue had gone out of Him,
turned about and said, Who touched my clothes? His disciples said,
Thou seest the multitude thronging thee and ask Who touched me? Then
Jesus spotted her who had done this thing. The woman, in fear and
trembling, but knowing what was done in her, came and fell down before
Him and spoke the truth. He said to her, Daughter, thy faith has made
thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague.

While He yet spoke, messengers came from the ruler of the synagogue's
house and announced, Thy daughter is dead. Why trouble the Master any
further? As soon as Jesus heard the message, He said to the ruler of
the synagogue, Be not afraid, only believe. Jesus allowed no one to
follow Him except Peter, James, and John, the brother of James. When
they got to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, Jesus saw the
tumult and many weeping and wailing.

Inside the house Jesus said to them, Why make this commotion and weep?
The damsel is not dead, but sleeps. They laughed Him to scorn. But
when He had put them all out, He took the father and mother of the
damsel and those who were with Him and entered where she was lying.
Then Jesus took her by the hand and said, Talitha cumi; Damsel, I say
to thee, arise.

Immediately the damsel, who was twelve years old, arose and walked.
They were astonished and Jesus charged them directly that they should
tell no one. Then He said that she should be given something to eat.

6        And He went, followed by His disciples, into His own country.
On the sabbath day, He began to teach in the synagogue. Many local
people heard the sayings of Jesus and were astonished. They asked,
From whence has this man learned these things? What wisdom is this
that is given to Him that even such mighty works are wrought by His
hands? Is this not the carpenter, the son of Mary, and the brother of
James, Joses, Juda, and Simon? Are His sisters not right here among
us? Thus, they were offended at Him. And Jesus said, A prophet is
without honour in his own country, among his own kin, and in his own
house.

Jesus went there to do mighty works. He marvelled at their unbelief
and, because of this, could do little but lay His hands upon and heal
a few of the sick and teach in the villages around the area.

In a little while, Jesus called to Him the twelve to begin to go forth
by two and two. He gave them power over unclean spirits. He told them
that they should take nothing for their journey except a staff; no
scrip, no bread, no money in their purse. He instructed them to be
shod with only sandals; and not put on two coats.

He said to them, In what place soever ye enter into a house, abide
there until ye depart from that place. And whosoever shall not receive
you, nor hear you, when ye leave there, shake off the dust from your
feet as a testimony against them. Verily I say to you, It shall be
more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment than for
that place. The disciples went out and preached that men should
repent. They cast out many devils, anointed many sick people with oil,
and healed many of them.

King Herod heard of Him (for His name was spread abroad) and said that
John the Baptist was risen from the dead and, therefore, mighty works
were shown forth in him. Others said, It is Elias. And others said, It
is one of the prophets. But when Herod heard all this he said, It is
John whom I beheaded. He is risen from the dead.

Herod himself had sent forth and laid hold of John. He had him bound
and imprisoned for Herodias, his brother Philip's wife's sake whom
Herod had married. John told Herod that it was not lawful for him to
have his brother's wife. Herodias, therefore, held this against John
and wanted him killed. Herod, however, feared John and knew he was a
just and holy man. Herod saw and heard John many times and heard him
gladly.

Then Herod, on his birthday, made a supper for his lords, high
captains, and chief estates of Galilee. The daughter of Herodias came
and danced. Herod and those who sat with him were pleased. The king
said to the damsel, Ask of me whatsoever thou wilt and I will give it
thee. He swore to her that whatever she should ask of him, he would
give her even up to half of his kingdom. She went to her mother,
Herodias, and said, What shall I ask? Her mother said, The head of
John the Baptist. Then she hurried back to the king and said, I will
that thou give me the head of John the Baptist on a charger.

The king was exceedingly sorry. Yet for his oath's sake, and for the
sake of those who sat with him, he would not reject her. The king sent
for an executioner and commanded his head to be brought. The
executioner went and beheaded John in the prison. He brought his head
on a charger and gave it to the damsel. Then the damsel gave it to her
mother. When his disciples heard of this, they came and took up his
corpse and laid it in a tomb.

The apostles gathered together, went to Jesus, and told him all
things, what they had done and what they had taught. Then Jesus said
to them, Come ye away into a desert place and rest a while. They had
been coming and going and had no time even to eat. Thus they departed
into a desert place, going privately by boat. But the people saw them
departing, outran them, and came together to Him.

Jesus saw the multitude that had gathered and was moved with
compassion toward them because they were as sheep without a shepherd.
He began to teach them. And when the day was far spent, His disciples
came to Him and said, This is a desert place and it is very late. Send
them away so they may go into the country and into the villages to buy
themselves bread for they have nothing to eat.

Jesus answered, Give ye them to eat. And they said, Shall we go and
buy two hundred pennyworth of bread and give it to them to eat? He
asked them, How many loaves have ye? Go and see. They came back and
told Him, Five, and two fish.

Jesus commanded them to make all the people sit down in groups upon
the green grass. They sat down in ranks, by hundreds and by fifties.
Then, when He had taken the five loaves and the two fish, He looked up
to heaven and blessed it. He broke the loaves and gave them to His
disciples to set before them all. And He divided the two fish among
them. They all ate and were filled. After, they took up twelve baskets
full of the fragments of bread and fish. Those who ate of the loaves
were about five thousand men.

And immediately He instructed His disciples to get into the boat and
go to the other side to Bethsaida while He sent the people away and He
departed into a mountain to pray. At evening time the boat was in the
midst of the sea. Jesus was alone on the land.

He looked out and saw them rowing with great difficulty for the wind
was contrary to them. At about the fourth watch of the night He came
to them, walking upon the sea, and would have passed by them. But,
when they saw Him walking upon the sea, they supposed it was a spirit.
They cried out and were troubled.

Immediately Jesus talked with them and said, Be of good cheer. It is
I. Be not afraid. And He went up to them in the boat. Then the wind
ceased and they were amazed beyond measure. They wondered and did not
even remember the miracle of the loaves for their hearts were
hardened.

They reached the other shore and came into the land of Gennesaret. As
they drew into shore and got out of the boat, the people immediately
recognized Jesus. After they ran to all the area around the region,
many arrived carrying in beds those that were sick. And wheresoever He
entered into villages or cities or country, they laid the sick in the
streets and besought Him to allow the sick to touch but the border of
His garment. And as many as touched Him, He made them whole.

7        Pharisees and some scribes from Jerusalem observed that some
of His disciples ate bread with unwashed hands. They found fault with
this defilement for the Pharisees, and all the Jews, do not eat unless
they wash their hands, holding the tradition of the elders along with
the washing of cups, and pots, brasen vessels, and of tables. Then the
Pharisees and scribes asked Him, Why do thy disciples not walk
according to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashed
hands?

Jesus answered, Well has Esaias prophesied of you hypocrites. It is
written, This people honor me with their lips but their heart is far
from me. Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines
the commandments of men. In laying aside the commandment of God, ye
hold the tradition of men, as the washing of pots and cups and many
other things that ye do. And He said to them, Full well ye reject the
commandment of God in order to keep your own tradition.

Moses said, Honour thy father and thy mother and, whoso curses father
or mother, let him die. But ye say, If a man says to his father or
mother, It is Corban, a gift, by whatsoever thou might be gained by
me; he shall be free. Ye allow him to do nothing for his father or
mother and make the word of God worthless through your tradition and
many other things like this.

Then He called all the people to Him and said, Hearken to me every one
of you. Understand that there is nothing from outside a man that,
entering into him, can defile him; but the things which come out of
him are those that defile the man. If any man has ears to hear, let
him hear.

After He went into the house, His disciples asked Him about the
parable. Jesus replied, Are ye without understanding also? Do ye not
perceive that whatsoever thing from without enters into the man it
cannot defile him because it enters not into his heart, but into the
belly and goes out into the draught, purging all meats? But that which
comes out of the man is what defiles him. It is from inside, out of
the heart of men, that proceed: evil thoughts, adulteries,
fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit,
lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness. All these
evil things come from within and defile the man.

From there He arose and went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon. He
entered into a house and would have no man know it. But He could not
be hid for a certain woman whose young daughter had an unclean spirit
had heard of Him. She found Him and came and fell at His feet. The
woman was a Greek, a Syrophenician by nation; and she besought Him to
cast forth the devil from her daughter.

But Jesus said to her, Let the children first be filled. It is not fit
to take the child's bread and cast it to the dogs. She answered, Yes,
Lord. Yet the dogs under the table eat the child's crumbs. Jesus then
said to her, For saying this, go thy way. The devil is gone from thy
daughter. When she returned home she found her daughter at rest upon
the bed and the devils cast out.

Upon leaving the coasts of Tyre and Sidon, He came to the sea of
Galilee through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis. Here they
brought a man that was deaf and had a speech impediment. They besought
Him to put His hand upon him. Jesus took the man apart from the
multitude and put His fingers into the man's ears. Looking up to
heaven, He sighed and said, Ephphatha, Be opened.

Immediately the man's ears were opened. His tongue was loosed and he
spoke plain. Then Jesus charged those present to tell no man. However,
the more He charged them, the more they published it saying, He has
done all things well. He makes the deaf to hear, and the dumb to
speak.

8        Jesus called His disciples to Him and said, I have compassion
on the multitude because they have been with me three days and they
have nothing to eat. If I send them away to their own houses fasting,
they will faint by the way. Many of them came from afar. His disciples
answered Him, How can these men be supplied with bread here in the
wilderness? Jesus asked them, How many loaves have ye? They answered,
Seven.

Then Jesus told the people to sit down on the ground. He took the
seven loaves and gave thanks. He broke the loaves and gave them to His
disciples. Then His disciples set them before the people. They also
had a few small fish which Jesus blessed and told the disciples to set
them also before the people. So they did eat and were filled. After
this the disciples took up the broken fragments and filled seven
baskets. The number of those who had eaten was about four thousand.

After Jesus sent the multitude on their way, He immediately got into a
boat with His disciples and came into Dalmanutha. Here the Pharisees
came forth and began to question Him, seeking of Him a sign from
heaven, and testing Him. To this Jesus sighed deeply in His spirit and
said, Why does this generation seek after a sign? Verily I say to you,
There shall be no sign given to this generation. Then He left them and
departed again by boat to the other side.

Now the disciples had forgotten to bring any bread. They had no more
than one loaf in the boat with them. Jesus uttered, Take heed. Beware
of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod. The disciples
reasoned among themselves and said, It is because we have no bread.

When Jesus realized their misunderstanding, He said to them, Why
reason ye because ye have no bread? Perceive ye not or understand?
Have ye still hardened hearts? Having eyes, see ye not? And having
ears, hear ye not? And do ye not remember when I broke the five loaves
among five thousand and how many baskets full of fragments ye took up?
And do ye not remember the seven loaves among four thousand and how
many baskets full of fragments ye took up? After they recalled the
numbers and told Him, Jesus said, Then how can it be that ye do not
understand?

At Bethsaida some people brought a blind man to Jesus, and besought
Him to touch the man. He took the blind man by the hand and led him
out of the town. When He had spit on the man's eyes and put His hands
upon him, Jesus asked the man if he saw anything. The man looked up
and said, I see men as trees, walking. After that Jesus put His hands
again upon his eyes then made him look up. Now he was restored and saw
every man clearly. Jesus sent him away to his house saying, Neither go
into the town, nor tell it to any in the town.

Jesus and His disciples went out into the towns of Caesarea Philippi.
Along the way He asked His disciples, Who do men say that I am? They
answered, Some say John the Baptist, but some say Elias, and others
say one of the prophets. Then Jesus said to them, But who do you say
that I am? Peter answered, Thou art the Christ. Jesus charged them to
tell no man of Him. Then He began to teach them that the Son of man
must suffer many things; that He must be rejected by the elders, the
chief priests, and scribes; and that He must be killed and, after
three days, rise again.

Jesus said all this very openly to His disciples. Then Peter took Him
aside and began to rebuke Him. But Jesus turned around, looked at His
disciples, and rebuked Peter saying, Get behind me, Satan. Thou savor
not the things of God, but the things of men.

Now, along with His disciples, He called the people to Him also and
said, Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself and take up
his cross and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose
it. Whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel's, the
same shall save it. For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain
the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul?

Whosoever, therefore, shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this
adulterous and sinful generation; the Son of man shall be ashamed of
him also when He comes in the glory of His Father with the holy
angels. Verily I say to you, There are some who stand here who shall
not taste of death until they have seen the kingdom of God come into
power.

9       After six days Jesus took Peter, James, and John up into a
high mountain and there He was transfigured before them. His raiment
became shining and, exceeding the white of snow, such as nothing on
earth could be more white. And there appeared Elias and Moses. They
were talking with Jesus. Peter said, Master, it is good for us to be
here. Let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, one for Moses, and
one for Elias.

Peter did not know what else to say because they were afraid. But,
quickly, a cloud overshadowed them and a voice came out of the cloud
saying, This is my beloved Son. Hear Him.

Then, suddenly, when they looked around, they saw only Jesus. Coming
down from the mountain Jesus instructed them to tell no man what
things they had seen until the Son of man had risen from the dead.

Among themselves they questioned eachother about what the rising from
the dead could mean. Then they asked Him if it was not so what the
scribes said that Elias must come first?

Jesus answered them, Verily, Elias comes first and restores all
things. And it is also written that the Son of man must suffer many
things and be set at nought. However, I say to you, Elias is indeed
come and they have done to him exactly what was written.

As He approached the disciples, He saw a great multitude gathered
about them. And He saw that there were scribes questioning them. Then,
when they beheld Him, all the people were greatly amazed and
immediately ran to salute Him.

Jesus asked the scribes, Why question them? And one of the multitude
answered, Master, I have brought my son who has a dumb spirit.
Wherever he takes him he tears him. He foams at the mouth, gnashes his
teeth, and wastes away. I spoke to thy disciples and they could not
cast him out. Jesus stepped forward and cried, O faithless generation,
how long shall I be with you? How long shall I suffer you? Bring him
to me.

As soon as Jesus looked at him, the spirit immediately tore forth. The
boy fell on the ground wallowing in foam. Jesus asked the father when
this came upon the son. The man answered, As a child. Often it has
cast him into the fire and into the water to destroy him. But if thou
can do anything, have compassion on us and help us.

Jesus said to the man, If thou can believe, all things are possible to
him that believes. Immediately, with tears flowing, the father of the
child cried out, Lord, I believe. Help thou my unbelief.

Then Jesus rebuked the foul spirit and said, Thou dumb and deaf
spirit, I charge thee, come out of him. Enter into him no more. The
spirit cried, lashed out, and then came out of him. The boy lay so
still that many said, He is dead. But Jesus took him by the hand,
lifted him up and he arose. After Jesus went inside, His disciples
asked Him privately, Why could we not cast him out? He said to them,
This kind can only come forth by prayer and fasting.

Then they departed and passed through Galilee without notice for He
taught His disciples and said, The Son of man is delivered into the
hands of men. They shall kill Him. After He is killed, He shall arise
on the third day.

They did not understand these words but were afraid to ask Him. Once
they got safely inside the house at Capernaum, Jesus asked them, What
was it that ye disputed among yourselves along the way?

They were silent because, on the way back, they had disputed who among
themselves should be the greatest. Jesus then sat down, called the
twelve, and said to them, If any man desire to be first, the same
shall be last of all and servant of all. Then He took a child and set
him in the midst of them. As He took the child in His arms, He said to
them, Whosoever shall receive one of such children in my name,
receives me. And whosoever shall receive me, receives not me, but Him
that sent me.

Then John said, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy name, but
he does not follow us so we forbad him because he does not follow us.
But Jesus said, Forbid him not. There is no man who shall do a miracle
in my name that can lightly speak evil of me. He that is not against
us is on our part. Whosoever shall give to drink a cup of water in my
name, because ye belong to Christ, shall not lose his reward. And
whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it
is better for him that a millstone were hung around his neck, and he
were cast into the sea.

If thy hand offend thee, cut it off. It is better for thee to enter
into life maimed than to have two hands and go into hell where the
worm does not die and the fire is never quenched. And if thy foot
offend thee, cut it off. It is better for thee to enter halt into life
than to have two feet to be cast into hell where the worm does not die
and the fire is never quenched. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it
out. It is better for thee to enter into the kingdom of God with one
eye than to have two eyes to be cast into hell fire. For every one
shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted with
salt. Salt is good. But if the salt has lost its flavor, with what
will ye season it? Have salt in yourselves, and have peace one with
another.

10        From there Jesus went into the coasts of Judaea by way of
the far side of Jordan. He was met by a large crowd who wanted to hear
Him speak and He taught them again.

The Pharisees came to Him, and, testing Him, asked, Is it lawful for a
man to put away his wife? In return, Jesus asked, What did Moses
command you?

They said, Moses suffered the writing of a bill of divorcement to put
her away. Jesus answered, Moses wrote this precept on account of the
hardness of your heart. But, from the beginning of the creation, God
made them male and female. For this cause a man shall leave his father
and mother, and cleave to his wife. The two shall be one flesh: so
then they are no more two, but one flesh. What, therefore, God has
joined together, let no man put asunder.

Later, in the house, His disciples asked Him again about this matter.
He said, Whosoever shall put away his wife and marry another commits
adultery against her. And if a woman shall put away her husband and be
married to another she commits adultery.

The people brought young children that He should touch them but His
disciples rebuked the people who brought them. Jesus was greatly
displeased and said to the disciples, Suffer the little children to
come to me. Forbid them not for of such is the kingdom of God.

Verily I say to you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as
a little child, shall not enter in. Jesus took them up in His arms,
put His hands upon them, and blessed them.

Along the road, a young man ran up to Jesus, knelt before Him and
asked, Good Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? Jesus
said, Why call me good? There is none good but one, that is, God. Thou
knowest the commandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not
steal, Do not bear false witness, Defraud not, Honor thy father and
mother.

The young man replied, Master, all these I have observed from my
youth. Then Jesus, beholding him, loved him and said to him, You lack
one thing: Go and sell whatever thou has and give the proceeds to the
poor. Thou shall have treasure in heaven. Then come, take up the
cross, and follow me. Upon hearing this the young man was sad and went
away grieving because he had many possessions.

Then Jesus turned to His disciples and said, How hard it shall be for
those who have riches to enter into the kingdom of God! The disciples
were astonished at His words. Jesus and said to them, Children, how
hard is it for those who trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of
God! It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than
for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.

The disciples were astonished beyond measure, saying among themselves,
Who, then, can be saved? Jesus, looking upon them, said, With men it
is impossible, but not with God. With God all things are possible.

Then Peter said, Lo, we have left all, and have followed thee. Jesus
answered, Anyone who has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake and the
gospel's, shall receive a hundredfold now and in eternal life. But
many that are first shall be last; and the last first.

Jesus led them to Jerusalem and, along the way, began to tell them the
things that would happen to Him. He said, In Jerusalem the Son of man
shall be delivered to the chief priests and scribes. They will condemn
Him to death, and shall deliver Him to the Gentiles. They will mock
Him and scourge Him. They will spit on Him. And they will kill him. On
the third day He shall rise again.

James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came to Him and said, Master, we
have a desire to tell you about. Jesus said to them, What should I do
for you? They said, Grant that we may sit, one on thy right hand, and
the other on thy left hand, in thy glory. Jesus answered, Ye know not
what ye ask. Can ye drink of the cup that I drink of? Can ye be
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with? They said to Him,
We can.

Jesus said, Ye shall indeed drink of the cup that I drink of. Ye shall
be baptized with the baptism with which I am baptized. But to sit on
my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to give. It shall be
given to them for whom it is prepared.

When the other ten disciples heard this, they became greatly
displeased with James and John. Jesus called them and said, Ye know
that those who are appointed to rule over the Gentiles exercise
lordship over them and their great ones heavily influence them. But it
shall not be like this among you. Whosoever will be great among you
shall be your minister. Whosoever will be your master shall be servant
to all. Even the Son of man came not to be ministered to, but to
minister and to give His life as a ransom for many.

They came to Jericho. As Jesus passed through Jericho with His
disciples, many, including blind Bartimaeus, the son of Timaeus, sat
begging by the side of the highway. When Bartimaeus heard that Jesus
of Nazareth was going by, he began to cry out, Jesus, thou son of
David, have mercy on me. Many told him to be silent, but he cried the
more, Thou son of David, have mercy on me. Jesus stood still. Then He
called the blind man to Him and said, Be of good comfort. Rise. I call
thee.

Casting away his garment, he rose up and went to Jesus. He said to the
man, What shall I do for thee? The blind man said, Lord, that I might
receive my sight. Jesus said to him, Go thy way. Thy faith has made
thee whole. Immediately he received his sight and followed Jesus.

11        They came near Jerusalem, to Bethphage and Bethany. At the
mount of Olives, He beckoned to two of His disciples and said, Go into
the village opposite here. As soon as ye enter it, ye shall find tied
a colt that has never been sat upon. Loose him and bring him here. If
a man asks why ye do this, say that the Lord has need of him; and
immediately he will send him.

They went to the village and found the colt tied outside the door in a
place where two ways met. As they untied him, a man said to them, What
are ye doing, loosing the colt? They said to him what Jesus commanded
and he let them go.

They brought the colt, cast their garments on him, and Jesus sat upon
him. Many people spread their garments in the way. Others cut branches
off the trees, and strewed them in the way. Those who went before, and
those that followed, cried, Hosanna. Blessed is He that comes in the
name of the Lord. Blessed be the kingdom of our father David, that
comes in the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest.

Jesus came into Jerusalem and went to the temple. When He had looked
around and upon all things, it drew on to the evening. He went out to
Bethany with the twelve. The next morning, coming back from Bethany,
Jesus was hungry. From a distance, He spotted a fig tree that might
offer something to eat. When He got to it, He found nothing but leaves
for it was not yet the time for figs. Jesus said to it, No man shall
eat the fruit of thee ever again. The disciples heard this.

They came to Jerusalem and Jesus went into the temple. He cast out
those who sold and bought in the temple. He overthrew the tables of
the moneychangers and the seats of those who sold doves. He would not
allow any man to carry any vessel through the temple. Jesus said to
them all, It is written: My house shall be called, by all nations, the
house of prayer but ye have made it a den of thieves.

The scribes and chief priests heard this and considered how they might
destroy Him. They feared Him because all the people were astonished at
His doctrine. When evening came, He went out of the city. The
following morning, as they passed by, they saw the fig tree dried up
from the roots. Peter called to Jesus, Master, behold, the fig tree
which thou cursed. It is withered away. Jesus answered, Have faith in
God. Whosoever shall say to this mountain, Be thou removed, and be
thou cast into the sea; and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall
believe that those things which he says shall come to pass; he shall
have whatsoever he says.

Whatever things ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them,
and ye shall have them. And when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have
anything against anyone, so that your Father which is in heaven may
also forgive you your trespasses. If ye do not forgive, neither will
your Father which is in heaven forgive your trespasses.

In Jerusalem, as He was walking in the temple, there came to Him the
chief priests, the scribes, and the elders. They questioned Him and
said, By what authority do thou do these things? Who gave thee this
authority to do these things?

Jesus answered, I will also ask you a question. If you answer me, I
will tell you by what authority I do these things. Was the baptism of
John from heaven or of men? They discussed this among themselves and
said, If we say, From heaven; He will say, Why then did ye not believe
him? But if we shall say, Of men; we must face the people who
considered John a prophet. Finally, they answered and said to Jesus,
We cannot tell. Jesus then said, Neither do I tell you by what
authority I do these things.

12       He began to speak to them by parables. A man planted a
vineyard. He set a hedge around it. He dug a place for the winevat and
built a tower. The man let it out to husbandmen and went into a far
country. At the end of the season he sent a servant to the husbandmen
to collect the fruit of the vineyard.

The husbandmen caught and beat up the servant. They sent him away
empty. The man sent another servant. They cast stones and wounded this
servant in the head. They shamefully handled him and sent him away.
The man sent another and they killed him as well as many others;
beating some, and killing some. Finally, the man sent his only son
whom he loved very much. He reasoned, They will respect my son. But
the husbandmen said, This is the heir; come, let us kill him and the
inheritance shall be ours. They took the son, killed him, and cast him
out of the vineyard. What, then, shall the lord of the vineyard do? He
will come and destroy the husbandmen and let out the vineyard to
others.

Have ye not read this scripture: The stone which the builders rejected
has become the cornerstone of the whole foundation. This was the
Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?

The chief priests and elders sought to lay hold of Jesus, but they
feared the people. They knew that He had spoken this parable about
them. When they left, they sent certain of the Pharisees and Herodians
to try to catch Jesus in His words. They asked, Master, we know that
thou art true, and regard not the person of men, but teach the way of
God. Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not? Shall we give, or
shall we not give?

Jesus, knowing their hypocrisy, answered, Why test me? Whose image and
superscription is on a coin? They said, Caesar's. Jesus replied, Then
render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things
that are God's. They marvelled at Him.

Then came the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection. They asked,
Master, Moses wrote to us, If a man's brother dies and leaves his wife
behind him, and leaves no children, his brother should take his wife
and raise up seed to his brother. Now there were seven brethren. The
first took a wife and, dying, left no seed. The second took her and,
dying, left no seed. The third brother likewise and this through all
seven brothers. The seven had her, and left no seed. Last of all the
woman died also. In the resurrection. when they shall rise, whose wife
shall she be since all the seven had her as wife.

Jesus answered, Ye err because ye know not the scriptures or the power
of God. When they rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are
given in marriage. They are as the angels who are in heaven. And, as
touching on the dead and that they rise: have ye not read in the book
of Moses, how God spoke to him in the bush and said, I am the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? He is not the God
of the dead, but the God of the living. Ye, therefore, do greatly err.

One of the scribes came, and having heard them reasoning together, and
perceiving that Jesus had answered them well, asked, Which is the
first commandment of all?

Jesus answered, The first of all the commandments is, Hear, O Israel.
The Lord our God is one Lord. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength. This is the first commandment. The second is, Thou shalt
love thy neighbour as thyself. There is no other commandment greater
than these.

The scribe said, Well, Master, thou has said the truth, for there is
one God, and there is no other but Him. To love Him with all the
heart, and with all the understanding, and with all the soul, and with
all the strength, and to love thy neighbour as thyself is worth more
than all of the burnt offerings and sacrifices. Jesus saw that he
answered discreetly. He said to him, Thou art not far from the kingdom
of God.

After this no man dared ask Him any more questions. While He taught in
the temple, Jesus said, How can the scribes say that Christ is the son
of David? David himself said: The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou on my
right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. If David calls
him Lord; how is he, then, his son?

The common people heard Him gladly. He said to them in His teaching,
Beware of the scribes, who love to go in flowing robes, and love
salutations in the marketplace, and the best seats in the synagogues,
and the uppermost rooms at feasts. These same devour widows' houses,
and, for a pretence, make long prayers. They shall receive greater
damnation.

Jesus sat over against the treasury and watched how the people cast
money into it. Many that were rich cast in large amounts. Then a poor
widow walked up and put in two small coins. Jesus called His disciples
to Him and said, This poor widow has cast more in than all the rest
have cast into the treasury. They gave out of their abundance; but she
cast in what she had to live upon.

13        As He went out of the temple, one of His disciples said,
Master, see these stones and what buildings are here! Jesus answered,
See these great buildings? There shall not be one stone left upon
another and not one that shall not be thrown down.

Jesus sat upon the mount of Olives over against the temple. Peter,
James, John, and Andrew went over to Him and asked, When shall these
things happen? What sign will there be when all these things will be
fulfilled? Jesus cautioned them and said, Take heed lest any man
deceive you. Many shall come in my name saying, I am Christ; and shall
deceive many.

When ye hear of wars and rumors of wars, do not be troubled, for such
things must needs be. But the end shall not be yet. First, nation
shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. There shall be
earthquakes in divers places, and famines and crises. These are the
beginnings of sorrows.

But, take heed. They shall deliver you up to councils. In the
synagogues ye shall be beaten. Ye shall be brought before rulers and
kings for my sake, for a testimony against them. The gospel must first
be published among all nations.

When they lead you away and deliver you up, take no thought or plan
beforehand what ye shall speak. Whatever ye need to say shall be given
you in that hour, for it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost.

In that time, brother shall betray brother even unto death; father
shall betray his son; and children shall rise up against their parents
and cause them to be put to death. Ye shall be hated by all men for my
name's sake. But he that shall endure to the end shall be saved.

When ye see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the
prophet, standing where it ought not (let him who reads understand),
then let those who are in Judaea flee to the mountains. Let him that
is on the housetop not go down into the house to take anything out of
his house. Let him that is in the field not turn back again to get his
garment. And woe to those who are with child. And pray that your
flight be not in the winter. Unless the Lord shortened those days, no
flesh would be saved. But for the sake of the elect, whom He has
chosen, He has shortened the days. For in those days shall be
affliction such as was not seen from the beginning of God's creation
to this time.

In the days after that tribulation, the sun shall be darkened, the
moon shall not give her light, the stars shall fall, and the powers in
the heavens shall be shaken. Then the Son of man will appear in the
clouds with great power and in glory. He shall send His angels, and
shall gather together His elect from the four winds and from the
uttermost part of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven.

So if any man shall say to you, Lo, here is Christ; or, lo, He is
there; do not believe him. False Christs and false prophets shall rise
and show signs and wonders to seduce, if it be possible, even the
elect. But take heed. I have warned you of these things.

Now learn a parable of the fig tree; When her branch is yet tender,
and puts forth leaves, ye know that summer is near. In the same way,
when ye see these things come to pass, know that it is near, as close
as at the door.

This generation shall not pass until all these things are done. Heaven
and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away. But, of
the day and the hour, no man knows, no, not the angels in heaven or
the Son, but the Father only knows. Take heed. Watch and pray. Ye know
not when the time is.

For the Son of Man is like a man taking a distant journey, who left
his house, and gave authority to his servants, assigned each his work,
and left the porter to watch. Therefore, ye watch also for ye know not
when the master of the house will come - during evening, or at
midnight, or at the break of dawn, or in daylight. Therefore, be alert
lest, in His coming suddenly, He find you sleeping. What I say to you,
I say to all, Watch.

14        The feast of the passover and of unleavened bread was in two
days. The chief priests and the scribes considered how they might take
Him by craft and put Him to death. But they said, Not on the feast
day, lest there be an uproar among the people.

Jesus was in Bethany at the house of Simon the leper. As He sat at
dinner, a woman came to Him carrying an alabaster box of very precious
ointment of spikenard. She broke the container and anointed Jesus'
head with the oil.

Some of the others at the table became indignant and said, Why was
this waste of the ointment made? It might have been sold for a great
price and the money given to the poor. And they murmured against her.
But Jesus said, Let her alone. Why trouble her? She has done a good
work. Ye have the poor with you always, and, whenever ye will, ye may
do them good; but me ye have not always. She has done what she could.
She has come beforehand to anoint my body for burying. Wheresoever
this gospel shall be preached throughout the world, this that she has
done shall also be told.

Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went to the chief priests to
arrange to betray Jesus to them. They were glad to hear of his offer
and promised to give him money. Then Judas schemed about how he might
conveniently betray Him.

On the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the passover
lamb, His disciples said to Jesus, Where shall we go to prepare that
thou may eat the passover? He sent two of His disciples into the city.
He told them, There you shall meet a man bearing a pitcher of water.
Follow him. Wherever he shall go in, say to the good man of the house,
The Master wants to know where the guestchamber is where He shall eat
the passover with His disciples. This man will show you a large upper
room that is furnished and prepared. Make ready for us there.

The two disciples went into the city and found all as Jesus had said
to them. They made ready the passover. In the evening Jesus came with
the disciples. As they sat and ate, Jesus said, One of you who eats
with me shall betray me. They began to be sorrowful, and, one by one,
ask Him, Is it I? Is it I?

Jesus answered, It is one of the twelve that dips with me in the dish.
The Son of man indeed goes as it is written of Him: But woe to that
man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! Better were it for that man if
he had never been born.

As they ate, Jesus took bread and blessed it. He broke it and gave it
to them. He said, Take and eat. This is my body. Then He took the cup
and, when He had given thanks, He gave it to them. They all drank from
it. And He said to them, This is my blood of the new testament, which
is shed for many. I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine until
that day when I drink it anew in the kingdom of God.

After they had sung a hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives.
Jesus said, Ye shall all be offended because of me this night for it
is written: I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be
scattered. But, after that, I am risen and I will go before you into
Galilee.

Peter said, Although all shall be offended, I will not. Jesus said to
him, This day, even this night, before the cock crows twice, thou
shall deny me thrice. But Peter spoke the more vehemently, I will not
deny you in any way, even if it means I should die. Likewise, they all
said the same.

They came to a place named Gethsemane. Jesus said to His disciples,
Sit here while I go to pray. He took Peter and James and John with
Him. He said to them, My soul is exceedingly sorrowful and heavy unto
death. Wait here and watch. Jesus went forward a little, and fell on
the ground. He prayed that, if it were possible, the hour might pass
from Him. He said, Abba, Father, all things are possible to thee; take
away this cup from me. Nevertheless, not what I will, but what thou
wilt.

He came back and found them sleeping. Jesus said to Peter, Simon, why
do you sleep? Could you not watch one hour with me? Watch ye and pray
so you do not give in to temptation. The spirit truly is ready, but
the flesh is weak.

Then Jesus went away a second time and prayed with the same words.
When He returned, He found them asleep again (for their eyes were
heavy) They did not know what to say to Him.

The third time, when He returned to them, Jesus said, It is enough.
The hour has come. The Son of man is now betrayed into the hands of
sinners. Rise up, let us go. The one who betrays me is at hand.

Immediately, while He yet spoke, Judas, one of the twelve, arrived. He
was with a great multitude who were armed with swords and staves, sent
from the chief priests, scribes, and elders. He that betrayed Jesus
had given them a signal, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is
He. Take Him and lead Him away swiftly. Judas immediately went to Him
and said, Master, master; then kissed Him.

They laid their hands on Him, and took Him. One of them that stood by
drew a sword, smote a servant of the high priest, and cut off his ear.
Jesus said to them, Have ye come to take me with swords and staves as
against a thief? I was with you daily, teaching in the temple, and ye
did not take me. But the scriptures must be fulfilled. Then they all
left Him and fled. There followed Him a young man who had a linen
cloth cast about his naked body. When they grabbed him and laid hold
of him, he left the linen cloth and fled from them naked.

They led Jesus to the high priest. All the chief priests and the
elders and the scribes were assembled there. Peter, following from
afar, went to the palace of the high priest and sat with the servants
who warmed themselves at a fire.

The chief priests and all the council sought for witness against Jesus
to put Him to death; but they found none. Many bore false witness
against Him, but their witness did not agree. Then there arose a
certain false witness who said, We heard Him say, I will destroy this
temple that is made with hands, and within three days, I will build
another made without hands. But this witness still did not agree with
the rest.

Then the high priest stood up and said to Jesus, Answer thou nothing?
What is it that these witness against thee? Jesus held His peace and
answered nothing. Again the high priest asked Him, Art thou the
Christ, the Son of the Blessed? Jesus said, I am: and ye shall see the
Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the
clouds of heaven.

Then the high priest called out, What need we of any further
witnesses? Ye have heard the blasphemy. What think ye? They all
condemned Him to be guilty of death. And some began to spit on Him,
and to cover His face, and to buffet Him, and to say to Him, Prophesy;
and the servants struck Him with the palms of their hands.

As Peter was outside, one of the maids of the high priest saw him
warming himself and said, Thou also was with Jesus of Nazareth. But he
denied and said, I do not know nor understand what you say. He went to
the porch; and the cock crowed. A maid saw him again, and began to say
to those who stood by, This is one of them. And he denied it again.

Then, a little after, those who stood by said again to Peter, Surely
thou art one of them. Thou art a Galilaean by thy speech. Peter began
to curse and swear and said, I do not know this man of whom ye speak.
The cock crowed a second time. And Peter called to mind the word that
Jesus said to him: Before the cock crows twice, thou shalt deny me
three times. When Peter remembered this he wept.

15        First thing the next morning the chief priests held a
consultation with the elders and scribes and the whole council, and
bound Jesus, and carried Him away, and delivered Him to Pilate. And
Pilate asked Him, Art thou the King of the Jews? He answered, Thou say
it. The chief priests accused Him of many things, but He answered
nothing. Pilate said to Him, Answer thou nothing? Do you behold how
many things they witness against thee? But Jesus still answered
nothing and Pilate marvelled.

Now at that feast he released to them one prisoner, whoever the people
chose. And there was one named Barabbas, who lay bound with those
involved in insurrection with him and who had committed murder in the
insurrection. The multitude began to cry aloud their desire for Pilate
to do as he had done before. Pilate said to the multitude, Will ye
that I release to you the King of the Jews? But the chief priests told
the people that Pilate would rather release Barabbas to them.

Pilate asked, What do you want me to do to Him whom ye call the King
of the Jews? They cried out, Crucify Him. Then Pilate said to them,
Why, what evil has He done? And they cried out the more, Crucify Him.

And so Pilate, to content the people, released Barabbas to them. After
he had Jesus scourged, he delivered Him to be crucified. The soldiers
led Him away into the hall, called Praetorium; and they called
together the whole troop. They clothed Him with purple, platted a
crown of thorns, and put it around His head. They saluted Him, Hail,
King of the Jews! They smote Him on the head with a reed, spit on Him,
and bowing their knees, worshipped Him.

After they mocked Him, they took off the purple cloth and put His own
clothes on Him, and led Him out to be crucified. They compelled a man
named Simon, a Cyrenian and the father of Alexander and Rufus, who was
passing by on his way out of the country, to bear His cross.

They took Him to the place called Golgotha, the place of a skull. They
gave Him wine mingled with myrrh to drink but He received it not. When
they had crucified Him, they parted His garments, casting lots for
what every man should take.

It was the third hour when they crucified Him. The superscription of
His accusation was written and hung over Him: The King of the Jews.
Along with Him they crucified two thieves; one on His right hand, and
the other on His left. The scripture was fulfilled: And He was
numbered with the transgressors.

Those who passed by railed at Him. They said, Ah, thou that destroys
the temple and builds it up again in three days, save thyself and come
down from the cross. The chief priests along with the scribes said
among themselves, He saved others; Himself He cannot save. Let Christ
the King of Israel descend now from the cross that we may see and
believe. Those who were crucified with Him reviled Him. And, when the
sixth hour came, there was darkness over the whole land until the
ninth hour.

At the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, Eloi, Eloi, lama
sabachthani? My God, my God, why has thou forsaken me? Some of those
who stood by, when they heard this, said, Behold, He calls Elias. And
one ran and filled a sponge full of vinegar, put it on a reed, gave it
to Him to drink. They said, Let Him alone. Let us see whether Elias
will come to take Him down. Then Jesus cried with a loud voice and
took His last breath.

The veil of the temple was rent in two from the top to bottom. And,
when the centurion who stood near Him saw this, he said, Truly this
man was the Son of God.

There were also women looking on from afar; among whom was Mary
Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the less and Joses, and Salome
(who also, when He was in Galilee, followed Him and ministered to
Him), and many other women who came up with Him to Jerusalem.

When evening came, because it was the preparation day before the
sabbath, Joseph of Arimathaea, an honorable counsellor, who also
waited for the kingdom of God, went to Pilate to request the body of
Jesus. Pilate marvelled that He was already dead. He called the
centurion to him to find out how long He had been dead. When he
learned it from the centurion, he released the body. Joseph brought
fine linen, took Him down, and wrapped Him in the linen. He laid Him
in a sepulchre hewn out of rock, and rolled a stone across the
entrance. Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses watched where He
was laid.

16        When the sabbath was past, very early in the morning the
first day of the week, Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and
Salome, went to the sepulchre at the rising of the sun. With them they
brought sweet spices that they might anoint Him. They said among
themselves, Who shall roll the stone away from the door of the
sepulchre for us? Then, when they looked, they saw that the large
stone was rolled away.

Entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on the right
side, clothed in a long white garment. They were frightened. But he
said, Be not afraid. Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, who was crucified. He
is risen. He is not here. See the place where they laid Him. But go
your way, tell His disciples and Peter that He goes before you into
Galilee. There ye shall see Him, just as He told you. They went out
quickly, and fled from the sepulchre; for they trembled and were
amazed. They said nothing to any one because they were afraid.

Then Jesus appeared to Mary Magdalene, out of whom He had cast seven
devils. She went and told those who had been with Him as they mourned
and wept. When they had heard that He was alive and had been seen by
her, they did not believe it.

Then He appeared, in another form, to two of them as they walked in
the country. These two went and told it to the rest, but they did not
believe them either.

Afterward He appeared to the eleven as they sat at supper. He
upbraided them for their unbelief and hardness of heart because they
did not believe those who had seen Him after He was risen.

Then He said to them, Go into all the world and preach the gospel to
every creature. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved; but
he that does not believe shall be damned. And these signs shall follow
them that believe: In my name shall they cast out devils. They shall
speak with new tongues. They shall take up serpents. And, if they
drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them. They shall lay hands
on the sick, and they shall recover.

So then after the Lord had spoken to them, He was received up into
heaven and sat on the right hand of God. And they went forth and
preached everywhere; the Lord working with them and confirming the
word with these signs.

Amen.
  _________________________________________________________________

                        edited by Lightheart
                    www.PracticeGodsPresence.com










End of Project Gutenberg's The Gospel of Mark for Readers, by Lightheart

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOSPEL OF MARK FOR READERS ***

***** This file should be named 6530.txt or 6530.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/5/3/6530/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
