The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Purple Parasol, by George Barr McCutcheon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Purple Parasol

Author: George Barr McCutcheon

Posting Date: April 12, 2013 [EBook #6575]
Release Date: September, 2004
First Posted: December 29, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PURPLE PARASOL ***




Produced by Avinash Kothare, Charles Aldarondo and the
On-line Distributed Proofreading Team.











THE PURPLE PARASOL


GEORGE BARR McCUTCHEON




THE PURPLE PARASOL




Young Rossiter did not like the task. The more he thought of it as he
whirled northward on the Empire State Express the more distasteful it
seemed to grow.

"Hang it all," he thought, throwing down his magazine in disgust, "it's
like police work. And heaven knows I haven't wanted to be a cop since we
lived in Newark twenty years ago. Why the dickens did old Wharton marry
her? He's an old ass, and he's getting just what he might have expected.
She's twenty-five and beautiful; he's seventy and a sight. I've a notion
to chuck the whole affair and go back to the simple but virtuous
Tenderloin. It's not my sort, that's all, and I was an idiot for mixing in
it. The firm served me a shabby trick when it sent me out to work up this
case for Wharton. It's a regular Peeping Tom Job, and I don't like it."

It will require but few words to explain Sam Rossiter's presence in the
north-bound Empire Express, but it would take volumes to express his
feelings on the subject in general. Back in New York there lived Godfrey
Wharton, millionaire and septuagenarian. For two years he had been husband
to one of the prettiest, gayest young women in the city, and in the latter
days of this responsibility he was not a happy man. His wife had fallen
desperately, even conspicuously, in love with Everett Havens, the new
leading man at one of the fashionable playhouses. The affair had been
going on for weeks, and it had at last become the talk of the town. By
"the town" is meant that vague, expansive thing known as the "Four
Hundred." Sam Rossiter, two years out of Yale, was an attachment to, but
not a component part of, the Four Hundred. The Whartons were of the inner
circle.

Young Rossiter was ambitious. He was, besides, keen, aggressive, and
determined to make well for himself. Entering the great law offices of
Grover & Dickhut immediately after leaving college, he devoted himself
assiduously to the career in prospect. He began by making its foundation
as substantial as brains and energy would permit. So earnest, so
successful was he that Grover & Dickhut regarded him as the most promising
young man in New York. They predicted a great future for him, no small
part of which was the ultimate alteration of an office shingle, the name
of Rossiter going up in gilt, after that of Dickhut. And, above all,
Rossiter was a handsome, likable chap. Tall, fair, sunny-hearted, well
groomed, he was a fellow that both sexes liked without much effort.

The Wharton trouble was bound to prove startling any way one looked at
it. The prominence of the family, the baldness of its skeleton, and the
gleeful eagerness with which it danced into full view left but little for
meddlers to covet. A crash was inevitable; it was the _clash_ that
Grover & Dickhut were trying to avert. Old Wharton, worn to a slimmer
frazzle than he had ever been before his luckless marriage, was determined
to divorce his insolent younger half. It was to be done with as little
noise as possible, more for his own sake than for hers. Wharton was proud
in, not of, his weakness.

It became necessary to "shadow" the fair debutante into matrimony. After
weeks of indecision Mr. Wharton finally arose and swore in accents
terrible that she was going too far to be called back. He determined to
push, not to pull, on the reins. Grover & Dickhut were commanded to get
the "evidence"; he would pay. When he burst in upon them and cried in his
cracked treble that "the devil's to pay," he did not mean to cast any
aspersion upon the profession in general or particular. He was annoyed.

"She's going away next week," he exclaimed, as if the lawyers were to
blame for it.

"Well, and what of it?" asked Mr. Grover blandly.

"Up into the mountains," went on Mr. Wharton triumphantly.

"Is it against the law?" smiled the old lawyer.

"Confound the law! I don't object to her going up into the mountains for
a rest, but--"

"It's much too hot in town for her, I fancy."

"How's that?" querulously. "But I've just heard that that scoundrel
Havens is going to the mountains also."

"The same mountain?"

"Certainly. I have absolute proof of it. Now, something has to be done!"

And so it was that the promising young lawyer, Samuel W. Rossiter, Jr.,
was sent northward into the Adirondacks one hot summer day with
instructions to be tactful but thorough. He had never seen Mrs. Wharton,
nor had he seen Havens. There was no time to look up these rather
important details, for he was off to intercept her at the little station
from which one drove by coach to the quiet summer hotel among the clouds.
She was starting the same afternoon. He found himself wondering whether
this petted butterfly of fashion had ever seen him, and, seeing him, had
been sufficiently interested to inquire, "Who is that tall fellow with the
light hair?" It would be difficult to perform the duties assigned to him
if either she or Havens knew him for what he was. His pride would have
been deeply wounded if he had known that Grover & Dickhut recommended him
to Wharton as "obscure."

"They say she is a howling beauty as well as a swell," reflected
Rossiter, as the miles and minutes went swinging by. "And that's something
to be thankful for. One likes novelty, especially if it's feminine. Well,
I'm out for the sole purpose of saving a million or so for old Wharton,
and to save as much of her reputation as I can besides. With the proof in
hand the old duffer can scare her out of any claim against his bank
account, and she shall have the absolute promise of 'no exposure' in
return. Isn't it lovely? Well, here's Albany. Now for the dinky road up to
Fossingford Station. I have an hour's wait here. She's coming on the
afternoon train and gets to Fossingford at eleven-ten to-night. That's a
dickens of a time for a young woman to be arriving anywhere, to say
nothing of Fossingford."

Loafing about the depot at Albany, Rossiter kept a close lookout for Mrs.
Wharton as he pictured her from the description he carried in his mind's
eye. Her venerable husband informed him that she was sure to wear a white
shirt-waist, a gray skirt, and a Knox sailor hat, because her maid had
told him so in a huff. But he was to identify her chiefly by means of a
handsome and oddly trimmed parasol of deep purple. Wharton had every
reason to suspect that it was a present from Havens, and therefore to be
carried more for sentiment than protection.

A telegram awaited him at Fossingford Station. Fossingford was so small
and unsophisticated that the arrival of a telegraphic message that did not
relate to the movement of railroad trains was an "occasion." Everybody in
town knew that a message had come for Samuel Rossiter, and everybody was
at the depot to see that he got it. The station agent had inquired at the
"eating-house" for the gentleman, and that was enough. With the eyes of a
Fossingford score or two upon him, Rossiter read the despatch from Grover
& Dickhut.

"Too bad, ain't it?" asked the agent, compassionately regarding the
newcomer. Evidently the contents were supposed to be disappointing.

"Oh, I don't know," replied Rossiter easily. But just the same he was
troubled in mind as he walked over and sat down upon his steamer trunk in
the shade of the building. The telegram read:

"She left New York five-thirty this evening. Stops over night Albany.
Fossingford to-morrow morning. Watch trains. Purple parasol. Sailor hat.
Gray travelling suit.

"G. and D."

It meant that he would be obliged to stay in Fossingford all night--but
where? A general but comprehensive glance did not reveal anything that
looked like a hotel. He thought of going back to Albany for the night, but
it suddenly occurred to him that she might not stop in that city, after
all. Pulling his wits together, he saw things with a new clearness of
vision. Ostensibly she had announced her intention to spend the month at
Eagle Nest, an obscure but delightful hotel in the hills; but did that
really mean that she would go there? It was doubtless a ruse to throw the
husband off the track. There were scores of places in the mountains, and
it was more than probable that she would give Eagle Nest a wide berth.
Rossiter patted his bump of perceptiveness and smiled serenely until he
came plump up against the realization that she might not come by way of
Fossingford at all, or, in any event, she might go whisking through to
some station farther north. His speculations came to an end in the shape
of a distressing resolution. He would remain in Fossingford and watch the
trains go by!

After he had dashed through several early evening trains, the cheerful,
philosophical smile of courage left his face and trouble stared from his
eyes. He saw awkward prospects ahead. Suppose she were to pass through on
one of the late night trains! He could not rush through the sleepers, even
though the trains stopped in Fossingford for water.

Besides, she could not be identified by means of a gray suit, a sailor
hat, and a purple parasol if they were tucked away in the berth. At eleven
o'clock he was pacing the little depot platform, waiting for the
eleven-ten train, the last he was to inspect for the night. He had eaten
a scanty meal at the restaurant nearby, and was still mad about it. The
station agent slept soundly at his post, and all the rest of the town had
gone to bed.

The train pulled in and out again, leaving him at the far end of the
platform, mopping his harassed brow. He had visited the chair-cars and had
seen no one answering the description. A half-dozen passengers huddled off
and wandered away in the darkness.

"I'll bet my head she's in one of those sleepers," he groaned, as he
watched the lights on the rear coach fade away into the night. "It's all
off till to-morrow, that's settled. My only hope is that she really
stopped in Albany. There's a train through here at three in the morning;
but I'm not detective enough to unravel the mystery of any woman's berth.
Now, where the deuce am _I_ to sleep?"

As he looked about dismally, disconsolately, his hands deep in his
pockets, his straw hat pulled low over his sleepy eyes, the station agent
came up to him with a knowing grin on his face.

"'Scuse me, boss, but she's come," he said, winking.

"She? Who?"

"Her. The young lady. Sure! She's lookin' fer you over in the
waitin'-room. You mus' 'a' missed her when she got off--thought she
wasn't comin' up till to-morrer. Mus' 'a' changed her mind. That's
a woming all over, ain't it?"

Rossiter felt himself turn hot and cold. His head began to whirl and his
courage went fluttering away. Here was a queer complication. The quarry
hunting for the sleuth, instead of the reverse. He fanned himself with his
hat for one brief, uncertain moment, dazed beyond belief. Then he
resolutely strode over to face the situation, trusting to luck to keep him
from blundering his game into her hands. Just as he was about to put his
foot upon the lamp-lit door-sill the solution struck him like a blow. She
was expecting Havens to meet her!

There was but one woman in the room, and she was approaching the door
with evident impatience as he entered. Both stopped short, she with a look
of surprise, which changed to annoyance and then crept into an nervous,
apologetic little smile; he with an unsuppressed ejaculation. She wore a
gray skirt, a white waist, and a sailor hat, and she was surpassingly good
to look at even in the trying light from the overhead lamp. Instinctively
his eye swept over her. She carried on her arm the light gray jacket, and
in one hand was the tightly rolled parasol of--he impertinently craned his
neck to see--of purple! Mr. Rossiter was face to face with the woman he
was to dog for a month, and he was flabbergasted. Even as he stopped,
puzzled, before her, contemplating retreat, she spoke to him.

"Did that man send you to me?" she asked nervously, looking through the
door beyond and then through a window at his right, quite puzzled, he
could see.

"He did, and I was sure he was mistaken. I knew of no one in this
God-forsaken place who could be asking for me," said he, collecting his
wits carefully and herding them into that one sentence. "But perhaps I
can help you. Will you tell me whom I am to look for?"

"It is strange he is not here," she said a little breathlessly. "I wired
him just what train to expect me on."

"Your husband?" ventured he admirably.

"Oh, dear, no!" said she quickly.

"I wish she'd wired me what train to expect her on," thought he grimly.
"She doesn't know me. That's good. She was expecting Havens and he's
missed connections somehow," shot rapidly through his brain. At the same
time he was thinking of her as the prettiest woman he had seen in all his
life. Then aloud: "I'll look on the platform. Maybe he's lost in this
great city. What name shall I call out?"

"Please don't call very loudly. You'll wake the dead," she said, with a
pathetic smile. "It's awfully good of you. He may come at any minute, you
know. His name is--is"--she hesitated for a second, and then went on
determinedly--"Dudley. Tall, dark man. I don't know how I shall thank you.
It's so very awkward."

Rossiter darted from her glorious but perplexed presence. He had never
seen Havens, but he was sure he could recognize an actor if he saw him in
Fossingford. And he would call him Dudley, too. It would be wise. The
search was fruitless. The only tall, dark object he saw was the mailcrane
at the edge of the platform, but he facetiously asked if its name was
Dudley. Receiving no answer, he turned back to cast additional woe into
the heart of the pretty intriguer. She was standing in the door, despair
in her eyes. Somehow he was pleased because he had not found the wretch.
She was so fair to look upon and so appealing in her distress.

"You couldn't find him? What am I to do? Oh, isn't it awful? He promised
to be here."

"Perhaps he's at a hotel."

"In Fossingford?" in deep disgust. "There's no hotel here. He was to
drive me to the home of a friend out in the country." Rossiter leaned
against the wall suddenly. There was a long silence. He could not find his
tongue, but his eyes were burning deep into the plaintive blue ones that
looked up into his face.

"I'll ask the agent," he said at last.

"Ask him what?" she cried anxiously.

"If he's been here. No, I'll ask if there's a place where you can sleep
to-night. Mr. Dudley will surely turn up to-morrow."

"But I couldn't sleep a wink. I feel like crying my eyes out," she wailed.

"Don't do that!" exclaimed he, in alarm. "I'll take another look outside."

"Please don't. He is not here. Will you please tell me what I am to
do?"--very much as if it was his business to provide for her in the hour
of need.

Rossiter promptly awoke the agent and asked him where a room could be
procured for the lady. Doxie's boarding-house was the only place,
according to the agent, and it was full to overflowing. Besides, they
would not "take in" strange women.

"She can sleep here in the waiting-room," suggested the agent. "They'll
let you sleep in the parlor over at Doxie's, mister--maybe."

Rossiter did not have the heart to tell her all that the agent said. He
merely announced that there was no hotel except the depot waiting-room.

"By the way, does Mr. Dudley live out in the country?" he asked
insidiously. She flushed and then looked at him narrowly.

"No. He's visiting his uncle up here."

"Funny he missed you."

"It's terribly annoying," she said coldly. Then she walked away from him
as if suddenly conscious that she should not be conversing with a
good-looking stranger at such a time and place and under such peculiar
circumstances. He withdrew to the platform and his own reflections.

"He's an infernal cad for not meeting her," he found himself saying, her
pretty, distressed face still before him. "I don't care a rap whether
she's doing right or wrong--she's game. Still, she's a blamed little fool
to be travelling up here on such an outlandish train. So he's visiting an
uncle, eh? Then the chances are they're not going to Eagle Nest. Lucky I
waited here--I'd have lost them entirely if I'd gone back to Albany. But
where the deuce is she to sleep till morn--" He heard rapid footsteps
behind him and turned to distinguish Mrs. Wharton as she approached dimly
but gracefully. The air seemed full of her.

"Oh, Mr.--Mr.--" she was saying eagerly.

"Rollins."

"Isn't there a later train, Mr. Rollins?"

"I'll ask the agent."

"There's the flyer at three-thirty A. M.," responded the sleepy agent a
minute later.

"I'll just sit up and wait for it," she said coolly. "He has got the
trains confused."

"Good heavens! Till three-thirty?"

"But my dear Mr. Rollins, you won't be obliged to sit up, you know.
You're not expecting any one, are you?"

"N-no, of course not."

"By the way, why _are_ you staying up?" He was sure he detected
alarm in the question. She was suspecting him!

"I have nowhere to go, Miss--Mrs.--er--" She merely smiled and he said
something under his breath. "I'm waiting for the eight o'clock train."

"How lovely! What time will the three-thirty train get here, agent?"

"At half-past three, I reckon. But she don't stop here!"

"Oh, goodness! Can't you flag it--her, I mean?"

"What's the use?" asked Rossiter. "He's not coming on it, is he?"

"That's so. He's coming in a buggy. You needn't mind flagging her, agent."

"Well, say, I'd like to lock up the place," grumbled the agent. "There's
no more trains to-night but Number Seventeen, and she don't even whistle
here. I can't set up here all night."

"Oh, you wouldn't lock me out in the night, would you?" she cried in such
pretty despair that he faltered.

"I got to git home to my wife. She's--"

"That's all right, agent," broke in Rossiter hastily. "I'll take your
place as agent. Leave the doors open and I'll go on watch. I have to stay
up anyway."

There was a long silence. He did not know whether she was freezing or
warming toward him, because he dared not look into her eyes.

"I don't know who you are," she said distinctly but plaintively. It was
very dark out there on the platform and the night air was growing cold.

"It is the misfortune of obscurity," he said mockingly. "I am a most
humble wayfarer on his way to the high hills. If it will make you feel any
more comfortable, madam, I will say that I don't know who you are. So, you
see, we are in the same boat. You are waiting for a man and I am waiting
for daylight. I sincerely trust you may not have as long to wait as I.
Believe me, I regard myself as a gentleman. You are quite as safe with me
as you will be with the agent, or with Mr.--Mr. Dudley, for that matter."

"You may go home to your wife, Mr. Agent," she said promptly. "Mr.
Rollins will let the trains through, I'm sure."

The agent stalked away in the night and the diminutive station was left
to the mercy of the wayfarers.

"And now, Mr. Rollins, you may go over in that corner and stretch out on
the bench. It will be springless, I know, but I fancy you can sleep. I
will call you for the--for breakfast."

"I'm hanged if you do. On the contrary, I'm going to do my best to fix a
comfortable place for you to take a nap. I'll call you when Mr. Dudley
comes."

"It's most provoking of him," she said, as he began rummaging through his
steamer trunk. "What are you doing?"

"Hunting out something to make over into a mattress. You don't mind
napping on my clothes, do you? Here's a soft suit of flannels, a heavy
suit of cheviot, a dress suit, a spring coat, and a raincoat. I can rig up
a downy couch in no time if--"

"Ridiculous! Do you imagine that I'm going to sleep on your best clothes?
I'm going to sit up."

"You'll have to do as I say, madam, or be turned out of the hotel," said
he, with an infectious grin.

"But I insist upon your lying down. You have no reason for doing this for
me. Besides, I'm going to sit up. Good-night!"

"You are tired and ready to cry," he said, calmly going on with his
preparations. She stood off defiantly and watched him pile his best
clothes into a rather comfortable-looking heap on one of the long benches.
"Now, if you don't mind, I'll make a pillow of these negligee shirts.
They're soft, you know."

"Stop! I refuse to accept your--" she was protesting.

"Do you want me to leave you here all alone?" he demanded. "With the
country full of tramps and--"

"Don't! It's cowardly of you to frighten me. They say the railroads are
swarming with tramps, too. Won't you please go and see if Mr. Dudley is
anywhere in sight?"

"It was mean of me, I confess. Please lie down. It's getting cold. Pull
this raincoat over yourself. I'll walk out and--"

"Oh, but you are a determined person. And very foolish, too. Why should
you lose a lot of sleep just for me when--?"

"There is no reason why two men should fail you to-night, Mrs.--Miss--"

"Miss Dering," she said, humbled.

"When you choose to retire, Miss Dering, you will find your room quite
ready," he said with fine gallantry, bowing low as he stood in the
doorway. "I will be just outside on the platform, so don't be uneasy."

He quickly faded into the night, leaving her standing there, petulant,
furious, yet with admiration in her eyes. Ten minutes later he heard her
call. She was sitting on the edge of the improvised couch, smiling
sweetly, even timidly.

"It must be cold out there. You must wear this."

She came toward him, the raincoat in one hand, the purple parasol in the
other. He took the parasol only and departed without a word. She gasped
and would have called after him, but there was no use. With a perplexed
frown and smile she went slowly, dubiously toward the folded bed.

Rossiter smoked three cigars and walked two miles up and down the
platform, swinging the parasol absent-mindedly, before he ventured to look
inside the room again. In that time he had asked and answered many
questions in his mind. He saw that it would be necessary to change his
plans if he was to watch her successfully. She evidently gave out Eagle
Nest to blind her husband. Somehow he was forgetting that the task before
him was disagreeable and undignified. What troubled him most was how to
follow them if Havens--or Dudley--put in an appearance for the
three-thirty train. He began to curse Everett Havens softly but potently.

When he looked into the waiting-room she was sound asleep on the bench.
It delighted him to see that she had taken him at his word and was lying
upon his clothes. Cautiously he took a seat on the door-sill. The night
was as still as death and as lonesome as the grave. For half an hour he
sat gazing upon the tired, pretty face and the lithe young figure of the
sleeper. He found himself dreaming, although he was wide awake--never more
so. It occurred to him that he would be immensely pleased to hear that
Havens's reason for failing her was due to an accident in which he had
been killed.

"Those clothes will have to be pressed the first thing to-morrow," he
said to himself, but without a trace of annoyance. "Hang it all, she
doesn't look like that sort of woman," his mind switched. "But just think
of being tied up to an old crocodile like Wharton! Gee! One oughtn't to
blame her!"

Then he went forth into the night once more and listened for the sound of
buggy wheels. It was almost time for the arrival of the belated man from
the country, and he was beginning to pray that he would not appear at all.
It came to his mind that he should advise her to return to New York in the
morning. At last his watch told him that the train was due to pass in five
minutes. And still no buggy! Good! He felt an exhilaration that threatened
to break into song.

Softly he stole back into the waiting-room, prepared to awaken her before
the train shot by. Something told him that the rumble and roar would
terrify her if she were asleep. Going quite close to her he bent forward
and looked long and sadly upon the perfect face. Her hair was somewhat
disarranged, her hat had a very hopeless tilt, her lashes swept low over
the smooth cheek, but there was an almost imperceptible choke in her
breathing. In her small white hand she clasped a handkerchief tightly,
and--yes, he was sure of it--there were tear-stains beneath her lashes.
There came to him the faint sob which lingers long in the breath of one
who has cried herself to sleep. The spy passed his hand over his brow,
sighed, shook his head and turned away irresolutely. He remembered that
she was waiting for a man who was not her husband.

Far down the track a bright star came shooting toward Fossingford. He
knew it to be the headlight of the flyer. With a breath of relief he saw
that he was the only human being on the platform. Havens had failed again.
This time he approached the recumbent one determinedly. She was awake the
instant he touched her shoulder.

"Oh," she murmured, sitting erect and looking about, bewildered. "Is
it--has he--oh, you are still here? Has he come?"

"No, Miss Dering, he is not here," and added, under his breath, "damn
him!" Then aloud, "The train is coming."

"And he didn't come?" she almost wailed.

"I fancy you'd better try to sleep until morning. There's nothing to stay
awake for," although it came with a pang.

"Absolutely nothing," she murmured, and his pride took a respectful tumble.

As she began to rearrange her hair, rather clumsily spoiling a charming
effect, he remonstrated.

"Don't bother about your hair." She looked at him in wonder for an
instant, a little smile finally creeping to her lips. He felt that she
understood something. "Maybe he'll come after all," he added quickly.

"What are you doing with my parasol?" she asked sleepily.

"I'm carrying it to establish your identity with Dudley if he happens to
come. He'll recognize the purple parasol, you know."

"Oh, I see," she said dubiously. "He gave it to me for a birthday present."

"I knew it," he muttered.

"What?"

"I mean I knew he'd recognize it," he explained.

The flyer shot through Fossingford at that juncture, a long line of
roaring shadows. There was silence between them until the rumble was lost
in the distance.

"If you don't mind, I'd like to go out on the platform for awhile," she
said finally, resignation in her eyes. "Perhaps he's out there, wondering
why the train didn't stop."

"It's cold out there. Just slip into my coat, Miss Dering." He held the
raincoat for her, and she mechanically slipped her arms into the sleeves.
She shivered, but smiled sweetly up at him.

"Thank you, Mr. Rollins, you are very thoughtful and very kind to me."

They walked out into the darkness. After a turn or two in silence she
took the arm he proffered. He admired the bravery with which she was
trying to convince him that she was not so bitterly disappointed. When she
finally spoke her voice was soft and cool, just as a woman's always is
before the break.

"He was to have taken me to his uncle's house, six miles up in the
country. His aunt and a young lady from the South, with Mr. Dudley and me,
are to go to Eagle Nest to-morrow for a month."

"How very odd," he said with well-assumed surprise. "I, too, am going to
Eagle Nest for a month or so."

She stopped stock-still, and he could feel that she was staring at him
hardly.

"You are going there?" she half whispered.

"They say it is a quiet, restful place," he said. "One reaches it by
stage over-land, I believe." She was strangely silent during the remainder
of the walk. Somehow he felt amazingly sorry for her. "I hope I may see
something of you while we are there," he said at last.

"I imagine I couldn't help it if I were to try," she said. They were in
the path of the light from the window, and he saw the strange little smile
on her face. "I think I'll lie down again. Won't you find a place to
sleep, Mr. Rollins? I can't bear the thought of depriving you--"

"I am the slave of your darkness," he said gravely.

She left him, and he lit another cigar. Daylight came at last to break up
his thoughts, and then his tired eyes began to look for the man and buggy.
Fatigued and weary, he sat upon his steamer trunk, his back to the wall.
There he fell sound asleep.

He was awakened by some one shaking him gently by the shoulder.

"You are a very sound sleeper, Mr. Rollins," said a familiar voice, but
it was gay and sprightly. He looked up blankly, and it was a full
half-minute before he could get his bearings.

A young woman with a purple parasol stood beside him, laughing merrily,
and at her side was a tall, dark, very good-looking young man.

"I couldn't go without saying good-by to you, Mr. Rollins, and thanking
you again for the care you have taken of me," she was saying. He finally
saw the little gloved hand that was extended toward him. Her companion was
carrying her jacket and the little travelling-bag.

"Oh--er--good-by, and don't mention it," he stammered, struggling to his
feet. "Was I asleep?"

"Asleep at your post, sir. Mr. Dudley--oh, this is Mr. Dudley, Mr.
Rollins--came in ten minutes ago and found--us--both--asleep."

"Isn't it lucky Mr. Dudley happens to be an honest man?" said Rossiter,
in a manner so strange that the smile froze on the face of the other man.
The unhappy barrister caught the quick glance that passed between them,
and was vaguely convinced that they had been discussing him while he
slept. Something whispered to him that they had guessed the nature of his
business.

"My telegram was not delivered to him until this morning. Wasn't it
provoking?" she was saying.

"What time is it now?" asked Rossiter.

"Half-past seven," responded Dudley rather sharply. His black eyes were
fastened steadily upon those of the questioner. "Mr. Van Haltford's man
came in and got Miss Dering's telegram yesterday, but it was not delivered
to me until a neighbor came to the house with both the message and
messenger in charge. Joseph had drunk all the whisky in Fossingford.

"Then there's no chance for me to get a drink, I suppose," said Rossiter
with a wry smile.

"Do you need one?" asked Miss Dering saucily.

"I have a headache."

"A pick-me-up is what you want," said Dudley coldly.

"My dear sir, I haven't been drunk," remonstrated Rossiter sharply. His
hearers laughed and he turned red but cold with resentment.

"See, Mr. Rollins, I have smoothed out your clothes and folded them," she
said, pointing to her one-time couch. "I couldn't pack them in your trunk
because you were sitting on it. Shall I help you now?"

"No, I thank you," he said ungraciously. "I can toss 'em in any old way."

He set about doing it without another word. His companions stood over
near the window and conversed earnestly in words too low for him to
distinguish. From the corner of his eye he could see that Dudley's face
was hard and uncompromising, while hers was eager and imploring. The man
was stubbornly objecting to something, and she was just as decided in an
opposite direction.

"He's finding fault and she's trying to square it with him. Oh, my
beauties, you'll have a hard time to shake off one Samuel Rossiter.
They're suspicious--or he is, at least. Some one has tipped me off to
them, I fancy."

"I'm sorry they are so badly mussed, Mr. Rollins, but they did make a
very comfortable bed," she said, walking over to him. Her cheeks were
flushed and her eyes were gleaming. "You are going to Eagle Nest to-day?"

"Just as soon as I can get a conveyance. There is a stage-coach at nine,
Miss Dering."

"We will have room for you on our break," she said simply. Her eyes met
his bravely and then wavered. Rossiter's heart gave a mighty leap.

"Permit me to second Miss Dering's invitation," said Dudley, coming over.
The suggestion of a frown on his face made Rossiter only too eager to
accept the unexpected invitation. "My aunt and Miss Crozier are outside
with the coachman. You can have your luggage sent over in the stage. It is
fourteen miles by road, so we should be under way, Mr. Rollins."

As Rossiter followed them across the platform he was saying to himself:

"Well, the game's on. Here's where I begin to earn my salary. I'll hang
out my sign when I get back to New York: 'Police Spying. Satisfaction
guaranteed. References given.' Hang it all, I hate to do this to her.
She's an awfully good sort, and--and--But I don't like this damned Havens!"

Almost before he knew it he was being presented to two handsome,
fashionably dressed young women who sat together in the rear seat of the
big mountain break.

"Every cloud has its silver lining," Miss Dering was saying. "Let me
present you to Mr. Dudley's aunt, Mrs. Van Haltford, and to Miss Crozier,
Mr. Rollins."

In a perfect maze of emotions, he found himself bowing before the two
ladies, who smiled distantly and uncertainly. Dudley's aunt? That dashing
young creature his aunt? Rossiter was staggered by the boldness of the
claim. He could scarce restrain the scornful, brutal laugh of derision at
this ridiculous play upon his credulity. To his secret satisfaction he
discovered that the entire party seemed nervous and ill at ease. There was
a trace of confusion in their behavior. He heard Miss Dering explain that
he was to accompany the party and he saw the poorly concealed look of
disapproval and polite inquiry that went between the two ladies and
Dudley. There was nothing for it, however, now that Miss Dering had
committed herself, and he was advised to look to his luggage without delay.

He hurried into the station to arrange for the transportation of his
trunk by stage, all the while smiling maliciously in his sleeve. Looking
surreptitiously from a window he saw the quartet, all of them now on the
break, arguing earnestly over--him, he was sure. Miss Dering was
plaintively facing the displeasure of the trio. The coachman's averted
face wore a half-grin. The discussion ended abruptly as Rossiter
reappeared, but there was a coldness in the air that did not fail to
impress him as portentous.

"I'm the elephant on their hands--the proverbial hot coal," he thought
wickedly. "Well, they've got to bear it even if they can't grin." Then
aloud cheerily: "All aboard! We're off!" He took his seat beside the
driver. The events of the ensuing week are best chronicled by the
reproduction of Rossiter's own diary or report, with liberties in the
shape of an author's comments.


THURSDAY.


"Settled comfortably in Eagle Nest House. Devilish rugged and
out-of-the-way place. Mrs. Van Haltford is called Aunt Josephine. She and
Miss Debby Crozier have rooms on the third floor. Mine is next to theirs,
Havens's is next to mine, and Mrs. Wharton has two rooms beyond his. We
are not unlike a big family party. They're rather nice to me. I go
walking with Aunt Josephine. I don't understand why I'm sandwiched in
between Havens and Aunt Josephine. Otherwise the arrangement is neat.
There is a veranda outside our windows. We sit upon it. Aunt Josephine
is a great bluff, but she's clever. She's never napping. I've tried to
pump her. Miss Crozier is harmless. She doesn't care. Havens never takes
his eyes off Mrs. W. when they are together. She looks at him a good bit,
too. They don't pay much attention to me. Aunt Josephine's husband is
very old and very busy. He can't take vacations. Everybody went to bed
early to-night. No evidence to-day."


FRIDAY NIGHT.


"Havens and Mrs. W. went hill-climbing this afternoon and were gone for
an hour before I missed them. Then I took Aunt Jo and Debby out for a
quick climb. Confound Aunt Jo! She got tired in ten minutes and Debby
wouldn't go on without her. I think it was a put-up job. The others didn't
return till after six. She asked me if I'd like to walk about the grounds
after dinner. Said I would. We did. Havens went with us. Couldn't shake
him to save my life."


SATURDAY NIGHT.


"I have to watch myself constantly to keep from calling her Mrs. Wharton.
I believe writing her real name is bad policy. It makes me forget. After
this I shall call her Miss Dering, and I'll speak of him as Dudley. This
morning he asked me to call him 'Jim.' He calls me 'Sam.' Actors do get
familiar. When she came downstairs to go driving with him this morning
I'll swear she was the prettiest thing I ever saw. They took a lunch and
were gone for hours. I'd like to punch his face. She was very quiet all
evening, and I fancied she avoided me. I smelt liquor on his breath just
before bedtime.

"_One A. M._--I thought everybody had gone to bed, but they are out
there on the veranda talking. Just outside her windows. I distinctly heard
him call her 'dearest.' Something must have alarmed them, for they parted
abruptly. He walked the veranda for an hour, all alone. Plenty of
evidence."


SUNDAY NIGHT.


"For appearance's sake he took Miss Crozier for a walk to-day. I went to
the chapel down the hill with Miss Dering and Aunt Josephine. Aunt
Josephine put a ten-dollar bill in the box. Thinks she's squaring herself
with the Lord, I suppose. Miss Dering was not at all talkative and gave
every sign of being uncomfortable because he had the audacity to go
walking with another girl. In the afternoon she complained of being ill
and went to her room. Later on she sent for Dudley and Mrs. Van Haltford.
They were in her room all afternoon. I smoked on the terrace with Debby.
She is the most uninteresting girl I ever met. But she's on to their game.
I know it because she forgot herself once, when I mentioned Miss Dering's
illness, and said: 'Poor girl! She is in a most trying position. Don't you
think Mr. Dudley is a splendid fellow?' I said that he was very
good-looking, and she seemed to realize she had said something she ought
not to have said and shut up. I'm sorry she's sick, though. I miss that
parasol dreadfully. She always has it, and I can see her a mile away.
Usually he carries it, though. Well, I suppose he has a right--as original
owner. Jim and I smoked together this evening, but he evidently smells a
mouse. He did not talk much, and I caught him eying me strangely several
times."


MONDAY NIGHT.


"Dudley has departed. I believe they are on to me. He went to Boston this
afternoon, and he actually was gruff with me just before leaving. The size
of the matter is, some one has posted him, and they are all up to my game
as a spy. I wish I were out of it. Never was so ashamed of a thing in my
life; don't feel like looking any one in the face. They've all been nice
to me. But what's the difference? They're all interested. She went to the
train with him and--the rest of us. I'll never forget how sad she looked
as she held his hand and bade him good-by. I carried the parasol back to
the hotel, and I know I hurt her feelings when I maliciously said that it
would look well with a deep black border. She almost looked a hole through
me. Fine eyes. I don't know what is coming next. She is liable to slip out
from under my eye at any time and fly away to meet him somewhere else. I
telegraphed this message to Grover & Dickhut:

"He has gone. She still here. What shall I do?

"Got this answer:

"Stay there and watch. They suspect you. Don't let her get away.

"But how the devil am I to watch day and night?"

The next week was rather an uneventful one for Rossiter. There was no
sign of Havens and no effort on her part to leave Eagle Nest.

As the days went by he became more and more vigilant. In fact, his watch
was incessant and very much of a personal one. He walked and drove with
her, and he invented all sorts of excuses to avoid Mrs. Van Haltford and
Miss Crozier. The purple parasol and he had become almost inseparable
friends. The fear that Havens might return at any time kept him in a fever
of anxiety and dread. Now that he was beginning to know her for himself he
could not endure the thought that she cared for another man. Strange to
say, he did not think of her husband. Old Wharton had completely faded
from his mind; it was Havens that he envied. He saw himself sinking into
her net, falling before her wiles, but he did not rebel.

He went to bed each night apprehensive that the next morning should find
him alone and desolate at Eagle Nest, the bird flown. It hurt him to think
that she would laugh over her feat of outwitting him. He was not guarding
her for old Wharton now; he was in his own employ. All this time he knew
it was wrong, and that she was trifling with him while the other was away.
Yet he had eyes, ears, and a heart like all men, and they were for none
save the pretty wife of Godfrey Wharton.

He spoke to her on several occasions of Dudley and gnashed his teeth when
he saw a look of sadness, even longing, come into her dark eyes. At such
times he was tempted to tell her that he knew all, to confound her by
charging her with guilt. But he could not collect the courage. For some
unaccountable reason he held his bitter tongue. And so it was that
handsome Sam Rossiter, spy and good fellow, fell in love with a woman who
had a very dark page in her history.

She received mail, of course, daily, but he was not sneak enough to pry
into its secrets, even had the chance presented itself. Sometimes she
tossed the letters away carelessly, but he observed that there were some
which she guarded jealously.

Once he heard her tell Aunt Josephine that she had a letter from "Jim."
He began to discover that "Jim" was a forbidden subject and that he was
not discussed; at least, not in his presence. Many times he saw the two
women in earnest, rather cautious conversation, and instinctively felt
that Havens was the subject. Mrs. Wharton appeared piqued and discontented
after these little talks. He made this entry in his diary one night, a
week after Havens went away:

"I almost wish he'd come back and end the suspense. This thing is wearing
on me. I was weighed to-day and I've lost ten pounds. Mrs. Van Haltford
says I look hungry and advises me to try salt-water air. I'm hanged if I
don't give up the job this week. I don't like it, anyhow. It doesn't seem
square to be down here enjoying her society, taking her walking and all
that, and all the time hunting up something with which to ruin her
forever. I'll stick the week out, but I'm not decided whether I'll produce
any evidence against her if the Wharton _vs._ Wharton case ever does
come to trial. I don't believe I could. I don't want to be a sneak."

One day Rossiter and the purple parasol escorted the pretty trifler over
the valley to Bald Top, half a mile from the hotel. Mrs. Van Haltford and
Miss Crozier were to join them later and were to bring with them Colonel
Deming and Mr. Vincent, two friends who had lately arrived. The hotel was
rapidly filling with fashionable guests, and Mrs. Wharton had petulantly
observed, a day or two before, that the place was getting crowded and she
believed she would go away soon. On the way over she said to him:

"I have about decided to go down to Velvet Springs for the rest of the
month. Don't you think it is getting rather crowded here?"

"I have been pretty well satisfied," he replied, in an injured tone. "I
don't see why you should want to leave here."

"Why should I stay if I am tired of the place?" she asked demurely,
casting a roguish glance at his sombre face. He clenched the parasol and
grated his teeth.

"She's leading me on, confound her!" he thought. At the same time his
head whirled and his heart beat a little faster. "You shouldn't," he said,
"if you are tired. There's more of an attraction at Velvet Springs, I
suppose."

"Have you been there?"

"No."

"You answered rather snappishly. Have you a headache?"

"Pardon me; I didn't intend to answer snappishly, as you call it. I only
wanted to be brief."

"Why?"

"Because I wanted to change the subject."

"Shall we talk of the weather?"

"I suppose we may as well," he said resignedly. She was plainly laughing
at him now. "Look here," he said, stopping and looking into her eyes
intently and somewhat fiercely, "why do you want to go to Velvet Springs?"

"Why should you care where I go?" she answered blithely, although her
eyes wavered.

"It's because you are unhappy here and because some one else is there.
I'm not blind, Mrs.--Miss Dering."

"You have no right to talk to me in that manner, Mr. Rollins. Come, we
are to go back to the hotel at once," she said coldly. There was steel in
her eyes.

He met her contemptuous look for a moment and quailed.

"I beg your pardon. I am a fool, but you have made me such," he said
baldly.

"I? I do not understand you," and he could not but admire the clever,
innocent, widespread eyes.

"You will understand me some day," he said, and to his amazement she
flushed and looked away. They continued their walk, but there was a
strange shyness in her manner that puzzled him.

"When is Dudley expected back here?" he asked abruptly.

She started sharply and gave him a quick, searching look. There was a
guilty expression in her eyes, and he muttered something ugly under his
breath.

"I do not know, Mr. Rollins," she answered.

"When did you hear from him last?" he demanded half savagely.

"I do not intend to be catechized by you, sir," she exclaimed, halting
abruptly. "We shall go back. You are very ugly to-day and I am surprised."

"I supposed you had letters from him every day," he went on ruthlessly.
She gave him a look in which he saw pain and the shadow of tears, and then
she turned and walked swiftly toward the hotel. His conscience smote him
and he turned after her. For the next ten minutes he was on his knees,
figuratively, pleading for forgiveness. At last she paused and smiled
sweetly into his face. Then she calmly turned and resumed the journey to
Bald Top, saying demurely:

"We have nearly a quarter of a mile to retrace, all because you were so
hateful."

"And you so obdurate," he added blissfully. He had tried to be severe and
angry with her and had failed.

That very night the expected came to pass. Havens appeared on the scene,
the same handsome, tragic-looking fellow, a trifle care-worn perhaps, but
still--an evil genius. Rossiter ran plump into him in the hallway and was
speechless for a moment. He unconsciously shook hands with the new
arrival, but his ears were ringing so with the thuds of his heart that he
heard but few of the brisk words addressed to him. After the eager actor
had left him standing humbly in the hall he managed to recall part of what
had been said. He had come up on the express from Boston and could stay
but a day or two. Did Mr. Rossiter know whether Miss Dering was in her
room? The barrister also distinctly remembered that he did not ask for his
aunt, which would have been the perfectly natural query.

Half an hour later Havens was strolling about the grounds, under the lamp
lights, in and out of dark nooks, and close beside him was a slim figure
in white. Their conversation was earnest, their manner secretive; that
much the harassed Rossiter could see from the balcony. His heart grew sore
and he could almost feel the tears of disappointment surging to his eyes.
A glance in his mirror had shown him a face haggard and drawn, eyes
strange and bright. He had not slept well, he knew; he had worn himself
out in this despicable watch; he had grown to care for the creature he had
been hired to spy upon. No wonder he was haggard.

Now he was jealous--madly, fiendishly jealous. In his heart there was the
savage desire to kill the other man and to denounce the woman. Pacing the
grounds about the hotel, he soon worked himself into a fever, devilish in
its hotness. More than once he passed them, and it was all he could do to
refrain from springing upon them. At length he did what most men do: he
took a drink. Whisky flew down his throat and to his brain. In his mind's
eye he saw her in the other's arms--and he could bear it no longer!
Rushing to his room, he threw himself on the bed and cursed.

"Good heaven! I love her! I love her better than all the world! I can't
stay here and see any more of it! By thunder, I'll go back to New York and
they can go to the devil! So can old Wharton! And so can Grover & Dickhut!"

He leaped to his feet, dashed headlong to the telegraph office
downstairs, and ten minutes later this message was flying to Grover &
Dickhut:

Get some one else for this job. I'm done with it. Coming home.--SAM.

"I'm coming on the first train, too," muttered the sender, as he hurried
up-stairs. "I can pack my trunk for the night stage. I'd like to say
good-by to her, but I can't--I couldn't stand it. What's the difference?
She won't care whether I go or stay--rather have me go. If I were to meet
her now I'd--yes, by George--kiss her! It's wrong to love her, but--"

There was nothing dignified about the manner in which big Sam Rossiter
packed his trunk. He fairly stamped the clothing into it and did a lot of
other absurd things. When he finally locked it and yanked out his watch
his brow was wet and he was trembling. It had taken just five minutes to
do the packing. His hat was on the back of his head, his collar was
melting, and his cigar was chewed to a pulp. Cane and umbrella were yanked
from behind the door and he was ready to fly. The umbrella made him think
of a certain parasol, and his heart grew still and cold with the knowledge
that he was never to carry it again.

"I hope I don't meet any of 'em," he muttered, pulling himself together
and rushing into the hall. A porter had already jerked his trunk down the
stair steps.

As he hastened after it he heard the swish of skirts and detected in the
air a familiar odor, the subtle scent of a perfume that he could not
forget were he to live a thousand years. The next moment she came swiftly
around a corner in the hall, hurrying to her rooms. They met and both
started in surprise, her eyes falling to his travelling-bag, and then
lifting to his face in bewilderment. He checked his hurried flight and she
came quite close to him. The lights in the hall were dim and the elevator
car had dropped to regions below.

"Where are you going?" she asked in some agitation.

"I am going back to New York," he answered, controlling himself with an
effort. She was so beautiful, there in the dim hallway.

"To-night?" she asked in very low tones.

"In half an hour."

"And were you going without saying good-by to--to us?" she went on rapidly.

He looked steadily down into her solemn eyes for a moment and an
expression of pain, of longing, came into his own.

"It couldn't make any difference whether I said good-by to you, and it
would have been hard," he replied unsteadily.

"Hard? I don't understand you," she said.

"I didn't want to see you. Yes, I hoped to get away before you knew
anything about it. Maybe it was cowardly, but it was the best way," he
cried bitterly.

"What do you mean?" she cried, and he detected alarm, confusion, guilt in
her manner.

"You know what I mean. I know everything--I knew it before I came here,
before I saw you. It's why I am here, I'm ashamed to say. But, have no
fear--have no fear! I've given up the job--the nasty job--and you can do
as you please. The only trouble is that I have been caught in the web;
I've been trapped myself. You've made me care for you. That's why I'm
giving it all up. Don't look so frightened--I'll promise to keep your
secret."

Her eyes were wide, her lips parted, but no words came; she seemed to
shrink from him as if he were the headsman and she his victim.

"I'll do it, right or wrong!" he gasped suddenly. And in an instant his
satchel clattered to the floor and his arms were straining the slight
figure to his breast. Burning lips met hers and sealed them tight. She
shivered violently, struggled for an instant in his mad embrace, but made
no outcry. Gradually her free arm stole upward and around his neck and her
lips responded to the passion in his. His kiss of ecstasy was returned.
The thrill of joy that shot through him was almost overpowering. A dozen
times he kissed her. Unbelieving, he held her from him and looked hungrily
into her eyes. They were wet with tears.

"Why do you go? I love you!" she whispered faintly.

Then came the revulsion. With an oath he threw her from him. Her hands
went to her temples and a moan escaped her lips.

"Bah!" he snarled. "Get away from me! Heaven forgive me for being as weak
as I've been to-night!"

"Sam!" she wailed piteously.

"Don't tell me anything! Don't try to explain! Be honest with one man, at
least!"

"You must be insane!" she cried tremulously.

"Don't play innocent, madam. I _know_." In abject terror she shrank
away from him. "But I have kissed you! If I live a thousand years I shall
not forget its sweetness."

He waved his hands frantically above her, grabbed up his suit-case and
traps, and, with one last look at the petrified woman shrinking against
the wall under the blasts of his vituperation, he dashed for the stairway.
And so he left her, a forlorn, crushed figure.

Blindly he tore downstairs and to the counter. He hardly knew what he was
doing as he drew forth his pocket-book to pay his account.

"Going away, Mr. Rollins?" inquired the clerk, glancing at the clock. It
was eleven-twenty and the last stage-coach left for Fossingford at
eleven-thirty, in time to catch the seven o'clock down train.

"Certainly," was the excited answer.

"A telegram came a few moments ago for you, sir, but I thought you were
in bed," and the other tossed a little envelope out to him. Mechanically
Rossiter tore it open. He was thinking of the cowering woman in the
hallway and he was cursing himself for his brutality.

He read the despatch with dizzy eyes and drooping jaw, once, twice,
thrice. Then he leaned heavily against the counter and a coldness assailed
his heart, so bitter that he felt his blood freezing. It read:

What have you been doing? The people you were sent to watch sailed for
Europe ten days ago.

       GROVER & DICKHUT.

The paper fell from his trembling fingers, but he regained it, natural
instinct inspiring a fear that the clerk would read it.

"Good Lord!" he gasped.

"Bad news, Mr. Rollins?" asked the clerk sympathetically, but the
stricken, bewildered man did not answer.

What did it mean? A vast faintness attacked him as the truth began to
penetrate. Out of the whirling mystery came the astounding, ponderous
realization that he had blundered, that he had wronged her, that he had
accused her of--Oh, that dear, stricken figure in the hallway above!

He leaped to the staircase. Three steps at a time he flew back to the
scene of the miserable tragedy. What he thought, what he felt as he rushed
into the hallway can only be imagined. She was gone--heartbroken, killed!
And she had kissed him and said she loved him!

A light shone through the transoms over the doors that led into her
apartments. Quaking with fear, he ran down the hall and beat a violent
tattoo upon her parlor door. Again he rapped, crazed by remorse, fear,
love, pity, shame, and a hundred other emotions.

"Who is it?" came in stifled tones from within.

"It is I--Rossiter--I mean Rollins! I must see you--now! For pity's sake,
let me in!"

"How dare you--" she began shrilly; but he was not to be denied.

"If you don't open this door I'll kick it in!" he shouted. "I must see
you!"

After a moment the door flew open and he stood facing her. She was like a
queen. Her figure was as straight as an arrow, her eyes blazing. But there
had been tears in them a moment before.

"Another insult!" she exclaimed, and the scorn in her voice was
withering. He paused abashed, for the first time realizing that he had
hurt her beyond reparation. His voice faltered and the tears flew to his
eyes.

"I don't know what to say to you. It has been a mistake--a frightful
mistake--and I don't know whether you'll let me explain. When I got
downstairs I found this telegram and--for heaven's sake, let me tell you
the wretched story. Don't turn away from me! You shall listen to me if I
have to hold you!" His manner changed suddenly to the violent, imperious
forcefulness of a man driven to the last resort.

"Must I call for help?" she cried, thoroughly alarmed, once more the weak
woman, face to face, as she thought, with an insane man.

"I love you better than my own life, and I've hurt you terribly. I'm not
crazy, Helen! But I've been a fool, and I'll go crazy if you don't give me
a chance to explain."

Whether she gave the chance or no he took it, and from his eager,
pleading lips raced the whole story of his connection with the Wharton
affair from first to last.

He humbled himself, accused himself, ridiculed himself, and wound up by
throwing himself upon her mercy, uttering protestations of the love which
had really been his undoing.

She heard him through without a word. The light in her eyes changed; the
fear left them and the scorn fled. Instead there grew, by stages, wonder,
incredulity, wavering doubt and--joy. She understood him and she loved
him! The awful horror of that meeting in the hallway was swept away like
unto the transformation scene in the fairy spectacle.

When he fell upon his knee and sought to clasp her fingers in his cold
hand she smiled, and, stooping over, placed both hands on his cheeks and
kissed him.

What followed her kiss of forgiveness may be more easily imagined than
told.

"You see it was perfectly natural for me to mistake you for Mrs.
Wharton," he said after awhile. "You had the gray jacket, the sailor hat,
the purple parasol, and you are beautiful. And, besides all that, you were
found red-handed in that ridiculous town of Fossingford. Why shouldn't I
have suspected you with such a preponderance of evidence against you?
Anybody who would get off of a night train in Fossingford certainly ought
to be ashamed of something."

"But Fossingford is on the map, isn't it? One has a perfect right to get
off where she likes, hasn't she, provided it is on the map?"

"Not at all! That's what maps are for: to let you see where you don't get
off."

"But I was obliged to get off there. My ticket said 'Fossingford,' and,
besides, I was to be met at the station in a most legitimate manner. You
had no right to jump at conclusions."

"Well, if you had not descended to earth at Fossingford I wouldn't be in
heaven at Eagle Nest. Come to think of it, I believe you did quite the
proper thing in getting off at Fossingford--no matter what the hour."

"You must remember always that I have not taken you to task for a most
flagrant piece of--shall I say indiscretion?"

"Good Heavens!"

"You stopped off at Fossingford for the sole purpose of seeing another
woman."

"That's all very fine, dear, but you'll admit that Dudley was an
excellent substitute for Havens. Can't you see how easy it was to be
mistaken?"

"I won't fall into easy submission. Still, I believe I could recommend
you as a detective. They usually do the most unheard of things--just as
you have. Poor Jim Dudley an actor! Mistaken for such a man as you say
Havens is! It is even more ridiculous than that I should be mistaken for
Mrs. Wharton."

"Say, I'd like to know something about Dudley. It was his confounded
devotion to you that helped matters along in my mind. What is he to you?"

"He came here to-night to repeat a question that had been answered
unalterably once before. Jim Dudley? Have you never heard of James Dudley,
the man who owns all of those big mines in South America, the man who--"

"Who owns the yachts and automobiles and--and the railroad trains? Is he
the one? The man with the millions? Good Lord! And you could have had him
instead of me? Helen, I--I don't understand it. Why didn't you take him?"

She hesitated a moment before answering brightly:

"Perhaps it is because I have a fancy for the ridiculous."


THE END










End of Project Gutenberg's The Purple Parasol, by George Barr McCutcheon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PURPLE PARASOL ***

***** This file should be named 6575.txt or 6575.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/5/7/6575/

Produced by Avinash Kothare, Charles Aldarondo and the
On-line Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
