The Project Gutenberg EBook of Old Caravan Days, by Mary Hartwell Catherwood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Old Caravan Days

Author: Mary Hartwell Catherwood


Release Date: November, 2004 [EBook #6909]
This file was first posted on February 10, 2003
Last Updated: March 8, 2018

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLD CARAVAN DAYS ***




Produced by Avinash Kothare, Tom Allen, Juliet Sutherland,
Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team. This file was produced from images generously made
available by the Canadian Institute for Historical
Microreproductions.








OLD CARAVAN DAYS


By Mary Hartwell Catherwood




CONTENTS.


    I. THE START

   II. THE LITTLE OLD MAN WITH A BAG ON HIS BACK

  III. THE TAVERN

   IV. THE SUSAN HOUSE

    V. THE SUSAN HOUSE CELLAR

   VI. MR. MATTHEWS

  VII. ZENE'S MAN AND WOMAN

 VIII. LITTLE ANT RED AND BIG ANT BLACK

   IX. THE GREAT CAMP MEETING

    X. THE CRY OF A CHILD IN THE NIGHT

   XI. THE DARKENED WAGON

  XII. JONATHAN AND THRUSTY ELLEN

 XIII. FAIRY CARRIE AND THE PIG-HEADED MAN

  XIV. SEARCHING

   XV. THE SPROUTING

  XVI. THE MINSTREL

 XVII. THE HOUSE WITH LOG STEPS

XVIII. “COME TO MAMMA!”

  XIX. FAIRY CARRIE DEPARTS

   XX. SUNDAY ON THE ROAD

  XXI. HER MOTHER ARRIVES

 XXII. A COUNTRY SUNDAY-SCHOOL

XXIII. FORWARD

 XXIV. THE TOLL-WOMAN

  XXV. THE ROBBERS

 XXVI. THE FAIR AND THE FIERCE BANDIT

XXVII. A NIGHT PICTURE OF HOME




OLD CARAVAN DAYS.




CHAPTER I. THE START.


In the year eighteen hundred and fifty-seven, on the fifth day of
June, the Padgett carriage-horses faced the west, and their mistress
gathered the lines into her mitted hands.

The moving-wagon was ready in front of the carriage. It was to be
driven by Zene, the lame hired man. Zene was taking a last drink from
that well at the edge of the garden, which lay so deep that your face
looked like a star in it. Robert Day Padgett, Mrs. Padgett's
grandson, who sat on the back seat of the carriage, decided that he
must have one more drink, and his aunt Corinne who sat beside him,
was made thirsty by his decision. So the two children let down the
carriage steps and ran to the well.

It was like Sunday all over the farm, only the cattle were not
straying over the fields. The house was shut up, its new inhabitants
not having arrived. Some neighbor women had come to bid the family
good-bye again, though it was so early that the garden lay in heavy
dew. These good friends stood around the carriage; one of them held
the front-door key in trust for the new purchaser. They all called
the straight old lady who held the lines grandma Padgett. She was
grandma Padgett to the entire neighborhood, and they shook their
heads sorrowfully in remembering that her blue spectacles, her
ancient Leghorn bonnet, her Quaker shoulder cape and decided face
might be vanishing from them forever.

“You'll come back to Ohio,” said one neighbor. “The wild Western
prairie country won't suit you at all.”

“I'm not denying,” returned grandma Padgett, “that I could end my
days in peace on the farm here; but son Tip can do very little here,
and he can do well out there. I've lost my entire family except son
Tip and the baby of all, you know. And it's not my wish to be
separated from son Tip in my declining years.”

The neighbors murmured that they knew, and one of them inquired as
she had often inquired before, at what precise point grandma
Padgett's son was to meet the party; and she replied as if giving new
information, that it was at the Illinois State line.

“You'll have pretty weather,” said another woman, squinting-in the
early sun.

“Grandma Padgett won't care for weather,” observed the neighbor with
the key. “She moved out from Virginia in the dead o' winter.”

“Yes; I was but a child,” said grandma Padgett, “and this country
one unbroken wilderness. We came down the Ohio River by flatboat, and
moved into this section when the snow was so deep you could ride
across stake-and-rider fences on the drifts.”

“Folks can get around easier now, though,” said the squinting
neighbor, “since they got to going on these railroads.”

“I shipped part of my goods on the railroad,” remarked grandma
Padgett with--a laugh. “But I don't know; I ain't used to the things,
and I don't know whether I'd resk my bones for a long distance or
not. Son Tip went out on the cars.”

“The railroads charge so high,” murmured a woman near the back
wheels. “But they do say you can ride as far West as you're a goin'
on the cars.”

“How long will you be gettin' through?” inquired another.

“Not more than two or three weeks,” replied grandma Padgett
resolutely. “It's a little better than three hundred and fifty miles,
I believe.”

“That's a long distance,” sighed the neighbor at the wheels.

But aunt Corinne and her nephew, untroubled by the length of
pilgrimage before them, ran from the well into the garden.

“I wish the kerns were ripe,” said aunt Corinne. “Look out, Bobaday!
You're drabblin' the bottoms of your good pants.”

“'Twouldn't do any good if the kerns were ripe,” said Bobaday,
turning his pepper-and-salt trousers up until the linings showed.
“This farm ain't ours now, and we couldn't pull them.”

Aunt Corinne paused at the fennel bed: then she impulsively
stretched forth her hand and gathered it full.

“I set out these things,” said aunt Corinne, “and I ain't countin'
them sold till the wagon starts.” So she gathered sweetbrier, and a
leaf of sage and two or three pinks.

“O Bobaday,” said aunt Corinne--this name being a childish
corruption of Robert Day: for aunt Corinne two years younger than her
nephew, and had talked baby talk when he prided himself on distinct
English--“you s'pose brother Tip's got a garden like this at the new
place? Oh, the pretty little primroses! Who'll watch them pop open
to-night? How you and me have sat on the primrose bed and watched the
t-e-e-nty buds swell and swell till finally--pop! they smack their lips
and burst wide open!”

“We'll have a primrose bed out West,” said Bobaday. “We'll plant
sweet anise too, and have caraway seeds to put in the cakes. Aunt
Krin, did you know grandma's goin' to have green kern pie when we
stop for dinner to-day?”

“I knew there was kern pie made,” said aunt Krin. “I guess we better
get into the carriage.”

She held her short dress away from the bushes, and scampered with
Bobaday into the yard. Here they could not help stopping on the
warped floor of the porch to look into the empty house. It looked
lonesome already. A mouse had ventured out of the closet by the tall
sitting-room mantel; and a faint outline of the clock's shape
remained on the wall.

The house with its trees was soon fading into the past. The
neighbors were going home by the road or across fields. Zene's wagon,
drawn by the old white and gray, moved ahead at a good pace. It was
covered with white canvas drawn tight over hoops which were held by
iron clamps to the wagon-sides. At the front opening sat Zene,
resting his feet on the tongue. The rear opening was puckered to a
round O by a drawing string. Swinging to and fro from the hind axle,
hung the tar-bucket. A feed box was fitted across the hind end of the
wagon. Such stores as might be piled to the very canvas roof, were
concealed from sight by a black oilcloth apron hanging behind Zene.
This sheet of oilcloth was designed for an additional roof to keep
the goods dry when it rained.

Under the wagon, keeping well away from the tar-bucket, trotted
Boswell and Johnson. Bobaday named them; he had read something of
English literature in his grandfather's old books. Johnson was a fat
black and white dog, who was obliged to keep his tongue out of his
mouth to pant during the greater part of his days. He had fits of
meditation, when Boswell galloped all over him without provoking a
snap. Johnson was, indeed, a most amiable fellow, and had gained a
reputation as a good watch dog, because on light nights he barked the
shining hours away.

Boswell was a little short-legged dog, built like a clumsy weasel;
for his body was so long it seemed to plead for six legs instead of
four, to support it, and no one could blame his back for swaying a
little in the middle. Boswell was a brindled dog. He had yellow spots
like pumpkin seeds over his eyes. His affection for Johnson was
extreme. He looked up to Johnson. If he startled a bird at the
roadside, or scratched at the roots of a tree after his imagination,
he came back to Johnson for approval, wagging his tail until it made
his whole body undulate. Johnson sometimes condescended to rub a nose
against his silly head, and this threw him into such fire of delight
that he was obliged to get out of the wagon-track, and bark around
himself in a circle until the carriage left him behind. Then he came
up to Johnson again, and panted along beside him, with a smile as
open and constant as sunshine.

No such caravan as the Padgett family has been seen moving West
since those days when all the States were in a ferment: when New York
and the New England States poured into Ohio, and Pennsylvania and
Ohio, Kentucky and Tennessee into Indiana, Illinois, and even--as a
desperate venture, Missouri. The Old National Turnpike was then a
lively thoroughfare. Sometimes a dozen white-covered wagons stretched
along in company. All classes of society were represented among the
movers. There were squalid lots to--be avoided as thieves: and there
were carriages full of families who would raise Senators, Presidents,
and large financiers in their new home. The forefathers of many a man
and woman, now abroad studying older civilization in Europe, came
West as movers by the wagon route.

Aunt Corinne and her nephew were glad when Zene drove upon the
'pike, and the carriage followed. The 'pike had a solid rumbling base
to offer wheels. You were comparatively in town while driving there,
for every little while you met somebody, and that body always
appeared to feel more important for driving on the 'pike. It was a
glittering white highway the ruts worn by wheels were literally worn
in stone. Yet never were roadsides as green as the sloping 'pike
sides. No trees encroached very close upon it, and it stretched in
endless glare. But how smoothly you bowled along! People living aside
in fields, could hear your progress; the bass roar of the 'pike was
as distinct, though of course not as loud, as the rumble of a train.

Going through Reynoldsburg however, was the great triumphal act of
leave-taking. The Padgetts went to church in Reynoldsburg. To-day it
is a decayed village, with many of its houses leaning wearily to one
side, or forward as if sinking to a nap. But then it was a lively
coach town, the first station out from the capital of the State.

[Illustration: THE STAGE SWEPT BY LIKE A FLASH.]

The Reynoldsburgers looked forth indifferently. They saw movers
every hour of the day. But with recognition growing in their faces,
many of them hastened to this particular carriage for parting words
with grandma Padgett and the children. Robert Day set up against the
high back, accepting his tribute of envious glances from the boys he
knew. He was going off to meet adventures. They--had to stay at home
and saw wood, and some of them would even be obliged to split it when
they had a tin box full of bait and their fish-poles all ready for
the afternoon's useful employment. There had been a time when Robert
thought he would not like to be called “movers.” Some movers fell
entirely below his ideas. But now he saw how much finer it was to be
travelling in a carriage than on the swift-shooting cars. He felt
sorry for the Reynoldsburg boys. One of them hinted that he might be
expected out West himself some day, and told Robert to watch down the
road for him. He appeared to think the West was a large prairie full
of benches, where folks sat down and told their adventures in coming.

Bobaday considered his position in the carriage the only drawback to
the Reynoldsburg parade. He ought to be driving. In the course of the
journey he hoped grandma Padgett would give up the lines--which she
had never yet done.

They drove out of Reynoldsburg. The tin-covered steeple on the
church dazzled their eyes for perhaps the last time.

Then coming around a curve in the 'pike appeared that soul-stirring
sight, the morning stage from Columbus. Zene and grandma Padgett drew
off to the side of the road and gave it a wide passage, for the stage
had the same right of way that any regular train now has on its own
track. It was drawn by six of the proudest horses in the world, and
the grand-looking driver who guided them, gripped the complication of
lines in his left hand while he held a horn to his mouth with the
right, and through this he blew a mellow peal to let the
Reynoldsburgers know the stage was coming. The stage, billowing on
springs, was paneled with glittering pictures, gilded on every part,
and evidently lined with velvet. Travellers inside looked through the
open windows with what aunt Corinne considered an air of opulent
pride. She had always longed to explore the interior of a stage, and
envied any child who had been shut in by the mysterious click and
turn of the door-handle. The top was crowded with gentlemen looking
only less important than the luxurious passengers inside: and behind
on a vast rack was such a mountain of-baggage swaying with the stage,
but corded firmly to place, and topped with bandboxes, that aunt
Corinne believed their moving wagon would not have contained it all.
Yet the stage swept past like a flash. All its details had to be
gathered by a quick eye. The leaders flew over the smooth
thoroughfare, holding up their heads like horse princes; and Bobaday
knew what a bustle Reynoldsburg would be in during the few minutes
that the stage halted.

After viewing this sumptuous pageant the little caravan moved
briskly on toward Columbus. Zene kept some distance ahead, yet always
in sight. And in due time the city began to grow around them. The
'pike never lost its individuality among the streets of the capital.
They saw the great penitentiary surrounded by stone walls as thick as
the length of a short boy. They saw trains of cars trailing in and
out; manufactories, and vistas of fine streets full of stores. They
even saw the capitol building standing high up on its shaded grounds,
many steps and massive pillars giving entrance to the structure which
grandma Padgett said was one of the finest in the United States. It
was not very long before they reached the western side of the city
and were crossing the Scioto River in a long bridge and entering what
was then a shabby suburb called Frankfort. At this point aunt Corinne
and her nephew entered unbroken ground.




CHAPTER II. THE LITTLE-OLD MAN WITH A BAG ON HIS BACK.


Grandma Padgett had prepared the noon lunch that very day, but
scarcely expected to make use of it. On the western borders of
Columbus lived a cousin Padgett in such a country place as had long
been the talk of the entire family connection. Cousin Padgett was a
mighty man in the city, and his wife and daughters had unheard-of
advantages. He had kept up a formal but very pleasant intercourse
with grandma's branch; and when he learned at the State Fair, the
year previous, her son Tip's design to cast their future lots in the
West, he said he should take it very ill if they did not spend the
first night of their journey with him. Grandma Padgett decided that
relationship must claim her for at least one meal.

Bobaday and Corinne saw Zene pause at the arched gates of this
modern castle, according to his morning's instructions. Corinne's.
heart thumped apprehensively. It was a formidable thing to be going
to cousin Padgett's. He lived in such overwhelming grandeur. She
knew, although she had never seen his grounds, that he kept two
gardeners on purpose to take care of them. His parlors were covered
with carpets in which immense bouquets of flowers were wrought, and
he had furniture not only of horsehair, but of flowered red velvet
also. I suppose in these days cousin Padgett's house would be
considered the extreme of expensive ugliness, and a violation of all
laws of beauty. But it was the best money could buy then, and that
was considered enough. Robert was not affected by the fluttering care
of his young aunt. He wanted to see this seat of grandeur. And when
Zene walked back down the avenue from making inquiries, and announced
that the entire family were away from home, Bobaday felt a shock of
disappointment.

Cousin Padgett did not know the exact date of the removal, and
people wrote few letters in those days. So he could not be blamed for
his absence when they came by. Zene limped up to his seat in front of
the wagon, and they moved forward along the 'pike.

“Good!” breathed aunt Corinne, settling back.

“'Tisn't good a bit!” said Bobaday.

And whom should they meet in a few miles but cousin Padgett himself,
riding horseback and leading a cream-colored horse which he had been
into the country to purchase. This was almost as trying as taking
dinner at his house. He insisted that the party should turn back. His
wife and daughters had only driven into the city that morning. Cousin
Padgett was a charming, hearty man, with a ring of black whiskers
extending under his face from ear to ear, and the more he talked the
less Corinne feared him. When he found that his kinspeople could not
be prevailed upon to return with him, he tied up his horses to the
wagon in the wood-shed where Zene unhitched, and took dinner with
grandma Padgett.

Aunt Corinne sat on a log beside him and ate currant pie. He went
himself to the nearest house and brought water. And when a start was
made, he told the children he still expected a visit from them, and
put as a parting gift a gold dollar as delicate as an old three-cent
piece, into the hand of each.

Bobaday felt his loss when the cream-colored horse could no longer
be discerned in the growing distance. Grandma Padgett smiled
pleasantly ahead through her blue glasses: she had received the
parting good wishes of a kinsman; family ties had very strong
significance when this country was newer. Aunt Corinne gazed on the
warm gold dollar in her palm, and wagged her head affectionately over
it for cousin Padgett's sake.

The afternoon sun sagged so low it stared into grandma's blue.
spectacles and made even Corinne shelter her eyes. Zene drove far
ahead with his load to secure lodgings for the night. Having left
behind the last acquaintance and entered upon the realities of the
journey, grandma considered it time to take off her Leghorn bonnet
and replace it with the brown barege one drawn over wire. So Bobaday
drew out a bandbox from under the back seat and helped grandma make
the change. The seat-curtain dropped over the Leghorn in its bandbox;
and this reminded him that there were other things beside millinery
stowed away in the carriage. Playthings could be felt by an
appreciative hand thrust under the seat; and a pocket in the side
curtain was also stuffed.

“I think I'll put my gold money in the bottom of that pocket,” said
aunt Corinne, “just where I can find it easy every day.”

She drew out all the package and dropped it in, and, having stuffed
the pocket again, at once emptied it to see that her piece had not
slipped through some ambushed hole. Aunt Corinne was considered a
flighty damsel by all her immediate relatives and acquaintances. She
had a piquant little face containing investigating hazel eyes. Her
brown hair was cut square off and held back from her brow by a round
comb. Her skin was of the most delicate pink color, flushing to rosy
bloom in her cheeks. She was a long, rather than a tall girl, with
slim fingers and slim feet, and any excitement tingled over her
visibly, so that aunt Corinne was frequently all of a quiver about
the most trivial circumstances. She had a deep dimple in her chin and
another at the right side of her mouth, and her nose tipped just
enough to give all the lines of her face a laughing look.

But this laughing look ran ludicrously into consternation when,
twisting away from the prospect ahead, she happened to look suddenly
backward under the looped-up curtain, and saw a head dodging down.
Somebody was hanging to the rear of the carriage.

Aunt Corinne kneeled on the cushion and stretched her neck and eyes
out over a queer little old man, who seemed to carry a bunch of some
kind on his back. He had been running noiselessly behind the
carriage, occasionally hanging by his arms, and he was taking one of
these swings when his dodging eyes met hers, and he let go, rolling
in the 'pike dust.

“You _better_ let go!” scolded aunt Corinne. “Bob'day, there's
a beggar been hangin' on! Ma Padgett, a little old man with a bag on
his back was goin' to climb into this carriage!”

[Illustration: A QUEER LITTLE OLD MAN.]

“Tisn't a bag,” said Bobaday laughing, for the little old man looked
funny brushing the dust off his ragged knees.

“_'Tis_ a bag,” said aunt Corinne, “and he ought to hurt himself
for scarin' us.”

“There's no danger of his doing us harm,” said grandma Padgett
mildly, after she had leaned out at the side and brought her blue
glasses to bear upon the lessening figure of the little old man.

Yet Corinne watched him when he sat down on a bank to rest; she
watched him grow a mere bunch and battered hat, and then fade to a
speck.

The 'pike was the home of such creatures as he appeared to be. The
advance guard of what afterwards became an army of tramps, was then
just beginning to move. But they were few, and, whether they asked
help or not, were always known by the disreputable name of “beggars.”
 A beggar-man or beggar-woman represented to the minds of aunt Corinne
and her nephew such possible enemies as chained lions or tigers. If
an “old beggar” got a chance at you there was no telling in what part
of the world he would make merchandise of you! They always suspected
the beggar boys and girls were kidnapped children. While it was
desirable to avoid these people, it was even more desirable that a
little girl should not offend them.

Aunt Corinne revolved in her mind the remark she had made to the
little old man with a bag on his back. She could take no more
pleasure in the views along the 'pike; for she almost expected to see
him start out of a culvert to give her cold shivers with his
revengeful grimaces. The culverts were solid arches of masonry which
carried the 'pike unbroken in even a line across the many runs and
brooks. The tunnel of the culvert was regarded by most children as
the befitting lair of beggars, who perhaps would not object to
standing knee-deep in water with their heads against a slimy arch.

“This is the very last culvert,” sighed Corinne, relieved, as they
rumbled across one and entered the village where they were to stop
over night.

It was already dusk. The town dogs were beginning to bark, and the
candles to twinkle. Zene's wagon was unhitched in front of the
tavern, and this signified that the carriage-load might confidently
expect entertainment. The tavern was a sprawled-out house, with an
arch of glass panes over the entrance door. A fat post stood in front
of it, upholding a swinging sign.

The tavern-keeper came out of the door to meet them when they
stopped, and helped his guests alight, while a hostler stood ready to
lead the horses away.

Aunt Corinne sprung down the steps, glad of the change after the
day's ride, until, glancing down the 'pike over their late route, she
saw tramping toward the tavern that little old man with a bag on his
back.




CHAPTER III. THE TAVERN.


But the little old man with a bag on his back was left out in the
dusk, and aunt Corinne and her party went into the tavern parlor. The
landlady brought a pair of candles in brass candlesticks, setting one
on each end of the mantel. Between them were snuffers on a snuffer-tray,
and a tall mass of paper roses under a glass case. The fireplace
was covered by a fireboard on which was pasted wallpaper like that
adorning the room. Grandma Padgett sat down in a rocking settee, and
Corinne and Bobaday on two of the chairs ranged in solemn rows along
the wall. They felt it would be presumption to pull those chairs an
inch out of line.

It was a very depressing room. Two funeral urns hung side by side,
done in India ink, and framed in chipped-off mahogany. Weeping
willows hung over the urns, and a weeping woman leaned on each. There
was also a picture of Napoleon in scarlet standing on the green rock
of St. Helena, holding a yellow three-cornered hat under his elbow.
The house had a fried-potato odor, to which aunt Corinne did not
object. She was hungry. But, besides this, the parlor enclosed a
dozen other scents; as if the essences of all the dinners served in
the house were sitting around invisible on the chairs. There was not
lacking even that stale cupboard smell which is the spirit of hunger
itself.

The landlady was very fat and red and also melancholy. She began
talking at once to Grandma Padgett about the loss of her children
whom the funeral urns commemorated, and Grandma Padgett sympathized
with her and tried to outdo her in sorrowful experiences. But this
was impossible; for the landlady had-lived through more ordeals than
anybody else in town, and her manner said plainly, that no passing
stranger should carry off her championship.

So she made the dismal room so doleful with her talk that aunt
Corinne began to feel terribly about life, and Robert Day wished he
had gone to the barn with Zene.

Then the supper-bell rung, and the landlady showed them into the big
bare dining-room where she forgot all her troubles in the clatter of
plates and cups. A company of men rushed from what was called the bar-room,
though its shelves and counter were empty of decanters and glasses.
They had the greater part of a long table to themselves, and Zene sat
among them. These men the landlady called the boarders: she placed
Grandma Padgett's family at the other end of the table; it seemed the
decorous thing to her that a strip of empty table should separate the
boarders and women-folks.

There were stacks of eatables, including mango stuffed with cabbage
and eggs pickled red in beet vinegar. All sorts of fruit butters and
preserves stood about in glass and earthen dishes. One end of the
table was an exact counterpart of the other, even to the stacks of
mighty bread-slices. Boiled cabbage and onions and thick corn-pone
with fried ham were there to afford a strong support through the
night's fast. Nothing was served in order: you helped yourself from
the dishes or let them alone at your pleasure. The landlord appeared
just as jolly as his wife was dismal. He sat at the other end of the
table and urged everybody with jokes to eat heartily; yet all this
profusion was not half so appetizing as some of Grandma Padgett's
fried chicken and toast would have been.

After supper Bobaday went out to the barn and saw a whole street of
horse-stalls, the farthest horse switching his tail in dim distance;
and such a mow of hay as impressed him with the advantages of travel.
A hostler was forking down hay for the evening's feeding, and Robert
climbed to his side, upon which the hostler good-naturedly took him
by the shoulders and let him slide down and alight upon the spongy
pile below. This would have been a delightful sensation had Bobaday
not bitten his tongue in the descent. But he liked it better than the
house where his aunt Corinne wandered uneasily up stairs which were
hollowed in the middle of each step, and along narrow passages where
bits of plaster had fallen off.

There was a dulcimer in the room aunt Corinne occupied with her
mother. She took the hammer and beat on its rusty wires some time
before going to bed. It tinkled a plea to her to let it alone, but
what little girl could look at the queer instrument and keep her
hands off it? The landlady said it was left there by a travelling
showman who could not pay his board. He hired the bar-room to give a
concert in, and pasted up written advertisements of his performance
in various parts of the town. He sent free tickets to the preacher
and schoolmaster, and the landlord's family went in for nothing.
Nobody else came, though he played on the flute and harmonium,
besides the dulcimer, and sang _Lilly Dale_, and _Roll on,
Silver Moon_, so touchingly that the landlady wiped her eyes at
their mere memory. As he had no money to pay stage-fare further, and
the flute and harmonium--a small bellows organ without legs--were
easier to carry than the dulcimer, he left it and trudged eastward.
And no one at that tavern could tell whether he and his instruments
had perished piecemeal along the way, or whether he had found crowded
houses and forgotten the old dulcimer in the tide of prosperity.

Grandma Padgett's party ate breakfast before day, by the light of a
candle covering its candlestick with a tallow glacier. It made only a
hole of shine in the general duskiness of the big dining-room. The
landlady bade them a pathetic good-by. She was sure there were
dangers ahead of them. The night stage had got in three hours late,
owing to a breakdown, and one calamity she said, is only the
forerunner of another.

Zene had driven ahead with the load. It was a foggy morning, and
drops of moisture hung to the carriage curtains. There was the
morning star yet trembling over the town. Aunt Corinne hugged her
wrap, and Bobaday stuck his hands deep in his pockets. But Grandma
sat erect and drove away undaunted and undamped. She merely searched
the inside of the carriage with her glasses, inquiring as a last
precaution:

“Have we left anything behind?”

“I got all my things,” said Robert. “And my gold dollar's in my
pocket.”

At this aunt Corinne arose and plunged into the carriage pocket on
her side.




CHAPTER IV. THE SUSAN HOUSE.


The contents of that pocket she piled upon her seat; she raked the
interior with her nails, then she looked at Robert Day with dilating
eyes.

“_My_ gold dollar's gone!” said aunt Corinne. “That little old
man with a bag on his back--I just know he got into the barn and took
it last night.”

“You put it in and took it out so many times yesterday,” said
Bobaday, “maybe it fell on the carriage floor.” So they unavailingly
searched the carriage floor.

The little old man with a bag on his back was now fixed in Corinne's
imagination as the evil genius of the journey. If he spirited out her
gold dollar, what harm could he not do them! He might throw stones at
them from sheltered places, and even shoot them with guns. He could
jump out of any culvert and scare them almost to death! This
destroyed half her pleasure as the day advanced, in watching boys
fish with horse-hair snares in the runs which trickled under
culverts. But Robert felt so much interest in the process that he was
glad to have the noon halt made near such a small fishing-place. He
took his lunch and sat on the bank with the boys. They were very
dirty, and one of them had his shirtsleeve split to the shoulder,
revealing a sun-blistered elbow joint that still worked with a right
good will at snaring. But no boys were ever fuller of out-door
wisdom. They had been swimming, and knew the best diving-hole in the
world, only a couple of miles away. They had dined on berries, and
expected to catch it when they got home, but meant to attend a show
in one of their barns that afternoon, the admission price being ten
pins. Bobaday learned how to make a slip-knot with the horse-hair and
hold it in silent suspense just where the minnows moved: the moment a
fish glided into the open snare a dexterous jerk whipped him out of
the water, held firmly about the middle by the hair noose. It
required skill and nice handling, and the split-sleeved boy was the
most accomplished snarer of all.

[Illustration: BOBADAY LUNCHES WITH STRANGE BOYS.]

Robert shared his lunch with these youths, and parted from them
reluctantly when the horses were put in. But aunt Corinne who stood
by in a critical attitude, said she couldn't see any use in catching
such little fish. You never fried minnies. You used 'em for bait in
deep water, though, the split-sleeved boy condescended to inform her,
and you _could_ put 'em into a glass jar, and they'd grow like
everything. Aunt Corinne was just becoming fired with anxiety to own
such a jarful herself, when the carriage turned toward the road and
her mother obliged her to climb in.

About the middle of the afternoon Zene halted and waited for the
carriage to come up. He left his seat and came to the rear of Old
Hickory, the off carriage horse, slapping a fly flat on Old Hickory's
flank as he paused.

“What's the matter, Zene?” inquired Grandma Padgett. “Has anything
happened?”

“No, marm,” replied Zene. He was a quiet, singular fellow, halting
in his walk on account of the unevenness of his legs; but faithful to
the family as either Boswell or Johnson. Grandma Padgett having
brought him up from a lone and forsaken child, relied upon all the
good qualities she discovered from time to time, and she saw nothing
ludicrous in Zene. But aunt Corinne and Bobaday never ceased to
titter at Zene's “marm.”

“I've been inquirin' along, and we can turn off of the 'pike up here
at the first by-road, and then take the first cross-road west, and
save thirty mile o' toll gates. The road goes the same direction.
It's a good dirt road.”

Grandma Padgett puckered the brows above her glasses. She did not
want to pay unnecessary bounty to the toll-gate keepers.

“Well, that's a good plan, Zene, if you're sure we won't lose the
way, or fall into any dif-fick-ulty.”

“I've asked nigh a dozen men, and they all tell the same tale,” said
Zene.

“People ought to know the lay of the land in their own neighborhood,”
 admitted Grandma Padgett. “Well, we'll try what virtue there is in the
dirt road.”

So she clucked to the carriage horses and Zene went back to his
charge.

The last toll-gate they would see for thirty miles drew its pole
down before them. Zene paid according to the usual arrangement, and
the toll-man only stood in the door to see the carriage pass.

“I wouldn't like to live in a little bit of a house sticking out on
the 'pike like that,” said aunt Corinne to her nephew. “Folks could
run against it on dark nights. Does he stay there by himself? And if
robbers or old beggars came by they could nab him the minute he
opened his door.”

“But if he has any boys,” suggested Robert looking back, “they can
see everybody pass, and it'd be just as good as going some place all
the time. And who's afraid of robbers!”

Zene beckoned to the carriage as he turned off the 'pike. For a
distance the wagon moved ahead of them, between tall stake fences
which were overrun with vines or had their corners crowded with bushes.
Wheat and cornfields and sweet-smelling buckwheat spread out on each
side until the woods met them, and not a bit of the afternoon heat
touched the carriage after that. Aunt Corinne clasped a leather-covered
upright which hurt her hand before, and leaned toward the trees on
her side. Every new piece of woodland is an unexplored country containing
moss-lined stumps, dimples of hollows full of mint, queer-shaped trees,
and hickory saplings just the right saddle-curve for bending down as
“teeters,” such as are never reproduced in any other piece of woodland.
Nature does not make two trees alike, and her cool breathing-halls under
the woods' canopies are as diverse as the faces of children wandering
there. Moss or lichens grow thicker in one spot; another particular
enclosure you call the lily or the bloodroot woods, and yet another
the wild-grape woods. This is distinguished for blackberries away up
in the clearings, and that is a fishing woods, where the limbs stretch
down to clear holes, and you sit in a root seat and hear springs
trickling down the banks while you fish. Though Corinne could possess
these reaches of trees only with a brief survey, she enjoyed them as a
novelty.

“I would like to get lost in the woods,” she observed, “and have
everybody out hunting me while I had to eat berries and roots. I
don't believe I'd like roots, though: they look so big and tough. And
I wouldn't touch a persimmon! Nor Injun turnip. You's a bad boy that
time you give me Injun turnip to eat, Bobaday Padgett!”

She turned upon her nephew, fierce with the recollection, and he
laughed, saying he wished he'd some to fool somebody with now.

“It bit my mouth so a whole crock of milk wouldn't help it, and if
brother Tip'd been home, Ma Padgett wouldn't let you off so easy.”

“You wanted to taste it,” said Robert. “And you'd eat the green
persimmons if they'd puckered your mouth clear shut.”

“I wanted to see what the things that the little pig that lived in
the stone house filled his churn with, tasted like,” admitted aunt
Corinne lucidly; so she subsided.

“Do you see the wagon, children?” inquired Grandma Padgett, who felt
the necessity of following Zene's lead closely. She stopped Old
Hickory and Old Henry at cross-roads.

“No; but he said turn west on the first road we came to,” counseled
Bobaday.

“And this is the first, I counted,” said aunt Corinne.

“I wish we could see the cover ahead of us. We don't want to resk
gettin' separated,” said Grandma Padgett.

Yet she turned the horses westward with a degree of confidence, and
drove up into a hilly country which soon hid the sun. The long shades
crept past and behind them. There was a country church, with a
graveyard full of white stones nearly smothered in grass and briers.
And there was a school-house in an open space, with a playground
beaten bare and white in the midst of a yellow mustard jungle. They
saw some loiterers creeping home, carrying dinner-pail and basket,
and taking a languid last tag of each other. The little girls looked
up at the passing carriage from their sunbonnet depths, but the boys
had taken off their hats to slap each other with: they looked at the
strangers, round-eyed and ready to smile, and Robert and Corinne
nodded. Grandma Padgett bethought herself to ask if any of them had
seen a moving wagon pass that way. The girls stared bashfully at each
other and said “No, ma'am,” but the boys affirmed strongly that they
had seen two moving wagons go by, one just as school was out, and the
boldest boy of all made an effort to remember the white and gray
horses.

The top of a hill soon stood between these children, and the
travellers, but in all the vista beyond there was no glimpse of Zene.

Grandma Padgett felt anxious, and her anxiety increased as the dusk
thickened.

“There don't seem to be any taverns along this road,” she said; “and
I hate to ask at any farmer's for accommodations over night. We don't
know the neighborhood, and a body hates to be a bother.”

“Let's camp out,” volunteered Bobaday.

“We'd need the cover off of the wagon to do that, and kittles,” said
Grandma Padgett, “and dried meat and butter and cake and things
_out_ of the wagon.”

“Maybe Zene's back in the woods campin' somewhere,” exclaimed aunt
Corinne. “And he has his gun, and can shoot birds too.”

“No, he's goin' along the right road and expectin' us to follow. And
as like as not has found a place to put up,--while we're off on the
wrong road.”

“How'll we ever get to brother Tip's, then?” propounded aunt
Corinne. “Maybe we're in Missouri, or Iowa, and won't never get to
the Illinois line!”

“Humph!” remarked Robert her nephew; “do you s'pose folks could go
to Iowa or Missouri as quick as this! Cars'd have to put on steam to
do it.”

“And I forgot about the State lines,” murmured his aunt. “The'
hasn't been any ropes stretched along't _I_ saw.”

“They don't bound States with ropes,” said Robert Day.

“Well, it's lines,” insisted aunt Corinne.

“Do you make out a house off there?” questioned Grandma Padgett,
shortening the discussion.

“Yes, ma'am, and it's a tavern,” assured her grandson, kneeling upon
the cushion beside her to stretch his neck forward.

It was a tavern in a sandy valley. It was lighting a cautious candle
or two as they approached. A farmer was watering his team at the
trough under the pump spout. All the premises had a look of Holland,
which Grandma Padgett did not recognize: she only thought them very
clean. There was a side door cut across the centre like the doors of
mills, so that the upper part swung open while the lower part
remained shut. A fat white woman leaned her elbows upon this,
scarcely observing the travellers.

Grandma Padgett paused at the front of the house and waited for
somebody to come out. The last primrose color died slowly out of the
sky. If the tavern had any proprietor, he combined farming with
tavern keeping. His hay and wheat fields came close to the garden,
and his corn stood rank on rank up the hills.

“They must be all asleep in there,” fretted Grandma Padgett. The
woman with her arms over the half door had not stirred.

“Shall I run in?” said Bobaday.

“Yes, and ask if Zene stopped here. I don't see a sign of the wagon.”

Her grandson opened the carriage door and ran down the steps. The
white-scrubbed hall detained him several minutes before he returned
with a large man who smoked a crooked-stemmed pipe during the
conference. The man held the bowl of the pipe in his hand which was
fat and red. So was his face. He had a mighty tuft of hair on his
upper lip. His shirt sleeves shone like new snow through the dark.

“Goot efenins,” he said very kindly.

“I want to stop here over night,” said Grandma Padgett. “We're
moving, and our wagon is somewhere on this road. Have you seen
anything of a wagon--and a white and a gray horse?”

“Oh, yes,” said the tavern keeper, nodding his head. “Dere is lots
of wakkons on de road aheadt.”

“Well, we can't go further ourselves. Can you take the lines?”

“Oh, nein,” said the tavern-keeper mildly. “I don't keep moofers mit
my house. Dey goes a little furter.”

“You don't keep movers!” said Grandma Padgett indignantly. “What's
your tavern for?”

“Oh, yah,” replied the host with undisturbed benevolence. “Dey goes
a little furter.”

“Why have you put out a sign to mislead folks?”

The tavern keeper took the pipe out of his mouth to look up at his
sign. It swayed back and forth in the valley breeze, as if itself
expostulating with him.

“Dot's a goot sign,” he pronounced. “Auf you go up te hill, tere ist
te house I put up mit te moofers. First house. All convenient. You
sthay tere. I coom along in te mornin'. Tere ist more as feefty
famblies sthop mit tat house. Oh, nien, I don't keep moofers mit te
tafern.”

“This is a queer way to do,” said Grandma Padgett, fixing the full
severity of her glasses on him. “Turn a woman and two children away
to harbor as well as they can in some old barn! I'll not stop in your
house on the hill. Who'd 'tend to the horses?”

“Tare ist grass and water,” said the landlord as she turned from his
door. “And more as feefty famblies hast put up tere. I don't keep
moofers mit te tafern.”

Robert and Corinne felt very homeless as she drove at a rattling
pace down the valley. They were hungry, and upon an unknown road; and
that inhospitable tavern had turned them away like vagrants.

“We'll drive all night before we'll stop in his movers' pen,” said
Grandma Padgett with her well-known decision. “I suppose he calls
every vagabond that comes along a mover, and his own house is too
clean for such gentry. I've heard about the Swopes and the Dutch
being stupid, but a body has to travel before they know.”

But well did the Dutch landlord know the persuasion of his house on
the hill after luckless travellers had passed through a stream which
drained the valley. This was narrow enough, but the very banks had a
caving, treacherous look. Grandma Padgett drove in, and the carriage
came down with a plunge on the flanks of Old Hickory and Old Henry,
and they disappeared to their nostrils and the harness strips along
the centre of their backs.

[Illustration: “HASN'T THE CREEK ANY BOTTOM?” CRIED GRANDMA PADGETT.]

“Hasn't the creek any bottom?” cried Grandma Padgett, while Corinne
and Robert clung to the settling carriage. The water poured across
their feet and rose up to their knees. Hickory and Henry were urged
with whip and cry.

“Hold fast, children! Don't get swept out!” Grandma Padgett
exhorted. “There's no danger if the horses can climb the bank.”

They were turned out of their course by the current, and Hickory and
Henry got their fore feet out, crumbling a steep place. Below the
bank grew steeper. If they did not get out here, all must go whirling
and sinking down stream. The landing was made, both horses leaping up
as if from an abyss. The carriage cracked, and when its wheels once
more ground the dry sand, Grandma Padgett trembled awhile, and moved
her lips before replying to the children's exclamations.

“We've been delivered from a great danger,” she said. “And that
miserable man let us drive into it without warning!”

“If I's big enough,” said Robert Day, “I'd go back and thrash him.”

“It ill becomes us,” rebuked Grandma Padgett, “to give place to
wrath after escaping from peril. But if this is the trap he sets for
his house on the hill, I hope he has been caught in it himself
sometime!”

“Where'll we go now?” Corinne wailed, having considered it was time
to begin crying. “I'm drownded, and my teeth knock together, I'm
gettin' so cold!”

They paused at the top of the hill, Corinne still lamenting.

“I don't want to stop here,” said Grandma Padgett, adding, “but I
suppose we must.”

The house was large and weather-beaten; its gable-end turned toward
the road. The “feefty famblies” had left no trace of domestic life.
Grass and weeds grew to the lower windows. The entrance was at one
side through a sea of rank growths.

“It looks like they's ghosts lived here,” pronounced Robert dismally.

“Don't let me hear such idle speeches!” said Grandma Padgett,
shaking her head. “Spooks and ghosts only live in people's
imaginations.”

“If they got tired of that,” said Robert, “they'd come to live here.”

“The old house looks like its name was Susan,” wept Corinne. “Are we
goin' to stay all night in this Susan house, ma?”

Her parent stepped resolutely from the carriage, and Bobaday
hastened to let down some bars. He helped his grandmother lead the
horses into a weedy enclosure, and there unhitch them from the
carriage. There was a shed covered with straw which served for a
stable. The horses were watered--Robert wading to his neck among
cherry sprouts to a curb well, and unhooking the heavy bucket from
its chain, after a search for something else available. Then leaving
the poor creatures to browse as best they could, the party prepared
to move upon the house. Aunt Corinne came out of the wet carriage.

Grandma Padgett picked up some sticks and chips. They attempted to
unlock the door; but the lock was broken. “Anybody can go in!”
 remarked the head of the party. “But I don't know that we can even
build a fire, and as to provisions, I s'pose we'll have to starve
this night.”

But stumbling into a dark front room, and feeling hopelessly along
the mantel, they actually found matches. The tenth one struck flame.

There were ashes and black brands in the fireplace, left there possibly,
by the landlord's last moofer. Grandma Padgett built a fire to which the
children huddled, casting fearful glances up the damp-stained walls.
The flame was something like a welcome.

“Perhaps,” said Grandma with energy, “there are even provisions in
the house. I wouldn't grudge payin' that man a good price and cookin'
them myself, if I could give you something to eat.”

“We can look,” suggested Bobaday. “They'd be in the cellar, wouldn't
they?”

“It's lots lonesomer than our house was the morning we came away,”
 chattered aunt Corinne, warming her long hands at the blaze.

And now beneath the floor began a noise which made even Grandma
Padgett stand erect, glaring through her glasses.

“_Something's_ in the cellar!” whispered Bobaday.




CHAPTER V. THE SUSAN HOUSE CELLAR.


It was not pleasant to stand in a strange house in an unknown
neighborhood, drenched, hungry and unprotected, hearing fearful
sounds like danger threatening under foot.

Corinne felt a speechless desire to be back in the creek again and
on the point of drowning; that would soon be over. But who could tell
what might occur after this groaning in the cellar?

“I heard a noise,” said Grandma Padgett, to bespeak their attention,
as if they could remember ever hearing anything else.

“It's cats, I think,” said Robert Day, husky with courage.

Cats could not groan in such short and painful catches. Conjectures
of many colors appeared and disappeared like flashes in Bobaday's
mind. The groaner was somebody that bad Dutch landlord had half
murdered and put in the cellar. Maybe the floor was built to give way
and let every traveller fall into a pit! Or it might be some boy or
girl left behind by wicked movers to starve. Or a beggarman, wanting
the house to himself, could be making that noise to frighten them
away.

The sharp groans were regularly uttered. Corinne buried her head in
her mother's skirts and waited to be taken or left, as the Booggar
pleased.

“Well,” said Grandma Padgett, “I suppose we'll have to go and see
what ails that Thing down there. It may be a human bein' in distress.”

Robert feared it was something else, but he would not have mentioned
it to his grandmother.

“What'll we carry to see with?” he eagerly inquired. It was easy to
be eager, because they had no lights except the brands in the
fireplace.

Grandma Padgett, who in her early days had carried live coals from
neighbors' houses miles away, saw how to dispense with lamp or
candle. She took a shovel full of embers--and placed a burning chip
on top. The chip would have gone out by itself, but was kept blazing
by the coals underneath.

“Shall I go ahead?” inquired Robert.

“No, you walk behind. And you might carry a piece of stick,” replied
his grandmother, conveying a hint which made his shoulder blades feel
chilly.

They moved toward the cellar entrance in a slow procession, to keep
the chip from flaring out.

“Don't hang to me so!” Grandma Padgett remonstrated with her
daughter. “I sh'll step on you, and down we'll all go and set the
house afire.”

Garrets are cheerful, cobwebby places, always full of slits where
long, smoky sun-rays can poke in. An amber warmth cheers the darkness
of garrets; you feel certain there is nothing ugly hiding behind the
remotest and dustiest box. If rats or mice inhabit it, they are
jovial fellows. But how different is a cellar, and especially a
cellar neglected. You plunge down rough steps into a cavern. A mouldy
air from dried-up and forgotten vegetables meets you. The earth may
not be moist underfoot, but it has not the kind feeling of sun-warmed
earth. And if big rats hide there, how bold and hideous they are!
There are cool farmhouse cellars floored with cement and shelved with
sweet-smelling pine, where apple-bins make incense, and swinging-shelves
of butter, tables of milk crocks, lines of fruit cans and home-made
catsup bottles, jars of pickles and chowder, and white covered pastry
and cake, promise abundant hospitality. But these are inverted garrets,
rather than cellars. They are refrigerators for pure air; and they keep
a mellow light of their own. When you go into one of them it seems as
if the house were standing on its head to express its joy and comfort.

But the Susan House cellar was one of dread, aside from the noise
proceeding out of it. Bobaday knew this before they opened a door
upon a narrow-throated descent.

One of Zene's stories became vivid. It was a story of a house where
nobody could stay, though the landlord offered it rent-free. But
along came two good youths without any money, and for board and
lodging, they undertook to break the spell by sleeping there three
nights. The first two nights they were not disturbed, and sat with
their candle, reading good books until after midnight. But the third,
just on the stroke of twelve, a noise began in the cellar! So they
took their candle, and, armed with nothing except good books, went
below, and in the furthest corner they saw a little old man with a
red nightcap on his head, sitting astride of a barrel! In Zene's
story the little old man only had it on his mind to tell these good
youths where to dig for his money; and when they had secured the
money, he amiably disappeared, and the house was pleasant to live in
ever afterward.

This tale, heard in the barn while Zene was greasing harnesses, and
heard without Grandma Padgett's sanction, now made her grandson
shiver with dread as his feet went down into the Susan House dungeon.
It was trying enough to be exploring a strange cellar full of groans,
without straining your eyes in expectation of seeing a little old man
in a red nightcap, sitting astride of a barrel!

“Who's there?” said Grandma Padgett with stern emphasis, as she held
her beacon stretched out into the cellar.

The groaning ceased for an awful space of time. Aunt Corinne was
behind her nephew, and she squatted on the step to peer with
distended eyes, lest some hand should reach up and grab her by the
foot.

It was a small square cellar, having earthen sides, but piles of
pine boxes made ambushes everywhere.

“Come out!” Grandma Padgett spoke again. “We won't have any tricks
played. But if you're hurt, we can help you.”

It was like addressing solid darkness, for the chip was languishing
upon its coals, and cast but a dim red glare around the shovel.

Still some being crept toward them from the darkness, uttering a
prolonged and hearty groan, as if to explode at once the
accumulations of silence.




CHAPTER VI. MR. MATTHEWS.


Aunt Corinne realizing it was a man, rushed to the top of the steps
and hid her eyes behind the door. She knew her mother could deal with
him, and, if he offered any harm, pour coals of fire upon his head in
a literal sense. But she did not feel able to stand by. Robert, on
the other hand, seeing no red nightcap on the head thrust up toward
them, supported his grandmother strongly, and even helped to pull the
man up-stairs.

One touch of his soft, foolish body was enough to convince any one
that he was a harmless creature. His foot was sprained.

Robert carried a backless chair and set it before the fire, and on
this the limping man was placed. Grandma Padgett emptied her coals on
the hearth and surveyed him. He had a red face and bashful eyes, and
while the top of his head was quite bald, he had a half-circle of
fuzz extending around his face from ear to ear. He wore a roundabout
and trousers, and shoes with copper toes. His hands were fat and
dimpled as well as freckled. Altogether, he had the appearance of a
hugely overgrown boy, ducking his head shyly while Grandma Padgett
looked at him.

“For pity sake!” said Grandma Padgett. “What ails the creature?
What's your name, and who are you?”

At that the man chanted off in a nasal sing-song, as if he were
accustomed to repeating his rhyme:

  J. D. Matthews is my name,
    Ohio-r is my nation,
  Mud Creek is my dwellin' place,
    And glory is my expectation.

“Yes,” said Grandma Padgett, removing her glasses, as she did when
very much puzzled.

Corinne, in a distant corner of the lighted room, began to laugh
aloud, and after looking towards her, the man laughed also, as if
they two were enjoying a joke upon the mother.

“Well, it may be funny, but you gave us enough of a scare with your
gruntin' and your groanin',” said Grandma Padgett severely.

J. D. Matthews reminded of his recent tribulations, took up one of
his feet and began to groan over it again. He was as shapeless and
clumsy as a bear, and this motion seemed not unlike the tiltings of a
bear forced to dance.

“There you go,” said Grandma Padgett. “Can't you tell how you came
in the cellar, and what hurt you?”

Mr. Matthews piped out readily, as if he had packed the stanza into
shape between the groans of his underground sojourn:

  To the cellar for fuel I did go,
  And there I met my overthrow;
  I lost my footing and my candle,
  And grazed my shin and sprained my ankle.

“The man must be a poet,” pronounced Grandma Padgett with contempt.
“He has to say everything in rhyme.”

Chanted Mr. Matthews:

  I was not born in a good time,
  I cannot speak except in rhyme.

“Ain't he funny?” said Bobaday, rubbing his own knees with enjoyment.

“He's very daft,” said the grandmother. “And what to do for him I
don't know. We've nothing to eat ourselves. I might wet his foot and
tie it up.”

Mr. Matthews looked at her smilingly while he recited:

  I have a cart that does contain
  A pana_seer_ for ev'_ry_ pain.
  There's coffee, also there is _chee_,
  Sugar and cakes, bread and hone-ee.
  I have parch corn and liniment,
  Which causes me to feel content.
  There is some half a dozen kittles
  To serve me when I cook my vittles.
  Butter and eggs I do deal in;
  To go without would be a sin.
  When I sit down to cook my meals,
  I know how good a king feels.

“Well, if you had your cart handy it would be worth while,” said
Grandma Padgett indulgently. “But talkin' of such things when the
children are hungry only aggravates a body more.”

Producing a key from his roundabout pocket, Mr. Matthews lifted his
voice and actually sung:

  J. D. Matthews' cart stands at your door.
  Lady, will you step out and see my store?
  I've cally-co and Irish table linen,
  Domestic gingham and the best o' flannen.
    I take eggs and butter for these treasures,
    I never cheat, but give good measures.

“Let me see if there is a cart,” begged Bobaday, reaching for the
key which his grandmother reluctantly received.

He then went to the front door and groped in the weeds. The hand-cart
was there, and all of Mr. Matthews' statements were found to be
true. He had plenty of provisions, as well as a small stock of dry
goods and patent medicines, snugly packed in the vehicle which he was
in the habit of pushing before him. There were even candles. Grandma
Padgett lighted one, and stuck it in an empty liniment bottle. Then
she dressed the silly pedler's ankle, and put an abundant supper on
the fire to cook in his various kettles; the pedler smiling with pure
joy all the time to find himself the centre of such a family party.

Bobaday and Corinne came up, and stood leaning against the ends of
the mantel. No poached eggs and toast ever looked so nice; no honey
ever had such melting yellow comb; no tea smelled so delicious; no
ginger cakes had such a rich moistness. They sat on the carriage
cushions and ate their supper with Grandma Padgett. It was placed on
the side of an empty box, between them and the pedlerman. He divided
his attention betwixt eating and chanting rhymes, interspersing both
with furtive laughs, into which he tried to draw the children.
Grandma Padgett overawed him; but he evidently felt on a level with
aunt Corinne and her nephew. In his foolish red face there struggled
a recollection of having gone fishing, or played marbles, or hunted
wild flowers with these children or children like them. He nodded and
twinkled his eyes at them, and they laughed at whatever he did. His
ankle was so relieved by a magic liniment, that he felt able to
hobble around the house when Grandma Padgett explored it, repeating
under his breath the burst he indulged in when she arrayed the supper
on the box:

  O, I went to a friend's house,
    The friend says, 'Come in,
  Have a hot cup of coffee;
    And how have you been?'

Grandma Padgett said she could not sleep until she knew what other
creatures were hidden in the house.

They all ascended the enclosed staircase, and searched echoing dusty
rooms where rats or mice whisked out of sight at their approach.

“This is a funny kind of an addition to a tavern,” remarked the head
of the party. “No beds: no anything. We'll build a fire in this upper
fireplace, and bring the cushions and shawls up, and see if we can
get a wink of sleep. It ain't a cold night, and we're dry now. You
can sleep by the fireplace down-stairs,” she said to the pedler, “and
I'll settle with you for our breakfast and supper before we leave in
the morning. It's been a providence that you were in the house.”

Mr. Matthews smiled deferentially, and appeared to be pondering a
new rhyme about Grandma Padgett. But the subject was so weighty it
kept him shaking his head.

They came down-stairs for fuel and coals, and she requested the
pedler to take possession of the lower room and make himself
comfortable, but not to set the house on fire.

“What shall we give him to sleep on?” pondered the grandmother. “I
can't spare things from the children; it won't do to let him sleep on
the floor.”

    “I have a cart, it has been said,
  Which serves me both for cupboard and bed,”

chanted Mr. Matthews.

“Well, that's a good thing,” said Grandma Padgett. “If you could
pull a whole furnished house out of that cart 'twouldn't surprise me.”

The pedler opened the door and dragged his cart in over the low
sill. They then bolted the door with such rusty fastenings as
remained to it.

As soon as he felt the familiar handle on his palms, J. D. Matthews
forgot that his ankle had been twisted. He was again upon the road,
as free as the small wild creatures that whisked along the fence.
Grandma Padgett's grown-up strength of mind failed to restrain him
from acting the horse. He neighed, and rattled the cart wildly over
the empty room. Now he ran away and pretended to kick everything to
pieces; and now he put himself up at a manger, and ground his feed.
He broke out of his stable and careened wildly around a pasture,
refusing to be hitched, and expressing his contempt for the cart by
kicking up at it.

“I guess your sprain wasn't as bad as you let on,” observed Grandma
Padgett.

The observation, or a twinge, reminded Mr. Matthews to double
himself down and groan again.

With painful limps, and Robert Day's assistance, he got the cart
before the fireplace. It looked like a narrow, high green box on
wheels. The pedler blocked the wheels behind, and propped the handle
level. Then he crept with great contentment to the top, and stretched
himself to sleep.

“He's a kind of a fowl of the air,” said Grandma Padgett.

“Oh, but I hope he's going our road!” said Bobaday, as they re-ascended
the stairs. “He's more fun than a drove of turkeys!”

“And I'm not a bit afraid of him,” said aunt Corinne. “He ain't like
the old man with a bag on his back.”

But J. D. Matthews was going in the opposite direction.

Before Grandma Padgett had completed her brief toilet next morning,
and while the daylight was yet uncertain, the Dutch landlord knocked
at the outer door for his fee. He seemed not at all surprised at
finding the pedler lodging there, but told him to stop at the tavern
and trade with the vrow.

“And a safe time the poor simple soul will have,” said Grandma
Padgett, making her spectacles glitter at the landlord, “gettin'
through the creek that nigh drowned us. I suppose, _you_ have a
ford that you don't keep for movers.”

“Oh, yah!” said the landlord. “Te fort ist goot.”

“How dared you send a woman and two children to such an empty,
miserable shell as this?”

[Illustration: J. D. MATTHEWS RUNS AWAY.]

“I don't keep moofers to mine tafern,” said the landlord, putting
his abundant charge into his pocket. “Chay-Te, he always stops here.
He coes all ofer te countries, Chay-Te toes. His headt ist pat.”

“But his heart is good,” said the grandmother. “And that will count
up more to his credit than if he was an extortioner, and ill-treated
the stranger within his gate.”

“Oh, Chay-Te ist a goot feller!” said the Dutch landlord
comfortably, untouched by any reflections on his own conduct.

Grandma Padgett could not feel placid in her mind until the weeds
and hill hid him from sight.

Mr. Matthews arose so sound from his night's slumber, that he was
able after pumping a prodigious lot of water over himself, and
blowing with enjoyment, to help her get the breakfast, and put the
kettles in travelling order afterwards. He had a great many
housewifely ways, and his tidiness was a satisfaction to Grandma
Padgett. The breakfast was excellent, but Corinne and Bobaday on one
side of the box, and J. D. Matthews on the other, exchanged glances
of regret at parting. He helped Robert put the horses to the
carriage, making blunders at every stage of the hitching up.

They all came out of the Susan House, and he pushed his cart into
the road.

“I almost hate to leave it,” said aunt Corinne, “because we did have
a good time after we were scared so bad.”

“Seems as if a body always hates to leave a place,” remarked
Bobaday. “The next people that come along will never know we lived
here one night. But _we'll_ always remember it.”

Grandma Padgett before entering the carriage, was trying to make the
pedler take pay for the food her family ate. He smiled at her
deferentially, but backed away with his cart.

“What a man this is!” she exclaimed impatiently. “We owe you for two
meals' vittles.”

“I have some half a dozen kittles,” murmured Mr. Matthews.

“But won't you take the money? The landlord was keen enough for his.”

The pedler had got his rhyme about Grandma Padgett completed. He
left her, still stretching her hand out, and rattled his cart up to
the children who were leaning from the carriage towards him.

“She is a lady of renown,” chanted J. D. Matthews, indicating their
grandmother.

  She makes good butter by the pound,
  Her hand is kind, so is her tongue;
  But when she comes I want to run!

He accordingly ran, rattling the cart like a hailstorm before him,
downhill; and out of their sight.

“Ah, there he goes!” sighed aunt Corinne, “and he hardly limps a
bit. I hope we'll see him again some time.”

“I might 'a forced the money into his pocket,” reflected Grandma
Padgett, as she took up the lines. “But I'd rather feel in debt to
that kind, simple soul than to many another. Why didn't we ask him if
he saw Zene's wagon up the road? These poor horses want oats. They'll
be glad to sight the white cover once more.”

“I would almost rather have him come along,” decided Robert Day,
“than to find the wagon. For he could make a camp anywhere, and speak
his poetry all the time. What fun he must have if he wants to stay in
the woods all night. I expect if he wanted to hide he could creep
into that cart and stretch out, with his face where he could smell
the honey and ginger cakes. I'd like to have a cart and travel like
that. Are we going on to the 'pike again, Grandma?”

“Not till we find Zene,” she replied, driving resolutely forward on
the strange road.




CHAPTER VII. ZENE'S MAN AND WOMAN.


A covered wagon appeared on the first crossroad, moving steadily
between rows of elder bushes. The carriage waited its approach. A
figure like Zene's sat resting his feet on the tongue behind the old
gray and the old white.

“It's our wagon,” said Robert Day. Presently Zene's countenance, and
even the cast in his eyes, became a certainty instead of a wavering
indistinctness, and he smiled with satisfaction while halting his
vehicle at right angles with the carriage.

“Where have you been?” inquired Grandma Padgett.

“Over on t'other road,” replied Zene, indicating the direction with
his whip, “huntin' you folks. I knowed you hadn't made the right turn
somehow.”

Grandma Padgett mentioned her experience with the Dutch landlord and
the ford, both of which Zene had avoided by taking another cross-road
that he had neglected to indicate to them. He said he thought they
would see the wagon-track and foller, not bein' fur behind. When he
discovered they were not in his train, he was in a narrow road and
could not turn; so he tied the horses and walked back a piece. He got
on a corn-field fence and shouted to them; but by that time there was
no carriage anywhere in the landscape.

“Such things won't do,” said Grandma Padgett with some severity.

“No, marm,” responded Zene humbly.

“We must keep together,” said the head of the caravan.

“Yes, marm,” responded Zene earnestly.

“Well, now, you may drive ahead and keep the carriage in sight till
it's dinner-time and we come to a good place to halt.”

Bobaday said he believed he would get in with Zene and try the wagon
awhile. Springs and cushions had become tiresome. He half-stood on
the tongue, to bring his legs down on a level with Zene's, and
enjoyed the jolting in every piece of his backbone. He had had a
surfeit of woman-society. Even the horsey smell of Zene's clothes was
found agreeable. And above all, he wanted to talk about J. D.
Matthews, and tell the terrors of a bottomless ford and a house with
a strange-sounding cellar.

“But the man was the funniest thing,” said Bobaday. “He just talked
poetry all the time, and Grandma said he was daft. I'd like to talk
that way myself, but I can't make it jee.”

Zene observed mysteriously, that there were some queer folks in this
section.

Yes, Bobaday admitted; the landlord was as Dutch as sour-krout.

Zene observed that all the queer folks wasn't Dutch. He shook his
head and looked so steadily at a black stump that Robert knew his
eyes were fixedly cast on the horizon. The boy speculated on the
possibility of people with crooked eyes seeing anything clearly. But
Zene's hints were a stimulant to curiosity.

“Where did _you_ stay last night?” inquired Robert, bracing
himself for pleasant revelations.

“Oh, I thought at first I'd put up in the wagon.” replied Zene.

“But you didn't?”

“No: not _intirely_.”

“What _did_ you do?” pressed Robert Day.

“Well, I thought I'd better git nigh some house, on account of
givin' me a chance to see if you folks come by. I thought you'd
inquire at all the houses.”

“Did you stop at one?”

[Illustration: ZENE EXCITES BOBADAY'S CURIOSITY.]

“I took the team out _by_ a house. It was plum dark then.”

“I'd gone in to see what kind of folks they were first,” remarked
Bobaday.

“Yes, sir; that's what I'd orto done. But I leads them round to
their feed-box after I watered 'em to a spring o' runnin' water. Then
I doesn't know but the woman o' the house will give me a supper if I
pays for it. So I slips to the side door and knocks. And a man opens
the door.”

Robert Day drew in his breath quickly.

“How did the man look?” he inquired.

“I can't tell you that,” replied Zene, “bekaze I was so struck with
the looks of the woman that I looked right past him.”

Robert considered the cast in Zene's eyes, and felt in doubt whether
he looked at the man and saw the woman, or looked at the woman and
saw the man.

“Was she pretty?”

“Pretty!” replied Zene. “Is that flea-bit-gray, grazin' in the
medder there, pretty?”

“Well,” replied Bobaday, shifting his feet, “that's about as good-looking
as one of our old grays.”

“You don't know a horse,” said Zene indulgently. “Ourn's an iron
gray. There's a sight of difference in grays.”

“Was the woman ugly?”

“Is a spotted snake ugly?”

“Yes,” replied Robert decidedly; “or it 'pears so to me.”

“That's how the woman 'peared to me. She was tousled, and looked
wild out of her eyes. The man says, says he, 'What do you want?' I
s'ze, 'Can I git a bite here?'”

Robert had frequently explained to Zene the utter nonsense of this
abbreviation, “I s'ze,” but Zene invariably returned to it, perhaps
dimly reasoning that he had a right to the dignity of third person
when repeating what he had said. If he said of another man, “says
he,” why could he not remark of himself, “I says he?” He considered
it not only correct, but ornamental.

“The man says, says he, 'We don't keep foot-pads.' And I s'ze--for I
was mad--'I ain't no more a foot-pad than you are,' I s'ze. 'I've got
a team and a wagon out here,' I s'ze, 'and pervisions too, but I've
got the means to pay for a warm bite,' I s'ze, 'and if you can't
accommodate me, I s'pose there's other neighbors that can.'”

“You shouldn't told him you had money and things!” exclaimed Robert,
bulging his eyes.

“I see that, soon's I done it,” returned Zene, shaking a line over
the near horse. “The woman spoke up, and she says, says she, 'There
ain't any neighbor nigher than five miles.' Thinks I, this settlement
looked thicker than that. But I doesn't say yea or no to it. And they
had me come in and eat. I paid twenty-five cents for such a meal as
your gran'marm wouldn't have set down on her table.”

“What did they have?”

“Don't ask me,” urged Zene; “I'd like to forget it. There was
vittles, but they tasted so funny. And they kept inquirin' where I's
goin' and who was with me. They was the uneasiest people you ever
see. And nothing would do but I must sleep in the house. There was
two rooms. I didn't see till I was in bed, that the only door I could
get out of let into the room where the man and woman stayed.”

Robert Day began to consider the part of Ohio through which his
caravan was passing, a weird and unwholesome region, full of
shivering delights. While the landscape lay warm, glowing and natural
around him, it was luxury to turn cold at Zene's night-peril.

“I couldn't go to sleep,” continued Zene, “and I kind of kept my eye
on the only window there was.”

Robert drew a sigh of relief as he reflected that an enemy watching
at the window would be sure Zene was looking just in the opposite
direction.

“And the man and woman they whispered.”

“What did they whisper about?”

“How do I know?” said Zene mysteriously. “Whisper--whisper--whisper--z-z!
That's the way they kept on. Sometimes I thought he's threatenin' her,
and sometimes I thought she's threatenin' him. But along in the middle
of the night they hushed up whisperin'. And then I heard somebody open
the outside door and go out. I s'ze to myself, 'Nows the time to be up
and ready.' So I was puttin' on the clothes I'd took off, and right
there on the bed, like it had been there all the time, was two great
big eyes turnin' from green to red, and flame comin' out of them like
it does out of coals when the wind blows.”

“Was it a cat?” whispered Robert Day, hoping since Zene was safe,
that it was not.

Zene passed the insinuation with a derisive puff. He would not stoop
to parley about cats in a peril so extreme.

“'How do _I_ know what it was?” he replied. “I left one of my
socks and took the boot in my hand. It was all the gun or anything o'
that kind I had. I left my neckhan'ketcher, too.”

“But you didn't get out of the window,” objected Bobaday eagerly.
“They always have a hole dug, you know, right under the window, to
catch folks in.”

“Yes, I did,” responded Zene, leaping a possible hole in his
account. “I guess I cleared forty rod, and I come down on all-fours
behind a straw-pile right in the stable-lot.”

“Did the thing follow you?”

“Before I could turn around and look, I see that man and that woman
leadin' our horses away from the grove where I'd tied 'em to the
feed-box.”

“What for?” inquired Robert Day.

Zene cast a compassionate glance at his small companion.

“What do folks ever lead critters away in the night for?” he hinted.

“Sometimes to water and feed them.”

“I s'ze to myself,” continued Zene, ignoring this absurd
supposition, “'now, if they puts the horses in their stable, they
means to keep the wagon too, and make way with me so no one will ever
know it. But,' I s'ze, 'if they tries to lead the horses off
somewhere for to hide 'em, then _that's_ all they want, and
they'll pretend in the morning to have lost stock themselves.'”

“And which did they do?” urged Robert after a thrilling pause.

“They marched straight for their stable.”

The encounter was now to take place. Robert Day braced himself by
means of the wagon-tongue.

“Then what did _you_ do?”

“I rises up,” Zene recounted in a cautious whisper, “draws back the
boot, and throws with all my might.”

“Not at the woman?” urged Bobaday.

“I wanted to break her first,” apologized Zene. “She was worse than
the man. But I missed her and hit him.”

Robert was glad Zene aimed as he did.

“Then the man jumps and yells, and the woman jumps and yells, and
the old gray he rears up and breaks loose. He run right past the
straw pile, and before you could say Jack Robinson, I had him by the
hitch-strap--it was draggin'--and hoppin' against the straw, I jumped
on him.”

“Jack Robinson,” Zene's hearer tried half-audibly. “Then what? Did
the man and woman run?”

“I makes old Gray jump the straw pile, and I comes at them just like
I rose out of the ground! Yes,” acknowledged Zene forbearingly, “they
run. Maybe they run toward the house, and maybe they run the other
way. I got a-holt of old White's hitch-strap and my boot; then I
cantered out and hitched up, and went along the road real lively. It
wasn't till towards mornin' that I turned off into the woods and tied
up for a nap. Yes, I slept _part_ of the night in the wagon.”

Robert sifted all these harrowing circumstances.

“_Maybe_ they weren't stealing the horses,” he hazarded. “Don't
folks ever unhitch other folks' horses to put 'em in their stable?”

Zene drew down the corners of his mouth to express impatience.

“But I'd hated to been there,” Robert hastened to add.

“I guess you would,” Zene observed in a lofty, but mollified way,
“if you'd seen the pile of bones I passed down the road a piece from
that house.”

“Bones?”

“Piled all in a heap at the edge of the woods.”

“What kind of bones, Zene?”

“Well, I didn't get out to handle 'em. But I see one skull about the
size of yours, with a cap on about the size of yours.”

This was all that any boy could ask. Robert uttered a derisive “Ho!”
 but he sat and meditated with pleasure on the pile of bones. It cast
a lime-white glitter on the man and woman who but for that might have
been harmless.

“I didn't git much rest,” concluded Zene. “I could drop off sound
now if I'd let myself.”

“I'll drive,” proposed Bobaday.

Zene reluctantly considered this offer. The road ahead looked smooth
enough. “I guess there's no danger unless you run into a fence
corner,” he remarked.

“I can drive as well as Grandma Padgett can,” said Robert indignantly.

Zene wagged his head as if unconvinced. He never intended to let
Robert Day be a big boy while he stayed with the family.

“Your gran'marm knows how to handle a horse. Now if I's to crawl
back and take a nap, and you's to run the team into any accident, I'd
have to bear all the blame.”

Robert protested: and when Zene had shifted his responsibility to
his satisfaction, he crept back and leaned against the goods, falling
into a sound sleep.

The boy drove slowly forward. It seemed that old gray and old white
also felt last night's vigils. They drowsed along with their heads
down through a landscape that shimmered sleepily.

Robert thought of gathering apples in the home orchard: of the big
red ones that used to fall and split asunder with their own weight,
waking him sometimes from a dream, with their thump against the sod.
What boy hereafter would gather the sheep-noses, and watch the early
June's every day until their green turned suddenly into gold, and one
bite was enough to make you sit down under the tree and ask for
nothing better in life! He used to keep the chest in his room floored
with apples. They lay under his best clothes and perfumed them. His
nose knew the breath of a russet, and in a dark cellar he could smell
out the bell-flower bin. The real poor people of the earth must be
those who had no orchards; who could not clap a particular comrade of
a tree on the bark and look up to see it smiling back red and yellow
smiles; who could not walk down the slope and see apples lying in
ridges, or pairs, or dotting the grass everywhere. Robert was half-asleep,
dreaming of apples. He felt thirsty, and heard a humming like the
buzz of bees around the cider-press. He and aunt Corinne used to sit
down by the first tub of sweet cider, each with two straws apiece,
and watch their faces in the rosy juice while they drank Cider from
the barrels when snow was on the ground, poured out of a pitcher into
a glass, had not the ecstatic tang of cider through a straw. The Bees
came to the very edge of the tub, as if to dispute such hiving of
diluted honey; and more of them came, from hanging with bent bodies,
around the dripping press.

Their buzz increased to a roar. Robert Day woke keenly up to find
the old white and the old gray just creeping across a railroad track,
and a locomotive with its train whizzing at full speed towards them.




CHAPTER VIII. LITTLE ANT RED AND BIG ANT BLACK.


A breath's delay must have been fatal. Robert had no whip, but
doubling the lines and shouting at the top of his voice, he braced
himself and lashed the gray. The respectable beast leaped with
astonishment, dragging its fellow along. The fore wheels cleared the
track, and Bobaday's head was filled with the prolonged cry of the
locomotive. Zene sprang up, and the hind part of the wagon received a
crash which threw the boy out at the side, and Zene quite across the
gray's back.

The train came to a stop after running a few yards further. But
finding that no lives were lost, it put on steam and disappeared on
its course, and Zene and his trembling assistant were trying to prop
up one corner of the wagon when Grandma Padgett brought her
spectacles to bear upon the scene.

One hind wheel had been splintered by the train, the leap of the
gray turning the wagon from the road. Grandma Padgett preserved her
composure and asked few questions. Her lips moved at frequent
intervals for a long time after this accident. But aunt Corinne flew
out of the carriage, and felt her nephew's arms and wailed over the
bump his cheek received, and was sure his legs were broken, and that
Zene limped more than ever, and that the train had run straight
across their prostrate forms.

Zene busied himself with shamefaced eagerness in getting the wagon
off the road and preparing to hunt a shop. He made piteous grimaces
over every strap he unfastened.

“We cannot leave the goods standing here in the wagon with nobody to
watch 'em,” said the head of the caravan. “It's nigh dinner-time, and
we'll camp in sight, and wait till we can all go on together. A
merciful Providence has brought us along safe so far. We mustn't git
separated and run ourselves into any more dangers than we can help.”

Zene lingered only to pitch the camp and find water at a spring
running down into a small creek. Then he bestrode one of the wagon
horses, and, carrying the broken wheel-hubs, trotted away.

Grandma Padgett tucked up her dress, took provisions from the wagon,
and got dinner. Aunt Corinne and her nephew made use of this occasion
to lay in a supply of nuts for winter. The nuts were old ones, lying
under last autumn's leaves, and before a large heap had been
gathered, aunt Corinne bethought her to examine if they were fit to
eat. They were not; for besides an ancient flavor, the first kernel
betrayed the fact that these were pig-nuts instead of hickory.

[Illustration: BOBADAY'S NARROW ESCAPE.]

“You would have 'em,” said Bobaday, kicking the pile. “I didn't
think they's good, anyhow.”

“They looked just like our little hickories,” said aunt Corinne,
twisting her mouth at the acrid kernel, “that used to lay under that
tree in the pasture. And their shells are as sound.”

But there was compensation in two saplings which submitted to be
rode as teeters part of the idle afternoon.

Grandma Padgett had put away the tea things before Zene returned. He
brought with him a wagon-maker from one of the villages on the 'pike.
The wagon-maker, after examining the disabled vehicle, and getting
the dimensions of the other hind wheel which Zene had forgotten to
take to him, assured the party he would set them up all right in a
day or two.

Grandma Padgett was sitting on a log knitting.

“We'd better have kept to the 'pike,” she remarked.

“Yes, marm,” responded Zene.

“The toll-gates would be a small expense compared to this.”

“Yes, indeed, marm,” responded Zene, grimacing piteously.

“Still,” said Grandma Padgett, “we have much to be thankful for, in
that our lives and health have been spared.”

“Oh, yes, marm! yes, marm!” responded Zene.

The wagon-maker hung by one careless leg to his horse before
cantering off, and inquired with neighborly interest:

“How far West you folks goin'?”

“We're goin' to Illinois,” replied Grandma Padgett.

“Oh, pshaw, now!” said the wagon-maker. “Goin' to the Eeleenoy!
that's a good ways. Ain't you 'fraid you'll never git back?”

“We ain't expectin' to come back,” said Grandma Padgett. “My son's
settled there.”

“He has!” said the wagon-maker with an accent of surprise. “Well,
well! they say that's an awful country.”

“My son writes back it's as fine land as he ever saw,” said Grandma
Padgett with dignity and proper local pride.

“But the chills is so bad,” urged the wagon-maker, who looked as if
he had experienced them at their worst. “And the milk-sick, they say
the milk-sick is all over the Eeleenoy.”

“We're not borrowing any trouble about such things,” said Grandma
Padgett.

“Some of our townsfolks went out there,” continued the wagon-maker,
“but what was left of 'em come back. They had to buy their drinkin'
water, and the winters on them perrares froze the children in their
beds! Oh, I wouldn't go to the Eeleenoy,” said the wagon-maker
coaxingly. “You're better off here, if you only knew it.”

As Grandma Padgett heard this remonstrance with silent dignity, the
wagon-maker took himself off with a few additional remarks.

Then they began to make themselves snug for the night. The wagon-cover
was taken off and made into a tent for Grandma Padgett and aunt Corinne.
Robert Day was to sleep in the carriage, and Zene insisted on sleeping
with blankets on the wagon where he could watch the goods. He would be
within calling distance of the camp.

“We're full as comfortable as we were last night, anyhow,” observed
the head of the caravan.

Zene said it made no difference about his supper. He took thankfully
what was kept for him, and Robert Day felt certain Zene was trying to
bestow on him some conscience-stricken glances.

It was an occasion on which Zene could be made to tell a story. He
was not lavish with such curious ones as he knew. Robert sometimes
suspected him to be a mine of richness, but it took such hard mining
to get a nugget out that the results hardly compensated for the
effort.

But when the boy climbed upon the wagon in starlight, and made a few
leading remarks, Zene really plunged into a story. He thereby
relieved his own feelings and turned the talk from late occurrences.

“I told you about Little Ant Red and Big Ant Black?”

“No, you never!” exclaimed Bobaday.

“Well, once there was Little Ant Red and Big Ant Black lived
neighbors.”

“Whose aunts were they--each other's?” inquired the boy.

“They wasn't your father's or mother's sisters; they was
_antymires_,” explained Zene.

“Oh,” said Robert Day.

“Ant Red, she was a little bit of a thing; you could just see her.
But Ant Black, she was a great big critter that went like a train of
cars when she was a mind to.”

“I don't like either kind,” said Robert. “The little ones got into
our sugar once, and Grandma had to fight 'em out with camphor, and a
big black got into my mouth and I bit him in two. He pinched my
tongue awful, and he tasted sour.”

“Big Ant Black,” continued Zene, “she lived in a hill by a stump,
but Little Ant Red she lived on a leaf up a tree.”

“I thought they always crept into houses,” urged Bobaday.

“This one didn't. She lived on a leaf up a tree. And these two ants
run against each other in everything. When they met in the grass
they'd stand up on their hind feet and shake hands as friendly as you
please, but as soon as their backs was turned they'd talk! Big Ant
Black said Little Ant Red was always a meddling, and everybody knowed
her son was drowned in under the orchard cider-press where his mother
sent him to snuff round. And Little Ant Red she used to tell how Ant
Black was so graspin' she tried to carry that cider-press off and
hide it in her hole.

“They had all the neighbors takin' sides. There was a yellow-back
spider. He took up for Ant Red; he hoped to get a taste of her, and
Ant Black he knowed was big enough to bite him unless he was mighty
soople in wrappin' the web around her. Every mornin' when the dew
stood in beads on his net he told Ant Red they was tears he shed
about her troubles, and she run up and down and all around, talkin'
like a sawmill, but keepin' just off the web. And there was Old
Grasshopper, he sided with Ant Red, and so did Miss Green Katydid.
But all the beetles, and them bugs that lived under the bark of the
old stump, they took up for Ant Black, 'cause she was handy. And the
snake-feeder was on her side.

“Well, it run along, feelin's gittin' harder and harder, till Ant
Black she jumped up and kitched Ant Red fussin' round her cow pasture
one night, and then the cows began to give bloody milk, and then Ant
Black she give out that Ant Red was a witch.

“Now, these kind of critters, they're as smart as human bein's if
you only knowed it. And that was enough. The katydid, she said she
felt pins and needles in her back whenever Ant Red looked at her; and
the snake-feeders said she shot arries at 'em when they was flyin'
over a craw-fish hole. All the beetles and wood-bugs complained of
bein' hit with witch-bells, and the more Ant Red acted careful the
more they had ag'in her.

“Well, the spider he told her to come into his den and live, and
she'd be safe from hangin', but she wasn't sure in her mind about
that. Even the grasshopper jumped out of her way, and bunged his eyes
out at her; as if she could harm such a great big gray lubber as him!
She was gittin' pretty lonesome when she concluded to try a projic.”

“What's a projic?” inquired Robert Day.

“Why, it's a--p'epperation, or--a plan of some kind,” explained Zene.

“So she invites Big Ant Black and all her family, and the spider and
all his family, and the beetles and bugs and all their families, and
the snake-feeders and Miss Katydid for young folks, and don't leave
out a neighbor, to an apple-bee right inside the orchard fence.

“So it was pleasant weather, and they all come and brung the babies,
the old grasshopper skippin' along as nimble and steppin' on the
shawl that was wrapped round his young one. And the snake-feeders
they helped Miss Katydid over the lowest fence-rail, and here come
Big Ant Black with such a string behind her it looked like a funeral
instead of a family percession and she twisted her neck from side to
side as soon as she see the great big apple, kind of wonderin' if
they couldn't carry it off.

“Little Ant Red had all her children's heads combed and the best
cheers set out, and she had on her good dress and white apron, and
she says right and left, 'Hoddy-do, sir? hoddy-do, marm? Come right
in and take cheers. And they all shook hands with her as if they'd
never dreamt of callin' her a witch, and fell right on to the apple
and begun to eat. And they all e't and e't, till they'd made holes in
the rind and hollered it out. And Big Ant Black she gits her family
started, and they carries off chunk after chunk of that apple till
the road was black and white speckled between her house and the
apple-tree.

“Little Ant Red she walks around urgin' them all to help
theirselves, and that made them all feel pleasant to her. But Big Ant
Black she got so graspin' and eager, that what does she do but try to
help her young ones carry off the whole apple-shell. It did look
jub'ous to see such a big thing movin' off with such little critters
tuggin' it. And then Ant Red got on to a clover-head and showed the
rest of the company what Ant Black was a-doin'. Says Ant Red: 'You
ain't e't more'n a mouthful, Mr. Grasshopper.'

“'No, marm,' says he.

“'I s'ze to myself,' says Ant Red, 'here is this polite company, and
the snake-feeders don't touch nothin,' and everybedy knows Miss
Katydid lives on nothin' but rose-leaf butter, and the bugs and
beetles will hardly take enough, to keep 'em alive.' 'And I s'ze to
myself,' says Ant Red, 'here's this big apple walkin' off with nobody
but Ant Black to move it. This great big sound apple. And it looks to
me like witchcraft. That's what it looks like,' says Ant Red.

“They all declared it looked just like witchcraft. Ant Black tried
to show them how holler the apple was, and they declared if she'd
hollered it that way so quick, it was witchcraft certain.

“So what does they do but pen her and her young ones in the apple-shell
and stop it up with mud. Even the mud-wasps and tumble-bugs that hadn't
been bid come and took part when they see the dirt a-flyin'. Ant Red
set on the clover-head and teetered.

“Now, down to this present minute,” concluded Zene, “you never pick
up an apple and find a red ant walkin' out of it. If ants is there,
it's one of them poor black fellers that was shut up at the apple-bee,
and they walk out brisk; as if they's glad to find daylight once more.”




CHAPTER IX. THE GREAT CAMP MEETING.


Towards evening of the next day the broken wagon wheel was replaced.
By that time the children were not more anxious to move forward than
was Grandma Padgett. So just before sunset they broke up camp and
moved along the country road until the constellations were swinging
overhead. Zene took the first good crossway that led to the 'pike,
and after waiting to be sure that the noses of Old Hickory and Old
Henry were following, he jogged between dewy fence rows, and they
came to the broad white ribbon of high road, and in time to the
village of Somerford, having progressed only ten miles that day.

Bobaday and Corinne were so sleepy, and their departure from
Somerford next morning was taken at such an early hour, that they
remembered it only as a smell of tallow candles in the night,
accompanied by a landlady's head in a ruffled nightcap.

Very different was Springfield, the county seat of Clark County.
That was a town with people moving briskly about it, and long streets
could be seen, where pleasant houses were shaded with trees.

Zene inquired the names of all small places as soon as they entered
the main street, and then, obligingly halting the wagon at one side,
he waited until Grandma Padgett came up, and told her. He learned and
announced the cities long before any of them came into view. It was a
pleasure to Bobaday and aunt Corinne to ride into a town repeating
its name to themselves and trying to fasten its identity on their
minds. First they would pass a gang of laborers working on the road,
or perhaps a man walking up and down telegraph poles with sharp-shod
heels; then appeared humble houses with children playing thickly
around them. Finer buildings crowded on the sight, and where the
signs of business flaunted, were women and little children in pretty
clothes, always going somewhere to buy something nice. Once they met
a long procession of carriages, and in the first carriage aunt
Corinne beheld and showed to her nephew a child's coffin made of
metal. It glittered in the sun. Grandma Padgett said it was zinc. But
aunt Corinne secretly suspected it was made of gold, to enclose some
dear little baby whose mother would not put it into anything else.

At New Carlisle, a sleepy little village where the dogfennel was
wonderfully advanced for June, Zene took the gray from the wagon and
hitched him to the carriage, substituting Old Hickory. The gray's
shoulder was rubbed by his collar, and Zene reasoned that the lighter
weight of the carriage would give him a better chance of healing his
bruise. Thus paired the horses looked comical. Hickory and Henry
evidently considered the change a disgrace to them. But they made the
best of it and uttered no protest, except keeping as wide a space as
possible between themselves and their new mates. But the gray and
white, old yoke fellows at the plough, who knew nothing of the
dignity of carriage drawing, and cared less, who had rubbed noses and
shared feed-boxes ever since they were colts, both lifted up their
voices in mournful whinneys and refused comfort and correction. The
white turned his head back over his shoulder and would have halted
anywhere until his mate came up; while the gray strained forward,
shaking his head, and neighing as if his throat were full of tears
every time a tree or a turn in the road hid the wagon.

The caravan moving to this irregular and doleful music, passed
through another little town which Zene said was named Boston, late on
a rainy afternoon. Here they crossed the Miami River in a bridge
through the cracks of which Robert Day and Corinne looked at the full
but not very wide stream. It flowed beneath them in comparative
silence. The rain pricked the water's surface into innumerable
puckers.

“Little boys dancing up,” said aunt Corinne, in time-honored phrase.

“No; it's bees stingin' the water,” said her nephew, “with long
stingers that reach clear out of the clouds.”

These sky-bees stung the dusty road until it lay first in dark
dimples and last in swollen mud rows and shallow pools. The 'pike
kept its dignity under the heaviest rains. Its very mud was light and
plaster-like, scarcely clinging to the wheels or soiling the horses'
legs. Its flint ribs rung more sharply under the horses' shoes.
Through the damp dusk aunt Corinne took pleasure in watching the fire
struck by old Henry and the gray, against the trickling stones. They
pulled the carriage curtains down, and Grandma Padgett had the
oilcloth apron drawn up to her chin, while she continued to drive the
horses through a slit. The rear of the wagon made a blur ahead of
them. Now the 'pike sides faded from fresh green to a general
dulness, and trees whispering to the rain lost their vistas and
indentations of shade, and became a solid wall down which a steady
pour hissed with settled monotony. Boswell and Johnson no longer
foraged at the 'pike sides, or lagged behind or scampered ahead. They
knew it was a rainy October night without lightning and thunder,
slipped by mistake into the packet of June weather; and they trotted
invisibly under the carriage, carrying their tails down, and their
lolling tongues close to the puddles they were obliged to scamper
through or skip. Boswell and Johnson remembered their experiences at
the lonesome Susan house, where they lay in the deep weeds and were
forgotten until morning by the harassed family; and they rolled their
eyes occasionally, with apprehension lest the grinding of the wheels
should cease, and some ghostly wall loom up at one side of their way,
unlighted by a single glimmer and unperfumed by any whiff of supper.
It was a fine thing to be movers' dogs when the movers went into camp
or put up in state at a tavern. Around a camp were all sorts of
woodsy creatures to be scratched out of holes or chased up trees, or
to be nosed and chewed at. There were stray and half-wild pigs that
had tails to be bitten, and what could be more exhilarating than
making a drove of grunting pigs canter like a hailstorm away into
deep woods! And in the towns and villages all resident dogs came to
call on Boswell and Johnson. At every tavern Boswell picked a fight
and Johnson fought it out; sometimes retiring with his tail to the
earth and a sad expression of being outnumbered, but oftener a victor
to have his wounds dressed and bandaged by Boswell's tongue. There
was plenty to eat at taverns and camps, and good hunting in the
woods; but who could tell what hungry milestone might stand at the
end of this day's journey?

Grandma Padgett herself was beginning to feel anxious on this
subject. She drove faster in order to overtake Zene and consult with
him, but before his attention could be attracted, both carriage and
wagon reached a broad belt of shine stretching across the 'pike, and
making trees in the meadow opposite stand out as distinct individuals.

This illumination came from many camp-fires extending so far into
the woods that the last one showed like a spark. A great collection
of moving wagons were ranged in line along the extent of these fires,
and tents pitched under the dripping foliage revealed children
playing within their snug cover, or women spreading the evening meal.
Kettles were hung above the fires, and skillets hissed on the coals.
The horses, tied to their feed-boxes, were stamping and grinding
their feed in content, and the gray lifted up his voice to neigh at
the whole collection as Grandma Padgett stopped just behind Zene. All
the camp dogs leaped up the 'pike together, and Boswell and Johnson
met them in a neutral way while showing the teeth of defence. To Boswell
and Johnson as well as to their betters, this big and well-protected
encampment had an inviting look, provided the campers were not to be
shunned.

A man came up the 'pike side through the rain and kicked some of the
dogs aside.

“Hullo,” said he most cheerfully. “Want to put up?”

“What is it?” inquired Zene cautiously. He then craned his neck
around to look at Grandma Padgett, whose spectacles glared seriously
at the man.

This hospitable traveller wore a red shirt and a slouched hat, and
had his trousers tucked in his boots. He pulled off his hat to shake
the rain away, and showed bushy hair and a smiling bearded face. No
weather could hurt him. He was ready for anything.

“Light down,” he exclaimed. “Plenty of room over there if you want
it.”

“Who's over there?” inquired Zene.

“Oh, it's a big camp-meeting,” replied the man. “There's twenty or
thirty families, and lots of fun.”

“Do you mean,” inquired Grandma Padgett, “a camp-meeting for
religious purposes?”

“You can have that if you want it,” responded the man, “and have
your exhorters along. It's a family camp. Most of us going out to
Californy. Goin' to cross the plains. Some up in the woods there
goin' to Missoury. Don't care where they're goin' if they want to
stop and camp with us. _We're_ from the Pan Handle of Virginia.
There's a dozen families or more of us goin' out to Californy
together. The rest just happened along.”

“I'm a Virginian myself,” said Grandma Padgett, warming, “though
Ohio's been my State for many years.”

“Well, now,” exclaimed the mover, “if you want to light right down,
we'll be all the gladder for that. I saw you stoppin' here uncertain;
and there's the ford over Little Miami ahead of you. I thought you'd
not like to try it in the dark.”

“You're not like a landlord back on the road that let us risk our
necks!” said Grandma Padgett with appreciation. “But if you take
everybody into camp ain't you afraid of getting the wrong sort?”

“Oh, no,” replied the Virginian. “There's enough of _us_ to
overpower _them_.”

“Well, Zene,” said Grandma Padgett, “I guess we'd better stop here.
We've provisions in our wagon.”

“How far you goin'?” inquired the hospitable mover.

“Into Illinois,” replied the head of the small caravan.

“Your trip'll soon be done, then. Come on, now, and go to Californy,
why don't you! _That's_ the country to get rich in! You'll see
sights the other side of the Mississippi!”

“I'm too old for such undertakings,” said Grandma Padgett, passing
over the mover's exuberance with a smile.

“Why, we have a granny over ninety with us!” he declared. “Now's the
time to start if you want to see the great western country.”

Zene drove off the 'pike on the temporary track made by so many
vehicles, and Grandma Padgett followed, the Virginian showing them a
good spot near the liveliest part of the camp, upon which they might
pitch.

The family sat in the-carriage while Zene took out the horses,
sheltered the wagon under thick foliage where rain scarcely
penetrated, and stretched the canvas for a tent. Then Grandma Padgett
put on her rubber overshoes, pinned a shawl about her and descended;
and their fire was soon burning, their kettle was soon boiling, in
defiance of water streams which frequently trickled from the leaves
and fell on the coals with a hiss. The firelight shone through slices
of clear pink ham put down to broil. Aunt Corinne laid the cloth on a
box which Zene took out of the wagon for her, and set the cups and
saucers, the sugar and preserves, and little seed cakes which grew
tenderer the longer you kept them, all in tempting order. They had
baker's bread and gingercakes in the carriage. Since her adventure at
the Susan house, Grandma Padgett had taken care to put provisions in
the carriage pockets. Then aunt Corinne, assisted by her nephew, got
potatoes from the sack, wrapped them in wet wads of paper, and
roasted them in the ashes. A potato so roasted may be served up with
a scorched and hardened shell, but its heart is perfumed by all the
odors of the woods. It tastes better than any other potato, and while
the butter melts through it you wonder that people do not fire whole
fields and bake the crop in hot earth before digging it, to store for
winter.

[Illustration: BOBADAY'S CANOPIED THRONE.]

Zene had frequently assured Robert Day that an egg served this way
was better still. He said he used to roast eggs in the ashes when
burning stumps, and you only needed a little salt with them, to make
them fit for a king. But Robert Day scorned the egg and remained true
to the potato.

While they were at supper the Virginian's wife came to see them,
carrying in her hand an offering of bird-pie. Grandma Padgett
responded with a dish of preserves. And they then talked about the
old State, trying to discover mutual interests there.

The Virginian's wife was a strong, handsome, cordial woman. Her
family came from the Pan Handle, but from the neighborhood of
Wheeling, They were not mountaineers. She had six children. They were
going to California because her husband had the mining fever. He
wanted to go years before, but she held out against it until she saw
he would do no good unless he went. So they sold their land, and
started with a colony of neighbors.

The names of all her relatives were sifted, and Grandma Padgett made
a like search among her own kindred, and they discovered that an
uncle of one, and a grandfather of the other, had been acquainted,
and served together in the War of '12. This established a bond.
Grandma Padgett was gently excited, and told Bobaday and Corinne
after the Virginia woman's departure to her own wagons, that she
should feel safe on account of being an old neighbor in the camp.




CHAPTER X. THE CRY OF A CHILD IN THE NIGHT.


But the camp was too exciting to let the children fall asleep early.
Fires were kept briskly burning, and some of the wagoners feeling in
a musical humor, shouted songs or hummed melancholy tunes which
sounded like a droning accompaniment to the rain. The rain fell with
a continuous murmur, and evidently in slender threads, for it
scarcely pattered on the tent. It was no beating, boisterous,
drenching tempest, but a lullaby rain, bringing out the smell of
barks, of pennyroyal and May-apple and wild sweet-williams from the
deep woods.

Robert Day crept out of the carriage, having with him the oil-cloth
apron and a plan. Four long sticks were not hard to find, or to
sharpen with his pocket knife, and a few knocks drove them into the
soft earth, two on each side of a log near the fire. He then
stretched the oil-cloth over the sticks, tying the corners, and had a
canopied throne in the midst of this lively camp. A chunk served for
a footstool. Bobaday sat upon his log, hearing the rain slide down,
and feeling exceedingly snug. His delight came from that wild
instinct with which we all turn to arbors and caves, and to
unexpected grapevine bowers deep in the woods; the instinct which
makes us love to stand upright inside of hollow sycamore-trees, and
pretend that a green tunnel among the hazel or elderberry bushes is
the entrance hall of a noble castle.

Bobaday was very still, lest his grandmother in the tent, or Zene in
the remoter wagon, should insist on his retiring to his uneasy bed
again. He got enough of the carriage in daytime, having counted all
its buttons up and down and crosswise. The smell of the leather and
lining cloth was mixed with every odor of the journey. One can have
too much of a very easy, well-made carriage.

The firelight revealed him in his thoughtful mood: a very white boy
with glistening hair and expanding large eyes of a gray and velvet
texture. Some light eyes have a thin and sleepy surface like inferior
qualities of lining silk; and you cannot tell whether the expression
or the humors of the eye are at fault. But Nature, or his own
meditations on what he read and saw in this delicious world, had
given to Bobaday's irises a softness like the pile of gray velvet,
varied sometimes by cinnamon-colored shades.

His eyes reflected the branches, the other campfires, and many
wagons. It gave him the sensation of again reading for the first time
one of grandfather's Peter Parley books about the Indians, or Mr.
Irving's story of Dolph Heyleger, where Dolph approaches Antony
Vander Heyden's camp. He saw the side of one wagon-cover dragged at
and a little night-capped head stuck out.

“Bobaday!” whispered aunt Corinne, creeping on tiptoe toward him,
and anxious to keep him from exclaiming when he saw her.

“What did you get up for?” he whispered back.

“What did _you_ get up for?” retaliated aunt Corinne.

Robert Day made room for her on the log under the canopy, and she
leaned down and laced her shoes after being seated. “Ma Padgett's
just as tight asleep! What'd she say if she knew we wasn't in bed!”

It was so exciting and so nearly wicked to be out of bed and
prowling when their elders were asleep, they could not possibly enjoy
the sin in silence.

“Ain't it nice?” whispered aunt Corinne. “I saw you fixin' this
little tent, and then I sl-ip-ped up and hooked some of my clothes
on, and didn't dast to breathe 'fear Ma Padgett'd hear me. There must
be lots of children in the camp.”

“Yes; I've heard the babies cryin'.”

“Do you s'pose there's any gipsy folks along?”

“Do 'now,” whispered Bobaday, his tone inclining to an admission
that gipsy folks might be along.

“The kind that would steal us,” explained aunt Corinne.

This mere suggestion was an added pleasure; it made them shiver and
look back in the bushes.

“There might be--away back yonder,” whispered Robert Day, emboldened
by remembering that his capable grandmother was just within the tent,
and Zene at easy waking distance.

“But all the people will hitch up and drive away in the morning,” he
added, “and we won't know anything about 'em.”

To aunt Corinne this seemed a great pity. “I'd like to see how
everybody looks,” she meditated.

“So'd I,” whispered her nephew.

“It's hardly rainin' a drizzle now,” whispered aunt Corinne.

“I get so tired ridin' all day long,” whispered Robert, “that I wish
I was a scout or something, like that old Indian that was named
Trackless in the book--that went through the woods and through the
woods, and didn't leave any mark and never seemed to wear out. You
remember I read you a piece of it?”

Aunt Corinne fidgeted on the log.

“Wouldn't you like,” suggested her nephew, whose fancy the nighttime
stimulated, “to get on a flying carpet and fly from one place to
another?”

Aunt Corinne cast a glance back over her shoulder.

“We could go a little piece from our camp-fire and not get lost,”
 she suggested.

“Well,” whispered Robert boldly, “le's do it. Le's take a walk. It
won't do any harm. 'Tisn't late.”

“The's chickens crowin' away over there.”

“Chickens crow all times of the night. Don't you remember how our
old roosters used to act on Christmas night? I got out of bed four
times once, because I thought it was daylight, they would crow so!”

“Which way'll we take?” whispered aunt Corinne.

Robert slid cautiously from the log and mapped out the expedition.

“Off behind the wagon so's Zene won't see us. And then we'll slip
along towards that furthest fire. We can see the others as we go by.
Follow me.”

It was easy to slip behind the wagon and lose themselves in the
brush. But there they stumbled on unseen snags and were caught or
scratched by twigs, and descended suddenly to a pig-wallow or other
ugly spot, where Corinne fell down. Bobaday then thought it expedient
for his aunt to take hold of his jacket behind and walk in his
tracks, according to their life-long custom when going down cellar
for apples after dark. Grandma Padgett was not a woman to pamper the
fear of darkness in her family. She had been known to take a child
who recoiled from shapeless visions, and lead him into the unlighted
room where he fancied he saw them.

So after proceeding out of sight of their own wagon, aunt Corinne
and her nephew, toughened by this training, would not have owned to
each other a wish to go back and sit in safety and peace of nerve
again upon the log. Robert plodded carefully ahead, parting the
bushes, and she passed through the gaps with his own figure,
clinching his jacket with fingers that tightened or relaxed with her
tremors.

They had not counted on being smelled out by dogs at the various
watch-fires. One lolling yellow beast sprang up and chased them. Aunt
Corinne would have flown with screams, but her nephew hushed her up
and put her valiantly on a very high stump behind himself. The dog
took no trouble to trace them. He was too comfortable before the
brands, too mud-splashed and stiff from a long day's journey, to care
about chasing any mystery of the wood to its hole. But this warned
them not to venture too near other fires where other possible dogs
lay sentry.

“Why didn't we fetch old Johnson?” whispered aunt Corinne, after
they slid down the tree stump.

“'Cause Boswell'd been at his heels, and the whole camp'd been in a
fight,” replied Bobaday. “Old Johnson was under our wagon; I don't
know where Bos was. I was careful not to wake him.”

Through gaps in foliage and undergrowth they saw many an individual
part of the general camp; the wagon-cover in some cases being as dun
as the hide of an elephant. When a curtain was dropped over the front
opening of the wagon, Bobaday and Corinne knew that women and
children were sleeping within on their chattels. Here a tent was made
of sheets and stretched down with the branch of an overhanging tree
for a ridge-pole; and there horse-blankets were made into a canopy
and supported by upright poles. Within such covers men were asleep,
having sacks or comforters for bedding.

On a few wagon tongues, or stretched easily before fires, men
lingered, talking in steady, monotonous voices as if telling stories,
or in indifferent tones as if tempting each other to trades.

The rain had entirely ceased, though the spongy wet wood sod was not
pleasant to walk upon. “I guess,” said-aunt Corinne, “we'd better go
back.”

“Well, we've seen consider'ble,” assented her nephew. “I guess we'd
better.”

So he faced about. But quite near them arose the piercing scream of
a child in mortal fear.




CHAPTER XI. THE DARKENED WAGON.


Aunt Corinne and her nephew felt pierced by the cry. Her hands
gripped his jacket with a shock. Robert Day turning took hold of his
aunt's wrist to pinch her silent, but his efforts were too zealous
and turned her fright to indignation.

“I don't want my hand pinched off, Bobaday Padgett!” whispered aunt
Corinne, jerking away and thus breaking the circuit of comfort and
protection which was supposed to flow from his jacket.

“But listen,” hissed Robert.

“I don't want to listen,” whispered aunt Corinne; “I want to go back
to our camp-fire.”

“Nobody can hurt us,” whispered her nephew, gathering boldness. “You
stay here and let me creep through the bushes to that wagon. I want
to see what it was.”

“If you stay a minute I'll go and leave you,” remonstrated aunt
Corinne. “Ma Padgett don't want us off here by ourselves.”

But Robert's hearing was concentrated upon the object toward which
he moved. He used Indian-like caution. The balls of his large eyes
became so prominent that they shone with some of the lustre of a
cat's in the dark.

Corinne took hold of the bushes in his absence.

The wind was breathing sadly through the trees far off. What if some
poor little child, lost in the woods, should come patting to her,
with all the wildness of its experience hanging around it? Oh, the
woods was a good play-house, on sunshiny days, but not the best of
homes, after all. That must be why people built houses. When the snow
lay in a deep cake, showing only the two thumb-like marks at long
intervals made by the rabbit in its leaping flight, and when the air
was so tense and cold you could hear the bark of a dog far off,
Bobaday used to say he would love to live in the woods all the time.
He would chop to keep himself warm. He loved to drag the air into his
lungs when it seemed frozen to a solid. Corinne remembered how his
cheeks burned and his eyes glittered during any winter exertion. And
what could be prettier, he said, than the woods after it sleeted all
night, and hoar frost finished the job! Every tree would stand
glittering in white powder, as if dressed for the grandest occasion,
the twigs tipped with lace-work, and the limbs done in tracery and
all sorts of beautiful designs. Still this white dress was deadly
cold to handle. Aunt Corinne had often pressed her fingers into the
velvet crust upon the trunks. She did not like the winter woods, and
hardly more did she like this rain-soaked place, and these broad,
treacherous leaves that poured water down her neck in the humid dark.

Bobaday pounced upon her with such force when he appeared once more,
that she was startled into trying to climb a bush no higher than
herself.

He had not a word to say, but hitched his aunt to his jacket and
drew her away with considerable haste. They floundered over logs and
ran against stumps. Their own smouldering fire, and wagon with the
hoops standing up like huge uncovered ribs, and the tents wherein
their guardian slept after the fatigue of the day, all appeared
wonderfully soon, considering the time it had taken them to reach
their exploring limit.

Aunt Corinne huddled by the coals, and Bobaday sat down on the foot-chunk
he had placed for his awning throne.

“You better go to bed quick as ever you can,” he said.

“I guess I ain't goin',” said aunt Corinne with indignant surprise,
“till you tell me somethin' about what was up in the bushes. I stayed
still and let you look, and now you won't tell me!”

“You heard the sound,” remonstrated Robert.

“But I didn't see anything,” argued aunt Corinne.

“You wouldn't want to,” said Bobaday.

They were talking in cautious tones, but no longer whispering. It
had become too tiresome. Aunt Corinne would now have burst out with
an exclamation, but checked herself and tilted her nose, talking to
the coals which twinkled back to her between her slim fingers.

“Boys think they are so smart! They want to have all the good times
and see all the great shows, and go slidin' in winter time, when
girls have to stay in the house and knit, and then talk like they's
grown up, and we's little babies!”

Robert Day fixed his eyes on his aunt with superior compassion.

“Grandma Padgett wouldn't want me to scare you,” he observed.

Corinne edged several inches closer to him. She felt that she must
know what her nephew had seen if she had to thread all the dark mazes
again and look at it by herself.

“Ma Padgett never 'lows me to act scared,” she reminded him. “I
always have to go up to what I'm 'fraid of.”

“You won't go up to this.”

“Maybe I will. Tisn't so far back to that wagon.”

“I wouldn't stir it up for considerable,” said Robert.

“Was it a lion or a bear? Was it goin' to eat anything? Is that what
made the little child cry?”

“The little child hollered 'cause 'twas afraid of it. I was glad you
didn't look in at the end of the wagon with me.”

Aunt Corinne edged some inches nearer her protector.

“How could you see what was in a dark wagon?”

“There was a candle lighted inside. Aunt Krin, there was a little
pretty girl in that wagon that I do believe the folks stole!”

This was like a story. The luxury of a real stolen child had never
before come in aunt Corinne's way.

“Why, Bobaday?” she inquired affectionately.

“Because the little girl seemed like she was dead till all at once
she opened her eyes, and then her mouth as if she was going to scream
again, and they stopped her mouth up, and covered her in clothes.”

“What did the wagon look like?”

“Like a little room. And they slept on the floor. They had tin
things hangin' around the sides, and a stove in one corner with the
pipe stickin' up through the cover. And the cover was so thick you
couldn't see a light through it. You could only see through the
pucker-hole where it comes together over the feed-box.”

“And how many folks were there?”

“I don't know. I saw them fussing with the little girl, and I saw
it, and then I didn't stay any longer.”

“What was it, Bobaday?”

“I don't know,” he solemnly replied.

“Yes, but what did it look like?”

Her nephew stared doubtingly upon her.

“Will you holler if I tell you?”

Aunt Corinne went through an impressive pantomime of deeding and
double-deeding herself not to holler.

“Will you be afraid all the rest of the night?”

No; aunt Corinne intimated that her courage would be revived and
strengthened by knowing the worst about that wagon.

He pierced her with his dilating eyes, and beckoned her to put up
her ear for the information.

“You ain't goin' to play any trick,” remonstrated his relative, “like
you did when you got me to say grandmother, grandmother,
thith--thith--thith, and then hit my chin and made me bite my tongue?”

Robert was forced to chuckle at the recollection, but he assured
aunt Corinne that grandmother, grandmother, thith--thith--thith was
far from his thoughts. He hesitated, with aunt Corinne's ear jogging
against his chin. Then in a loud whisper he communicated:

“_It_ was a man with a pig's _head on_ him!”




CHAPTER XII. JONATHAN AND THRUSTY ELLEN.


Aunt Corinne drew back into a rigid attitude. “I don't believe it!”
 she said.

Robert Day passed over her incredulity with a flickering smile.

“People don't have pigs' heads on them!” argued aunt Corinne. “Did
he grunt?”

“And he had a tush stickin' out from his lower jaw,” added Robert.

They gazed at each other in silent horror. While this awful
pantomime was going on, the flap of Grandma Padgett's tent was
lifted, and a voice of command, expressing besides astonishment and
alarm, startled their ears with--

“Children!”

Aunt Corinne leaped up and turned at bay, half-expecting to find the
man with the pig's head gnashing at her ear. But what she saw in the
sinking light was a fine old head in a night-cap, staring at them
from the tent. Bobaday and his aunt were so rapid in retiring that
their guardian was unable to make them explain their conduct as fully
as she desired. They slept so long in the morning that the camp was
broken up when Grandma Padgett called them out to breakfast.

[Illustration: THE VIRGINIAN AND HIS CHILDREN.]

Zene wanted the tent of aunt Corinne to stretch over the wagon-hoops.
He had already hitched the horses, restoring the gray and the white to
their former condition of yoke-fellows, and these two rubbed noses
affectionately and had almost as much to whisper to each other as had
Robert and Corinne over their breakfast.

The darkened wagon was nowhere to be seen. Corinne climbed a tall
stump as an observatory, and Bobaday went a piece into the bushes,
only to find that all that end of the camp was gone. The colony of
Virginians was also partly under way.

Aunt Corinne felt a certain sadness steal over her. She had brought
herself to admit the pig-headed man, with limitations. He might have
a pig's head on him, but it wasn't fast. He did it to frighten
children. She had fully intended to see him and be frightened by him
at any cost. Now he was gone like a bad dream in the night. And she
should not know if the little girl was stolen. She could only revenge
herself on Robert Day for having seen into that darkened wagon, with
the stove-pipe sticking out when she had not, by sniffing doubtfully
at every mysterious allusion to it. They did not mention the
pigheaded man to Grandma Padgett, though both longed to know if such
a specimen of natural history had ever come under her eyes. She would
have questioned then about the walk that led to this discovery. Her
prejudices against children's prowling away from their elders after
dark were very strong.

Aunt Corinne thought the pig-headed man might have come to their
carriage when they were ready to start, instead of the Virginian.

“Right along the pike?” he inquired cheerfully.

“I believe so,” said Grandma Padgett.

“You'll be in our company then as far as you go. It'll be better for
you to keep in a big company.”

“It will indeed,” said Grandma Padgett sincerely.

“Oh, you'll keep along to Californy,” said the Virginian.

“To the Illinois line,” amended Grandma Padgett, at which he
laughed, adding:

“Well, we'll neighbor for a while, anyhow.”

“Let your little boy and girl ride in our carriage,” begged Robert
Day, seizing on this relief from monotony.

“Yes do,” said his grandmother, turning her glasses upon the little
boy and girl. Aunt Corinne had been inspecting them as they stood at
their father's heels, and bestowing experimental smiles on them. The
boy was a clear brown-eyed fellow with butternut trousers up to his
arm-pits, and a wool hat all out of shape. The little girl looked
red-faced and precise, the color from her lips having evidently become
diluted through her skin. Over a linsey petticoat she wore a calico
belted apron. The belt was as broad as the length of aunt Corinne's
hand, for in the course of the morning aunt Corinne furtively
measured it. Although it was June weather, this little girl also wore
stout shoes and yarn stockings.

“Well, they might get in if they won't crowd you,” assented their
father. “You're all to take dinner with us, my wife says.”

The children were hoisted up the steps, which they climbed with
agile feet, as if accustomed to scaling high cart wheels. Bobaday sat
by his grandmother, and the back seat received this addition to the
party without at all crowding aunt Corinne. She looked the boy and
girl over with great satisfaction. They were near her own age.

“Do you play teeter in the woods?” she inquired with a fidget, by
way of opening the conversation.

The boy rolled his eyes towards her and replied in a slow drawl,
sometimes they did.

Robert Day then put it to him whether he liked moving.

“I like to ride the leaders for fawther,” replied the boy.

“What's your name?” inquired aunt Corinne, directing her inquiry to
both.

The little girl turned redder, answering in a broad drawl like her
brother, “His name's Jonathan and mine's Clar'sy Ellen.”

Aunt Corinne looked down at the hind wheel revolving at her side of
the carriage, and her lips unconsciously moved in meditation.

“Thrusty Ellen!” she repeated aloud.

“Clar'sy Ellen,” corrected the little girl, her broad drawl still
confusing the sound.

Aunt Corinne's lips continued to move. She whispered to the hind
wheel, “Mercy! If I was named Jonathan and Thrusty Ellen, I'd wish my
folks'd forgot to name me at all!”




CHAPTER XIII. FAIRY CARRIE AND THE PIG-HEADED MAN.


Little Miami river was crossed without mishap, and the Padgetts and
Breakaways took dinner together.

Robert Day could not help noticing the difference between his
grandmother's wagon and the wagons of the Virginians. Their wagon-beds
were built almost in the shape of the crescent moon, bending down
in the centre and standing high at the ends, and they appeared half
as long again as the Ohio vehicle. The covers were full of innumerable
ribs, and the puckered end was drawn into innumerable puckers.

The children took their dinners to the yellow top of a brand-new
stump which, looked as if somebody had smoothed every sweet-smelling
ring clean on purpose for a picnic table. Some branches of the felled
tree were near enough to make teeter seats for Corinne and Thrusty
Ellen. Jonathan and Robert stood up or kneeled against the arching
roots. Dinner taken from the top of a stump has the sap of out-door
enjoyment in it; and if you have to scare away an ant, or a pop-eyed
grasshopper thuds into the middle of a plate, you still feel kindly
towards these wild things for dropping in so sociably.

Jonathan and Thrusty Ellen were rather silent, but such remarks as
they made were solid information.

“You don't know wher' my fawther's got his money,” said Jonathan.

This was stated so much like a dare that Robert yearned to retort
that he did know, too. As he did not know, the next best thing was to
pretend it was no consequence anyhow, and find out as quickly as
possible; therefore Robert Day said:

“Ho! Maybe he hasn't any.”

“He has more gold pieces 'n ever you seen,” proceeded Jonathan
weightily.

“Then why don't he give you some?” exclaimed aunt Corinne with a
wriggle. “I had a gold dollar, but I b'lieve that little old man with
a bag on his back stole it.”

Jonathan and Thrusty Ellen made round eyes at a young damsel who had
been trusted with gold.

[Illustration]

“My fawther calls 'em yeller boys,” said Jonathan. “He carries 'em
and his paper money in a belt fastened round his waist under all his
clothes.”

“You don't ought to tell,” said Thrusty Ellen. “Father said we
shouldn't talk about it.”

“_He_ won't steal it,” said Jonathan, indicating Robert with
his thumb. “_She_ won't neither,” indicating aunt Corinne.

Aunt Corinne with some sharpness assured the Virginia children that
her nephew and herself were indeed above such suspicion; that Ma
Padgett and brother Tip had the most money, and even Zene was well
provided with dollars; while they had silver spoons among their goods
that Ma-Padgett said had been in the family more than fifty years!

Jonathan and Thrusty Ellen accepted this information with much
stolidity. The grandeur of having old silver made no impression on
them. They saw that Grandma Padgett had one pair of horses hitched to
her moving-wagon instead of three pairs, and they secretly rated her
resources by this fact.

It was very cheerful moving in this long caravan. When there was a
bend in the 'pike, and the line of vehicles curved around it, the
sight was exhilarating.

Some of the Virginians sat on their horses to drive. There was singing,
and calling back and forth. And when they passed a toll-gate, all the
tollkeeper's family and neighbors came out to see the array. Jonathan
and Robert rode in his father's easiest wagon, while Thrusty Ellen, and
her mother enjoyed Grandma Padgett's company in the carriage. As they
neared Richmond, which lay just within the Indiana line, men went ahead
like scouts to secure accommodations for the caravan. At Louisburg,
the last of the Ohio villages, aunt Corinne was watching for the boundary
of the State. She fancied it stretched like a telegraph wire from pole
to pole, only near the ground, so the cattle of one State could not stray
into the other, and so little children could have it to talk across,
resting their chins on the cord. But when they came to the line and
crossed it there was not even a mark on the ground; not so much as a
furrow such as Zene made planting corn. And at first Indiana looked
just like Ohio. Later, however, aunt Corinne felt a difference in the
States. Ohio had many ups and downs; many hillsides full of grain basking
in the sun. The woods of Indiana ran to moss, and sometimes descended to
bogginess, and broad-leaved paw-paw bushes crowded the shade; mighty
sycamores blotched with white, leaned over the streams: there was a
dreamy influence in the June air, and pale blue curtains of mist hung
over distances.

But at Richmond aunt Corinne and her nephew, both felt particularly
wide awake. They considered it the finest place they had seen since
the capital of Ohio. The people wore quaint, but handsome clothes.
They saw Quaker bonnets and broad-brimmed hats. Richmond is yet
called the Quaker city of Indiana. But what Robert Day and Corinne
noticed particularly was the array of wagons moved from street to
street, was an open square such as most Western towns had at that
date for farmers to unhitch their teams in, and in that open square a
closely covered wagon connected with a tent. It was nearly dark. But
at the tent entrance a tin torch stuck in the ground showed letters
and pictures on the tent, proclaiming that the only pig-headed man in
America was therein exhibiting himself and his accomplishments,
attended by Fairy Carrie, the wonderful child vocalist.

Before Bobaday had made out half the words, he telegraphed a message
to aunt Corinne, by leaning far out of the Brockaway wagon and
lifting his finger. Aunt Corinne was leaning out of the carriage, and
saw him, and she not only lifted her finger, but violently wagged her
head.

The caravan scouts had not been able to find lodging for all the
troops, and there was a great deal of dissatisfaction about the rates
asked by the taverns. So many of the wagons wound on to camp at the
other side of the town, the Brockaways among them. But the neighborly
Virginian, in exchanging Robert for his wife and daughter at the
carriage door, assured Grandma Padgett he would ride back to her
lodging-place next morning and pilot her into the party again.

“I thank you kindly,” said Grandma Padgett in old-fashioned phrase.
“It's growing risky for me to sleep too much in the open night air.
At my age folks must favor themselves, and I'd like a bed to-night,
if it is a tavern bed, and a set, table, if the vittles are tavern
vittles. And we can stir out early.”

So Thrusty Ellen and Jonathan rode away with their father,
unconscious of Robert and Corinne's superior feeling in stopping at a
tavern.

In the tavern parlor were a lot of sumptuous paper flowers under a
glass case. There were a great many stairs to climb, and a gong was
sounded for supper.

After supper Grandma Padgett made Zene take her into the stable-yard,
that she might carry from the wagon some valuables which thieves in
a town would be tempted to steal.

It was about this time that Corinne and Robert Day strayed down the
front steps, consulted together and ventured down the street, came
back, and ventured again to the next corner.

“He gave us the slip before,” said Robert, “but I'd like to get a
good look at him for once.”

“Would you da'st to spend your gold dollar, though,” said aunt
Corinne.

“Well, that's better than losin' it,” he responded.

It seemed very much better in aunt Corinne's eyes.

“We can just run down there, and run right back after we go in,
while Ma Padgett is busy.”

“Then we'll have to be spry,” said Robert Day.

Having passed the first corner they were spry, springing along the
streets with their hands locked. It was not hard to find one's way
about in Richmond then, and the tavern was not far from the open
square. They came upon the tent, the smoky tin torch, the crowd of
idlers, and a loud-voiced youth who now stood at the entrance
shouting the attractions within.

Robert dragged his aunt impetuously to the tent door and offered his
gold dollar to the shouter.

“Pass right in, gentlemen and ladies,” said the ill-looking youth in
his monotonous yell, bustling as if he had a rush of business, “and
make room for the crowd, all anxious to see the only pig-headed man
in America, and to hear the wonderful warblings of Fairy Carrie, the
child vocalist. Admission fixed at the low figure of fifteen cents
per head,” said the ill-looking youth, dropping change into Robert's
hand and hustling him upon the heels of Corinne who craned her neck
toward the inner canvas. “Only fifteen cents, gentlemen, and the last
opportunity to see the pig-headed man who alone is worth the price of
admission, and has been exhibited to all the crowned heads of Europe.
Fifteen cents. Five three cent pieces only. Fairy Carrie, the
wonderful child vocalist, and the only living pig-headed man standing
between the heavens and earth to-day.”

But when aunt Corinne had reached the interior of the tent, she
turned like a flash, clutched Robert Day, and hid her eyes against
him. A number of people standing, or seated on benches, were watching
the performances on a platform at one end of the tent.

“He won't hurt you,” whispered Robert.

“Go 'way!” whispered aunt Corinne, trembling as if she would drive
the mere image from her thoughts.

“It's the very thing I saw at the camp,” whispered Robert.

“Le's go out again.”

“I want my money's worth,” remonstrated Robert in an injured tone.
“And now he's pickin' up his things and going behind a curtain. Ain't
he ugly! I wonder how it feels to look that way? Why don't you stand
up straight and act right! Folks'll notice you. I thought you wanted
to see him so bad!”

“I got enough,” responded aunt Corinne. “But there comes the little
girl. And it's the little girl I saw in the wagon. Ain't she pretty!”

[Illustration]

“She ain't got a pig's head, has she?” demanded aunt Corinne.

“She's the prettiest little girl I ever saw,” responded Robert
impatiently. “I guess if she sees you she'll think, you're sheep-headed.
You catch me spendin' gold dollars to take you to shows any more!”

The shrill treble of a little child began a ballad at that time very
popular, and called “Lilly Dale.” Aunt Corinne faced about and saw a
tiny creature, waxen-faced and with small white hands, and feet in
bits of slippers, standing in a dirty spangled dress which was made
to fluff out from her and give her an airy look. Her long brown curls
hung about her shoulders. But her black eyes were surrounded with
brownish rings which gave her a look of singing in her sleep, or in a
half-conscious state. She was a delicate little being, and as she
sung before the staring people, her chin creased and the corners of
her mouth quivered as if she would break into sobs if she only dared.
Her song was accompanied by a hand-organ ground behind the scenes;
and when she had finished and run behind the curtain, she was pushed
out again in response to the hand-clapping.

Robert Day hung entranced on this performance. But when Fairy Carrie
had sung her second song and disappeared, he took hold of his aunt's
ear and whispered cautiously therein:

“I know the pig-headed man stole that little girl.”

Aunt Corinne looked at him with solemn assent. Then there were signs
of the pig-headed man's returning to the gaze of the public. Aunt
Corinne at once grasped her nephew's elbow and pushed him from the
sight. They went outside where the ill-looking youth was still
shouting, and were crowded back against the wagon by a group now
beginning to struggle in.

Robert proposed that they walk all around the outside, and try to
catch another glimpse of Fairy Carrie.

They walked behind the wagon. A surly dog chained under it snapped
out at them. Aunt Corinne said she should like to see Fairy Carrie
again, but Ma Padgett would be looking for them.

At this instant the little creature appeared back of the tent.
Whether she had crept under the canvas or knew some outlet to the
air, she stood there fanning herself with her hands, and looking up
and about with an expression which was sad through all the dusk.

Corinne and Robert Day approached on tiptoe. Fairy Carrie continued
to fan herself with her fingers, and looked at them with a dull gaze.

“Say!” whispered aunt Corinne, indicating the interior of the tent,
“is he your pa?”

Fairy Carrie shook her head.

“Is your ma in there?”

Fairy Carrie again shook her head, and her face creased as if she
were now determined in this open air and childish company to cry and
be relieved.

“Can't you talk?” whispered aunt Corinne.

“No,” said the child.

“Yes, you can, too! Did the show folks steal you?”

Fairy Carrie's eyes widened. Tears gathered and dropped slowly down
her cheeks.

Aunt Corinne seized her hand. “Why, Bobaday, Padgett! You just feel
how cold her fingers are!”

Robert did so, and shook his head to indicate that he found even her
fingers in a pitiable condition.

“You come with us to Ma Padgett,” exhorted aunt Corinne in an
excited whisper. “I wouldn't stay where that pig-man is for the world.”

The dog under the wagon was growling.

“If the pig-man stole you, Ma Padgett will have him put in jail.”

“Le's go back this way, so they won't catch her,” cautioned Bobaday.

The dog began to bark.

Robert and Corinne moved away with the docile little child between
them. At the barking of the dog one or two other figures appeared
behind the tent. Fairy Carrie in her spangled dress was running
between Robert and Corinne into the dark.




CHAPTER XIV. SEARCHING.


But Grandma Padgett did not enjoy the tavern bed or the tavern
breakfast. She passed the evening until midnight searching the
streets of Richmond, accompanied by Zene and his limp. Some of the
tavern people had seen her children in front of the house, but the
longest search failed to bring to light any trace of them in or about
that building. The tavern-keeper interested himself; the chamber
maids were sympathetic. Two hostlers and a bartender went different
ways through the town making inquiries. The landlady thought the
children might have wandered off to the movers' encampment, where
there were other children to play with. Grandma Padgett bade Zene put
himself on one of the carriage horses and post to camp. When he came
back he reported that Thrusty Ellen and Jonathan were asleep in the
tents, and nobody had seen Robert and Corinne.

While searching the streets earlier in the evening, Grandma Padgett
observed the pig-headed man's pavilion, and this she also explored
with Zene. A crowd was making the canvas stifling, and the pig-headed
man's performances were being varied by an untidy woman who screamed
and played on a portable bellows which had ivory keys, after
explaining that Fairy Carrie, the Wonderful Musical Child, had been
taken suddenly ill and could appear no more that night.

Grandma Padgett remained only long enough to scan twice over every
face in the tent. She went out, telling Zene she was at her wits' end.

“Oh, they ain't gone far, marm,” reassured Zene. “You'll find out
they'll come back to the tavern all right; mebby before we get there.”

But every such hopeful return to base disheartened the searchers
more. At last the grandmother was obliged to lie down.

Early in the morning the Virginian came, full of concern. His party
was breaking camp, but he would stay behind and help search for the
children.

“That I won't allow,” said Grandma Padgett. “You're on a long road,
and you don't want to risk separating from the colony. Besides no one
can do more than we can--unless it was Son Tip. As I laid awake, I
wished in my heart Son Tip was here.”

“Can't you send him a lightnin' message?” said the Virginian. “By
the telegraphic wire,” he explained, quoting a line of a popular song.

“I wish I could,” said Grandma Padgett, “but there's no telegraph
office in miles of where he's located. I thought of it last night.
There's no way to reach him that I can see, but by letter, and
sometimes _they_ lay over on the road. And I don't allow to stop
at this place. I'm goin' to set out and hunt in all directions till I
find the children.”

The Virginian agreed that her plan was best. He also made
arrangements to ride back and tell her if the caravan overtook them
on the 'pike during that day's journey. Then he and Grandma Padgett
shook hands with each other and reluctantly separated.

She made inquiries about all the other roads leading out of
Richmond. Zene drove the carriage out of the barnyard, and Grandma
Padgett, having closed her account with the tavern, took the lines,
an object of interest and solicitude to all who saw her depart, and
turned Old Hickory and Old Henry on a southward track. Zene followed
with the wagon; he was on no account to loiter out of speaking
distance. The usual order of the march being thus reversed, both
vehicles moved along lonesomely. Even Boswell and Johnson scented
misfortune in the air. Johnson ran in an undeviating line under the
carriage, as if he wished his mistress to know he was right there
where she could depend on him. His countenance expressed not only
gravity, but real concern. Boswell, on the other hand, was in a state
of nerves. If he saw a bank at the roadside he ran ahead and mounted
it, looking back into the carriage, demanding to know, with a yelping
howl, where Bobaday and Corinne were. When his feelings became too
strong for him he jumped at the step, and Grandma Padgett shook her
head at him.

“Use your nose, you silly little fice, and track them, why don't you?”

As soon as Boswell understood this reproach he jumped a fence and
smelt every stump or tuft of grass, every bush and hummock, until the
carriage dwindled in the distance. Then he made the dust smoke under
his feet as a sudden June shower will do for a few seconds, and
usually overtook the carriage with all of his tongue unfurled and his
lungs working like a furnace. Johnson reproved him with a glance, and
he at once dropped his tail and trotted beside Johnson, as if
throwing himself on that superior dog for support in the hour of
affliction.

At noon no trace of Robert and Corinne had been seen. Grandma
Padgett halted, and when Zene came up she said:

“We'll eat a cold bite right here by the road, and then go on until
sunset. If we don't find them, we'll turn back to town and take
another direction.”

They ate a cold bite, brought ready packed from the Richmond tavern.
The horses were given scant time for feeding, and drank wherever they
could find water along the road.

Cloudless as the day was, Grandma Padgett's spectacles had never
made any landscape look as blue as this one which she followed until
sunset. Sometimes it was blurred by a mist, but she wiped it off the
glasses.

At sunset they had not seen a track which might be taken for Robert
or Corinne's. The grasshoppers were lonesome. There was a great void
in the air, and the most tuneful birds complained from the fence-rails.
Grandma Padgett constantly polished her glasses on the backward road.

Nothing was said about making a halt for supper or any kind of cold
bite. The carriage was silently turned as one half the sun stood
above the tree-tops, I and it passed the wagon without other sign.
The wagon turned as silently. The shrill meadow insects became more
and more audible. Some young calves in a field, remembering that it
was milking time, began to call their mothers, and to remonstrate at
the bars in voices full of sad cadences. The very farmhouse dogs,
full-fed, and almost too lazy to come out of the gates to interview
Boswell and Johnson, barked as if there was sickness in their
respective families and it was all they could do to keep up their
spirits and refrain from howling.

The carriage and wagon jogged along until the horizon rim was all of
that indescribable tint that evening mixes with saffron, purple and
pink. Grandma Padgett became anxious to reach Richmond again. The
Virginian might have returned over the road with news of her
children. Or the children themselves might be at the tavern waiting
for her. Zene drove close behind her, and when they were about to
recross a shallow creek, scooped between two easy swells and floating
a good deal of wild grapevine and darkly reflecting many sycamores,
he came forward and loosened the check-reins of Hickory and Henry to
let them drink. Grandma Padgett felt impatient at any delay.

“I don't think they want water, Zene,” said she.

“They'd better cool their mouths, marm.” he said. But still he
fingered the check reins, uncertain how to state what had sent him
forward.

“Seems like I heard somebody laugh, marm,” said Zene.

“Well, suppose you did,” said Grandma Padgett. “The whole world
won't mourn just because we're in trouble.”

“But it sounded like Corinne,” said Zene uncertainly.

Grandma Padgett's glasses glared upon him.

“You'd' be more apt to hear her crying,” she exclaimed. “When did
you hear it?”

“Just now. I jumped right off the load.”

Hickory and Henry, anxious to taste the creek, would have moved
forward, but were checked by both pairs of hands.

“What direction?”

“I don't feel certain, marm,” said Zene, “but it come like it was
from that way through the woods.”

Grandma Padgett stretched her neck out of the carriage toward the
right.

“Is that a sled track?” she inquired. “It's gittin' so dim I can't
see.”.

Zene said there was a sled track, pointing out what looked like a
double footpath with a growth of grass and shrubs along the centre.

“We'll drive in that way,” she at once decided, “and if we get
wedged among the trees, we'll have to get out the best way we can.”

Zene turned the gray and white, and led on this new march. Hickory
and Henry, backed from the creek without being allowed to dip their
mouths, reluctantly thumped the sled track with their shoes, and
pretended to distrust every tall stump and every glaring sycamore
limb which rose before their sight. Scrubby bushes scraped the bottom
of the carriage bed. Now one front wheel rose high over a chunk, and
the vehicle rolled and creaked. Zene's wagon cover, like a big white
blur, moved steadily in front, and presently Hickory and Henry ran
their noses against it, and seemed to relish the knock which the
carriage-pole gave the feed-box. Zene had halted to listen.

It was dark in the woods. A rustle could be heard now and then as of
some tiny four-footed creature moving the stiff grass; or a twig cracked.
The frogs in the creek were tuning their bass-viols. A tree-toad rattled
on some unseen trunk, and the whole woods heaved its great lungs in the
steady breathing which it never leaves off, but which becomes a roar
and a wheeze in stormy or winter weather.

“There isn't anything”--began Grandma Padgett, but between thing and
“here” came the distinct laugh of a child.

[Illustration: “WHERE'S BOBADAY?”]

Zene cracked his whip over the gray and the white, and the wagon
rumbled ahead rapidly, jarring against roots, and ends of decayed
logs, turning short in one direction, and dipping through a long
sheltered mud-hole to the very wheel-hubs, brushing against trees and
under low branches until guttural remonstrances were scraped out of
the cover, and finally descending into an abrupt hollow, with the
carriage rattling at its hind wheels.

Grandma Padgett had been through many experiences, but she felt she
could truly say to her descendants that she never gave up so entirely
for pure joy in her life as when she saw Robert and Corinne sitting
in front of a fire built against a great stump, and talking with a
fat, silly-looking man who leaned against a cart-wheel.




CHAPTER XV. THE SPROUTING.


“Why, Bobaday Padgett,” exclaimed aunt Corinne, “if there isn't our
wagon--and Ma Padgett.”

Both children came running to the carriage steps, and their guardian
got down, trembling. She put her arms around them, and after a silent
hug, shook one in each hand.

The fire illuminated wagon and carriage, J. D. Matthew's cart, and
the logs and bushes surrounding them. It flickered on the blue
spectacles and gave Grandma Padgett a piercing expression while she
examined her culprits.

“Where have you been, while Zene and I hunted up and down in such
distress?”

“We's going right back to the tavern soon's he could get us there,”
 Robert hastened to explain. “It's that funny fellow, J. D., Grandma.
But he thought we better go roundabout, so they wouldn't catch us.”

Zene, limping down from his wagon, listened to this lucid statement.

“O Zene,” exclaimed aunt Corinne, “I'm so glad you and Ma Padgett
have come! But we knew you wouldn't go on to Brother Tip's without
us. Bobaday said you'd wait till we got back, and we ran right
straight out of town.”

“You ought to be well sprouted, both of you,” said Grandma Padgett,
still trembling as she advanced toward the fire. “Robert Day, break
me a switch; break me a good one, and peel the leaves off. So you
came across this man again, and he persuaded you to run away with
him, did he?”

J. D. Matthews, who had stood up smiling his widest, now moved
around to the other side of his cart and crouched in alarm.

Grandma Padgett now saw that the cart was standing level and open,
and within it there appeared a nest of brown curls and one slim,
babyish hand.

“What's that?” she inquired.

“Why, don't you see, Grandma?” exclaimed Robert, “that's Fairy
Carrie that we ran away with. They made her sing at the show. We just
went in a minute to see the pig-headed man. I had my gold dollar. And
she felt so awful. And we saw her behind the tent.”

“She cried, Ma Padgett,” burst in aunt Corinne, “like her heart was
broke, and she couldn't talk at all. Then they were coming out to
make her go in again, and we said didn't she want to go to you? You
wouldn't let her live with a pig-headed man and have to sing. And she
wanted to go, so they came out. And we took hold of her hands and
ran. And they chased us. And we couldn't go to the tavern 'cause they
chased us the other way: it got dark, and when Bobaday hid us under a
house, they chased past us, and we waited, oh! the longest time.”

“And then,” continued Robert, “when we came out, we didn't know
which way to go to the tavern, but started roundabout, through fields
and over fences, and all, so the show people wouldn't see us. Aunt
Corinne was scared. And we stumbled over cows, and dogs barked at us.
But we went on till after 'while just as we's slippin' up a back
street we met J. D. and the cart, and he was so good! He put the poor
little girl in the cart and pushed her. She was so weak she fell down
every little bit when we's runnin'. Aunt Corinne and me had to nearly
carry her.”

“Well, why didn't he bring you back to the tavern?”

“Grandma, if he had, the show people would been sure to get her! We
thought they'd travel on this morning. And we were so tired! He took
us to a cabin house, and the woman was real good. The man was real
good, too. They had lots of dogs. We got our breakfast and stayed all
night. They knew we'd strayed off, but they said J. D. would get us
back safe. I gave them the rest of my dollar. Then this morning we
all started to town, but J. D. had to go away down the road first,
for some eggs and things. And it took us so long we only got this far
when it came dusk.”

“J. D. took good care of us,” said aunt Corinne. “Everybody knows
him, and he is so funny. The folks say he travels along the pike all
through Indiana and Ohio.”

“Well, I'm obliged to him,” said Grandma Padgett, still severely;
“we owe him, too, for a good supper and breakfast he gave us the
other time we saw him. But I can't make out how he can foot it faster
than we can ride, and so git into this State ahead of us.”

Mr. Matthews now came forward, and straightening his bear-like
figure, proceeded to smile without apprehension. He cleared his voice
and chanted:

  Sometimes I take the wings of steam,
  And on the cars my cart I wheel.
  And so I came to Richmond town
  Two days ago in fair renown.

“Oh,” said Grandma Padgett.

“What's that he's givin' out, marm?” inquired Zene.

“It's a way he has,” she explained. “He talks in verses. This is the
pedler that stayed over in that old house with us, near by the Dutch
landlord and the deep creek. Were you going to camp here all night?”
 she inquired of J. D.

“We wanted him to,” coaxed aunt Corinne, “my feet ached so bad. Then
we could walk right into town in the morning, and he'd hide Fairy
Carrie in his cart till we got to the tavern.”

“Zene,” said Grandma Padgett, “you might as well take out the horses
and feed them. They haven't had much chance to-day.”

“Will we stay here, marm?”

“I'll see,” said Grandma Padgett. “Anyhow, I can't stand it in the
carriage again right away.”

“Let's camp here,” urged Robert. “J. D.'s got chicken all dressed to
broil on the coals, and lots of good things to eat.”

“He wouldn't have any money the last time, and I can't have such
doings again. I'm hungry, for I haven't enjoyed a meal since
yesterday. Mister, see here,” said Grandma Padgett, approaching the
cart.

J. D. moved backwards as she came as if pushed by an invisible pole
carried in the brisk grandmother's hands.

“Stand still, do,” she urged, laying a bank bill on his cart. She,
snapped her steel purse shut again, put it in her dress pocket, and
indicated the bill with one finger. “I don't lay this here for your
kindness to the children, you understand. You've got feelings, and
know I'm more than obliged. But here are a lot of us, and you buy
your provisions, so if you'll let us pay you for some, we'll eat and
be thankful. Take the money and put it away.”

Thus commanded, J. D. returned cautiously to the other side of the
cart, took the money and thrust it into his vest pocket without
looking at it. He then smiled again at Grandma Padgett, as if the
thought of propitiating her was uppermost in his mind.

“Now go on with your chicken-broiling,” she concluded, and he went
on with it, keeping at a distance from her while she stood by the
cart or when she sat down on a log by the fire.

“Here's your stick, Grandma,” said Robert Day, offering her a limb
of paw paw, stripped of all its leaves.

Grandma Padgett took it in her hands, reduced its length and tried
its limberness.

“If I had given my family such trouble when I's your age,” she said
to Corinne and Robert, “I should have been sprouted as I deserved.”

They listened respectfully.

“Folks didn't allow their children to run wild then. They whipped
them and kept them in bounds. I remember once father whipped brother
Thomas for telling a falsehood, and made welts on his body.”

Corinne and Robert had heard this tale before, but their
countenances, put on a piteous expression.

“You ought to have a sprouting,” concluded their guardian as if she
did not know how to compromise with her conscience, “but since you
meant to do a good turn instead of a bad one”--

“Oh, we never intended to run away, Grandma, and worry you so,”
 insisted Robert.

“We's just sorry for the little girl,” murmured aunt Corinne.--“Why,
I'll let it pass this time. Only never let me know you to do such a
thing again.” The paw paw sprout fell to the ground, unwarped by use.
Corinne and Robert were hearty in promising never to run away with
Fairy Carrie or any other party again.

This serious business completed, the grandmother turned her
attention to the child in the cart.

“How sound asleep the little thing is,” she observed, smoothing
Fairy Carrie's cheek from dark eye-circle to chin, “and her flesh so
cold!”

“She's just slept that way ever since J. D. put her in his cart!”
 exclaimed aunt Corinne. “We made her open her eyes and take some
breakfast in her mouth, but she went to sleep again while she's
eatin'.”

“And we let her sleep ever since,” added Bobaday. “It didn't make a
bit of difference whether the cart went jolt-erty-jolt over stones or
run smooth in the dust. And we shaded her face with bushes.”

“She's not well,” said their experienced elder. “The poor little
thing may have some catching disease! It's a pretty face. I wonder
whose child she is? You oughtn't to set up your judgment and carry a
little child off with you from her friends. I hardly know what we'll
do about it.”

“Oh, but they wern't her friends, Ma Padgett,” asserted aunt Corinne
solemnly. “She isn't the pig-headed man's little girl. Nor any of
them ain't her folks. Bobaday thinks they stole her away.”

“If she'd only wake up and talk,” said Robert, “maybe she could tell
us where she lives. But she was afraid of the show people.”

“I should think that was likely,” said Grandma Padgett.

In the heat of his sympathy, he confided to his grandmother what he
had seen of the darkened wagon the night they met the Virginians at
the large camp.

The paw paw stick had been laid upon the fire. It blackened
frowningly. But Robert and Corinne had known many an apple sprout to
preach them such a discourse as it had done, without enforcing the
subject matter more heavily.

Grandma Padgett reported that she had searched for her missing
family in the show tent, though she could not see why any sensible
boy or girl would want to enter such a place. And it was clear to her
the child might be afraid of such creatures, and very probable that
she did not belong to them by ties of blood. But they might prove her
lawful guardians and cause a small moving party a great deal of
trouble. “But we won't let them find her again,” said aunt Corinne.
“Ma, mayn't I keep her for my little sister?--and Bobaday would like
to have another aunt.”

“Then we'd be stealing her,” said Grandma Padgett. “If she's a lost
child she ought to be restored to her people, and travelling along
the 'pike we can't keep the showmen from finding her.”

Bobaday and Corinne gazed pensively at the stump fire, wondering how
grown folks always saw the difficulties in doing what you want to do.




CHAPTER XVI. THE MINSTREL.


J. D. Matthews spread his supper upon a log. He had delicacies which
created a very cheerful feeling in the party, such as always rises
around the thanksgiving board.

Zene sat at one side of the log by J. D. Matthews. Opposite them the
grandmother and her children, camped on chunks covered with shawls
and horse-blankets Seeing what an accomplished cook this singular
pedler was, how much at home he appeared in the woods, and what a
museum he could make of his cart, Zene respectfully kept from
laughing at him, except in an indulgent way as the children did.

“I guess we'll stay just where we are until morning,” said Grandma
Padgett. “The night's pleasant and warm, and there are just as few
mosquitoes here as in the tavern. I didn't sleep last night.” She
felt stimulated by the tea, and sufficiently recovered from the
languor which follows extreme anxiety, to linger up watching the
fire, allowing the children to linger also, while J. D. Matthews put
his cupboard to rights after supper.

It was funny to see his fat hands dabbling in dishwater; he laughed
as much about--it as aunt Corinne did.

Grandma Padgett removed the sleeping child from his cart, and after
trying vainly to make her eat or arouse herself, put her in the bed
in the tent, attired in one of aunt Corinne's gowns.

“She was just as helpless as a young baby,” said Grandma Padgett,
sitting down again by the fire. “I'll have a doctor look at that
child when we go through Richmond. She acts like she'd been drugged.”

J. D. Matthews having finished--his dishwashing, sat down in the
shadow some distance from the outspoken woman in spectacles, and her
family.

“Now come up here,” urged aunt Corinne, “and sing it all over--what
you was singing before Ma Padgett came.”

J. D. ducked his head and chuckled, but remained in his shadow.

“Awh-come on,” urged Robert Day “Zene'll sing 'Barb'ry Allen' if
you'll sing your song again.”

Zene glanced uneasily at Grandma Padgett, and said he must look at
the horses. “Barb'ry Allen” was a ballad he had indulged the children
with when at a distance from her ears.

But the tea and the hour, and her Virginia memories through which
that old sing-song ran like the murmur of bees, made Grandma Padgett
propitious, and she laid her gracious commands on Zene first, and J.
D. Matthews afterwards. So that not only “Barb'ry Allen” was sung,
but J. D.'s ditty, into which he plunged with nasal twanging and much
personal enjoyment.

“It's why he didn't ever get married,” explained aunt Corinne,
constituting herself prologue.

“I should think he needn't make any excuses for that,” remarked
Grandma Padgett, smiling.

J. D. sawed back and forth on a log, his silly face rosy with
pleasure over the tale of his own woes:

  O, I went to a friend's house,
  The friend says “Come in.
  Take a hot cup of coffee,
  O where have you been?”

  It's down to the Squi-er's
  With a license I went,
  And my good Sunday clothes on,
  To marry intent.

  “O where is the lady?”
   The good Squi-er, says he.
  “O she's gone with a wed'wer
  That is not poor J. D.”

  “It's now you surprise me,”
   The friend says a-sigh'n,
  “J. D. Matthews not married,
  The sun will not shine!”

“Well, I think she was simple!” exclaimed aunt Corinne in epilogue,
“when she might have had a man that washed the dishes and talked
poetry all the time.”




CHAPTER XVII. THE HOUSE WITH LOG STEPS.


Richmond must soon have seemed far behind Grandma Padgett's little
caravan, had not Fairy Carrie still drowsed in the carriage, keeping
the Richmond adventures always present.

They had parted from J. D. Matthews and the Virginian and his troop.
Jonathan and Thrusty Ellen were somewhere on the road ahead, but at a
point unknown to Robert and Corinne. They might turn off towards the
southwest if all the emigrants agreed to forsake the St. Louis route.
No one could tell where J. D. might be rattling his cart.

The afternoon which finally placed Richmond in diminishing
perspective, Robert rode with Zene and lived his campaign over again.
This was partly necessary because little Carrie lay on the back
carriage-seat. But it was entirely agreeable, for Zene wanted to know
all the particulars, and showed a flattering, not to say a
stimulating anxiety to get a good straight look at Bobaday's prowess
in rescuing the distressed. Said Zene:

“But what if her folks never turn up?”

“Then my pa will take her to live with us,” said Robert Day, “and
Grandma Padgett will do by her just as she does by aunt Krin and me.
She isn't a very lively little girl. I'd hate to play Blind Man with
her to be blinded; for seems as if she'd just stand against the wall
and go to sleep. But it'll be a good thing to have one still child
about the house: aunt Corinne fidgets so. I believe, though, her
folks are hunting her. Look what a fuss there was about us I When
people's children get lost or stolen, they hunt and hunt, and don't
give it up.”

In the carriage, aunt Corinne sitting by her mother, turned her head
at every fifth revolution of the wheels, to see how the strange
little girl fared.

“Do you s'pose she will ever be clear awake, Ma Padgett?” inquired,
aunt Corinne.

“She'll drowse it off by and by,” replied Ma Padgett. “The rubbing I
give her this morning, and the stuff the Richmond doctor made her
swallow, will bring her out right.”

“She's so pretty,” mused aunt Corinne. “I'd like to have her hair if
she never wanted it any more.”

“That's a covetous spirit. But it puts me in mind,” said Grandma
Padgett, smiling, “of my sister Adeline and the way she took to get
doll's hair.”

Aunt Corinne had often heard of sister Adeline and the doll's hair,
but she was glad to hear the brief tale told again in the pleasant
drowsing afternoon.

The Indiana landscape was beautiful in tones of green and stretches
of foliage. Whoever calls it monotonous has never watched its varying
complexions or the visible breath of Indian summer which never
departs from it at any season.

“Mother came in from meeting one day,” said Grandma Padgett, “and
went into her bedroom and threw her shawl on the bed. She had company
to dinner and was in a hurry. It was a fine silk shawl with fringe
longer than my hand. Uncle Henry brought it over the mountains as a
present. But Adeline come in and saw the fringe and thought what nice
doll hair it would make. So by and by mother has an errand in the
bedroom, and she sees her shawl travelling down behind the bed, and
doesn't know what to think. Then she hears something snip, snip, and
lifts up the valance and looks under the bed, and there sets Adeline
cutting the fringe off her shawl! She had it half cut off.”

“And what did Grandma do then?” aunt Corinne omitted not to ask.

“Oh, she punished Adeline. But that never had any effect on her.
Adeline was a funny child,” said Grandma Padgett, retrospective
tenderness showing through her blue glasses. “I remember once she got
to eatin' brown paper, and mother told her it would kill her if she
didn't quit it. Adeline--made up her mind she was going to eat brown
paper if it did kill her. She never doubted that it would come true
as mother said. But she prepared to die, and made her will and
divided her things. Mother found it out and put a stop to the
business. I remember,” said Grandma Padgett, laughing, “that I was
disappointed, because I had to give back what she willed to me! yet I
didn't want Adeline to die. She was a lively child. She jumped out of
windows and tom-boyed around, but everybody liked her. Once I had
some candy and divided fair enough, I thought, but Adeline after she
ate up what she had, said I'd be sorry if I didn't give her more,
because she was going, to die. It worked so well on my feelings that
next time I tried that plan on Adeline's feelings, and told her if
she didn't do something I wanted her to do _she'd_ be sorry; for
I was going to die. She said she knew it; everybody was going to die
some day, and she couldn't help it and wasn't going to be sorry for
any such thing! Poor Adeline: many a year she's been gone, and I'm
movin' further away from the old home.”

Grandma Padgett lifted the lines and slapped them on the backs of
old Hickory and Henry. Rousing themselves from coltish recollections
of their own, perhaps, the horses began to trot.

[Illustration: THE LAWYER.]

In Indiana, some reaches of the 'pike were built on planks instead
of broken stone, and gave out a hollow rumble instead of a flinty
roar. The shape and firmness of the road-bed were the same, but the
ends of boards sometimes cropped out along the sides. In this day,
branches of the old national thoroughfare penetrate to every part of
the Hoosier State. The people build 'pikes instead of what are called
dirt roads. There are, of course, many muddy lanes and by-ways. But
they have some of the best drives which have been lifted out of the
Mississippi Valley.

Though the small caravan had lost time, and Son Tip might be waiting
at the Illinois line before they reached that point, Grandma Padgett
said they would all go to morning meeting in the town where they
stopped Saturday night, and only drive a short piece on Sunday
afternoon. She hated to be on expense, but they had much to return
thanks for; and the Israelites made Sabbath day's journeys when they
were moving.

The first Sunday--which seemed so remote now--had been partially
spent in a grove where they camped for dinner, and Grandma Padgett
read the Bible, and made Bobaday and Corinne answer their catechism.
But this June Sunday was to be of a thanksgiving character. And they
spent it in Greenfield.

At Cambridge City little Carrie roused sufficiently to eat with
evident relish. But no such recollection of Dublin, Jamestown called
Jimtown for short, by some inhabitants, and only distinguished by its
location from another Jamestown in the State---Knightstown and
Charlottesville, remained to her as remained to Bobaday and Corinne.
The Indiana village did not differ greatly from the Ohio village
situated on the 'pike. There were always the church with a bonny
little belfry, and the schoolhouse more or less mutilated as to its
weather boarding. The 'pike was the principal street, and such houses
as sat at right angles to it, looked lonesome, and the dirt roads
weedy or dusty.

Greenfield was a country seat and had a court house surrounded by
trees. It looked long and straggling in the summer dusk. Zene, riding
ahead to secure lodgings, came back as far as the culvert to tell
Grandma Padgett there was no room at the tavern Court, was session,
and the lawyers on the circuit filled the house. But there was
another place, near where they now halted, that sometimes took in
travellers for accommodation's sake. He pointed it out, a roomy
building with a broad flight of leg steps leading up to the front
doors. Zene said it was not a tavern, but rather nicer than a tavern.
He had already prevailed on the man and woman keeping it to take in
his party.

Robert and aunt Corinne scampered up the log steps and Grandma
Padgett led Fairy Carrie; after them. A plain tidy woman met them at
the door and took them into a square room. There were the homemade
carpet, the centre-table with daguerreotypes standing open and
glaring such light as they had yet to reflect, samplers and colored
prints upon the walls, but there was also a strange man busy with
some papers at the table.

His hat stood beside him on the floor, and he dropped the sorted
papers into it. He was, as Grandma Padgett supposed, one of the
lawyers on the circuit. After looking up, he kept on sorting and
folding his papers.

The woman went out to continue her supper-getting. In a remote part
of the house bacon could be heard hissing over the fire. Robert and
Corinne sat upright on black chairs, but their guardian put Carrie on
a padded lounge.

The little creature was dressed in aunt Corinne's clothing, giving it
a graceful shape in spite of the broad tucks in sleeve, skirt and
pantalet, which kept it from draggling over her hands or on the floor,
She leaned against the wall, gazing around her with half-awakened
interest. The dark circles were still about her eyes, but her pallor
was flushed with a warmer color, Grandma Padgett pushed the damp
curls off her forehead.

“Are you hungry, Sissy?” she inquired.

“No, ma'am,” replied Carrie. “Yes, ma'am,” she added, after a
moment's reflection.

“She actually doesn't know,” said Bobaday, sitting down on the
lounge near Carrie. Upon this, aunt Corinne forsook her own black
chair and sat on the other side of their charge.

“Do you begin to remember, now?” inquired Robert Day, smoothing the
listless hands on Carrie's lap.

“How we run off with you--you know,” prompted aunt Corinne, dressing
a curl over her finger.

The child looked at each of them, smiling.

“Don't pester her,” said Grandma Padgett, taking some work out of
her dress pocket and settling herself by a window to make use of the
last primrose light in the sky.

“If we don't begin to make her talk, she'll forget how,” exclaimed
aunt Corinne. “Can't you 'member anything about your father and mother
now, Carrie?”

[Illustration: THE “YOUNG MAN WHO SOLD TICKETS” APPEARS AT THE DOOR.]

The man who was sorting his papers at the table, turned an attentive
eye and ear toward the children. But neither Bobaday nor Corinne
considered that he broke up the family privacy. They scarcely noticed
him.

“Grandma,” murmured Carrie vaguely, turning her eyes toward their
guardian by the window.

“Yes, that's Grandma,” said Bobaday. “But don't you know where your
own pa and ma are?”

“Papa,” whispered Carrie, like a baby trying the words. “Mamma.
Papa--mamma.”

“Yes, dear,” exclaimed aunt Corinne. “Where do they live? She's big
enough to know that if she knows anything.”

“Let's get her to sing a song,” suggested Bobaday. “If she can
remember a song, she can remember what happened before they made her
sing.”

“That papa?” said Carrie, looking at the stranger by the table.

“No,” returned aunt Corinne, deigning a glance his way. “That's only
a gentleman goin' to eat supper here. Sing, Carrie. Now, Bobaday
Padgett,” warned aunt Corinne, shooting her whisper behind the curled
head, “don't you go and scare her by sayin' anything about that pig-man.”

“Don't you scare her yourself,” returned Robert with a touch of
indignation. “You've got her eyes to stickin' out now. Sing a pretty
tune, Carrie. Come on, now.”

The docile child slid off the lounge and stood against it, piping
directly one of her songs. Yet while her trembling treble arose, she
had a troubled expression, and twisted her fingers about each other.

In an instant this expression became one of helpless terror. She
crowded back against the lounge and tried to hide herself behind
Bobaday and Corinne.

They looked toward the door, and saw standing there the young man
who sold tickets at the entrance of the pig-headed individual's show.
His hands were in his pockets, but he appeared ready to intone forth:

“Walk right in, ladies and gentlemen, and hear Fairy Carrie, the
child vocalist!” And the smoky torch was not needed to reveal his
satisfaction in standing just where he did.




CHAPTER XVIII. “COME TO MAMMA!”


Though the dissipated looking young man only stood at the door a
moment, and then walked out on the log steps at a sauntering pace, he
left dismay behind him. Aunt Corinne flew to her mother, imploring
that Carrie be hid. Robert Day stood up before the child, frowning
and shaking his head.

“All the pig-headed folks will be after her,” exclaimed aunt
Corinne. “They'll come right into this room so soon as that fellow
tells them. Le's run out the back way, Ma Padgett!”

Grandma Padgett, who had been giving the full strength of her
spectacles to the failing light and her knitting, beheld this
excitement with disapproval.

“You'll have my needles out,” she objected. “What pig-headed folks
are after what? Robert, have you hurt Sissy?”

“Why, Grandma Padgett, didn't you see the doorkeeper looking into
the room?”

“Some person just looked in--person they appear to object to,” said
the strange man, giving keen attention to what was going forward.
“Are these your own children, ma'am?”

Grandma Padgett rolled up her knitting, and tipped her head slightly
back to bring the stranger well under her view.

“This girl and the boy belong to my family,” she replied.

“But whose is the little girl on the lounge?”

“I don't know,” replied Grandma Padgett, somewhat despondently. “I
wish I did. She's a child that seems to be lost from her friends.”

“But you can't take her away and give her to the show people again,”
 exclaimed aunt Corinne, turning on this stranger with nervous
defiance. “She's more ours than she is yours, and that ugly man
scared her so she couldn't do anything but cry or go to sleep. If
brother Tip was here he wouldn't let them have her.”

“That man that just went out, is a showman,” explained Robert Day,
relying somewhat on the stranger for aid and re-inforcement. “She was
in the show that he tended door for. They were awful people. Aunt
Krin and I slipped her off with us.”

“That's kidnapping. Stealing, you know,” commented the stranger.

“_They'd_ stolen her,” declared Bobaday.

“How do you know?”

“Look how 'fraid she was! I peeped into their wagon in the woods,
and as soon as she opened her eyes and saw the man with the pig's
head, she began to scream, and they smothered her up.”

Grandma Padgett was now sitting on the lounge with Carrie lifted
into her lap. Her voice was steady, but rather sharp. “This child's
in a fit! Robert Day, run to the woman of the house and tell her to
bring hot water as soon as she can.”

During the confusion which followed, and while Carrie was partially
undressed, rubbed, dipped, and dosed between her set teeth, the
stranger himself went out to the log steps and stood looking from one
end of the street to the other. The dissipated young man appeared
nowhere in the twilight.

Returning, the lawyer found Grandma Padgett holding her patient
wrapped in shawls. The landlady stood by, much concerned, and talking
about a great many remedies beside such as she held in her hands.
Aunt Corinne and Robert Day maintained the attitude of guards, one on
each side of the door.

Carrie was not only conscious again, but wide awake and tingling
through all her little body. Her eyes had a different expression.
They saw everything, from the candle the landlady held over her, to
the stranger entering: they searched the walls piteously, and passed
the faces of Bobaday and aunt Corinne as if they by no means
recognized these larger children.

“I want my mamma!” she wailed. Tears ran down her face and Grandma
Padgett wiped them away. But Carrie resisted her hand.

“Go away!” she exclaimed. “You aren't my mamma!”

“Poor little love!” sighed the landlady, who had picked up some
information about the child.

“And you aren't my mamma!” resented Carrie. “I want my mamma to come
to her little Rose.”

“Says her name's Rose,” said Grandma Padgett, exchanging a flare of
her glasses for a startled look from the landlady.

“She says her name's Rose,” repeated the landlady, turning to the
lawyer as a general public who ought to be informed. Robert and
Corinne began to hover between the door and the lounge, vigilant at
both extremes of their beat.

“Rose,” repeated the lawyer, bending forward to inspect the child.
“Rose what? Have you any other name, my little girl?”

“I not your little girl,” wept their excited patient. “I'm my
mamma's little girl. Go away! you're an ugly papa.”

Bobaday and Corinne chuckled at this accusation. Aunt Corinne could
not bring herself to regard the lawyer as an ally. If he wished to
play a proper part he should have gone out and driven the doorkeeper
and all the rest of those show-people from Greenfield. Instead of
that, he stood about, listening.

“I haven't even seen such people,” murmured the landlady in reply to
a whispered question from Grandma Padgett. “There was a young man
came in to ask if we had more room, but I didn't like his looks and
told him no, we had no more. Court-times we can fill our house if we
want to. But I'm always particular. We don't take shows at all. The
shows that come through here are often rough. There was a magic-lantern
man we let put up with us. But circuses and such things can go to
the regular tavern, says I. And if the regular tavern can't accommodate
them, it's only twenty mile to Injunop'lis.”

“I was afraid they might have got into the house,” said Grandma
Padgett. “And I wouldn't know what to do. I couldn't give her up to
them again, when the bare sight throws her into spasms, unless I was
made to do it.”

“You couldn't prove any right to her,” observed the lawyer.

“No, I couldn't,” replied Grandma Padgett, expressing some injury in
her tone. “But on that account ought I to let her go to them that
would mistreat her?”

“She may be their child,” said the lawyer. “People have been known
to maltreat their children before. You only infer that they stole her.”

Aunt Corinne told her nephew in a slightly guarded whisper, that she
never had seen such a mean man as that one was.

“They ought to prove it before they get her, then,” said Grandma
Padgett.

“Yes,” he assented. “They ought to prove it.”

“And they must be right here in the place,” she continued. “I'm
afraid I'll have trouble with them.”

“We could go on to-night,” exclaimed Robert Day. “We could go on to
Indianapolis, and that's where the governor lives, Zene says; and
when we told the governor, he'd put the pig-headed folks in jail.”
 Small notice being taken of this suggestion by the elders, Robert and
Corinne bobbed their heads in unison and discussed it in whispers
together.

The woman of the house locked up that part which let out upon the
log steps, before she conducted her guests to supper. She was a
partisan of Grandma Padgett's.

At table the brown-eyed child whom Grandma Padgett still held upon
her lap, refused food and continued to demand her mother. She leaned
against the old lady's shoulder seeing every crack in the walls,
every dish upon the cloth, the lawyer who sat opposite, and the
concerned faces of Bobaday and Corinne. Supper was too good to be
slighted, in spite of Carrie's dangerous position. The man of the
house was a Quaker, and while his wife stood up to wait on the table,
he repeatedly asked her in a thee-and-thou language highly edifying
to aunt Corinne, for certain pickles and jams and stuffed mangoes;
and as she brought them one after the other, he helped the children
plentifully, twinkling his eyes at them. He was a delicious old
fellow; as good in his way as the jams.

“And won't thee have some-in a sasser?” he inquired tenderly of
Carrie, “and set up and feed thyself? Thee ought to give thy grandame
a chance to eat her bite--don't thee be a selfish little dear.”

“I want my mamma,” responded Carrie, at once taking this twinkle-eyed
childless father into her confidence. “I'm waiting for my mamma. When
she comes she'll give me my supper and put me to bed.”

“Thee's a big enough girl to wait ort thyself,” said the Quaker, not
understanding the signs his wife made to him.

“She doesn't live at your house,” pursued the child. “She lives at
papa's house.”

“Where is papa's house?” inquired the lawyer helping himself to
bread as if that were the chief object of his thoughts.

“It's away off. Away over the woods.”

“And what's papa's name?”

Carrie appeared to consider the questioner rather than the question,
and for some unexpressed reason, remained silent.

“Mother,” said the Quaker from the abundant goodness of his heart,
“doesn't thee mind that damson p'serve thee never let's me have
unless I take the ag'y and shake for it? Some of that would limber a
little girl's tongue, doesn't thee think?”

“It's in the far pantry on a high shelf,” said the woman of the
house, demurring slightly.

“I can reach it down.”

“No, I'll bring it myself. The jars are too crowded on that shelf
for a man's hands to be turned loose among 'em.”

The Quaker smiled, sparkling considerably under his gray eyebrows
while his wife took another light and went after the damson
preserve. She had been gone but a moment when knocking began at the
front door, and the Quaker rose at once from his place to answer it.

[Illustration: “COME TO MAMMA.”]

Robert Day and Corinne looked at each other in apprehension. They
pictured a fearful procession coming in. Even their guardian gave an
anxious start. She parted her lips to beg the Quaker not to admit any
one, but the request was absurd.

Their innocent host piloted straight to the dining-room a woman whom
Robert and Corinne knew directly. They had seen her in the show, and
recalled her appearance many a time afterwards when speculating about
Carrie's parents.

“Here you are!” she exclaimed to the child in a high key. “My poor
little pet! Come to mamma!”




CHAPTER XIX. FAIRY CARRIE DEPARTS.


Neither William Sebastian, the Quaker landlord, nor his wife,
returning with the damson preserves in her hand--not even Grandma
Padgett and her family, looked at Fairy Carrie more anxiously than
the lawyer.

“Is this your mother, Sissy?” inquired Grandma Padgett.

“No,” replied the child; A blank, stupid expression replacing her
excitement. “Yes. Mamma?”

The woman sat down and took Carrie upon her lap, twisting her curls
and caressing her.

“Where have you been, frightening us all to death!” she exclaimed.
“The child is sick; she must have some drugs to quiet her.”

“She's just come out of a spasm,” said Grandma Padgett distantly.
“Seems as if a young man scared her.”

“Yes; that was Jarvey,” said the woman. “'E found her here. Carrie
was always afraid of Jarvey after he-tried to teach her wire-walking,
and let her fall. Jarvey would've fetched her right away with him,
But 'e knows I don't like to 'ave 'im meddle with her now.”

“She says her name's Rose,” observed the wife of William Sebastian,
taking no care to veil her suspicion.

“'Tis Rose,” replied the woman indifferently, passing her hand in
repeated strokes down the child's face as it was pressed to her
shoulder. “The h'other's professional--Fairy Carrie. We started
'igher. I never expected to come down with my child to such a
miserable little combination. But we've 'ad misfortunes. Her father
died coming over. We're English. We 'ad good engagements in the
Provinces, and sometimes played in London. The manager as fetched us
over, failed to keep his promises, and I had no friends 'ere. I had
to do what I could.”

An actual resemblance to Carrie appeared in the woman's face. She
wiped tears from, the dark rings under her eyes.

William Sebastian's wife rested her knuckles on the table, still
regarding Carrie's mother with perplexed distrust.

While returning none of the caresses she received, the child lay
quite docile and submissive.

“Well,” said Grandma Padgett, still distantly “folks bring up their
children different. There's gypsies always live in tents, and I
suppose show-people always expect to travel with shows. I don't know
anything about it. But I do know when that child came to me she'd
been dosed nearly to death with laudanum, or some sleepin' drug, and
didn't really come to her senses till after her spasm.”

The woman cast a piteous expression at her judge.

“She's so nervous, poor pet! Perhaps I'm in the 'abit of giving her
too much. But she lives in terror of the company we 'ave to associate
with, and I can't see her nerves be racked.”

“Thee ought to stop such wrong doings,” pronounced William
Sebastian, laying his palm decidedly on the table. “Set theeself to
some honest work and put the child to school. Her face is a rebuke to
us that likes to feel at peace.”

The woman glanced resentfully at him.

“The child is gifted,” she maintained. “I'm going to make a hartist
of her.”

She smoothed Carrie's wan hands, and, as if noticing her borrowed
clothing for the first time, looked about the room for the tinsel and
gauze.

[Illustration: THE CHILD LAY QUITE DOCILE AND SUBMISSIVE.]

“The things she had on her when she come to us,” said Grandma
Padgett, “were literally gone to nothing. The children had run so far
and rubbed over fences and sat in the grass. I didn't even think it
was worth while to save the pieces; and I put my least one's clothes
on her for some kind of a covering.

“It was her concert dress,” said the woman, regarding aunt Corinne's
pantalets with some contempt. “I suppose I hought to thank you, but
since she was hinticed away, I can't. When one 'as her feelings
'arrowed up for nearly a week as mine have been 'arrowed, one can't
feel thankful. I will send these 'ere things back by Jarvey. Well,
ladies and gentlemen, let me bid you good evening. The performance
'as already begun and we professionals cannot shirk business.”

“You give an exhibition in Greenfield to-night, do you?” inquired
the lawyer.

“Yes, sir,” replied the woman, standing with Carrie in arms. She had
some difficulty in getting at her pocket, but threw him a handbill.

Then passing out through the hall, she shut the front door behind her.

There were two other front doors to the house, though only the
central one was in constant use, being left open in the summer
weather, excepting on occasions such as the present, when William
Sebastian's wife thought it should be locked. One of the other front
doors opened into the sitting-room, but was barred with a tall
bureau. The third let into a square room devoted to the lumber
accumulations of the house. A bar and shelves for decanters remained
there, but these William Sebastian had never permitted to be used
since his name was painted on the sign.

Mrs. Sebastian felt a desire to confuse the outgoing woman by the
three doors and imprison her in the old store room.

“I don't think the child's hers,” exclaimed Mrs. Sebastian.

“Thee isn't Solomon,” observed the Quaker, twinkling at his wife.
“Thee cannot judge who the true mother may be.”

“She shouldn't got in here if I'd had the keeping of the door,”
 continued Mrs. Sebastian. “I may not be Solomon, but I think I could
keep the varmints out of my own chicken house.”

Grandma Padgett set her glasses in a perplexed stare at the door.

“She didn't let us say good-by to Fairy Carrie,” exclaimed aunt
Corinne indignantly, “and kept her face hid away all the time so she
couldn't look at us. I'd hate to have such a ma!”

“She'll whip the poor little thing for running off with us, when she
gets her away,” said Robert Day, listening for doleful sounds.

“Well, what does thee think of this business?” inquired William
Sebastian of the lawyer who was busying himself drawing squares on
the tablecloth with a steel fork. “It ought to come in thy line. Thee
deals with criminals and knows the deceitfulness of our human hearts.
What does thee say to the woman?”

The lawyer smiled as he laid down his fork, and barely mentioned the
conflicting facts:

“She took considerable pains to tell something about herself: more
than was necessary. But if they kidnapped the child, they are
dangerously bold and confident in exhibiting and claiming her.”




CHAPTER XX. SUNDAY ON THE ROAD.


Aunt Corinne occupied with her mother a huge apartment over the
sitting-room, in which was duplicated the fireplace below. At this
season the fireplace was closed with a black board on which paraded
balloon-skirted women cut out of fashion plates.

The chimneys were built in two huge stacks at the gable-ends of the
house, outside the weather boarding: a plan the architects of this
day utterly condemn. The outside chimney was, however, as far beyond
the stick-and-clay stacks of the cabin, as our fire-stone flues are
now beyond it. This house with log steps no longer stands as an old
landmark by the 'pike side in Greenfield. But on that June morning it
looked very pleasant, and the locust-trees in front of it made the
air heavy with perfume. There is no flower like the locust for
feeding honey to the sense of smell. Half the bees from William
Sebastian's hives were buzzing overhead, when Bobaday and aunt
Corinne sat down by Zene on the log steps to unload their troubles.
All three were in their Sunday clothes. Zene had even greased his
boots, and looked with satisfaction on the moist surfaces which he
stretched forth to dry in the sun.

He had not seen Carrie borne away, but he had been to the show
afterwards, and heard her sing one of her songs. He told the children
she acted like she never see a thing before her, and would go dead
asleep if they didn't stick pins in her like they did in a woman he
seen walkin' for money once. Robert was fain to wander aside on the
subject of this walking woman, but aunt Corinne kept to Fairy Carrie,
and made Zene tell every scrap of information he had about her.

“After I rubbed the horses this mornin',” he proceeded, “I took a
stroll around the burg, and their tent and wagon's gone!”

“Gone!” exclaimed aunt Corinne. “Clear out of town?”

Zene said he allowed so. He could show the children where the tent
and wagon stood, and it was bare ground now. He had also discovered
the time-honored circus-ring, where every summer the tinseled host
rode and tumbled. But under the circumstances, a circus-ring had no
charms.

“Then they've got her,” said Bobaday. “We'll never see the pretty
little thing again. If I'd been a man I wouldn't let that woman have
her, like Grandma Padgett did. Grown folks are so funny. I did wish
some grand people would come in the night and say she was their
child, and make the show give her up.”

Aunt Corinne arose to fly to her mother and Mrs. Sebastian with the
news. But the central door opening on the instant and Mrs. Sebastian,
her husband and guest coming out, aunt Corinne had not far to fly.

“The woman is a stealer,” she added to her breathless recital. “She
didn't even send my things back.”

“She's welcome to them,” said Grandma Padgett, shaking her head,
“but I feel for that child, whether the rightful owners has her or
not.”

“This is Lord's Day,” said William Sebastian to the children, “along
the whole length of the pike, and across the whole breadth of the
country. Thy little friend will get her First Day blessing.”

He wore a gray hat, half-high in the crown, and a gray coat which
flapped his calves when he walked. His trousers were of a cut which
reached nearly to his armpits, but this fact was kept from the public
by a vest crawling well toward his knees. Yet he looked beautifully
tidy and well-dressed. His wife, who was not a Quaker, had by no
means such an air of simple grandeur.

Grandma Padgett and aunt Corinne, somewhat reluctantly followed by
Zene, were going to the Methodist church. Already its bell was
filling the air. But Robert hung back and asked if he might not go to
Quaker meeting.

“Thee couldn't sit and meditate,” said William Sebastian.

Bobaday assured William Sebastian he could sit very still, and he
always meditated. When he ran after his grandmother to get her
consent, it occurred to him to find out from Zene how the pig-headed
man was, and if he looked as ugly as ever. But aunt Corinne scorned
the question, and quite flew af him for asking it.

The Methodist services Robert knew by heart: the open windows, the
high pulpit where the preacher silently knelt first thing, hymn books
rustling cheerfully, the hymn given out two lines at a time to be
sung by the congregation, then the kneeling of everybody and the
prayer, more singing, and the sermon, perhaps followed by an
exhortation, when the preacher talked loud enough for the boys
sitting out on the fence to hear every word. Perhaps a few children
whispered, or a baby cried and its mother took it out. Everybody
seemed happy and astir. After church there was so much handshaking
that the house emptied very slowly.

But on his return he described the Quaker meeting to aunt Corinne.

“They all sat and sat,” said Bobaday. “It was a little bit of a
house and not half so many folks could get in it as sit in the
corners by the pulpit in Methodist meeting. And they sat and sat, and
nobody said a word or gave out a hymn. The women looked at the cracks
in the floor. You could hear everything outdoors. After a long time
they all got up and shook hands. Mrs. Sebastian said to Mr. Sebastian
when we came away, 'The spirit didn't appear to move anybody this
morning.' And he said, 'No: but it was a blessed meeting.'”

“Didn't your legs cramp?” inquired aunt Corinne.

“Yes; and my nose tickled and I wanted to sneeze.”

“But you dursn't move your thumb even. That lawyer that ate supper
here last night would like such a meeting, wouldn't he?”

The lawyer was coming up the log steps while Robert spoke of him.
And with him was a lady who looked agitated, and whom he had to assist.

Robert and Corinne, at the open sitting-room window, looked at each
other with quick apprehension.

“Aunt Krin, _that's_ her mother,” said aunt Krin's nephew. His
young relative grasped his arm and exclaimed in an awe-struck whisper:

“Bobaday Padgett!”




CHAPTER XXI. HER MOTHER ARRIVES.


Both children regarded the strange lady with breathless interest
when the lawyer seated her in the room. They silently classed her
among the rich, handsome and powerful people of the earth. She had
what in later years they learned to call refinement, but at that date
they could give it no name except niceness. When Grandma Padgett and
the landlord's wife were summoned to the room, she grew even younger
and more elegant in appearance, though her face was anxious and her
eyes were darkened by crying.

“This is Mrs. Tracy from Baltimore,” said the lawyer. “She was in
Chicago yesterday, and I telegraphed for her a half-hour or so before
the child was taken out of the house. She came as far as
Indianapolis, and found no Pan Handle train, this morning, so she was
obliged to get a carriage and drive over. Mrs. Sebastian, will you be
kind enough to set out something for her to eat as soon as you can?
She has not thought of eating since she started. And Mrs.--what did I
understand your name to be?”

[Illustration: “THIS IS LORD'S DAY,” SAID WILLIAM SEBASTIAN.]

“Padgett,” replied the children's guardian.

“Yes; Mrs. Padgett. Mrs. Padgett, my client is hunting a lost child,
and hearing this little girl was with you some days, she would like
to make some inquiries.”

“But the child's taken clear away!” exclaimed Grandma Padgett.

“If you drove out from Injunop'lis,” said the Quaker's wife, “you
must have met the show-wagon on the 'pike.”

“The show-wagon took to a by-road,” observed the lawyer. “We have
men tracking it now.”

“I knew it wasn't right for them to carry off that child,” said the
Quaker's wife, “and if I'd tended the door they wouldn't carried her
off.”

“It was best not to arouse their suspicions before she could be
identified,” said the lawyer. “It's easy enough to take her when we
know she is the child we want.”

“Maybe so,” said the Quaker's wife.

“Easy enough. The vagabonds can't put themselves beyond arrest
before we can reach them, and on the other hand, they could make a
case against us if we meddle with them unnecessarily. Since Mrs.
Tracy came West a couple of weeks ago, and since she engaged me in
her cause, we have had a dozen wrong parties drawn up for
examination; children of all ages and sizes.”

“Did she,” inquired Mrs. Tracy, bringing her chair close to Grandma
Padgett and resting appealing eyes on the blue glasses, “have hair
that curled? Rather long hair for a child of her years.”

“Yes'm,” replied Grandma Padgett with dignified tenderness. “Long
for a child about five or six, as I took her to be. But she was
babyish for all that.”

“Yes--oh, yes!” said Mrs. Tracy.

“And curly. How long since you lost her?”

The lady from Baltimore sobbed on her handkerchief, but recovered
with a resolute effort, and replied:

“It was nearly three months ago. She was on the street with her
nurse, and was taken away almost miraculously. We could not find a
trace. Her papa is dead, but I have always kept his memory alive to
her. My friends have helped me search, but it has seemed day after
day as if I could not bear the strain any longer.”

Grandma Padgett took off her glasses and polished them.

“I know how you feel,” she observed, glancing at Robert Day and
Corinne. “I had a scare at Richmond, in this State.”

“Are these your children?”

“My youngest and my grandson. It was their notion of running away
with the little girl, and their gettin' lost, that put me to such a
worry:”

Mrs. Tracy extended her hands to Bobaday and aunt Corinne, drawing
one to each side of her, and made the most minute inquiries about
Fairy Carrie. She knew that the child had called herself Rose, and
that she had been in a partially stupified state during her stay with
the little caravan. But when Robert mentioned the dark circles in the
child's face, and her crying behind the tent, the lady turned white
and leaned back, closing her eyes and groping for a small yellow
bottle in her pocket. Having smelled of this, she recovered herself.

But aunt Corinne, in spite of her passionate sympathy, could barely
keep from tittering at the latter action. Though the smelling bottle
was yellow, instead of a dull blue, like the one Ma Padgett kept in
the top bureau drawer at home, aunt Corinne recognized her enemy and
remembered the time she hunted out that treasure and took a long,
strong, tremendous snuff at it, expecting to revel in odors of
delight. Her head tingled again while she thought about it; she felt
a thousand needles running through her nose, and saw herself sitting
on the floor shedding tears. How anybody could sniff at a hartshorn
bottle and find it a consolation or restorative under any
circumstances, she could not understand.

Mrs. Sebastian, in her First Day clothes, and unwilling to lose a
word of what was going on in the sitting-room, had left the early
dinner to her assistant. But she brought in a cup of strong tea, and
some cream toast, begging the bereaved mother to stay her stomach
with that until the meal's victuals was ready. Mrs. Tracy appeared to
have forgotten that her stomach needed staying, but she thanked the
landlady and drank the tea as if thirsty, between her further
inquiries about the child.

“Are you not sure,” she asked the lawyer, “that we are on the right
track this time?”

He said he was not sure, but indications were better than they had
been before.

“I don't wish to reproach you,” said Mrs. Tracy, “but it is a
fearful thought to me, that they may be poisoning my child with
opiates again and injuring her perhaps for life. You might have
detained her.”

“That's what I've said right along,” exclaimed Mrs. Sebastian.

“But there was that woman who pretended to be her rightful mother,”
 observed Grandma Padget, who, though not obliged to set up any
defence, wanted the case seen in all its bearings. “There _she_
set, easy and deliberate, telling _her_ story, how the little
thing's father died comin' over the water, and how hard, it was for
her to do the right thing by the child. She maintained she only dosed
the child to keep her from sufferin'. I didn't believe her, but we
had nothing to set up against her.”

Mrs. Tracy became as erect and fierce in aspect as such a delicate
creature could become. The long veil of crape which hung from her
bonnet and swept the floor, emphasizing the blackness of all her
other garments, trembled as she rose.

“Why am I sitting here and waiting for anything, when that woman is
claiming my child for her own? The idea of anybody's daring to own my
child! It is more cruel than abuse. I never thought of their being
able to teach her to forget me--that they could confuse her mamma
with another person in her mind!”

“You're tired out,” said the lawyer, “and matters are moving just as
rapidly as if you were chasing over all the roads in Hancock County.
You must quiet yourself, ma'am, or you'll break down.”

Mrs. Tracy made apparent effort to quiet herself. She took hold of
Grandma Padgett's arm when they were called out to dinner. Robert
walked on the other side of her, having her hand on his shoulder and
aunt Corinne went behind, carrying the end of the crape veil as if
Fairy Carrie's real mother could thus receive support and consolation
through the back of the head.

Nobody was more concerned about her trouble than William Sebastian.
And he remembered more tempting pickles and jellies than had ever
been on the table before at once. Yet the dinner was soon over.

Grandma Padgett said she had intended to go a piece on the road that
afternoon anyhow, but she could not feel easy in her mind to go very
far until the child was found. Virginia folks and Marylanders were
the same as neighbors. If Mrs. Tracy would take a seat in the
carriage, they would make it their business to dally along the road
and meet the word the men out searching were to bring in. Mrs. Tracy
clung to Grandma Padgett's arm as if she knew what a stay the Ohio
neighbors had always found this vigorous old lady. The conveyance
which brought her from Indianapolis had been sent back. She was glad
to be with, the Padgetts. No railroad trains would pass through until
next day. William Sebastian helped her up the carriage steps, and
aunt Corinne set down reverently on the back seat beside her. Zene
was already rumbling ahead with the wagon. Mrs. Sebastian came down
the steps of log and put a hearty lunch in. It was particularly for
the child they hoped to find.

[Illustration: MRS. TRACY MAKES INQUIRIES.]

“Make her eat something,” she counselled the mother. “She hardly
tasted a bite of supper last night, and according to all accounts,
she ain't in hands that understands feedin' children now.”

“The Lord prosper all thy undertakings,” said William Sebastian,
“and don't thee forget to let us know what hour we may begin to
rejoice with thee.”

The lawyer touched his hat as Hickory and Henry stepped away on the
plank 'pike. He remained in Greenfield, and was to ride after them if
any news came in about Fairy Carrie.




CHAPTER XXII. A COUNTRY SUNDAY-SCHOOL.


However we may spend our Sabbath, it is different from the other
days of the week. I have often thought the little creatures of field
and woods knew the difference. They run or sing with more gladness
and a less business-like air. The friskiest lambs, measuring strength
with each other by stiff-legged jumps, are followed by gentle bleats
from their mothers, and come back after a frolic to meditate and
switch their tails. The fleecy roll of a lamb's tail, and the dimples
which seem to dint its first coat, the pinkness of its nose, and the
drollery of its eye, are all worth watching under a cloudless Sunday
sky.

As the carriage and wagon rolled along the 'pike, they met other
vehicles full of people driving for an outing, or going to afternoon
Sunday-school held in schoolhouses along the various by-roads.

Mrs. Tracy leaned forward every time a buggy passed the wagon, and
scanned its occupants until they turned towards the right to pass
Grandma Padgett.

The first messenger they met entered on the 'pike from a cross-road
some distance ahead of them, but was checked in his canter toward
Greenfield by Zene, who stopped the wagon for a parley. Mrs. Tracy
was half irritated by such officiousness, and Grandma Padgett herself
intended to call Zene to account, when he left the white and gray and
came limping to the carriage at the rider's side. However, the news
he helped to bring, and the interest he took in it, at once excused
him. This man, scouring the country north and south since early
morning, had heard nothing of the show-wagon.

It might be somewhere in the woods, or jogging innocently along a
dirt road. It was no longer an object to the searchers. He believed
the woman and child had left it, intending to rejoin it at some
appointed place when all excitement was over. He said he thought he
had the very woman and child back here a piece, though they might
give him the slip before he could bring anybody to certainly identify
them.

“My little one 'give me the slip'!” exclaimed Mrs. Tracy indignantly.

The man said his meaning was, she might be slipped off by her keeper.

“Where have you got them?” inquired Grandma Padgett.

“He saw 'em goin' into Sunday-school, marm,” explained Zene.
“There's a meetin'-house over yonder three or four mile,” pointing
with his whip.

“It's the unlikeliest place that ever was,” said the messenger,
polishing his horse's wet neck. “And I suppose that's what the woman
thought when she slipped in there. If I hadn't happened by in the
nick of time I wouldn't mistrusted. She didn't see me. She was goin'
up the steps, with her back to the road, and the meetin'-house sets a
considerable piece from the fence. They was all singin' loud enough
to drown a horse's feet in the dust.”

“And both were like the descriptions you had?” said Mrs. Tracy.

“So nigh like that I half-pulled up and had a notion to go in and
see for myself. Then, thinks I, you better wait and bring-the ones
that would know for sure. There ain't no harm in that.”

Before the mother could speak again, Grandma Padgett told the man to
turn back and direct them, and Zene to fall behind the carriage with
his load. He could jog leisurely in the wake of the carriage, to
avoid getting separated from it: that would be all he need attempt.
She took up her whip to touch Hickory and Henry.

After turning off on the by-road, Grandma Padgett heard Zene
leisurely jogging in the wake of the carriage, and remembered for a
moment, with dismay, the number of breakable things in his load. He
drove all the way to the meeting-house with the white and gray
constantly rearing their noses from contact with the hind carriage
curtains; up swells, when the road wound through stump-bordered
sward, and down into sudden gullies, when all his movables clanged
and rumbled, as if protesting against the unusual speed they had to
endure. Zene was as anxious to reach the meeting-house as the man who
cantered ahead.

They drew up to where it basked on the rising ground, an old brown
frame with lichens crusting the roof. There were two front doors, a
flight of wooden steps leading up to each, and three high windows
along the visible side. All these stood open letting out a pleasant
hum, through which the cracked voice of an old man occasionally
broke. No hump of belfry stood upon its back. The afternoon sun was
the bell which called that neighborhood together for Sunday-school.
And this unconscious duty performed, the afternoon sun now brightened
the graves which crowded to the very fence, brought out the glint and
polish of the new marble headstones, or showed the grooved names in
the old and leaning slate ones. Some graves were enclosed by rails,
and others barely lifted their tops above the long grass. There were
baby-nests hollowing into the turf, and clay-colored piles set head
and foot with fresh boards. And on all these aunt Corinne looked with
an interest which graves never failed to rouse in her, no matter what
the occasion might be.

[Illustration: THE FIRST MESSENGER.]

The horses switched their tails along the outside of the fence. One
backed his vehicle as far as his hitching-strap would let him,
against the wheels of another's buggy, that other immediately
responding by a similar movement. Some of them turned their heads and
challenged Hickory and Henry and the saddle-horse with speaking
whinneys. “Whe-hee-hee-hee! You going to be tied up here for the
grass-flies to bite too? Where do you come from, and why don't you
kick your folks for going to afternoon meeting in hot June time?”

The pilot of the caravan had helped take horse-thieves in his time,
and he considered this a similar excursion. He dismounted swiftly,
but with an air of caution, and as he let down the carriage steps,
said he thought they better surround the house.

But Mrs. Tracy reached the ground as if she did not see him, and ran
through the open gate with her black draperies flowing in a rush
behind her. Robert Day and aunt Corinne were anxious to follow, and
the man tied Grandma Padgett's horses to a rail fence across the
road, while some protest was made among the fly-bitten row against
the white cover of Zene's moving-wagon.

Although Bobaday felt excited and eager as he trotted up the grass
path after Mrs. Tracy, the spirit of the country Sunday-school came
out of doors to meet him.

There were the class of old men and the class of old women in the
corner seats each side of the pulpit, and their lesson was in the Old
Testament. The young ladies listened to the instruction of the smart
young man of the neighborhood, and his sonorous words rolled against
the echoing walls. He usually taught the winter district and singing
schools. The young girl who did for summer schoolmiss, had a class of
rosebud children in the middle of the meetinghouse, and they crowded
to Her lap and crawled up on her shoulders, though their mothers, in
the mothers' class, shook warning heads at them. Scent of cloves,
roses and sweetbrier mingled with the woody smell of a building shut
close six days out of seven. Two rascals in the boys' class, who,
evading their teacher's count, had been down under the seats kicking
each other with stiff new shoes, emerged just as the librarian came
around with a pile of books, ready to fight good-naturedly over the
one with the brightest cover. The boy who got possession would never
read the book, but he could pull it out of his jacket pocket and
tantalize the other boy going home.

The Sunday-school was a wholesome, happy place, even for these young
heathen who were enjoying their bodies too much to care particularly
about their souls. And when the superintendent stood up to rap the
school to order for the close of the session, and line out one of
Watts's sober hymns, there was a pleasant flutter of getting ready,
and the smart young man of the neighborhood took his tuning-fork from
his vest pocket to hit against his teeth so he could set the tune. He
wore a very short-tailed coat, and had his hair brushed up in a high
roach from his forehead, and these two facts conspired to give him a
brisk and wide awake appearance as he stepped into the aisle holding
a singing book in his hand.

But no peaceful, long-drawn hymn floated through the windows and
wandered into the woods. The twang of the tuning-fork was drowned by
a succession of cries. The smart young man's eyebrows went up to meet
his roach while he stood in the aisle astonished to see a lady in
trailing black clothes pounce upon a child strange to the
neighborhood, and exclaim over, and cover it with kisses.




CHAPTER XXIII. FORWARD.


Some of the boys climbed upon seats to look, and there was
confusion. A baby or two in the mothers' class began to cry, but the
mothers themselves soon understood what was taking place, and forgot
the decorum of Sunday-school, to crowd up to Mrs. Tracy.

“The child is hers,” one said to another. “It must have been lost.
Who brought it in here?”

The fortunate messenger who had been successful in his undertaking,
talked in undertones to the superintendent, telling the whole story
with an air of playing the most important part in it. In return, the
superintendent mentioned the notice he had taken of those two
strangers, his attempt to induce the woman to go to the mothers'
class, her restlessness and the child's lassitude.

The smart young man stood close by, receiving the correct version of
the affair, and holding his tuning-fork and book behind him; and all
the children, following their elders, flocked to seats around Mrs.
Tracy, gazing over one another's shoulders, until she looked up
abashed at the chaos her excitement had made.

“It's really your child?” said Grandma Padgett, sitting down beside
the mother with a satisfied and benevolent expression.

“Oh, indeed, yes! Don't you know mamma, darling?”

For reply, the little girl was clinging mutely to her mother's neck.
Her curls were damp and her eyes very dark-ringed. But there was
recognition in her face very different from the puzzled and crouching
obedience she had yielded to the one who claimed her before.

“They've been dosing her again,” pronounced Grandma Padgett severely.

“And she's all beat out tramping, poor little thing!” said one of
the neighborhood mothers. “Look at them dusty feet!”

Mrs. Tracy gathered the dusty feet into her lap and wiped them with
her lace handkerchief.

Word went forth to the edge of the crowd that the little girl needed
water to revive her, and half a dozen boys raced to the nearest house
for a tin pailful.

With love-feast tenderness the neighborhood mothers administered the
dripping cup to little Rose Tracy when the boys returned. Her face
and head were bathed, and hands and feet cooled. The old women all
prescribed for her, and her mother listened to everybody with
distended eyes, but fell into such frequent paroxysms of kissing her
little girl that some of the boys ducked their heads to chuckle. This
extravagant affection was more than they could endure.

“But where's that woman?” inquired Robert Day. He stood up on the
seat behind his grandmother and Mrs. Tracy, and could see all over
the house, but his eyes roamed unsuccessfully after the English
player. The people having their interest diverted by that question,
turned their heads and began to ask each other where she was. Nobody
had noticed her leave the church, but it was a common thing to be
passing in and out during Sunday school. She had made her escape.
Half the assembly would have pursued her on the instant; she could
not be far away. But Mrs. Tracy begged them to let her go; she did
not want the woman, could not endure the sight of her, and never
wished to hear of her again. Whatever harm was done to her child, was
done. Her child was what she had come in search of, and she had it.

So the group eager to track a kidnapper across fields and along
fence-corners, calmed their zeal and contented themselves with going
outdoors and betting on what direction the fugitive from punishment
had taken.

Perhaps she had grown to love little Rose, and was punished in
having to give her up. In any case, the Pig-headed man and the
various people attached to his show, no more appeared on the track
followed by Grandma Padgett's caravan. Mrs. Tracy would not have him
sought out and arrested, and he only remained in the minds of Robert
and aunt Corinne as a type of monster.

When they left the meeting-house, the weather had changed. People
dismissed from Sunday-school with scanter ceremony than usual, got
into their conveyances to hurry home, for thunder sounded in the
west, and the hot air was already cooled by a rush of wet fragrance
from the advancing rain.

[Illustration: THEY BADE FAIRY CARRIE GOOD-BY.]

It proved to be a quick shower, white and violent while it lasted,
making the fields smoke, and walling out distant views. Spouts of
water ran off the carriage top down the oil cloth apron which
protected Robert and his grandmother. Mrs. Tracy held her little girl
in her lap, and leaned back with an expression of perfect happiness.
The rain came just as her comfort had come, after so much parching
suspense. Aunt Corinne wondered in silence if anything could be nicer
than riding under a snug cover on which the sky-streams pelted,
through a wonderland of fragrance. Every grateful shrub and bit of
sod, the pawpaw leaves and spicewood stems, the half-formed hazel-nuts
in fluted sheaths, and even new hay-stacks in the meadows, breathed
out their best to the rain. The world never seems so fresh and lovable
as after a June shower.

Presently the sun was shining, and the ground-incense steaming with
stronger sweetness, and they came to the wet 'pike stretching like a
russet-colored ribbon east and west, and turned west toward
Indianapolis.

On the 'pike they met another of the men sent out by Mrs. Tracy and
the lawyer. His horse's coat was smoking. Mrs. Tracy took up a gold
pencil attached to her watch, and wrote a note to the lawyer. She was
going on to the city, and would return directly home with her child.
The note she sent by the men, after thanking them, and paying them in
what Robert and his aunt considered a prodigal and wealthy manner.

So large a slice out of the afternoon had their trip to the meeting-house
taken, that it was quite dark when the party drove briskly into
Indianapolis.

It was a little city at that date. Still, Bobaday felt exalted by
clanging car-bells and railroad crossings. It being Sunday evening,
the freights were making up. The main street, called Washington, was
but an extension of the 'pike, stretching broad and straight through
the city. He noticed houses with balconies, set back on sloping
lawns. Here a light disclosed a broad hall with dim stairs at the
back. And in another place children were playing under trees; he
could hear their calls, and by straining his eyes, barely discern
that they wore sumptuous white city raiment. The tide of home-makers
and beautifiers had not then rolled so far north of East Washington
street as to leave it a mere boundary line.

Grandma Padgett and her party stopped at a tavern on Illinois
street. Late in the night they were to separate, Mrs. Tracy taking
the first train for Baltimore. So aunt Corinne and Robert, before
going to bed, bade good-by to the child who had scarcely been a
playmate to them, but more like a delicate plaything in whose
helplessness they had felt such interest.

Rose, obeying her mamma, put her arms around their necks and kissed
them, telling them to come and see her at home. She looked brighter
than hitherto, and remembered a dollhouse and her birds at mamma's
house; yet, her long course of opiates left her little recognition of
the boy and girl she had so dimly seen.

Her mamma hugged them warmly, and Bobaday endured his share of the
hugging with a very good grace, though he was so old. Then it seemed
but a breath until morning, and but another breath until they were
under way, the wagon creaking along the dewy 'pike ahead of them, an
opal clearness growing through the morning twilight, and no Fairy
Carrie asleep, like some tiny enchanted princess, on the back seat.

“The rest of the way,” observed Robert Day to his aunt, “there won't
be anything happening--you see if there will. Zene says we're half
across the State now. And I know we'll never see J. D. Matthews
again. And nobody will be lost and have to be found, and there's no
tellin' where that great big crowd Jonathan and his folks moved with,
are.”

“I feel lonesome,” observed aunt Corinne somewhat pensively. “When
Mrs. Tracy was sending back word to the Quaker tavern man, I wished
we's going back to stay awhile longer. Some places are so nice!”

“Now it's a pretty thing for you to begin at your time of life,”
 said Grandma Padgett, “to set your faces backward and wish for what's
behind. That's a silly notion. Folks that encourage themselves in
doin' it don't show sound sense. The One that made us knew better
than to let us stand still in our experience, and I've always found
them that go forward cheerfully will pretty generally keep the land
of Beulah right around them. Git up, Hickory!”

Thus admonished, the children entered the lone bridge over White
River, or that branch of White River on which Indianapolis is
situated. The stream, seen between chinks in the floor, appeared
deep, but not particularly limpid. How the horses' feet thundered on
the boards, and how long they trod before the little star at the
other end grew to an opening quite large enough to let any vehicle
out of the bridge!




CHAPTER XXIV. THE TOLL-WOMAN.


Still, as crossing the Sciota at Columbus, had been entering a land
of adventure, crossing the White River at Indianapolis, seemed at
first entering a land of commonplace.

The children were very tired of the wagon. Even aunt Corinne got
permission to ride stretches of the road with Robert Day and Zene in
the wagon. It gave out a different creak and jolted her until she was
grateful for springs and cushions when obliged to go back to them.
The landscape was still hazy, the woods grew more beautiful. But
neither of the children cared for the little towns along the route:
Bellville, Stilesville, Meridian, Manhattan, Pleasant Garden. Hills
appeared and ledges of rock cropped out in them. Yet even hills may
be observed with indifference by eyes weary of an endless panorama.

They drove more rapidly now to make up for lost time. Both children
dived into the carriage pockets for amusement, and aunt Corinne
dressed her rag doll a number of times each day. They talked of Rose
Tracy, still calling her Fairy Carrie. Of the wonderful clothes her
mother laid out to put upon her the night of her departure, in place
of aunt Corinne's over-grown things, and the show woman's tawdry
additions. They wondered about her home and the colored people who
waited on her, and if she would be quite well and cured of her stupor
by the time she reached Baltimore. Grandma Padgett told them
Baltimore was an old city down in Maryland, and the National 'Pike
started in its main street. From Baltimore over the mountains to
Wheeling, in the Pan Handle of Virginia, was a grand route. There
used to be a great deal of wagoning and stage-coaching, and driving
droves of horses and cattle by that road. Perhaps, suggested aunt
Corinne, Fairy Carrie would watch the 'pike for the Padgett family,
but Bobaday ridiculed the idea. When he grew up a man he meant to go
to Baltimore but the railroad would be his choice of routes.

Both Robert and his aunt were glad the day they stopped for dinner
near a toll-house, and the woman came and invited them to dine with
her.

The house stood on the edge of the 'pike, with its gate-pole ready
to be lowered by a rope, looking like any other toll place. But the
woman was very brisk and Yankee-like, and different from the many
slatternly persons who had before taken toll. She said her people
came from “down East,” but she herself was born in Ohio. She thought
the old lady would like a cup of strong tea, and her dinner was just
ready, and it did get lonesome eating by a body's self day after day.

The Padgetts added their store to the square table set in a back
room, and the toll-woman poured her steaming tea into cups covered
with flower sprigs. Everything about her was neat and compact as a
ship's cabin. Her bed stood in one corner, curtained with white
dimity. There were two rooms to the toll-house, the front one being a
kind of shop containing a counter, candy jars set in the windows,
shoestrings and boxes of thread on shelves, and a codfish or two
sprawled upon nails and covered with netting. From the back door you
could descend into a garden, and at the end of the garden was a pig-sty,
occupied by a white pig almost as tidy and precise as his owner. In
the toll-woman's living room there was a cupboard fringed with tissue
paper, a rocking-chair cushioned in red calico, curtains to match, a
cooking-stove so small it seemed made for a play-thing, and yellow
chairs having gold-leaf ornaments on their backs. She herself was a
straight, flat woman, looking much broader in a front or back view
than when she stood sidewise toward you. Her face was very good-natured.
Altogether she seemed just the ready and capable wife for whom the
man went to London after the rats and the mice led him such a life.
Though in her case it is probable the wheelbarrow would not have
broken, nor would any other mishap have marred the journey.

“You don't live here by yourself, do you?” inquired Grandma Padgett
as the tea and the meal in common warmed an acquaintance which the
fact of their being from one State had readily begun.

“Since father died I have,” replied the toll-woman. “Father moved in
here when about everything else failed him, and he'd lost ambition,
and laws! now I am used to it. I might gone back to Ohio, but when
you fit me into a place I never want to pull up out of it.”

“And don't you ever get afraid, nights or any time, without men
folks about?”

“Before I got used to being alone, I did. And there's reason yet
every little while. But I only got one bad scare.”

A wagon paused at the front door, so near the horses might have put
their heads in and sniffed up the merchandise, and the woman went to
take toll, before telling about her bad scare.

“How do you manage in the nights?” inquired her guest.

“That's bad about fair-times, when the wild young men get to racin'
late along. The pole's been cut when I tied it down, and sometimes
they've tried to jump it. But generally the travellers are peaceable
enough. I've got a box in the front door like a letter-box, with a
slit outside for them to drop change into, and the pole rope pulls
down through the window-frame. There ain't so much travel by night as
there used to be, and a body learns to be wakeful anyhow if they've
ever had the care of sick old people.”

“You didn't say how you got scared,” remarked aunt Corinne, sitting
straight in one of the yellow chairs to impress upon her mind the
image of this heroine of the road.

“Well, it was robbers,” confessed the toll-woman, “breakin' into the
house, that scared me.”

Robbers! Aunt Corinne's nephew mentally saw a cavern in one of the
neighboring hills, and men in scarlet cloaks and feathers lurking
among the bushes. If there is any word sweeter to the young male ear
than Indian or Tagger, it is robbers.

“Are there many robbers around here?” he inquired, fixing intent
eyes on the toll-woman.

“There used to be plenty of horse-thieves, and is, yet,” she replied.
“They've come huntin' them from away over in Illinois. I remember that
year the milk-sick was so bad there was more horse-thieves than we've
ever heard of since.”

“But they ain't true robbers, are they?” said aunt Corinne's nephew
in some disgust, his scarlet bandits paling.

“Not the kind that come tryin' the house when I got scared,”
 admitted the toll-woman.

“And did they get in?” exclaimed Robert Day's aunt.

“I don't like to think about it yet,” remarked the toll-woman,
cooling her tea and intent on enjoying her own story. “'Twasn't so
very long ago, either. First comes word from this direction that a
toll-gate keeper and his wife was tied and robbed at the dead o'
night. And then comes word from the other direction of an old man
bein' knocked on the head when he opened his door. It wouldn't seem
to you there'd be enough money at a toll-gate to make it an object,”
 said the woman, looking at Zene's cross eyes with unconcealed
disfavor. “But folks of that kind don't want much of an object.”

“They love to rob,” suggested Bobaday, enjoying himself.

“They're a desp'rate, evil set,” said the toll-woman sternly. “Why,
I could tell things that would make your hair all stand on end, about
robberies I've known.”

Aunt Corinne felt a warning stir in her scalp-lock. But her nephew began
to desire permanent encampment in the neighborhood of this toll-gate.
Robber-stories which his grandmother not only allowed recited, but
drank in with her tea, were luxuries of the road not to be left behind.

“Tell some of them,” he urged.

“I'll tell you about their comin' _here_,” said the toll-woman.
“'Twas soon after father's death. They must known there was a lone
woman here, and calculated on findin' it an easy job. He'd kept me
awake a good deal, for father suffered constant in his last sickness,
and though I was done out, I still had the habit of wakin' regular at
his medicine-hours. The time was along in the fall, and there was a
high wind that night. Fair time, too, so there was more travel on the
'pike of people comin' and goin' to the Fair and from it, in one day,
than in a whole week ordinary times.”

[Illustration: THE TOLL-WOMAN.]

“I opened my eyes just as the clock struck two and seemed like I
heard something at the front door. I listened and listened. It wasn't
the wind singin' along the telegraph wires as it does when there's a
strong draught east and west. And it wasn't anybody tryin' to wake me
up. Some of our farmers that buys stock and has to be out early and
late in a droviete way, often tells me beforehand what time o' night
they'll be likely to come by, and I set the pole so it'll be easy for
them that knows how to tip up. Then they put their money in the box,
and tip the pole back after they drive through, to save wakin' me,
for the neighbors are real accommodating and they knew father took a
heap of care. But the noise I heard wasn't anybody droppin' coppers
in the box, nor raisin' or lowerin' the pole. The rope rasps against
the hole when the gate goes up or down. It was just like a lock was
bein' picked, or a rattly old window bein' slid up by inches.

“I mistrusted right away. It wouldn't do any good for me to holler.
The nearest neighbor was two miles off. I hadn't any gun, and never
shot off a gun in my life. I would hate to hurt a human bein' that
way. Still, I was excited and afraid of gettin' killed myself; so if
I'd _had_ a gun I _might_ have shot it off, for by the time
I got my dress and stockin's on, that window was up, and somethin'
was in that front room. I could hear him step, still as a cat.

“I thought about the toll-money. Everybody knew the box's inside the
door, so I was far from leavin' it there till the collector came. I
always took the money out and tied it in a canvas sack and hid it. A
body would never think of lookin' where I hid that money.”

“Where did you hide it?” inquired aunt Corinne.

The toll-woman rose up and went to collect from a carriage at the
door. The merry face of a girl in the carriage peeped through the
house, and some pleasant jokes were exchanged.

“That's the daughter of the biggest stock man around here,” said the
toll-woman, returning, and passing over aunt Corinne's question. “She
goes to college, but it don't make a simpleton of _her_. She always
has a smile and a pleasant word. Her folks are real good friends of
mine. They knew our folks in Ohio.”

“And did he come right in and grab you?” urged Bobaday, keeping to
the main narrative.

“I was that scared for a minute,” resumed the toll-woman, “that I
hadn't any strength. The middle door never is locked. I leave it on
the latch like, so I can hear wheels better. What to do I didn't
know, but a body thinks fast at such times. First thing I knew I was
on the back doorstep, hookin' the door on the outside. Then a gust of
wind like, came around the corner of the house, and voices came with
it, and I felt sure there were more men waitin' there to ketch me, if
I tried to run.”




CHAPTER XXV. ROBBERS.


It was a light night, but the new moon looked just like it was
blowed through the sky by the high wind. I noticed that, because I
remembered it afterwards.

“Now I was outside, I didn't know which way to turn. If I run to
either side, there were the men, and if I took toward the pig-pen
they'd see me. And they'd be comin' around and 'd ketch me where I
was.”

“What did you do?” exclaimed aunt Corinne, preserving a rigid
attitude.

The toll-woman laughed cheerfully as she poured out more tea for
herself, Grandma Padgett having waved back the teapot spout.

“I took the only chance I saw and jumped for that there cave.”

Both Robert and his aunt arose from their chairs to look out of the
back door.

The cave was a structure which I believe is peculiar to the West,
being in reality a kind of dug-out. It flourished before people built
substantial houses with cellars under them, and held the same
relation to the family's summer economy as the potato, apple, and
turnip holes did to its winter comfort. Milk, butter, perishable
fruit, lard, meats, and even preserves were kept in the cave. It was
intended for summer coolness and winter warmth. To make a cave, you
lifted the sod and dug out a foot of earth. The bottom was covered
with straw. Over this you made boards meet and brace each other with
the slope of the roof. The ends were boarded up, leaving room for a
door, and the whole outside sodded thickly, so that a cave looked
like a sharp-printed bulge in the sward, excepting at that end where
the heavy padlocked door closed it. It was a temptation to bad boys
and active girls; they always wanted to run over it and hear the
hollow sound of the boards under their feet. I once saw a cave break
through and swallow one out of such a galloping troup, to his great
dismay, for he was running over an imaginary volcano, and when he sat
down to his shoulders in an apple-butter jar, the hot lava seemed
ready made to his hand.

From the toll-woman's cave-roof, spikes of yellow mustard were
shooting up into the air. The door looked as stout as the opening to
a bank vault, though this comparison did not occur to the children,
and was secure with staple and padlock and three huge hinges.
Evidently, no mischievous feet had cantered over the ridge of this
cave.

It stood a few yards from the back door.

“I had the key in my pocket,” said the toll-woman, “and ever since
then I've never carried it anywhere else. I clapped, it into the
padlock and turned, but just as I pulled the door I heard feet comin'
around the house full drive. Instead of jumpin' into the cave I
jumped behind it. I thought they had me, but I wasn't goin' to be
crunched to death in a hole, like a mouse. My stocking-feet slipped,
and I came down flat, but right where the shadow of the house and the
shadow of the cave fell all over me. If I hadn't slipped I'd been
runnin' across that field, and they'd seen me sure. Folks around here
made a good deal of fuss over the way things turned out, but I don't,
take any more credit than's my due, so I say it just happened that I
didn't try to run further.

“The two men outside unlocked the back door and the one inside came
on to the step.

“'There's nothin' in the box and nobody in here,' says he. 'She's
jumped out o' bed and run and carried the cash with her.'

“'Did you look under the bed?' says one of the outsiders. And he ran
and looked himself; anyway, he went in the house and came out again.
I was glad I hadn't got under the bed.

“'This job has to be done quick,' says the first one. 'And the best
way is to ketch the woman and make her give up or tell where the
stuff is hid. She ain't got far, because I heard her open this door.'

“Then they must have seen the cave door stannin' open. I heard them
say something about 'cave,' and come runnin' up.

“'Hold on,' says one, and he fires a pistol-shot right into the
cave. I was down with my mouth to the ground, flat as I could lay,
but the sound of a gun always made me holler out, and holler I did as
the ball seemed to come thud! right at me; but it stuck in the back
of the cave.

“'All right. Here she is!' says the foremost man, and in they all
went. I heard them stumble as they stepped down, and one began to
blame the others for crowdin' after him when they ought to stopped at
the mouth to ketch me if I slipped through his fingers.

“I don't know to this hour how I did it,” exclaimed the toll-woman,
fanning herself, “nor when I thought of it. But the first thing I
felt sure of I had that door slammed to, and the key turned in the
padlock, and them three robbers was ketched like mice in a trap,
instead of it's bein' me!”

Robert Day gave a chuckle of satisfaction, but aunt Corinne braced
herself against the door-frame and gazed upon the magic cave with
still wider eyes.

“Did they yell?” inquired Bobaday.

“It ain't fit to tell,” resumed the toll-woman, “what awful language
them men used; and they kicked the door and the boards until I
thought break through they would if they had to heave the whole
weight, of dirt and sod out of the top. Then I heard somebody comin'
along the 'pike, and for a minute I felt real discouraged; for,
thinks I, if there's more engaged to help them, what's a poor body to
do?

“But 'twas a couple of stock-men, riding home, and they stopped at
the gate, and I run through the open house to tell my story, and it
didn't take long for them with pistols in their pockets and big black
whips loaded with lead in the handles, to get the fellows out and tie
'em up firm. I hunted all the new rope in the house, and they took
the firearms away from the robbers, and drove 'em off to jail, and
the robbers turned out to be three of the most desp'rate characters
in the State, and they're in prison now for a long term of years.”

“What did you do the rest of the night?” inquired Grandma Padgett.

“O, I locked everything tight again, and laid down till daylight,”
 replied the toll-woman, with somewhat boastful indifference. “Folks
haven't got done talkin' yet about that little jail in my back yard,”
 she added, laughing. “They came from miles around to look into it and
see where the men pretty nigh kicked the boards loose.”

This narrative was turned over and over by the children after they
resumed their journey, and the toll-woman and her cave had faded out
in distance. If they saw a deserted cabin among the hollows of the
woods, it became the meeting place of robbers. Now that aunt
Corinne's nephew turned his mind to the subject, he began to think
the whole expedition out West would be a failure--an experience not
worth alluding to in future times--unless the family were well robbed
on the way. Jonathan and Thrusty Ellen, in the great overland colony,
would have Indians to shudder at, a desert and mountains to cross,
besides the tremendous Mississippi River. Robert would hate to meet
Jonathan in coming days--and he had a boy's faith that he should be
constantly repassing old acquaintances in this world--and have no
peril to put in the balance against Jonathan's adventures. Of course
he wanted to come out on the right side of the peril, it does not
tell well otherwise.

But while aunt Corinne's mind ran as constantly on robbers, they had
no charms for her. She did not want to be robbed, and was glad her
lines had not fallen in the lonely toll-house. Being robbed appeared
to her like the measles, mumps, or whooping-cough; more interesting
in a neighboring family than in your own. She would avoid it if
possible, yet the conviction grew upon her that it was not to be
escaped. The strange passers-by who once pleasantly varied the road,
now became objects of dread. Though Zene got past them in safety, and
though they gave the carriage a wide road, aunt Corinne never failed
to turn and watch them to a safe distance, lest they should make a
treacherous charge in the rear.

Had they been riding through some dismal swamp, the landscape's
influence would have accounted for all these terrors. But it was the
pretty region of Western Indiana, containing hills and bird-songs
enough to swallow up a thousand stories of toll-gate robberies in
happy sight and sound.

Grandma Padgett, indeed, soon put her ban upon the subject of caves
and night-attacks. But she could not prevent the children thinking.
Nor was she able to drive the carriage and at the same time sit in
the wagon when they rode with Zene and stop the flow of recollection
to which they stimulated him. While sward, sky, and trees became
violet-tinted to her through her glasses, and she calmly meditated
and chewed a bit of calamus or a fennel seed, Bobaday and aunt
Corinne huddled at the wagon's mouth, and Zene indulgently harrowed
up their souls with what he heard from a gentleman who had been in
the Mexican war.

“The very gentleman used to visit at your grand-marm's house,” said
Zene to Robert, “and your marm always said he was much of a
gentleman,” added Zene to aunt Corinne. “Down in the Mexican country
when they didn't fight they stayed in camp, and sometimes they'd go
out and hunt. Man that'd been huntin', come runnin' in one day scared
nigh to death. He said he'd seen the old Bad Man. So this gentleman
and some more of the fine officers, they went to take a look for
themselves. They hunted around a good spell. Most of them gave it up
and went back: all but four. The four got right up to him.”

“O don't, Zene!” begged aunt Corinne, feeling that she could not
bear the description.

But to Robert Day's mind arose the picture of Apollyon, in _Pilgrim's
Progress_, and he uttered something like a snort of enjoyment, saying:

“Go on, Zene.”

[Illustration: ZENE'S WILD MAN.]

“I guess it was a crazy darkey or Mexican,” Zene was careful to
explain. “He was covered with oxhide all over, so he looked red and
white hairy, and the horns and ears were on his head. He had a long
knife, and cut weeds and bark, and muttered and chuckled to himself.
He was ugly,” acknowledged Zene. “The gentleman said he never saw
anything better calkilated to look scary, and the four men followed
him to his den. They wouldn't shoot him, but they wanted to see what
he was, and he never mistrusted. After a long round-about, they
watched him crawl on all-fours into a hole in a hill, and round the
mouth of the hole he'd built up a tunnel of bones. The bones smelt
awful,” said Zene. “And he crawled in with his weeds and bark in his
hand, and they didn't see any more of him. That's a true story,”
 vouched Zene, snapping his whip-lash at Johnson, “but your grandmarm
wouldn't like for me to tell it to you. Such things ain't fit for
children to hear.”

Robert Day felt glad that Zene's qualms of repentance always came
after the offence instead of before, and in time to prevent the
forbidden tale.

Yet, having made such ardent preparation for robbers, and tuned
their minds to the subject by every possible influence, the children
found they were approaching the last large town on the journey
without encountering any.

This was Terre Haute. One farmer on the road, being asked the distance,
said, it was so many miles to Tarry Hoot. Another, a little later met,
pronounced the place Turry Hut; and a very trim, smooth-looking man
whom Zene classed as a banker or judge, called it Tare Hote. So the
inhabitants and neighbors of Terra Haute were not at all unanimous in
the sound they gave her French name; nor are they so to this day.




CHAPTER XXVI. THE FAIR AND THE FIERCE BANDIT.


At Terra Haute, where they halted for the night, Robert Day was made
to feel the only sting which the caravan mode of removal ever caused
him.

The tavern shone resplendent with lights. When Grandma Padgett's
party went by the double doors of the dining-room, to ascend the
stairs, they glanced into what appeared a bower or a bazaar of
wonderful sights. They had supper in a temporary eating-room, and the
waiter said there was a fair in the house. Not an agricultural
display, but something got up by a ladies' sewing-society to raise
money for poor people.

Now Robert Day and Corinne knew all about an agricultural display.
They had been to the State Fair at Columbus, and seen cattle standing
in long lines of booths, quilts, and plows, and chickens, pies,
bread, and fancy knitting, horses, cake stands, and crowds of people.
They considered it the finest sight in the world, except, perhaps, a
fabulous crystal palace which was or had been somewhere a great ways
off, and which everybody talked about a great deal, and some folks
had pictured on their window blinds. But a fair got up by a ladies'
sewing-society to raise money for the poor, was so entirely new and
tantalizing to them that they begged their guardian to take them in.

Grandma Padgett said she had no money to spare for foolishness, and
her expenses during the trip footed up to a high figure. Neither
could she undertake to have the trunks in from the wagon and get out
their Sunday clothes. But in the end, as both children were neatly
dressed, and the fair was to help the poor, she gave them a five-cent
piece each, over and above admission money, which was a fip'ney-bit,
for children, the waiter said. Zene concluded he would black his
boots and look into the fair awhile also, and as he could keep a
protecting eye on her young family, and had authority to send them
up-stairs in one hour and a half by the bar-room time, Grandma Padgett
went to bed. She was glad the journey was so nearly over, for every
night found her quite tired out.

Zene, magnifying his own importance and authority, ushered aunt
Corinne and Robert into the fair, and limped after them whenever he
thought they needed admonition or advice. The landlord's pert young
son noticed this and made his intimates laugh at it. Besides, he was
gorgeously attired in blue velvet jacket and ruffles and white
trousers, and among the crowds of grown people coming and going,
other children shone in resplendent attire. Aunt Corinne felt the
commonness of her calico dress. She had a “white” herself, if Ma
Padgett had only let her put it on, but this could not be explained
to all the people at the fair. And there were so many things to look
at, she soon forgot the white. Dolls of pink and pearly wax, with
actual hair, candy or wooden dogs, cats, and all domestic animals,
tables of cakes, and lines of made-up clothing which represented the
sewing society's labors. There was too much crowding for comfort, and
too much pastry trodden into the floor; and aunt Corinne and her
nephew felt keen anxiety to spend their five-cent pieces to the best
advantage. She was near investing in candy kisses, when yellow and
scarlet-backed books containing the history of “Mother Hubbard,” or
the “Babes in the Woods,” or “Little Red Riding Hood,” attracted her
eye, and she realized what life-long regret she must have suffered
for spending five cents on candy kisses, when one such volume might
be hers for the same money.

Just as aunt Corinne laid her silver on the book counter, however,
and gave her trembling preference to the “History of Old Dame Trot
and her Cat,” Bobaday seized her wrist and excitedly told her there
was a magic-lantern show connected with the fair, which could be seen
at five cents per pair of eyes. Dame Trot remained unpurchased, and
the coin returned to aunt Corinne's warm palm. But she inquired with
caution,

“What's a magic-lantern show?”

“Why, the man, you know,” explained Robert, “has pitctures in a
lantern, and throws light through 'em, and they spread out on a wet
sheet on the wall. The room's all dark except the place on the wall.
A Chinese man eatin' mice in his sleep: he works his jaws! And about
Saul in the Bible, when he was goin' to kill the good people, and it
says, 'Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?' And when they let him
down in a basket. And there's a big star like grandma's star quilt,
only it keeps turning all kinds of colors and working in and out on
itself. And a good many more. Zene went in. He said he wanted to see
if we ought to look at it. And he'll stand by the door and pay our
money to the man if we want to go. There's such a crowd to get in.”

Robert Day's aunt caught the fire of his enthusiasm and went
straight with him to the door wherein the magic lantern performed. A
crowd of children were pushing up, but Zene, more energetic than
courteous pushed his charges ahead so that they gained chairs before
the landlord's son could make his choice.

[Illustration: AT THE SEWING SOCIETY FAIR.]

He sat down directly behind Robert and aunt Corinne, and at once
began to annoy them with impertinent remarks.

“Movers' young ones are spry,” said the landlord's son, who had been
petted on account of his pretty face until he was the nuisance of the
house. “I wouldn't be a movers' young one.”

Robert felt a stinging throb in his blood, but sat still, looking at
the wall. Aunt Corinne, however, turned her head and looked
witheringly at the blue-jacketed boy.

“Movers' young ones have to wear calico,” he continued, “and their
lame pap goes lippity-clink around after them.”

“He thinks Zene's our father!” exclaimed aunt Corinne, blazing at
the affront she received.

“Don't mind him,” said Robert, slowly. “He's the hostler's boy, and
used to staying in the stable. He doesn't know how to behave when
they let him into the house.”

This bitter skirmishing might have become an open engagement at the
next exchange of fires, for the landlord's son stood up in rage while
his chums giggled, and Robert felt terribly equal to the occasion. He
told Zene next day he had his fist already doubled, and he didn't
care if the landlord put them all in jail. But just then the magic
light was turned upon the wall, the landlord's son was told by twenty
voices to sit down out of the way, the lantern man himself sternly
commanding it. So he sunk into his seat feeling much less important,
and the wonders proceeded though Aunt Corinne felt she should always
regret turning her back on the Dame Trot book and coming in there to
have Zene called her lame pap, while Robert wondered gloomily if any
stigma did attach to movers' children. He had supposed them a class
to be envied.

This grievance put the robbers out of his mind when they trotted
ahead next day. The Wabash River could scarcely soothe his ruffled
complacence. And never an inch of the Wabash River have I seen that
was not beautiful and restful to the eye. It flows limpidly between
varying banks, and has a trick of throwing up bars and islands,
wooded to the very edges--captivating places for any tiny Crusoe to
be wrecked upon. Skiffs lay along the shore, and small steamers felt
their way in the channel. It was a river full of all sorts of
promises; so shallow here that the pebbles shone in broad sheets like
a floor of opals wherever you might wade in delight, so deep and
shady with sycamore canopies there, that a good swimmer would want to
lie in ambush like a trout, at the bottom of the swimming hole, half
a June day.

Perhaps it was the sight of the Wabash River which suggested washing
clothes to Grandma Padgett. She said they were now near the Illinois
State line, and she would not like to reach the place with everything
dirty. There was always plenty to do when a body first got home,
without hurrying up wash-day.

So when they passed a small place called Macksville, and came to
Sugar Creek, she called a halt, and they spent the day in the woods.
Sugar Creek, though not sweet, was clear. Zene carried pails full of
it to fill the great copper kettle, and slung this over a fire. The
horses munched at their feed-box or cropped grass, wandering with
their heads tied to their forefeet to prevent their cantering off.
Grandma Padgett at the creek's brink, set up her tubs and buried
herself to the elbows in suds, and aunt Corinne with a matronly
countenance, assisted. All that day Robert went barelegged, and
splashed water, wading out far to dip up a gourdful; and he thought
it was fun to help stretch the clothes-line among saplings, and lift
the scalded linen on a paddle into the tub, losing himself in the
stream. Ordinary washdays as he remembered them, were rather disagreeable.
Everybody had to wake early, and a great deal of fine-split wood was
needed. The kitchen smelt of suds, and the school-lunch was scraps
left from Sunday instead of new cake, turnovers and gingerbread.

[Illustration: GRANDMA PADGETT'S WASHING-DAY IN THE WOODS.]

But this woods wash-day was an experience to delight in, like
sailing on a log in the water, and pretending you are a bold
navigator, or lashing the rocking-chair to a sled for a sleighride.
It was something out of the common. It was turning labor into
fantastic tricks.

They had an excellent supper, too, and after dusk the clothes stood
in glintly array on the line, the camp-fire shone ruddy in a place
where its smoke could not offend them, and they were really like
white stones encircling an unusual day.

But when Robert awoke in the night they gave him a pang of fright,
and he was sorry his grandma had decided to let them bleach in the
dew of the June woods. From his bed in the carriage he could see both
the road and the lines of clothes. A horseman came along the road and
halted. He was not attracted by the camp-fire, because that had died
to ashes. He probably would not have heard the horses stamp in their
sleep, for his own horse's feet made a noise. And the wagon cover was
hid by foliage. But woods and sight were not dark enough to keep the
glint of the washing out of his eyes. Robert saw this rider dismount
and heard him walking cautiously into their camp.




CHAPTER XXVII. A NIGHT PICTURE OF HOME.


Here at last was the robber. After you have given over expecting a
robber, and even feel that you can do without him, to find him
stealing up in the night when you are camped in a lonely place and
not near enough either tent or wagon to wake the other sleepers for
reinforcements, is trying to the nerves.

Bobaday sat up in the carriage, bracing his courage for the
emergency. He could take a cushion, jump out and attack the man with
that. It was not a deadly weapon, and would require considerable
force back of it to do damage. The whip might be better. He reached
for the whip and turned the handle uppermost. There was no cave at
hand to trap this robber in, but a toll-woman should not show more
spirit than Robert Day Padgett in the moment of peril.

Though the robber advanced cautiously, he struck his foot against a
root or two, and stumbled, making the horse take irregular steps
also, for he was leading his horse with the bridle over his arm.

And he came directly up to the carriage. Robert grasped the whip
around the middle with both hands, but some familiar attitude in the
stranger's dim outline made him lower it.

“Bobby,” said the robber, speaking guardedly, “are you in here?”

“Pa Padgett,” exclaimed Robert Day, “is that you?”

“Hush! Yes. It's me, of course. Don't wake your grandma. Old folks
are always light sleepers.”

Pa Padgett reached into the carriage, shook hands with his boy, and
kissed him. How good the bushy beard felt against Bobaday's face.

He said nothing about robbers, while his father unsaddled his horse
and tied the animal snugly to a limb.

Then Pa Padgett put his foot on the hub and sprang into the carriage.

“Is there room for me to stretch myself in here tonight too?”

“Of course there is. But don't you want to see grandma and aunt
Krin?”

“Wait till morning. We'll all take an early start. Have they kept
well?”

“Everybody's well,” replied Bobaday. “But how did you know we were
here?”

“I'd have passed by,” said Pa Padgett, “if I hadn't seen all that
white strung along. Been washing clothes?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Then I made out the carriage, and something like a wagon back in
the bushes. So I came up to examine.”

“We thought you'd be at the State line,” said Robert.

“Oh, I intended to ride out till I met you,” replied his father.
“But I'd have missed you on the plain road; and gone by to the next
town to stop for you, if it hadn't been for the washing. You better
go to sleep again now. Have you had a nice trip?”

“Oh, awful nice! There was a little girl lost, and we got her to her
mother again, and Zene and the wagon were separated from us once”--

“Zene has taken good care of you, has he?”

“He didn't have to take care of us!” remonstrated Robert. “And last
night when there was a fair, I thought he stuck around more than he
was needed: There was the meanest boy that stuck up his hose at
movers' children.”

Aunt Corinne's brother Tip laughed under his breath.

“You'll not be movers' children much longer. The home is over
yonder, only half a day's ride or so.”

“Is it a nice place?”

“I think it's a nice place. There's prairie, but there's timber too.
And there's money to be made. You go to sleep now. You'll wake your
grandma, and I expect she's tired.”

“Yes, sir, I'm going. Is there a garden?”

“There's a good bit of ground for a garden; and there's a planting
of young catalpas. Far as the eye can see in one direction, it's
prairie. On the other side is woods. The house is better than the old
one. I had to build, and I built pretty substantial. Your grandma's
growing old. She'll need comforts in her old age, and we must put
them around her, my man.”

Bobaday thought about this home to which he and his family were to
grow as trees grasp the soil. Already it seemed better to him than
the one he had left. There would be new playmates, new landscapes,
new meadows to run in, new neighbors, new prospects. The home, so
distant during the journey that he had scarcely thought about it at
all, now seemed to inclose him with its pleasant walls, which the
smell of new timbers made pleasant twice over.

Boswell and Johnson, under the carriage, waked by the cautious talk
from that sound sleep a hard day's hunts after woods things induces,
and perhaps sniffing the presence of their master and the familiar
air of home, rose up to shake themselves, and one of them yawned
until his jaws creaked.

“It's the dogs,” whispered Bobaday.

“We mustn't set them to barking,” cautioned Pa Padgett.

“Well, good-night,” said the boy, turning on his cushion.

“Good-night. This caravan must move on early in the morning.”








End of Project Gutenberg's Old Caravan Days, by Mary Hartwell Catherwood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLD CARAVAN DAYS ***

***** This file should be named 6909-0.txt or 6909-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/9/0/6909/

Produced by Avinash Kothare, Tom Allen, Juliet Sutherland,
Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team. This file was produced from images generously made
available by the Canadian Institute for Historical
Microreproductions.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

