Project Gutenberg's Frank on the Lower Mississippi, by Harry Castlemon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Frank on the Lower Mississippi

Author: Harry Castlemon

Posting Date: January 11, 2015 [EBook #6958]
Release Date: November, 2004
First Posted: February 17, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRANK ON THE LOWER MISSISSIPPI ***




Produced by David Garcia, Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.











FRANK ON THE LOWER MISSISSIPPI.

BY

HARRY CASTLEMON




  CONTENTS


  CHAPTER    I.--THE NEW PAYMASTER

  CHAPTER   II.--A NIGHT EXPEDITION

  CHAPTER  III.--ARCHIE IN A PREDICAMENT

  CHAPTER   IV.--A MARK FOR THE UNION

  CHAPTER    V.--A RUN FOR LIFE

  CHAPTER   VI.--FRANK TURNS DETECTIVE

  CHAPTER  VII.--FRANK'S FIRST COMMAND

  CHAPTER VIII.--AN UNLUCKY FLIGHT

  CHAPTER   IX.--UP THE WASHITA

  CHAPTER    X.--THE PROMOTION

  CHAPTER   XI.--THE RIVAL SPIES

  CHAPTER  XII.--A SCOUTING PARTY

  CHAPTER XIII.--TOM THE COXSWAIN

  CHAPTER  XIV.--A REBEL TRICK

  CHAPTER   XV.--HONORABLY DISCHARGED




FRANK ON THE LOWER MISSISSIPPI.




CHAPTER I.

The New Paymaster.


Vicksburg had fallen, and the army had marched in and taken possession
of the city. How Frank longed to accompany it, that he might see the
inside of the rebel stronghold, which had so long withstood the advance
of our fleet and army! He stood leaning against one of the monster guns,
which, at his bidding, had spoken so often and so effectively in favor
of the Union, and for two hours watched the long lines of war-worn
soldiers as they moved into the works. At length a tremendous cheer
arose from the city, and Frank discovered a party of soldiers on the
cupola of the court-house, from which, a few moments afterward, floated
the Stars and Stripes. Then came faintly to his ears the words of a
familiar song, which were caught up by the soldiers in the city, then by
those who were still marching in, and "We'll rally round the flag,
boys," was sung by an immense choir. The rebels in the streets gazed
wonderingly at the men on the spire, and listened to the song, and the
triumphant shouts of the conquering army, which proclaimed the beginning
of the downfall of their confederacy.

To Frank, it was one of the proudest moments of his life--a sight he
would not have missed to be able to float at the mast-head of his vessel
the broad pennant of the admiral. All he had endured was forgotten; and
when the Old Flag was unfurled in the air which had but a short time
before floated the "stars and bars," he pulled off his cap and shouted
at the top of his lungs.

Having thus given vent to his feelings of exultation, in obedience to
orders, he commenced the removal of his battery on board the Trenton. It
was two days' work to accomplish this, but Frank, who was impatient to
see the inside of the fortifications worked with a will, and finally the
battery was mounted in its old position. On the following day, the
Trenton moved down the river, and came to anchor in front of Vicksburg.
Shore liberty was granted, and Frank, in company with several of his
brother officers, strolled about the city. On every side the houses bore
the marks of Union shot and shell, and the streets were blocked with
fortifications, showing that had the city been taken by storm, it was
the intention of the rebels to dispute every inch of the ground. Every
thing bore evidence to the fact that the fight had been a most desperate
one; that the rebels had surrendered only when they found that it was
impossible to hold out longer.

In some places the streets ran through deep cuts in the bank, and in
these banks were the famous "gopher holes." They were [ca]ves dug in
the ground, into which a person, if he happened to hear a shell coming,
might run for safety. Outside the city, the fortifications were most
extensive; rifle-pits ran in every direction, flanked by strong forts,
whose battered walls attested the fury of the iron hail that had been
poured upon them. It was night before Frank was aware of it, so
interested was he in every thing about him, and he returned on board his
vessel, weary with his long walk, but amply repaid by seeing the inside
of what its rebel occupants had called "the Gibraltar of America."

During the next two days, several vessels of the squadron passed the
city, on their way to new fields of action further down the river. One
of them--the Boxer, a tin-clad, mounting eight guns--had Frank on board.
He had been detached from the Trenton, and ordered to join this vessel,
which had been assigned a station a short distance below Grand Gulf. As
usual, he had no difficulty in becoming acquainted with his new
messmates, and he soon felt perfectly at home among them. He found, as
he had done in every other mess of which he had been a member, that
there was the usual amount of wrangling and disputing, and it amused him
exceedingly. All the mess seemed to be indignant at the caterer, who did
not appear to stand very high in their estimation. The latter, he
learned, had just made an "assessment" upon the mess to the amount of
ten dollars for each member; and as there was no paymaster on board, the
officers had but very little ready money, and were anxious to know where
all the funds paid into the treasury went to. He also found that the
caterer's authority was not as much respected as he had a right to
claim, for during the very first meal Frank ate in the mess, a dispute
arose which threatened for a time to end in the whole matter being
carried before the captain.

One of the members of the mess, who was temporarily attached to the
vessel, was a pilot who had been pressed into the service. He was a
genuine rebel, and frequently said that he was called a traitor because
he was in favor of allowing the South to "peaceably withdraw from the
Union." The doctor, a little, fat, jolly man, and a thorough Unionist,
who believed in handling all rebels without gloves, took up the sword,
and the debate that followed was long and stormy. The pilot, as it
proved, hardly knew the reasons why the South had attempted to secede,
and was constantly clinching his arguments by saying, "Men who know
more, and who have done more fighting during this war than you, Doctor
Brown, say that they have a right to do so." The debate waxed hotter and
hotter, until some of the other members of the mess joined in with the
doctor against the pilot, and the caterer, thinking that the noise the
disputants made was unbecoming the members of a well-regulated mess, at
length shouted:

"Silence! Gentlemen, hereafter talking politics in this wardroom is
strictly prohibited."

"Eh?" ejaculated the doctor, who was thoroughly aroused, "Do you expect
us to sit here and listen to a conscript running down the Government--a
man who never would have entered the service if he had not been
compelled to do so? No, sir! I wouldn't hold my tongue under such
circumstances if all the six-foot-four caterers in the squadron should
say so. You are not a little admiral, to come down here and hoist your
broad pennant in this mess-room."

The caterer was astounded when he found his authority thus set at
defiance, and without further parley he retired to his room; and in a
few moments returned with the books, papers, and the small amount of
money that belonged to the mess; laying them on the table, he said:

"Gentlemen, you will please elect another caterer."

The debate was instantly hushed, for not one member of the mess, besides
the caterer just resigned, could have been hired to take the
responsibility of managing affairs. When the officers had finished their
dinner, they walked carelessly out on deck, as if the question of where
the next meal was to come from did not trouble them in the least.
Nothing was done toward an election; no one took charge of the books or
papers, and when the table was cleared away they were thrown
unceremoniously under the water-cooler. The money, however, was taken
care of by the doctor. Dinner-time came, and when Frank, tired and
hungry, was relieved from the deck, he inquired what was to be had to
eat.

"There's nothing been done about it yet," answered the officer who
relieved him. "The steward went to several of the members of the mess,
and asked what they wished served up; but they told him that they had
nothing to do with the caterer's business, and the consequence is, if
you want any thing to eat, you will have to go into the pantry and help
yourself."

Frank was a good deal amused at the obstinacy displayed by the different
members of the mess, and wondered how the affair would end. The mess
could not long exist without some one to take charge of it; but for
himself he was not at all concerned. He had paid no initiation fee,
because no one had asked him for it, and he knew that as long as there
were provisions in the paymaster's store-rooms, there was no danger but
that he would get plenty to eat. He found three or four officers in the
pantry making their dinner on hard-tack, pickles, and raw bacon. They
were all grumbling over the hard fare, but not one of them appeared
willing to assume the office of caterer.

Things went on in this way for nearly a week, (during which time they
had arrived at their station,) and the doctor, who was fond of good
living, could stand it no longer. He went to the caterer who had
resigned, and, after considerable urging, and a solemn promise that
politics should not again be discussed in the mess, the latter was
persuaded to resume the management of affairs. The change from hard
crackers and pickles to nice warm meals was a most agreeable one, and
the jolly doctor, according to promise, was very careful what questions
were brought up before the mess for discussion.

By this time, as we have before remarked, the Boxer had arrived at her
station. Her crew thought they were now about to lead a life of idleness
and inactivity, for not a rebel had they seen since leaving Vicksburg.
But one morning, while the men were engaged in washing off the
forecastle, they were startled by a roar of musketry, and three of the
sailors fell dead upon the deck.

The fight that followed continued for two hours, the rebels finally
retiring, not because they had been worsted, but for the reason that
they had grown weary of the engagement. This was the commencement of a
series of attacks which proved to be the source of great annoyance to
the crew of the Boxer. The guerrillas would appear when least expected,
and the levee afforded them a secure hiding-place from which they could
not be driven, either with big guns or small arms. They were fatal
marksmen, too; and during the week following, the Boxer's crew lost ten
men. One rebel in particular attracted their attention, and his reckless
courage excited their admiration. He rode a large white horse, and
although rendered a prominent mark for the rifles of the sailors, he
always escaped unhurt. He would ride boldly out in full view of the
vessel, patiently wait for someone to expose himself, when the sharp
crack of his rifle would be followed by the report made to the captain,
"A man shot, sir."

Frank had selected this man as a worthy foe-man; and every time he
appeared the young officer was on the watch for him. He was very expert
with the rifle, and after a few shots, he succeeded in convincing the
rebel that the safest place for him was behind the levee. One morning
the foe appeared in stronger force than usual, and conspicuous among
them was the white horse and his daring rider. The fight that ensued had
continued for perhaps half an hour, when the quartermaster reported the
dispatch-boat approaching. As soon as she came within range, the
guerrillas directed their fire against her, to which the latter replied
briskly from two guns mounted on her forecastle. The leader of the
rebels was constantly in view, cheering on his men, and discharging his
rifle as fast as he could reload. Frank fired several shots at him, and
finding that, as usual, they were without effect, he asked the captain's
permission to try a howitzer on him, which was granted. He ran below,
trained the gun to his satisfaction, and waited for an opportunity to
fire, during which the dispatch-boat came alongside and commenced
putting off a supply of stores.

At length the rebel mounted the levee, and reigning in his horse, sat in
his saddle gazing at the vessels, as if not at all concerned. He
presented a fair mark, and Frank fired, but the shell went wild and
burst in the woods, far beyond the rebel, who, however, beat a hasty
retreat behind the levee.

"Oh, what a shot!" shouted a voice through the trumpet that led from the
pilot-house to the main deck. "What a shot--altogether too much
elevation."

"Who's that, I wonder?" soliloquized Frank. "It _was_ a poor shot,
but I'd like to see that fellow, whoever he is, do any better."

After giving orders to have the gun reloaded and secured, he ran into
the wardroom to look after his mail, at the same time inquiring of every
one he met, "Who was that making fun of my shooting?" But no one knew,
nor cared to trouble himself about the matter, for the subject of
conversation was, "We've got a new paymaster."

Frank was pleased to hear this, but was still determined to find the
person who had laughed at his marksmanship, when he saw a pair of feet
descending the ladder that led from the cabin to the pilot-house, and a
moment afterward, a smart looking young officer, dressed in the uniform
of a paymaster, stood in the wardroom, and upon discovering Frank,
thrust out his hand and greeted him with--

"What a shot! Been in the service more than two years, and"--

"Why, Archie Winters, is this you?" exclaimed Frank, joyfully.

"_Paymaster_ Winters, if you please" replied Archie, with mock
dignity.

"How came you here? What are you doing? Got any money?" hurriedly
inquired Frank.

"Got plenty of funds," replied his cousin. "But I say, Frank, how long
has this fighting been going on?"

"Every day for the last week."

Archie shrugged his shoulders, and looked blank.

"I guess I had better go back to Cairo," said he; "these rebels, I hear,
shoot very carelessly. Just before we came alongside here, I was
standing on the deck of the dispatch-boat, and some fellow cracked away
at me, sending the bullet altogether too close to my head for comfort."

"Oh, that's nothing, so long as he didn't hit you. You'll get used to
that before you have been here a week. But, Archie, are you really
ordered to this vessel?"

Archie at once produced his orders, and, sure enough, he was an acting
assistant paymaster, and ordered to "report to the commanding officer of
the U. S. S. Boxer for duty on board that vessel."

During the two years that Archie had been in the fleet-paymaster's
office he had, by strict attention to his duties, worked his way up from
"writer" to corresponding clerk. He had had ample opportunity to learn
the duties of paymaster, and one day he suddenly took it into his head
to make application for the position. He immediately wrote to his
father, informing him of his intention, procured his letters of
recommendation, and a month afterward received the appointment.

Hearing, through Frank, that the Boxer was without a paymaster, he
succeeded in getting ordered to her, and, as he had not written to his
cousin of his good fortune, the latter, as may be supposed, was taken
completely by surprise.

Archie was speedily introduced to the officers of the vessel, who were
pleased with his off-hand, easy manners, and delighted with the looks of
a small safe which he had brought with him, for they knew, by the very
particular orders he gave concerning it, that there was money in it.

At the end of an hour the rebels seemed to grow weary of the fight, for
they drew off their forces; then, as soon as it was safe on deck, the
cousins seated themselves on the guard, to "talk over old times." Frank
gave descriptions of the fights in which he had engaged since they last
met, and also related stories of mess-room life, with which Archie was
entirely unacquainted; and to show him how things were conducted, told
him of the jokes the officers frequently played upon each other.

"Speaking of jokes," said Archie, "reminds me of a little affair I had a
hand in at Cairo.

"While the commandant of the station was absent on a leave, his place
was supplied by a gentleman whom, for short, I will call Captain Smith.
He was a regular officer, had grown gray in the service, and was one of
the most eccentric men I ever saw. He was extremely nervous, too, and if
a steamer happened to whistle while passing the wharf-boat, it would
make him almost wild.

"One day, a man who lived off somewhere in the woods, came down to Cairo
to get an appointment for his son as master's mate. Our office, you
know, was just to the right of the door, and, if there was any thing
that bothered me, it was for some body to stick his head over the
railing when I was busy, and ask, 'Is the commandant of the station in?'
There was an orderly on watch day and night, always ready to answer such
questions, and besides, there was an abundance of notices on the walls
pointing out the different offices; but in spite of this, every stranger
that came in must stop and make inquiries of me.

"Well, this man came into the office, and as he had evidently never been
there before, judging by the way he gaped at every thing, I told him
that it was after office hours, and that he must call again the next
morning about nine o'clock. He took a turn or two across the floor
(by-the-way, he wore squeaking boots, that made a noise like a
steam-whistle), and finally went out.

"The next evening, just as I was locking up my desk, he came in again,
and I repeated what I had told him the night before, that he must come
at nine o'clock in the _morning_--not at night--if he wished to see
the captain, and he went out, after making noise enough with his
squeaking boots to set a nervous man's teeth on edge. Now, would you
believe it, that evening, after I had finished my work, and was starting
out for supper, I saw this man coming up the stairs. He met me with the
usual question, 'Is the captain in?' and I suddenly hit upon a plan to
get rid of him, for I had made up my mind that the man didn't know what
he was about; so I replied:

"'What do you want? Why don't you come here during our office hours, if
you want to see me?'

"I spoke in a gruff voice, and I was so bundled up--for the night was
very cold--that I knew he wouldn't recognize me.

"'I've been busy all day, cap'in,' said he; 'but the fact is'--

"I was afraid that I would be obliged to stand there in the cold and
listen to a long, uninteresting yarn, so I interrupted him.

"'Speak quick, and don't keep me waiting.'

"'Wal, cap'in,' said he, 'I heerd you are in want of officers, an' I
come to get a place for my son; I hear the wages are purty good.'

"'Yes,' I replied, 'we do want officers; but does your son know anything
about a ship?'

"'Oh, yes? He's run the river as deck-hand for goin' nigh on to three
year.'

"'Then he ought to know something, certainly. Come around tomorrow
morning, at nine o'clock exactly, and I'll see what can be done for you.
Now, mind, I say nine o'clock in the morning.'

"Well, the next morning, at the appointed time, to my utter
astonishment, the man was on hand, and, as usual, commenced walking up
and down the floor with his squeaking boots. The noise disturbed
everyone within hearing, and presently the captain, who was in his
office, and so busy that he hardly knew what he was about, spoke in a
sharp tone:

"'Orderly, pull off those squeaking boots!'

"'It isn't me, sir.' said the orderly; 'it's a gentleman out here
waiting to see you, sir.'

"'Then send him in--send him in at once, so that I can get rid of that
noise.'

"The man was accordingly shown into the presence of the captain, while I
listened with both ears to hear what was said.

"'Mornin', cap'in,' he began; 'I reckon I'm here on time.'

"'Time! what time? What do you want?' inquired the captain, who always
spoke very fast, as though he were in a hurry to get through with what
he had to say. 'What do you want, my good man. Be lively now.'

"'Why, cap'in, I come here to get that appointment for my son in this
ere navy.'

"'Appointment! For your son!' repeated the captain. 'Who is he? I never
heard of him.'

"'Wal, really now, cap'in, I'll be shot if you didn't tell me last night
that you would make my son an officer. The wages are good, I hear, an'
as I've a debt to pay off on the farm'--

"'Don't bother me!' interrupted the captain, beginning to get impatient.

"'But, cap'in,' urged the man, 'you can't bluff me off this 'ere way.
You told me last night that you wanted officers; you know I met you on
the stairs, and you promised, honor bright.'

"'Eh!' ejaculated the captain, in surprise,'my good man, allow me to
know what I'm about, will you? _Will_ you allow me to know myself?
Orderly,' he continued, turning to that individual, who had stood by,
convulsed with laughter, which he was vainly endeavoring to conceal,
'orderly, do you think this man is in his right mind?'

"The orderly said he didn't know; but, taking the man by the arm, showed
him out of the office, telling him to come again, when the captain was
not quite so busy.

"The conversation had been carried on in a loud tone, and all the
occupants of the different offices had heard it, and were highly amused,
for they knew that somebody had been playing a joke on the countryman;
but it was a long time before I told anyone of the share I had had in
the affair."




CHAPTER II.

A Night Expedition.


"The captain wishes to see you, gentlemen!" said the orderly, stepping
up and saluting.

The cousins repaired to the cabin, and after Archie had been introduced
to the captain (for being utterly ignorant of the manner in which things
were conducted on shipboard, he had not yet reported his arrival), his
orders were indorsed, and the captain, turning to his desk, ran his eye
hastily over an official document, and said:

"Mr. Nelson, I have received instructions from the admiral to make you
the executive officer of this vessel. Mr. Kearney's resignation has been
accepted, and you will take his place. I am certain, from what I know
and have heard of your past history, that I shall have no cause to
regret the change."

After a few moments' conversation with the captain upon unimportant
matters, the cousins returned to the wardroom.

Frank's constant attention to his duties had again been rewarded, and he
was now the second in authority on board the vessel. All orders from the
captain must pass through him, and in the absence of that gentleman he
became commander. To say that Frank was delighted would but feebly
express his feelings; he was proud of the honor, and determined that he
would prove himself worthy of it. In fact, he had now reached the height
of his ambition, although he had little dreamed that it would come so
soon. He asked nothing more. He had worked hard and faithfully ever
since he had entered the service, but in receiving the appointment of
executive officer he felt amply rewarded.

He was young in years for so responsible a position, but he had no fears
of his ability to perform all the duties required of him, for the
routine of ship life had become as familiar to him as was the road from
Lawrence to his quiet little home on the banks of Glen's Creek. But his
promotion did not affect him as it does a great many who suddenly find
themselves possessed of power. He did not "stand upon his rank," nor in
his intercourse with his messmates endeavor to keep constantly before
their minds the fact that he was the second in command. Those who have
been in the service--especially in the navy--will recall to mind
incidents of this character; but our hero never forgot the respect he
owed to his superiors, and his conduct toward those under him was marked
by the same kindness he had always shown them.

Frank knew that he had something of a task before him. Although he could
now turn into his bunk at night without being called upon to stand his
regular watch, he had more difficult duties to perform. He was
responsible for the manner in which affairs were conducted about decks,
for the neat appearance of the vessel and of the men; and as the former
executive officer had been rather careless in this respect, Frank knew
that his first move must be made in that direction.

For the next two days, as the rebels did not trouble them, Frank worked
early and late, and the results of his labor were soon made apparent.
Every one remarked the improved appearance of the men, who, at the
Sunday morning muster, appeared on deck in spotless uniforms and
well-blacked shoes. After the roll had been called, and the captain, in
company with Frank, proceeded to inspect the vessel, the young officer
knew that his improvements had been appreciated when the former, who was
an old sailor, said, with a smile of satisfaction:

"Mr. Nelson, this begins to look something like a ship, sir. This really
looks like business. The admiral may come here now and inspect the
vessel as soon as he pleases."

The next morning, as Frank sat at the table in the wardroom, engaged in
answering the letters he had received by the dispatch-boat, and Archie
was in his office straightening out his books and papers, a bullet came
suddenly crashing through the cabin--a signal that the rebels had again
made their appearance. Frank, who had become accustomed to such
interruptions, deliberately wiped his pen, corked his ink-stand, and was
carefully putting away his letters, when there was a hurrying of feet in
the office; the door flew open, and Archie, divested of his coat,
bounded into the cabin, exclaiming:

"A fellow can't tell when he's safe in this country. I wish I was back
in the fleet-paymaster's office. I wouldn't mind a good fair fight, but
this thing of being shot at when you least expect it isn't pleasant."

As Archie spoke, he hurriedly seized a gun from the rack, which had been
put up in the cabin in order to have weapons close at hand, and sprang
up the ladder that led into the pilothouse. Frank, although he laughed
heartily at his cousin's rapid movements, was a good deal surprised, for
he had always believed him to be possessed of a good share of courage.
It would, however, have tried stronger nerves than Archie's; but men who
had become familiar with such scenes, who had learned to regard them
merely as something disagreeable which could not be avoided, could not
sympathize with one in his situation, and many a wink was exchanged, and
many a laugh indulged in, at the expense of the "green paymaster."

When Frank had put away his writing materials, he ran below to see that
the ports were all closed; after which he returned to the wardroom, and,
securing a rifle, went into the pilot-house, where he found Archie
engaged in reloading his gun, while the officers were complimenting him
on a fine shot he had just made.

"Mr. Nelson," exclaimed the doctor, as Frank made his appearance, "I
guess your white horseman is done for now. The paymaster lifted him out
of his saddle as clean as a whistle."

Frank looked out at one of the ports, and, sure enough, there was the
white horse running riderless about, and his wounded master was being
carried behind the levee. The officers continued to fire as often as a
rebel showed himself, but the latter seemed to have lost all desire for
fighting, for they retreated to the plantation-house which stood back
from the river, out of range of the rifles, where they gathered in a
body as if in consultation, now and then setting up defiant yells, which
came faintly to the ears of those in the pilot-house.

"They are saucy enough now that they are out of harm's way," said
Archie, turning to his cousin. But the latter made no reply. He stood
leaning on his rifle, gazing at the guerrillas, as if busily engaged
with his own thoughts, and finally left the pilot-house and sought an
interview with the captain.

"I have been thinking, sir," said he, as he entered the cabin and took
the chair offered him, "that if that house out there had been burned
long ago, we should not have had ten men killed by those guerrillas.
They seem to use that building as their head-quarters, and if it could
be destroyed they would cease to trouble us."

"That's my opinion," replied the captain. "But who is to undertake the
job? Who's to go out there, in the face of three or four hundred rebels,
and do it? _I_ can't, with a crew of only fifty men."

"I didn't suppose it could be done openly, sir; but couldn't it be
accomplished by stratagem in the night, for instance?"

The captain shook his head; but Frank, who was not yet discouraged,
continued:

"I have not made this proposition, captain, without thinking it all
over--without taking into consideration all the chances for and against
it--and I still think it could be accomplished."

"Well, how would you go to work?" asked the captain, settling back in
his chair with the air of a man who had made his decision, from which he
was not to be turned.

Frank then proceeded to recount the plans he had laid for the
accomplishment of his object, to which the captain listened attentively,
and when Frank had ceased, he rose to his feet and paced the cabin. He
knew that the young officer had before engaged in expeditions similar to
the one he now proposed, when, in carrying out his designs, he had
exhibited the skill and judgment of a veteran. In the present instance,
his plans were so well laid, that there appeared to be but little chance
for failure. After a few moments' consideration, the captain again
seated himself, and said:

"Well, Mr. Nelson, it shall be as you propose. If you succeed, I am
certain that this guerrilla station will be broken up; if you fail, it
will only be what many a good officer has done before you."

"I assure you, sir, I shall leave no plan untried to insure my success,"
replied Frank, as he left the cabin.

"What's the matter now?" inquired Archie, as his cousin entered the
wardroom. "Been getting a blowing up already?"

"Oh, no!" replied Frank. "Come in here, and I'll tell you all about it;"
and he drew Archie into the office, where he proceeded to tell him all
that had been determined upon. When he had finished, the latter
exclaimed:

"I want to go with you. Will you take me?"

Frank thought of Archie's behavior but a few moments before, and
wondered what use he could possibly be in an expedition like the one
proposed.

"If you do go," he answered, at length, "you'll be sorry for it. It
requires those who are accustomed to such business; and you have never
been in an action in your life. The undertaking is dangerous."

"I don't care if it is," answered Archie. "That's just the reason why I
want to go--to be with you; and I warrant you I'll stick to you as long
as any body."

"Besides," began Frank, "if any thing should happen to you"--

"I'm just as likely to get back as you are," replied Archie, excitedly,
"and I want to go."

After considerable urging, Frank finally asked and obtained permission
for Archie to accompany the expedition, at which the latter was
overjoyed. He was very far from realizing the danger there was in the
undertaking, and had as little idea of what would be required of him as
he had of the moon.

The cousins passed the afternoon in the pilothouse, watching the
movements of the guerrillas through spy-glasses, studying the "lay of
the land," the directions in which the different roads ran--in short,
nothing was omitted which they thought might be useful for them to know.
Just before night a storm set in; the wind blew, and the rain fell in
torrents; and, although Frank regarded it as something in their favor,
under any other circumstances he would have preferred tumbling into bed
to venturing out in it. The hammocks were not piped as usual, but all
hands were to remain on deck during the night, to be ready to lend
assistance in case it was required. At ten o'clock the cutter lay
alongside the vessel, the crew were in their places, and Frank and his
cousin, surrounded by the officers who had assembled to see them off,
stood on the guards ready to start.

"Paymaster," said Frank, turning to his cousin, "hadn't you better
remain on board?" (He addressed him as paymaster, for, of course, it
would have been contrary to naval rules to call him by his given name in
the presence of the captain.)

"No, sir," answered Archie, quickly buttoning up his pea-jacket with a
resolute air. "Do you suppose I'm going to back out now? If you do, you
are mistaken. I'm not afraid of a little rain."

Frank made no reply, but, after shaking hands with the captain and
officers, followed his cousin into the cutter, which floated off into
the darkness amid the whispered wishes for "good luck" from all the
ship's company who had witnessed its departure. Frank took the helm, and
turned the boat down the river. Not an oar was used, for the young
officer did not know but the rebels had posted sentries along the bank,
whom the least splashing in the water would alarm. Archie sat beside his
cousin, with his collar pulled up over his ears, and his hands thrust
into the pockets of his pea-jacket, heartily wishing that Frank had
chosen a pleasanter night for their expedition. For half an hour they
floated along with the current in silence, until Frank, satisfied that
he had gone far enough down the river to get below the sentries, if any
were posted on the bank, gave the order to use the oars, and turned the
cutter's head toward the shore, which they reached in a few moments.

The crew quietly disembarked, and as the sailors gathered about him,
Frank said,

"Now, men, I'm going to leave you here until the paymaster and myself
can go up to the house, and accomplish what we have come for. Tom," he
added, turning to the coxswain of the cutter, "you will have charge of
the boat, and remember you are in no case to leave her. We may be
discovered, and get into a fight. If we do, and are cut off from the
river and unable to get back, I'll whistle, and you will at once answer
me, so that I may know that you hear me, and pull off to the vessel.
We'll take care of ourselves. Do you understand?"

The crew of the cutter were old sailors--men who had followed the sea
through storm and sunshine all their lives. They had been in more than
one action, too, during the rebellion, and had gladly volunteered for
the expedition, supposing that they were to accompany Frank wherever he
went. During the short time the latter had been on board the Boxer, they
had become very much attached to him. Although he was a very strict
officer, and always expected every man to do his duty promptly, he
always treated them with the greatest kindness, and never spoke harshly
to them. This was so different from the treatment they had usually
received at the hands of their officers, that it won their hearts; and,
although they admired his courage, they would have felt much better
pleased had they received orders to accompany him.

"Don't you understand, Tom?" again asked Frank, seeing that the coxswain
hesitated.

"Oh, yes, sir," replied the sailor, touching his hat; "I understand,
sir. But, Mr. Nelson, may I be so bold as to ask one question--one
favor, I may say?"

"Certainly; speak it out," answered Frank, who little imagined what
thoughts were passing through the minds of his men. "What is it? Do you
wish to go back to the ship, and leave us here alone?"

"No, sir," answered all the men in a breath.

"Mr. Nelson," said the coxswain, "I never yet refused duty because there
was danger in it, and I'm too old a man to begin now. You have here,
sir, twelve as good men as ever trod a ship's deck, and you know, sir,
that when you passed the word for volunteers for this expedition, you
didn't have to call twice. But we all thought that we should go with you
to the end; and, to tell the truth, sir, we don't like the idea of you
and the paymaster going off alone among them rebels. You are sure to get
into trouble, and we want to go with you."

On more than one occasion had Frank been made aware of the affection his
men cherished for him, and he felt as proud of it as he did of the
uniform he wore; but he had never been more affected than he was on the
present occasion.

"Men," he answered, in a voice that was none of the steadiest, "I assure
you I appreciate the interest you take in my welfare, and were I going
to fight, I should certainly take you with me; but sometimes two can
accomplish more than a dozen. Besides, I promised the captain that I
would leave you here, and I must do so. Now, remember and pull off to
the vessel if you hear me whistle."

"Yes, sir," replied the coxswain; "but it'll be the first time I ever
deserted an officer in trouble."

The sailors were evidently far from being pleased with this arrangement,
but they were allowed no opportunity to oppose it, even had they felt
inclined to do so, for Frank and his cousin speedily disappeared in the
darkness.




CHAPTER III.

Archie in a Predicament.


As soon as the young officers had reached the top of the bank, they
paused to take their bearings, and to select some landmark that would
enable them to easily find the boat again. Away off in the darkness they
saw the twinkling of a light, which they knew was in the house which the
guerrillas were using as their head-quarters.

"Now, Archie," said Frank, "take a good look at this big tree here"
(pointing to the object in question) "so that you will know it again.
The boat lies in the river exactly in a line with that tree. Now, if you
should be separated from me and discovered, make straight for the
cutter. But if you are cut off from it, run up the river until you get a
little above where the vessel lies, and then jump in and swim out to
her. Do you understand?"

"Yes," replied Archie.

"Be careful of your weapons," continued his cousin, "and keep them dry
and ready for instant use. Don't be captured--whatever you do, don't be
captured!"

"I'll look out for that," answered Archie "But, Frank," he continued,
"why did you tell the men to pull back to the vessel if we should be cut
off from the river? I should think that would be just the time you would
want them to remain."

"Why," replied Frank, "the very first thing the rebels would think of,
if we were discovered, would be to capture our boat, and while part of
them were after us, the others would run to the river and gobble up
boat, crew, and all. Then they would know that we were still on shore,
and would scour the country to find us. But if the boat goes off to the
vessel, the rebels will be more than half inclined to believe that we
have gone off too, and, consequently, will not take the pains to hunt us
which they would do if they _knew_ we were still on shore. But let
us be moving; we've no time to waste."

Frank started toward the house, carefully picking his way over the wet,
slippery ground, now and then pausing to listen, and to reconnoiter as
well as the darkness would permit, and finally stopped scarcely a
stone's throw from the building. Not a guerrilla had they seen. Not
dreaming that the "yankee gun-boatmen" would have the audacity to attack
them when they knew the rebels were so far superior in numbers, the
latter had neglected to post sentries, and Frank was satisfied that
their approach had not been discovered.

"Now, Archie," said he, as they drew up behind a tree for concealment,
"you stay here, and I'll see if I can set fire to that house."

"There are people in it," said his cousin; "I just saw a man pass by
that window where the light is."

"Then they must look out for themselves," answered Frank. "That's what
we have to do when they shoot into our cabin. Now, you stay here, and if
you hear any shooting, run for the boat."

"What will _you_ do?" asked Archie.

"Oh, I'll take care of myself. Good-bye."

As Frank spoke he moved silently toward the house, and was soon out of
sight.

"Now," soliloquized Archie, "I am to stay here, am I? That's what I was
ordered to do, but I don't know whether I'll obey or not. It is evident
Frank left me here to keep me out of harm's way. Perhaps he thinks that
because I have never smelt powder, I am a coward; but I'll show him that
I am not."

So saying, Archie stepped out from behind his tree, and walked slowly
toward the house. When he arrived opposite the window from which the
light shone, he stopped and looked in. He did not, however, go up close
to the window, or he certainly would have been seen; but he remained
standing at a respectful distance, so that he would have some chance for
escape, in case he should be discovered.

The sight that met his gaze would have been sufficient to deter most men
from attempting to burn the house. The room was filled with men, some of
whom were lying on the floor on their blankets, others sitting around
the table, and one or two were walking about the apartment. In the
corner stood their arms, ready to be seized at a moment's warning. And
this was but one of the rooms; perhaps the whole house was filled with
guerrillas.

"My eye!" said Archie to himself, "what a hornet's nest would be raised
about our ears, if we should be discovered."

His heart beat faster than usual, as he moved back from the window, and
walked silently around to the other side of the house. Here also was a
window, from which a light shone, and as, like the other, it was
destitute of a curtain, every thing that went on within could be plainly
seen by Archie, who took his station behind some bushes that stood at a
little distance from the house. The room had three occupants, whom
Archie at once set down as officers. One of them carried his arm in a
sling. He was a tall, powerful-looking man, and Archie recognized in him
the daring rider of the white horse--the chief of the guerrillas.

"I wonder what the old chap would say if he knew I was about," thought
Archie--"I, who gave him that wound. I'd be booked for Shreveport,
certain."

He was interrupted in his meditations by the movements of the officers,
who arose and approached the door, bringing their chairs with them. The
storm had ceased, and as there was no longer any necessity of remaining
in the house, the rebels were, no doubt, moving to cooler quarters.
Archie at once thought of retreating; but the thought had scarcely
passed through his mind, when the door opened, the rebels walked out on
the portico, and seating themselves in their chairs, deposited their
feet on the railing; while the young officer stretched himself out
behind the bush, heartily wishing that he could sink into the ground out
of sight.

"A very warm evening, colonel," said one of the rebels, fanning himself
with his hat.

"Very," answered the guerrilla chief, gently moving his wounded arm,
little dreaming that the one who gave him that wound was at that very
moment lying behind the bushes into which he had just thrown the stump
of his cigar. "It's very warm. I wish I had that rascally Yank that shot
me," he added, "this wound is very painful."

Archie upon hearing this was almost afraid that the beating of his
heart, which thumped against his ribs with a noise that frightened him,
would certainly reveal to the rebels the fact that the "rascally Yank"
was then in their immediate vicinity.

"But, if our plans work," continued the colonel, "in less than a week
from this time they will all be on the way to Shreveport."

"May I ask, colonel," said the one who had not yet spoken, "how soon
those boats will be ready?"

"Major Jackson reports that they will be finished by to-morrow night,
and it will take all of one day to run them down the creek to the
river."

"Then by Thursday evening," said the one who had first spoken, "we may
be ready to make the attempt."

"Yes, if the night is favorable."

"But, colonel, all these gun-boats are supplied with hot water, and
that, you know, is the worst kind of an enemy to fight. Men will run
from that who wouldn't flinch before cold steel."

"Oh, we must take the Yanks by surprise, of course. The boats will hold
fifty men each, and we must drop down the river so that we will land one
on each side of the vessel. If the night is dark--and we shall not make
the attempt unless it is--we can get within pistol-shot of her before we
are discovered, and by the time their men get fairly out of bed she's
ours. Hark! what noise was that?"

The rebels listened for a moment, and one of them replied:

"I didn't hear any thing."

"Well, _I_ did," returned the colonel, "and it sounded very much
like some one shouting for help. I'm certain I heard it."

Archie, who lay in his concealment, trembling like a leaf, was also
confident that _he_ had heard something that sounded like a call
for assistance. What if it was Frank in danger, and shouting to the
cutter's crew for help? The thought to Archie was a terrible one, and he
forgot the dangers of his own situation, and thought only of his cousin.
But if Frank was in trouble, why did he not give the signal to the
cutter's crew? Archie waited and listened for it, but did not hear it
given.

While these thoughts were passing through his mind, the rebels sat on
the portico listening, and at length the colonel said:

"I know I hear something now, but it is the tramping of a horse. I
suppose it is Tibbs, coming with the mail."

The colonel's surmise proved to be correct, for in a few moments a man
rode up, and dismounting so close to Archie that the latter could have
touched him, tied his horse to the very bush which formed his
concealment; then, throwing a pair of well-filled saddle-bags across his
shoulder, he ran up the steps, saying:

"Good evening, gentlemen. What! colonel, are you wounded?" he added, on
seeing the rebel's bandaged arm.

"Yes; this makes four times I have been shot while in the service. But
how is the mail?"

"Rather heavy," answered the man. "If you have any letters to go, you
will have to furnish another bag--these are full."

"All right," said the colonel; then raising his voice, he called out,
"Bob! Bob! Where is that black rascal?"

"Heyar, sar," answered a voice, and presently a negro came around the
corner of the house, and removing his tattered hat, stood waiting for
orders.

"Bob," said the colonel, "tell Stiles that the mail is all ready to go
across the river."

_Stiles!_ How Frank would have started could he have heard that
name! He would have known then, had he not before been aware of the
fact, that he was again among _Colonel Harrison's Louisiana
Wild-cats_.

The negro, in obedience to his orders, disappeared, but soon returned,
with the intelligence that Stiles was not to be found.

"Not to be found," echoed the colonel; "that's twice he has failed me.
But this mail must not be delayed. Tell Damon I want to see him."

The negro again disappeared, and in a few moments came back with a
soldier, to whom the colonel said:

"Damon, here's a mail that must go across the river to-night. Can you
pull an oar?"

"Yas," replied the man.

"Then get some one to go with you, and start at once. The skiff, you
know, is in the creek, just above where that Yankee gun-boat lies."

"Yas," answered the man again, as he took the mail-bags which the
colonel handed him.

"This one," continued the rebel, pointing to a small canvas bag which
one of his officers had just brought out of the house--"this one
contains my mail--all official documents, to go to Richmond. Be careful
of it. Don't let the Yankees get hold of you."

"No," replied the soldier, as he shouldered the mail and disappeared.

The conversation that followed, of which Archie heard every word, served
to convince him that, although the rebels kept up a bold front, and
appeared sanguine of success in their attempts to destroy the
Government, yet among themselves they acknowledged their cause to be
utterly hopeless unless some bold stroke could be made to "dishearten
the Yankees."

In spite of Archie's dangerous situation, which had tried his nerves
severely, he listened to every word that was uttered, and even became
interested in what the rebels were saying. Now and then he was called to
a sense of his situation by the movements of the horse, which, being
restive, came very near stepping on him as he pranced about.

Damon had been gone about half an hour, and the colonel had just
commenced explaining to the man who had brought the mail the manner in
which the capture of the Boxer was to be effected, when suddenly the
report of a pistol startled every one on the portico. A moment afterward
came another, which was followed by a yell of agony.

"What's that?" exclaimed the colonel, springing from his chair in alarm.
"Are we attacked? Get out there, every mother's son of you!" he
continued, as the men, having been aroused by the noise, came pouring
out of the rooms in which they were quartered. "Every man able to draw a
saber get out there! Run for the river! That's where the reports
sounded, and if there are any boats there capture them. That will keep
the Yankees on shore, and we can hunt them up at our leisure!"

The men ran out of the house and started for the river at the top of
their speed, at the same time yelling with all the strength of their
lungs, while the colonel and his officers ran into their room, and
hastily seizing such weapons as came first to their hands, followed
after. To describe Archie's feelings, as he lay there behind that bush
and listened to the sounds of pursuit, were impossible. The noise the
rebels made seemed to bewilder him completely, for he lay on the ground
several moments, it seemed to him, without the power to move hand or
foot.

Suddenly the thought struck him that now was the time to accomplish the
object of the expedition. The house was deserted, and the yells, which
grew fainter and fainter, told him that the rebels were getting further
away. Yes, it was now or never. In an instant, Archie's courage and
power of action returned. Springing to his feet, he ran to the end of
the portico, on which were piled several bales of hay and bundles of
fodder, which the rebels no doubt intended for their horses. But Archie
determined that they should be put to a different use, for he quickly
drew from his pocket two large bottles filled with coal oil, which he
threw over the hay. He then applied a match, and in an instant it was in
a blaze. He waited a moment to see it fairly started, and then sprang
off the portico. As he passed the door, he heard an ejaculation of
surprise, followed by the report of a pistol, and the noise of a bullet
as it whizzed past his head. It frightened him, and at the same time
acted upon him as the crack of a whip does upon a spirited horse; for
when the rebel who fired the shot had reached the portico, Archie had
disappeared in the darkness.




CHAPTER IV.

A Mark for the Union.


Let us now return to Frank, whom we left setting out for the house,
after having given Archie emphatic instructions to remain behind the
tree until his return. He did not feel at all at his ease after he had
left his cousin, for he might have stationed him in the most dangerous
place that could have been found; and what if Archie should be
discovered and captured? He was well enough acquainted with his cousin's
disposition to know that he would not surrender without a fight; but
what could he do when opposed by a regiment of veteran rebels? Frank
thought not of his own peril, for that was something he had fully
expected to encounter before he started. This was not the first time he
had voluntarily placed himself in danger; but with Archie the case was
different; and Frank was several times on the point of returning to his
cousin and making use of his authority, as commander of the expedition,
to send him back to the boat. By the time these thoughts had passed
through his mind, he had reached a log-cabin which stood at a little
distance from the house; and as he halted behind it, to shelter himself
from the storm, still debating upon the course he ought to pursue in
regard to Archie, some one inside the cabin commenced singing--

  "I'll lay ten dollars down
  And chuck 'em up one by one!"



If there was any more of the song, the rebel evidently did not know it,
for he kept singing these two lines over and over, now and then varying
the monotony of the performance by whistling. Frank stood for some
moments listening to him, and finally began moving cautiously around the
cabin, to find some opening through which he could look and see what was
going on inside. He presently discovered a hole between the logs, and,
upon looking in, saw a man seated on the floor before a fire-place, in
which burned some pine knots, engaged in whittling out an oar with his
bowie-knife. On the floor near him lay one evidently just finished. At
the opposite side of the room stood a bag, from the mouth of which
peeped several letters.

A thought struck Frank--which would be of the most benefit, to burn the
house or to capture the mail, which might contain information of the
greatest importance? Undoubtedly the latter would be of the most
consequence. Then he debated long and earnestly upon the chances of
escaping with the mail, should he attempt its capture. The man who had
charge of it was a most powerful-looking fellow, who knowing the
importance of his trust, and the certainty of receiving prompt and
effective assistance from his comrades, would, no doubt, fight most
desperately, unless he could be taken at disadvantage and secured before
he had time to think of resistance. Besides, the cabin was scarcely
fifty feet distant from the house, which Frank knew was filled with men,
for he could hear them walking about the rooms and talking to each
other. The least unusual noise would certainly alarm them, in which case
escape would be entirely out of the question Frank, we say, thought over
all these things, and finally coming to the conclusion that it would be
worse than useless to attempt the capture of the mail, turned his
attention to the house. How was he to set fire to it?

Frank, we know, was not wanting in courage, but he had learned, by
experience, that there are times when "discretion is the better part of
valor." When he proposed the expedition, he had not expected to find the
entire regiment quartered in the house. He had supposed that the men
would find sleeping-rooms in the negro quarters, which were nearly a
half mile back, while the house would be reserved for the officers. But
the rebels surely would not remain up all night, and when they had all
gone to bed would be the time to execute his purpose. He would not
abandon his project until he had given it a trial, or fully satisfied
himself that the undertaking was utterly impracticable. For the present,
he would remain where he was; something might "turn up" which would be
to his advantage.

At this moment a man entered the cabin, the door of which stood open,
and inquired:

"Going over to-night, Stiles?"

Frank was thunderstruck, and he now saw the necessity of attempting
nothing unless it promised complete success. As the reader has already
learned, he was among his old enemies, the Wildcats. Upon making this
discovery he was both astonished and alarmed--astonished, for it seemed
to him that he could scarcely make a move in any direction without being
confronted by the redoubtable Wild-cats. This was the second time he had
found himself among them before he was aware of it. He was alarmed,
because he knew, by experience, the treatment he would receive if he
should fall into their hands without the prospect of an immediate
exchange.

But his attention was again drawn to the men in the cabin.

"Yes," replied Stiles, in answer to his companion's question, "I'm going
over to-night--allers makin' due 'lowance for bein' ketched by the
Yanks."

"Here's some mail, then," continued the man, thrusting several letters
into the bag. "How soon do you start?"

"Jest as soon as Tibbs comes with the up-country mail, an' I get the
kernel's letters. Was you takin' a chaw of tobaker, Bob?"

"No, I wasn't," replied the other, quickly thrusting his hand into his
pocket, as if to protect the precious article. "Tobacco is scarce."

"Now, Bob," said Stiles, "I know you've got some. Me an' you's allers
been good friends."

The rebel could not withstand this appeal, although he produced his
"plug" very reluctantly, and as he handed it to his companion, said:

"Stiles, you're a dead beat. Go easy on that, now, if you please,
because it's all there is in the regiment."

The rebel cut off a huge piece of the weed, and, thrusting it into his
cheek, went on with his work, while Bob returned to his quarters. He had
scarcely quitted the cabin before Frank had all his plans laid. He would
go back after Archie, and together they would lie in wait on the bank of
the river, and, if possible, capture that mail. With this determination,
he was moving slowly away from the cabin, when a door, which he had not
before noticed, suddenly opened, and Stiles came out, and turning the
corner, stood face to face with Frank, and scarcely an arm's length from
him. With the latter, retreat without discovery was, of course,
impossible. There was but one course he could pursue, and that presented
but a small chance for success. He was, however, allowed no time for
deliberation, for the rebel, quickly recovering from his surprise,
turned to run; but with one bound Frank overtook him, and throwing him
to the ground, caught him by the throat, stifling a cry for help that
arose to his lips. This it was that had alarmed the colonel and Archie;
and had the former investigated the matter, Frank would again have been
a prisoner in the hands of the Wild-cats.

Stiles struggled desperately to free himself from the strong grasp that
held him, until Frank pulled one of his revolvers from the pocket of his
pea-jacket and presented it at his head.

"Do you surrender?" he asked, releasing his hold of the rebel's throat.

"Yes," replied Stiles, faintly. "Don't shoot, Yank!"

"You shall not be harmed if you behave yourself. Have you any weapons?"

"No! They are all in the shanty!"

Frank, after searching the rebel's pockets and satisfying himself of the
truth of this statement, continued:

"Get up! Now, I know you have friends all around you, but if you have
the least desire to live, you'll not make any noise; although you may
alarm the camp, it will not save you. Do you understand?"

"Have I got a pair of ears?" asked the rebel.

"Well, if you have, you hear what I say," returned Frank. "Now go this
way," he added, pointing toward the river.

The rebel, who had a wholesome fear of the revolver which Frank held in
his hand, ready cocked, obeyed, without the slightest hesitation, and
they reached the bank of the river, where the cutter lay, without being
discovered.

"Now," said Frank, "I want to ask you a few questions. Where do you keep
the boat in which you were going to carry that mail?"

"In the creek, jest above where that ar' gunboat lies, replied Stiles."

"How many of you were to go?"

"Two--me an' another feller."

"Well, now, the colonel won't find you when he wants you. What will he
do?"

"Oh, he'll send some body else. The mail must go, an' it makes no odds
who takes it, so long as he don't get ketched."

"That's all I want to know," said Frank. Then, going to the top of the
bank, he called out:

"Tom, come up here!"

The coxswain soon made his appearance, and Frank said:

"Now, Stiles, you're a prisoner."

"Dog gone ef I keer," he replied, "so long as I get plenty of grub an'
tobaker."

The rebel was marched down the bank, and Frank again bent his steps
toward the house, intending to find his cousin, and, with his
assistance, to capture the mail. When he arrived at the tree where he
had left Archie, the latter was not to be seen. This, however, did not
give him any uneasiness, for Archie, he thought, had doubtless gone back
to the cutter. Frank had already made up his mind to go back after him,
when he saw a man walk up to the cabin in which he had first discovered
the man who was now his prisoner, and heard him call out:

"Massa Stiles! de mail all ready, sar!"

Receiving no answer, the negro walked into the cabin, but finding it
vacant, went out to make the report to the colonel that Stiles was not
to be found. From this Frank knew that he had no time to lose. Stiles
had told him that some one else would be sent with the mail, and as it
was all ready, a man would soon be found to take his place. If he went
back after Archie, he might be too late. He must attempt it alone, and
unaided. Walking out from behind the tree, he started toward the creek,
where lay the boat in which the mail was to be carried.

The creek he found without difficulty; but the boat was evidently hidden
away, for he searched up and down the bank for it without success. If he
found it, it was his intention to cut it loose, and allow it to drift
out into the river, thus depriving the rebels of the means of carrying
their mail. But failing in this, he ran up the bank, and awaited the
coming of the rebels. It was a hazardous undertaking to attempt the
capture of two men, both of whom were, no doubt, well armed; but Frank
had great confidence in the _looks_ of his revolvers, and hoped to
accomplish his object without alarming the rebels in the house.

He had waited perhaps a quarter of an hour, when he heard footsteps
approaching, and presently he discovered the two men for whom he had
been watching. One carried the mail-bags, and the other a pair of oars,
the same, no doubt, which Stiles had but a short time before completed.
Frank waited until they were almost upon him, and then sprang up with a
revolver in each hand, which he pointed straight at the heads of the
men, exclaiming:

"You're my prisoners. Don't make any resistance."

The rebels were astonished, and the man who carried the mail-bags threw
them down and held his arms above his head, in token of surrender. But
the other, after regarding the officer for a moment, as if to make sure
that it was a human being with whom he had to deal, dropped his oars,
and before his captor was aware of his intention, drew a pistol and
fired. Frank felt a sharp pain in his left shoulder, and the revolver
which he held in that hand fell from his grasp. He had received his
first wound, but although thoroughly frightened, he did not lose his
presence of mind. If he had, he would soon have been recalled to a sense
of his dangerous situation, for the rebel again cocked his revolver; but
this time Frank fired first, and the rebel sank to the ground with a
loud yell. In an instant Frank turned upon the other; but he appeared to
be too much under the influence of fear to lend his comrade any
assistance.

All thought of concealment was now out of the question. The rebels in
the house had, of course, been alarmed, and Frank's only chance for
escape with his prisoner and the mail was to reach the cutter as soon as
possible, and pull off to the vessel. Hastily relieving the prisoner of
his weapons, he directed him to pick up the mail and follow the course
he pointed out.

The prisoner did as he was ordered; but they had not gone far when a
loud yelling announced that the rebels in the house had been alarmed,
and were in pursuit. Frank kept close behind his prisoner, who, through
fear of the revolver, ran at a rapid rate, but they had further to run
to reach the cutter than the guerrillas, and the latter gained rapidly.
The prisoner, who was not long in discovering this, slackened his pace
considerably, although he appeared to be doing his utmost. Frank,
however, was not deceived. Thrusting his revolver into his pocket, he
seized the rebel by the nape of the neck, and helped him over the ground
in a manner more rapid than agreeable. Had the man been aware of the
fact that his captor had but one arm that he could use, he might not
have submitted so quietly as he did. Frank, whose whole mind was wrapped
up in the idea of saving his prisoner and the mail, did not stop to
think of this, but pushed his man ahead to such good advantage that they
succeeded in reaching the cutter before their pursuers. He marched the
rebel down the bank in the most lively manner, and tumbled him into the
boat, where he was instantly seized and secured.

The sailors, who had heard the noise of the pursuit, and waited
impatiently for the appearance of their officer, were all in their
places, and as Frank sprang in, he shouted:

"Shove off--lively now, lads!"

The cutter was speedily pushed from the shore, and the oars got out and
handled by twelve strong fellows, all good oarsmen.

"Let fall--give away together," again commanded Frank, who, in spite of
the pain of his wound, began to chuckle over his good luck in securing
the mail. "The rebs will give us a volley," he continued, "unless we get
out of sight in the darkness before they reach the bank. So, pick her
up, lads, and walk right away with her."

The sailors, understanding the order, and rejoicing in the escape of
their young officer, whose safety and well-being they regarded as
infinitely of more importance than their own, gave way manfully on the
muffled oars, which made no sound as they bent beneath the sturdy
strokes, and the cutter flew noiselessly through the water, The rebels
reached the bank but a few moments after the cutter had left, but
neither seeing nor hearing any thing of her, they contented themselves
with uttering their yells, and firing a volley into the darkness in the
direction they supposed the boat had gone.

But their attention was soon called to another quarter, for a bright
flame shot up from the house. The boat's crew saw it, and could scarcely
refrain hurrahing; but knowing that they were not yet out of range of
the guerrillas' rifles, they gave vent to their jubilant feelings by
redoubling their efforts at the oars.

"Mr. Nelson," whispered the coxswain, "may I be allowed to say that was
well done, sir!"

"I didn't do that, Tom," answered Frank, in a faint voice, as he gazed
in surprise at the burning house, and thought of his cousin. "Is
Paymaster Winters in the cutter?"

Frank hardly dared to ask the question, for if his cousin had been in
the boat he would have known it before that time.

"The paymaster!" repeated the coxswain; "no, sir. He went away with you,
sir, and I haven't seen him since. He's missing, that's a fact."

Frank felt ready to faint on hearing this, and very bitterly did he
censure himself for allowing his cousin to accompany him! But regrets
were useless; the mischief had been done, and could not be undone. He
had one hope, however, to which he still clung--that Archie might be on
board the vessel. Perhaps, not daring to attempt to find his way back to
the cutter, through fear of capture, he had swam on board and was now
safe. He would soon know.

In a few moments they had reached the Boxer, and as the cutter came
along side, Frank seized the mail-bags and sprang out. After giving the
officer of the deck, who met him at the gangway, instructions in regard
to the prisoners, he ran up the stairs that led to the wardroom. Here he
met the captain, who, taking him familiarly by the arm, led him into the
cabin, exclaiming:

"Mr. Nelson, I congratulate you, sir; it was well done, sir! The house
is all in a blaze."

"Captain," said Frank, "I didn't do that, sir. Is the paymaster on
board?

"Why, no, sir; not unless he came with you."

"I haven't seen him, captain, since I left him within a short distance
of that house. If he is not on board, sir, he's out there yet, and he
has fired the building."

"Why, Mr. Nelson," exclaimed the captain, for the first time noticing
Frank's pale face and useless hand, from which the blood was dripping,
"you are wounded, sir. Orderly, orderly, send the doctor here at once."




CHAPTER V.

A Run for Life.


Archie was as light of foot as an antelope, and fear lent him wings. In
obedience to his cousin's instructions, he ran up the river, directing
his course through a thick woods, jumping over logs and making his way
through the bushes with a rapidity that surprised himself. The rebel who
had discovered him followed for a short distance, but finding that he
was losing ground, he stopped and fired his revolver in the direction he
supposed Archie had gone; but the bullets went wide of the mark, and the
latter, who now regarded his escape as a thing beyond a doubt, laughed
when he thought how cleverly he had accomplished the object of the
expedition.

Having reached a safe distance from the house, he stopped and listened.
He distinctly heard the crackling of flames, and presently a bright
light shone over the trees. The building was fairly in a blaze. He was,
however, allowed scarcely a moment to congratulate himself, for the
yells of the guerrillas plainly told him that they had discovered the
fire, and were commencing pursuit. Archie again set out, intent on
reaching clear ground as soon as possible, for he knew that no plan
would be left untried to capture him. His situation was still any thing
but a pleasant one, but he was sanguine of reaching the vessel in
safety, until a long-drawn-out bay came echoing through the woods, and
drove the blood back upon his heart. The rebels were following him with
a blood-hound!

For a moment Archie staggered as though he had been struck a severe blow
by some unseen hand, but quickly realizing the fact that his safety
depended upon his own exertions and the use he made of the next few
moments, he speedily recovered his presence of mind, and hastily
securing his revolvers, which, up to this time, he had carried in the
pockets of his pea-jacket, he pulled off that garment, and throwing it
on the ground, started off at the top of his speed.

Being thus relieved of a great incumbrance, he made headway rapidly,
but, fast as he ran, he heard that dreadful sound coming nearer, mingled
with loud yells of triumph from the pursuing rebels He had, with
surprise and indignation, listened to Frank's description of his run
from Shreveport, when he and his companions had been pursued with
blood-hounds, little imagining that he would ever be placed in a similar
situation.

And how did it happen that he had not aroused the hound while he was
about the house? Had he moved so silently that the animal had not heard
him, or had he been in the building with the men? This question Archie
could not answer. But one thing was certain, and that was that the hound
was, at that very moment, on his trail, and unless he soon reached the
river his capture was beyond a doubt. He, however, had no fears of being
overpowered by the hound. He fully realized the fact that he would soon
be overtaken, and had resolved to shoot the animal the moment he made
his appearance.

The yells of the rebels grew fainter, and Archie knew he was gaining on
them. This gave him encouragement. In fact, since the hound had opened
on his trail, after the first momentary feeling of terror had vanished,
he had retained his coolness in a remarkable degree, and had counted
over his chances for capture and escape with surprising deliberation for
one who had never before been placed in so exciting and dangerous a
situation. We have seen that he felt fear. Had it been otherwise he must
have possessed nerves of steel, or have been utterly destitute of the
power of reasoning; but that fear did not so completely overpower him as
it had but a short time before, when he lay behind the bush, and
listened to the guerrilla's plan for the capture of the Boxer and her
crew. On the contrary, it nerved him to make the greatest exertions to
effect his escape.

In a few moments, to his great joy, he emerged from the woods and
entered an open field, across which he ran with redoubled speed.
Directly in front of him was another belt of timber, and beyond that lay
the river, which, if he could reach, he would be safe. The baying of the
hound had continued to grow louder and louder, and, when Archie had
accomplished perhaps half the distance across the field, a crashing in
the bushes and an impatient bark announced, in language too plain to be
misunderstood, that the hound had discovered him.

In an instant he stopped, faced about, and drew one of his revolvers.
Stooping down close to the ground, he finally discovered the hound,
which approached with loud yelps, that were answered by triumphant
cheers from the pursuing rebels. Waiting until the animal was so close
to him that he presented a fair mark, Archie raised his revolver and
fired. The hound bounded into the air, and, after a few struggles, lay
motionless on the ground. Scarcely waiting to witness the effect of the
shot, the young officer sprang to his feet, and again started for the
river. The yells of the rebels--who had heard the shot, and knew, from
the silence that followed, that the hound was dead--again arose fierce
and loud; but Archie, knowing that his pursuers had now lost the power
of following him with certainty, considered the worst part of the danger
as past.

But he had to deal with those who could not be easily deceived. Colonel
Harrison, knowing that the only chance for escape was by the river, had
lined the banks with men, and, as Archie neared the woods, a voice
directly in front of him called out:

"It's all up now, Yank! Drop that shootin'-iron, or you're a gone
sucker!"

Archie's heart fairly came up into his mouth. He had little expected to
find an enemy in that quarter, but, without waiting an instant, he
turned and ran up the river again, hoping that he might soon be able to
get above the sentinels. The rebel, hearing the sound of his footsteps,
and knowing that he was retreating, shouted:

"Halt, Yank! halt! or I'll shoot--blamed if I don't!"

And he _did_ shoot, and Archie heard the bullet as it sung through
the air behind him.

The rebel, without stopping to load his gun, started in pursuit; but
Archie, who was running for his life, soon left him behind. As the
latter ran he heard shots fired on all sides of him, showing that he was
completely surrounded.

Escape seemed utterly impossible; and fearing that he might run into the
very midst of the guerrillas when he least expected it, he threw himself
behind a log in the edge of the woods, and awaited the issue of events
with feelings that can not be described. He now had little hope of being
able to elude his pursuers, who, he was certain, would keep the river
closely guarded until daylight, when they would soon discover his
hiding-place. He could not go on without fear of running against some of
his enemies, in the dark, and to remain where he was, appeared equally
dangerous. But of one thing he was certain--and as the thought passed
through his mind, he clutched his revolvers desperately--and that was,
if he was captured, it would require more than one man to do it.

Presently he heard footsteps approaching, and two rebels came up. One of
them he knew, by his voice, was the very man who had just fired at him.

"I know he went this yere way," said he.

"Wal, hold on a minit," said the other, panting loudly; "let's rest a
leetle--I'm nigh gin out;" and he seated himself so close to Archie
that, had it been daylight, he would certainly have been discovered.

"I'll be dog-gone," said the one who had first spoken, "ef this 'ere
night's work don't beat all natur'. Them ar Yanks ain't no fools, dog ef
they ar!"

"Who'd a thought it?" returned his companion. "Them ar two fellers come
out here an' burn a house with more'n three hundred men in it? Dog-gone!
But how did that other feller get away?"

"Oh, he had a boat," answered the other, "an he got thar afore we could
ketch him. He's on board his gun-boat afore this time. I jest ketched a
glimpse of him as he was goin' down the bank. He had Damon by the neck,
an' he was makin' him walk turkey, now I tell yer."

"Damon ketched!" ejaculated his companion. "An' what's come on the
kernel's mail?"

"Gone up--the hul on it! Damon's got the bracelets on by this time. But
come, let's go on."

All this while the rebels had been coming up, and Archie could hear them
in the woods, on all sides of him, yelling and swearing, like demons. He
had one source of consolation, however--his cousin was safe; and,
judging by the rebels' conversation, he had not gone back to the vessel
empty-handed.

Archie lay for some time listening to the movements of the rebels,
almost afraid to breathe lest it should be overheard, when he was
suddenly startled by a stunning report, which was followed by a hissing
and shrieking in the air; a bright light shone in his eyes for an
instant, and the next, the woods echoed with the bursting of a shell.
The guerrillas had scarcely time to recover from their astonishment when
there came another, and another, each one followed by groans and cries
of anguish that made the young officer shudder.

Frank Nelson had gained the Boxer in safety, and although surprised and
alarmed at the absence of Archie--who, he thought, would make the best
of his way back to the vessel when left to himself--he knew by the
yelling of the rebels, and the pistol-shots that were occasionally
heard, that they had not yet captured him. The noise of the chase
plainly told the Boxer's crew that the fugitive was making the best of
his way up the river, and Frank had opened fire on the rebels to create,
if possible, a diversion in his cousin's favor. His shells were thrown
with fatal accuracy, and the guerrillas, taken completely by surprise,
and having no levee to protect them, beat a hasty retreat.

Although threatened by a new danger, Archie was so overjoyed that he
could scarcely refrain from shouting, and as soon as he was satisfied
that his pursuers were out of hearing, he crawled from his concealment
and ran toward the river. The shells still kept dropping into the woods
at regular intervals, making music most pleasant to Archie's ears, for
he knew that as long as the fire was continued, his chances for escape
were increased. But in his eagerness he never thought of the men who had
been posted on the bank, and as he dashed through the woods, several
shots were fired at him by the rebels concealed in the bushes. But he
reached the water in safety, and struck out for the vessel. A few random
shots were fired at him, which Archie heard as they whistled past him;
but his good fortune had not deserted him, and he again escaped unhurt.
The reports of the guns on board the Boxer pointed out the direction in
which he was to go, and in a quarter of an hour he was within
hailing-distance of the vessel. The splashing he made in the water soon
attracted the attention of the sentry on the forecastle, who, having
been instructed by Frank, had kept a good look-out. A rope was thrown to
Archie, who was pulled on board the vessel in a state of complete
exhaustion.

Frank was soon informed of the safe return of his cousin, and Archie,
almost too weak to speak plainly, was carried to his room, where, after
being divested of his wet clothes, he was put to bed, and left in a
sound sleep. The next morning, however, he appeared in the mess-room, as
lively as ever, and none the worse for his long run; while Frank, who
began to suffer from his wound, was confined to his bed.

The latter listened to his cousin's narration of the part he had borne
in the expedition, and in admiration of Archie's bravery, forgot the
lecture he had intended to administer. The officers, who had not
expected such an exhibition of courage in one whose cheek had blanched
at the whistle of a rebel bullet, were astonished, and it is needless to
say that no more jokes were indulged in at the expense of the "green
paymaster."

For two months Frank held his position as executive officer of the
Boxer, during which time the vessel was twice inspected by the admiral.
He now had little to do beyond the regular routine of ship duties, for
the guerrilla-station had been broken up by the burning of the
plantation-house, and vessels were seldom fired into on the Boxer's
beat. But this was not to continue long, for, one day, the dispatch-boat
brought orders for him to report on board the Michigan--which lay at the
mouth of Red River--as executive officer of that vessel.

This was still another advancement, for the Michigan was an iron-clad,
mounted fourteen guns, and had a crew of one hundred and seventy men.
But Frank would have preferred to remain in his present position. After
considerable hard work, he had brought the Boxer's crew into an
admirable state of discipline; every thing about decks went off as
smoothly as could be desired, and besides, Archie was on board, and he
did not wish to leave him. But he never hesitated to obey his orders,
and as soon as he had packed his trunk, and taken leave of his
messmates, he went on board the dispatch-boat, and in a few days arrived
at his new vessel.

The captain of the Michigan had written to the admiral, requesting that
a "first-class, experienced officer" might be sent him for an executive,
but when Frank presented himself and produced his orders, that gentleman
was astonished. After regarding the young officer sharply for a moment,
he said:

"The admiral, no doubt, knows his own business, but let me tell you,
young man, that you have no easy task before you."

He no doubt thought that a person of Frank's years was utterly incapable
of filling so responsible a position. The latter, with his usual
modesty, replied that he would endeavor to do his duty, and after he had
seen his baggage taken care of, he went into the wardroom, where he
found a young officer seated at the table reading. He arose as Frank
entered, and thrusting out his hand, greeted him with--

"I'm glad to meet you again, Mr. Nelson, and among friends, too."

It was George Le Dell, the escaped prisoner, whom he had met during his
memorable flight from Shreveport. Frank had not seen him, nor even heard
of him, since he had left him on board the Ticonderoga; but here he was,
"among the defenders of the Old Flag" again, in fulfillment of the
promise he had made his rebel father, in the letter which Frank had read
to his fellow fugitives in the woods, where they had halted for the day.
He was not changed--his face still wore that sorrowful expression--and
Frank found that he rarely took part in the conversation around the
mess-table. He was an excellent officer, the especial favorite of the
captain, and beloved by all his messmates, who, very far from suspecting
the cause of his quiet demeanor, called him "Silence."

Frank heartily returned his cordial greeting, and the two friends talked
for a long time of scenes through which they had passed
together--subjects still fresh in their memories--until the entrance of
an officer put a stop to the conversation. Frank understood, by this,
that he was the only one of the ship's company who knew any thing of
George's past history.

The change from the cool, comfortable quarters of the Boxer to the hot
wardroom of the ironclad was not an agreeable one; but Frank was not the
one to complain, and he entered upon his duties with his accustomed
cheerfulness and alacrity. He was allowed very little rest. The captain
of the Michigan--which was the flag-ship of the third division of the
squadron--was a regular officer, who believed in always keeping the men
busy at something, and Frank was obliged to be on his feet from morning
until night. The decks were scrubbed every day, the bright work about
the guns and engines cleaned, the small boats washed out, and then came
quarters, and drilling with muskets or broad-swords. After this, if
there was nothing else to be done, the outside of the vessel was
scrubbed, or the chimneys repainted. In short, the Michigan was the
pattern of neatness, and her crew, being constantly drilled, knew
exactly what was required of them, and were ready for any emergency.

For several months little occurred to relieve the monotony of ship-life
beyond making regular trips from one end of their beat to the other; but
when spring opened, gun-boats and transports, loaded with soldiers,
began to assemble, and preparations were made for the Red River
expedition. At length every thing was ready, and one pleasant morning
the gun-boats weighed their anchors and led the way up the river.

Frank stood on deck as the vessels steamed along, and could not help
drawing a contrast between his present position and the one in which he
was placed when he first saw Red River. Then, he and his companions were
fugitives from a rebel prison; they had been tracked by bloodhounds, and
followed by men at whose hands, if retaken, they could expect nothing
but death. He remembered how his heart bounded with joy on the morning
when he and his associates, in their leaky dug-out, had arrived in sight
of the Mississippi. Then, he was ragged, hatless, and almost shoeless,
weary with watching, and living in constant fear of recapture. Now, he
was among friends, the Old Flag waved above him, and he was the second
in command of one of the finest vessels in the squadron.

The passage up the river was without incident worthy of note, and in a
short time they arrived at the obstructions which the rebels had placed
in the river nine miles below Fort De Russy. A vast amount of time and
labor had been expended upon these obstructions, but they were speedily
cleared away, and the fleet passed on. They had expected a stubborn
resistance at the fort, but it had been captured by the army after a
short engagement, and the gun-boats kept on to Alexandria.




CHAPTER VI.

Frank turns Detective.


A day or two after the arrival of the fleet at Alexandria, it became
known that several persons belonging to the rebel secret service were
hovering about in the vicinity of the village, with the intention of
destroying some of the vessels by torpedoes--contrivances made to
resemble pieces of coal--which were to be placed in those barges out of
which the boats were supplied with fuel. By some means the names of
these persons became known to the admiral, who issued a general order,
calling on all the officers of the squadron to kill or capture them
wherever found.

The same day the order was issued Frank obtained shore liberty, and
while roaming about the town, espied a name on a sign that immediately
attracted his attention. It was one of the names borne in the general
order.

"There's one of the rascals, now," soliloquized Frank, "or, rather,
where he has been. I wonder where he is. I'll see if I can't find out
something about him. If he could be caught, he would be put in a place
where he wouldn't lay any more plans to blow up Union gun-boats."

The sign which had attracted his attention bore the name and occupation
of the individual in question--"S. W. ABBOTT, Chemist."

The store had been closed on the approach of the Union forces, and was
now in the possession of several army surgeons and their assistants, who
were overhauling its contents, and appropriating whatever they thought
might be of service to them. A negro was leaning against the counter,
and of him Frank inquired--

"Boy, do you belong here?"

"No, sar," he answered, indignantly; "I 'longs nowhar. I'se a free man,
I is. I'se a soger."

"Never been in this town before?"

"No, sar."

Frank left the store, and walked slowly up the street toward the hotel,
wondering where he could go to make inquiries concerning the man whom he
wished to find. It was evident that this was the hardest task he had yet
undertaken. He knew the rebel's name, and that was all. He had no idea
how he looked, and, although the admiral's order stated that he was
loitering about the village, he might, at that moment, be fifty miles
away, or Frank might have already passed him on the street.

There were several men dressed in butternut clothes hanging about the
hotel, and Frank determined to enter into conversation with one of them,
and, if possible, learn something about Abbott. An opportunity was soon
offered, for one of the butternuts approached him, and inquired--

"Got any Northern money--greenbacks?"

"Some," replied Frank.

"Wal," continued the man, "I'll give you five dollars in Confederate
money fur one dollar in greenbacks. Is it a bargain?"

"Confederate money!" repeated Frank. "Of what use would it be to me? And
I am greatly mistaken if it will be of use to you much longer."

"Wal, I want your money fur a keepsake," replied the man. "I know you-uns
don't like our money, but we-uns hev got to use it or go without any,"

"Well, I'll trade," said Frank. "Your paper will no doubt be a curiosity
to the folks at home." As he spoke, he produced the dollar, and the
butternut drew out of his capacious pocket a huge roll of bills--tens,
twenties, and fifties, enough to have made him independent if it had
been good money--and selecting a five-dollar bill, handed it to Frank,
who thrust it carelessly into his pocket.

"I'll allow that you-uns don't seem to be a bad lot of fellers," said
the butternut; "but I don't see what you-uns want to come down hyar to
fight we-uns for. We-uns never done nothing to you-uns."

"Every rebel I meet says the same thing," said Frank. "But who were the
richest men in this place before the war broke out?"

The man mentioned several names, among which was that of Abbott, the
chemist.

"Abbott, Abbott," repeated Frank, as if trying to recall the man to
mind; "I've heard that name before. Is he a Northern man?"

"No; he's allers lived at the South. His house is right back of the
hotel, third door from the corner, on the right-hand side as you go up
the street."

Frank had learned something, but he did not think it safe to question
the man further, for fear of exciting his suspicions; so, after a few
unimportant remarks, he turned on his heel and walked into the hotel,
which was used as the army head-quarters. Here he remained for nearly
half an hour, to give the man of whom he had received his information
time to leave the place, and then directed his steps toward Mr. Abbott's
dwelling. He had no difficulty in finding it, for he followed the
butternut's directions, and the rebel's name was borne on the
door-plate. The house, however, was deserted; the blinds were closed, as
were those of all the neighboring houses. Mr. Abbott, with his family,
if he had any, had doubtless removed out of reach of the Union forces.
Did he ever visit his home when in town? or did he make his
head-quarters somewhere else? were questions that suggested themselves
to Frank, but which, of course, he could not answer; neither did he dare
to question any of the citizens, for they might be Mr. Abbott's friends,
who would not fail to inform him that particular inquiries were being
made, which would lead him to act more cautiously. Frank did not know
what plan to adopt, but walked listlessly about the streets until he
heard the Michigan's bell strike half-past three o'clock. He must be on
board by four, as the admiral was to be there to inspect the vessel. He
was reluctant to leave without having accomplished any thing more than
the discovery of the rebel's dwelling; but there was no help for it, and
he walked slowly toward the landing, where he found a boat waiting for
him.

That night, although he retired early, he slept but little, but tossed
restlessly about in his bunk, endeavoring to conjure up some plan by
which he might capture the rebel; and when he fell asleep, he dreamed
about the subject uppermost in his mind. He thought that, after several
days' patient watching, he finally discovered his man; but all attempts
to capture him were unavailing. When he pursued, the rebel would
disappear in a magical way, that was perfectly bewildering. Finally, he
dreamed that the rebel assumed the offensive, and one day he met him in
the street, carrying in his hand something that looked like a lump of
coal, which he threw at Frank. It proved, however, to be a torpedo, for
it exploded with a loud report, and as Frank sprang over a fence that
ran close by the sidewalk, to escape, he came violently in contact with
the walls of a house. At this stage of his dream he was suddenly
awakened. To his no small amazement, he found himself stretched on the
floor of his room, his head jammed against the door, through which one
of the wardroom boys, a very small specimen of a contraband, was
endeavoring to escape, while the look of terror depicted on his face,
and the energy with which he strove to open the door, showed that he had
sustained something of a fright. On the opposite side of the room stood
the doctor, who gazed at Frank for a moment with open mouth and eyes,
and then threw himself on the bed, convulsed with laughter.

Frank rose slowly to his feet, and commenced drawing on his clothes,
while the little negro disappeared through the door like a flash.

"Mr. Nelson," said the doctor, as soon as he could speak, "you can't
make that jump again, sir. I came in to awaken you," he continued, "and
was just going to put my hand on you, when you sprang out of your bunk
upon your trunk, and then back again; and just as the darkey was coming
in, you made another jump, and landed against the door, frightening him
so that I actually believe he turned pale. Were you dreaming?"

"Yes," answered Frank, with a laugh; "I was getting out of the way of a
torpedo."

"Well, you certainly jumped far enough to get out of the way of almost
any thing," replied the doctor, after he had indulged in another hearty
fit of laughter. "Hurry up; breakfast is nearly ready."

Frank felt the effects of his agility in the shape of a severe pain over
his left eye, which had been occasioned by his head coming in contact
with the door-knob, and his "big jump" was the source of a good deal of
merriment at the breakfast-table.

Frank went ashore in the ten-o'clock boat, and, after strolling about
with his companions for a short time, invented a satisfactory excuse for
his absence, and started toward Mr. Abbott's house, which, to his joy,
he found open, with a negro engaged in sweeping the steps.

"Boy, who lives here?" he inquired.

The negro gave the desired information, adding: "He ain't hyar though,
but missus will be home dis arternoon."

"Where's your master?"

"Oh, he done gone off somewhar. I 'spects he don't like for to see you
Yankee sogers hyar."

As the negro ceased speaking, having finished his work, he turned and
went into the house, while Frank was about to move away, wondering what
was the next thing to be done, when a boy approached and opened the
gate.

"What do you want?" asked Frank.

The boy held up a letter which he carried in his hand, and Frank, seeing
that it was addressed to Mrs. Abbott, at once concluded that it
contained information which might be of the greatest value to him.

"It is all right," said he; "I'll attend to it;" at the same time taking
the note and handing some money to the boy, who departed well satisfied.
Frank then walked down the street, and, as soon as he was out of sight
of the house, opened the letter and read as follows:

HEYWARD'S PLANTATION, _March_ 20, 1864.

"Will be at home at eight o'clock this evening. Have my baggage ready to
start for Shreveport early in the morning."

No name was signed to the note, but Frank was certain that he now had
the matter in his own hands, and that any preparations Mrs. Abbott might
make for her husband's journey to Shreveport would only be thrown away.
He at once directed his steps toward the landing, hailed his vessel for
a boat, and when he had arrived on board and reported to the captain,
showed that gentleman the note, at the same time requesting permission
to remain on shore after dark, in order to capture the rebel.

"I should be only too happy to allow you to do so, Mr. Nelson," said the
captain, "for you seem to be particularly fortunate in every thing of
this description you undertake. But, as it is the admiral's order that
all officers repair on board their vessels at sundown, he must be
consulted in regard to the matter. Orderly, tell the officer of the deck
to have the gig called away. We will go up to the flag-ship," he
continued, "and talk to the admiral."

The gig was soon manned, and after Frank had buckled on his sword (for
all officers visiting the flag-ship were required to wear their
side-arms), he stepped into the boat with the captain, and in a short
time they were in the presence of the admiral. The captain, in a few
words, explained the nature of the visit, showed him the note Frank had
intercepted, and ended by repeating the young officer's request that he
might be allowed to remain on shore after dark.

"Certainly," replied the admiral, "certainly. If you succeed, young man,
we shall have one less of these secret-service fellows to fear." Then,
turning to one of his clerks, he gave him an order which Frank did not
hear, after which he asked:

"How did you discover the whereabouts of this man Abbott, Mr. Nelson?"

Frank then proceeded to give the admiral an account of all he had done,
how he had seen the rebel's name on the sign, learned his residence, and
secured the note. To all of which the latter listened with attention.

"I hope you will succeed in capturing him," said he. "If you do, bring
him here; I want a look at him. Here," he continued, as his clerk handed
him a letter, "is a request that the provost-marshal will furnish you
with a pass. Good luck to you, young man."

Their business being finished, Frank followed the captain out of the
cabin, and returned on board the Michigan.

All that afternoon Frank was in a fever of excitement. He was impatient
for the night to come, that he might know whether or not his attempt was
to be crowned with success. A hundred things might happen to prevent it.
The rebel might not come home, or the note might have been written with
the intention of having it intercepted, in order to throw the one into
whose hands it might fall on the wrong scent; or it might be written in
cipher, and mean directly opposite to what Frank had supposed. But he
consoled himself with the thought that he had done, and would still
continue to do, all in his power to obey the admiral's general order,
and if he failed, the blame would not rest with him.

When the sundown boat was called away, Frank, after exchanging his
uniform for a citizen's dress, and his cap for a tattered slouch-hat,
thrust a revolver into his pocket, stepped into the cutter, and was soon
set on shore. He walked directly to the office of the provost-marshal,
which was in the hotel, and finding that officer at his desk, handed him
the admiral's note, which ran as follows:

  "U. S. FLAG-SHIP BLACKHAWK,
  "OFF ALEXANDRIA, LA., March 20, 1864.


"SIR:--Please furnish the bearer, Acting Ensign Frank Nelson, with a
pass. He has important business to perform, which may detain him on
shore most of the night, and it is absolutely necessary, for the
successful accomplishment of his mission, that he should not be
interfered with.     Very respectfully, your obd't serv't.,

                           DAVID D. PORTER, _Rear Admiral_,
                                       Com'd'g Miss. Squadron.
  U. S. Provost Marshal,
                Alexandria, La.


"Your business must be important indeed, judging by the language of this
note," said the marshal. "You shall not be troubled."

While he was speaking he had been writing an order commanding "all
guards and patrols to allow the bearer the freedom of the city, as he
was under special orders from the admiral, and must not be detained."

"There," said he, after he had finished the pass and handed it to Frank.
"That will take you through all right. You have my best wishes for your
success."

Frank thanked him, and putting the pass carefully away in his pocket,
walked out of the hotel fully satisfied on one point, and that was, if
his success depended upon the good wishes of his friends, failure was
impossible. He walked slowly down the street toward the place where the
soldiers were encamped; for as it lacked fully an hour and a half of the
appointed time, he did not wish to be seen loitering about the house, as
it might excite the suspicions of its inmates, who would not fail to
send word to Mr. Abbott that the house was being watched. Time moved
altogether too slowly for the impatient young officer, but at length he
heard the flag-ship's bell strike half-past seven, and as it had begun
to grow dark, he walked toward the house, and took his station in the
shadow of some trees on the opposite side of the street. At the end of
an hour his patience was rewarded, for he heard the sound of approaching
footsteps, and a man passed by the house. Frank knew, from the
suspicious manner in which he gazed about, that if it was not the man
for whom he was waiting, it was some other guilty fellow who ought to be
secured. Presently he returned, and after again looking cautiously about
him, ascended the steps and knocked lightly at the door, which was
almost instantly opened, and a voice exclaimed:

"Massa Abbott, I'se glad to"--

The rest of the sentence Frank did not hear, for the moment the man
entered the hall, the door was closed again. Now was the time for Frank,
who hastily crossed the street, and noiselessly ascended the steps. Here
he paused for a moment to draw his revolver, and then suddenly opened
the door and sprang into the hall. He was met by the negro, the same, no
doubt, whom he had heard welcoming his master, who, not liking the looks
of the huge six-shooter which the officer flourished before his eyes,
beat a hasty retreat. Frank kept on and entered the parlor, where he
found his man standing in the middle of the floor, pale and breathless.
No one else was in the room.

"Mr. Abbott," said Frank, "you're my prisoner!"

The man, who was so terrified that he seemed to have lost even the power
of speech, surrendered his weapons and submitted to his captor, who led
him out of the house and toward the flag-ship, which they reached in
safety. The admiral received Frank with great cordiality, and after
listening to his account of the manner in which the capture of the
prisoner had been effected, he ordered the cutter called away, and the
young officer, rejoicing over his success, was sent on board his vessel.




CHAPTER VII.

Frank's First Command.


The next morning, just after quarters, while the officers were getting
ready to go on shore, a boat from the flag-ship came alongside, and the
officer in charge of it was shown into the cabin, as he said he had
business with the captain. Frank, who thought he had accomplished
sufficient to satisfy him to remain on board, sat in the wardroom
reading, when the orderly entered and informed him that the captain
desired his presence in the cabin.

"Mr. Nelson," said he, "here's an order from the admiral, directing me
to furnish you with a cutter and an armed crew, and to send you to the
flag-ship for orders. I am also instructed to appoint an executive to
fill your place during your absence. I expect you will be sent off on
some expedition; so you had better prepare for a long trip."

The officer who brought the order having returned to his vessel, the
captain accompanied Frank on deck, and ordered the second cutter to be
called away and furnished with a crew well armed. In a short time the
boat was ready, and Frank, buckling on his side-arms, took leave of the
captain and started toward the flag-ship, wondering what duty he was now
called upon to perform, and fully determined that whatever orders he
might receive, however dangerous or difficult, should be executed, if
within the bounds of possibility.

When he arrived on board the Blackhawk, an officer, who appeared to be
waiting for him, conducted him into the cabin, where the admiral sat
writing at his desk.

"Good morning, Mr. Nelson," said he; "take a chair, sir."

Frank took the seat pointed out to him, and the admiral, taking from his
desk a bundle of papers, carefully tied up, continued:

"It has always been my habit, Mr. Nelson, not to let a brave or skillful
action pass unrewarded, any more than I would allow a bad one to pass
unpunished. I am now about to give you a much more important, and
perhaps dangerous, commission than has yet been intrusted to you. This
package contains official documents of the greatest importance, and I
want you to go down the river, and deliver it to the commanding naval
officer, whom you will find at Acklen's plantation, opposite the mouth
of Red River. I know there are rebels all along the banks, but whatever
you do, don't allow these letters to fall into their hands. There are
iron weights in the package, and if you should be in danger of capture,
throw it overboard. You will take passage on the army transport that now
lies at the stern of this vessel, all ready to start. I send the cutter
and armed crew with you, for the reason that the rebels may sink the
transport, in which case you can escape in your boat; for those letters
must go through, if possible; perhaps the success of this expedition
depends upon them. The transport, you will find, is in command of a
second-lieutenant. I should feel much safer if I could put one of my own
officers in charge, but, as the boat belongs to the army, I have no
authority in the matter. After you have executed your orders, return, by
first opportunity, to your vessel, and report to me by letter. Now, sir,
you may go, for they are waiting for you. Remember, I say the success or
failure of this entire expedition may depend upon you; and don't forget
that you are the young man that saved the Milwaukee."

Frank bowed himself out of the cabin, sprang into the cutter, and
started toward the transport that lay alongside of the bank, a short
distance below the flag-ship. As he stepped on board, he was met by a
flashy-looking young lieutenant, dressed in a brand-new uniform, who
greeted him with the inquiry:

"Are you ready at last? I have been waiting an hour for you. Business is
business, you know, and when I command a ship, I don't like to be
detained."

The lieutenant said this, probably, to impress upon Frank's mind the
important fact that he was the captain of the steamer, and must be
respected and obeyed accordingly. Frank, who knew that he was not
subject to the orders of the lieutenant only so far as the safety of the
vessel was concerned, replied that he had come as soon as he could after
he had received his orders, and turning to his men, directed part of
them to make the cutter fast to the stern of the steamer, and the others
to carry their arms to the boiler-deck, where they could be readily
seized in case of emergency. The transport was a small side-wheel boat
belonging to the quarter-master's department. The deck-hands were all
soldiers--perhaps half a dozen of them in all--the only steamboatmen on
board being one pilot, four engineers, and as many firemen. The steamer
was armed with two howitzers, mounted on the boiler-deck, and the
muskets of the soldiers were stacked in the cabin. The boilers were
protected by bales of cotton, which were piled on the guards, and the
pilot-house was defended in the same manner. A few bales were also
placed on the boiler-deck to serve as a breastwork. The whole was under
the command of the lieutenant, who, judging by the orders he issued,
knew nothing whatever of the management of a boat.

Frank had been on board but a few moments, when the engineer's bell
rang, to inform the pilot that all was ready for the start. The boat was
made fast by a single line, which ran from the forecastle to a tree on
the bank, and the gang-plank was out. The lieutenant's first order was,
"Haul in that plank." The soldiers obeyed, and then came the command for
"somebody to run out there and untie that line."

One of the soldiers sprang ashore and began trying to cast off the line,
which was drawn as taut as a four-mile current could make it. He worked
for several moments, but, of course without success (for the line should
first have been slackened up on board), and then called out:

"Loosen up that other end, there!"

"No, no!" replied the lieutenant, "that would allow the boat to swing
away from the bank, and then how would you get on board? It must be
untied from that tree first."

What difference it could possibly make in regard to the boat's swinging
away from the bank, whether the line was first slackened up on shore or
on board, Frank could not determine.

He was astonished at the lieutenant's ignorance, and amused at his novel
mode of casting off a line, while the sailors, who had gathered in a
group on the forecastle, watched the operation with a smile, wondering
how the affair would end, as they knew that the line could not be
"untied" from the tree unless first slackened up on board. But the
lieutenant seemed to have his own idea of the manner in which it ought
to be accomplished, and was constantly ordering the man to "Hurry up,
there!" The soldiers worked and pulled, but all to no purpose, and the
lieutenant, becoming impatient, ordered two more of the men to his
assistance. But the knot, which had been awkwardly made, was jammed, and
resisted their utmost efforts.

"I never did see such a clumsy set of fellows," said the lieutenant, at
length, turning to Frank, who stood beside him, making use of his
handkerchief to conceal his laughter. "We ought to have been two miles
down the river by this time."

It was evident that he was fast becoming disgusted with his first
attempt at "steamboating," but was too proud to ask advice. At length he
turned and walked into the cabin, muttering, "I guess they will get it
untied before night." But Frank was unwilling to wait so long. The delay
was entirely unnecessary, and he had begun to get impatient.

"Men," said he, addressing himself to the cutter's crew, who were
convulsed with laughter, "some of you run out that gang-plank, and
another slack up that line."

These orders were promptly obeyed, and the difficulty was easily
overcome.

"All gone, sir," shouted Frank to the pilot, meaning that the line was
cast off, and in a few moments the transport swung off from the bank,
and was plowing her way down the river. Frank leaned over the railing,
and wondered how a man so utterly ignorant of the management of a
steamer, as was the lieutenant, came to be put in command, and at a
time, too, when they might be placed in situations that would call into
requisition all the skill and judgment of experienced men. He did not at
all like the appearance of the young commander, for he was of the type
of officers known as "upstarts," who like to show their authority, but
are without the ability to successfully fill even the post of corporal.
What if the transport should be fired upon and disabled? It was evident
that in such an emergency nothing could be expected of a man who could
not cast off a line. Frank's commission was too important to be
intrusted to the care of such a man, and the young officer felt that he
would much rather step into the cutter, and trust to the skill and
courage of his twelve sailors, than to remain on board the transport.
Calling the coxswain on deck, he directed that if they were attacked,
the cutter should be kept ready for instant use, and in case the vessel
was disabled, they would attempt to finish their journey in her. After
giving these orders, Frank went up into the pilot-house, where he found
the man at the wheel in no enviable state of mind.

"I'm glad to see you," said he, as Frank entered, "for I want to talk to
you. I'm not at all pleased with the looks of our skipper," he went on
to say, "and how he came to be placed in command is a mystery to me.
Perhaps the quarter-master thinks, like a good many men who see the
Mississippi River for the first time, that any body can take charge of a
steamboat; but suppose we should run aground--what does that lieutenant
know about sparring off? or what if something about the engine should
let down? why, we might go forty miles down the river before he could
get us tied up to the bank. Besides, if we are fired upon, he'll
surrender. Now, mark my words, he'll surrender before he will fight, and
I'm opposed to that, for I was a prisoner once."

"So was I," said Frank, "and I don't mean to fall into the rebels' hands
again, if I can help it. I'll never be surrendered. That lieutenant may
not fight, but I think his men will, and I have twelve good fellows, all
well armed, on whom I know I can depend."

"Then I feel better," said the pilot. "That's talk I like to hear; for
if we are not disabled, we'll go through all right. There goes the bell!
Go down and get your dinner."

Frank deposited his weapons on a bench in the pilot-house and ran down
into the cabin, where he found the lieutenant and two engineers seated
at the table. The former seemed to have forgotten his failure of the
morning, for he talked a good deal in a condescending manner, as if
addressing his inferiors; and to Frank's inquiry if he expected trouble
from the rebels, replied that he had not given the matter a moment's
thought; that if they did attack the vessel, it would not be the first
time he had smelt powder, and if the engineers and pilot could be
depended upon, he had no fears but that he should be able to take the
boat safely through. Frank replied that he trusted the officers would
not be found wanting in courage; and when he had finished his meal, he
went on deck again, and surprised the pilot, by offering to relieve him
while he went down to his dinner. In his spare moments Frank, who wisely
regarded it as the duty of every officer to acquaint himself with every
part of the management of a vessel, had learned to handle the wheel, and
he was an excellent steersman. He could make a landing or get a boat
under way, as well as the most experienced pilot; and in the present
instance he was fully capable of steering the boat, for as the water in
the river was high, there was no danger of getting out of the channel.

The pilot gave him his place, and after watching the movements of the
young officer, who handled the wheel with all the confidence of an old
river man, he went below to his dinner, satisfied that he had left the
boat in safe hands. Frank remained at the wheel most of the afternoon,
for the pilot, who would be on watch all night, had gone to bed to
obtain a few hours' rest. About four o'clock, however, he made his
appearance, and Frank went down into the cabin, and was engaged in
reading a newspaper, when he heard the pilot shout through the trumpet
to the engineers:

"Here they are! Now, push her ahead strong. There's a battery just
below."

At the same moment there was a rush of feet on deck, and the lieutenant
entered the cabin pale and breathless.

"We're captured," said he, in a faint voice. "We're surrounded. The bank
is black with rebels--ten thousand of them at least! It's no use to
think of fighting."

As he ceased speaking, he ran on deck again, followed by Frank, who
found his men drawn up behind the cotton-bales, with their weapons in
their hands, waiting for orders. The soldiers had cast loose the
howitzers, and stood at their posts. The lieutenant stopped a moment,
just long enough to say, "Boys, we're all captured!" and then ran into
the pilot-house. As Frank stood talking to his men, and encouraging them
with the famous words that never fail to nerve an American
seaman--"Don't give up the ship!"--a rebel rode out on the bank, in full
view of the steamer, and shouted:

"Come ashore here, or we'll sink you."

Frank looked toward the pilot-house, where the lieutenant had taken
refuge, and waited to hear his answer. To his surprise and horror, he
saw a hand extended waving a white handkerchief, and the coxswain
exclaimed:

"Mr. Nelson, he's surrendering us, sir!"

With one bound Frank sprang up the steps that led to the pilot-house,
caught the handkerchief and threw it overboard; and at the same moment
the lieutenant was seized from behind and thrown to the deck. He
instantly recovered his feet, and turning fiercely upon Frank and the
pilot, exclaimed:

"What are you about? Do you know that you have rendered yourselves
liable to a court-martial? I'm commander of this vessel, and I'll shoot
the first man that resists my authority!"

"You shall never surrender us," said Frank, firmly, not the least
intimidated by the other's threat. "If you will give orders for your men
to prepare for action, no one will oppose you. We'll stick to you as
long as a plank of this vessel remains above water."

"I know my own business," replied the lieutenant. "Resistance is
useless. We never could get by that battery, and I'm going to surrender
to save our lives. Turn her toward the shore, pilot!"

As he spoke, he walked out on deck, and calling out to the rebel, who
had continued to follow the vessel:

"I'll surrender! Pilot, I tell you to turn her in toward the shore."

The pilot gave a glance at Frank, and reading in his face a firm
determination to go through if possible, held the boat's head down the
stream, while a murmur of indignation arose from the men on the lower
deck, and the coxswain said, turning to his companions:

"Sink my tarry wig, if that ar' chap ain't going to give us up without
our having the least bit of a fight."

Frank stood for a moment irresolute. Ought he to oppose the lieutenant,
the lawful commander of the vessel? Was it his duty to stand by and
allow himself and his men to be surrendered without even a show of
resistance? And his dispatches, the importance of which the admiral had
stated in such emphatic language, should he throw them overboard,
instead of delivering them, as he had hoped to do, to the officer to
whom they were addressed? No! Sooner than do that, he would put the
cowardly lieutenant under arrest, and give the command to the pilot, a
man whom he knew understood his business, and would not think of
surrender until it had been clearly proved that successful resistance
was entirely out of the question.

While these thoughts were passing through Frank's mind, the boat, under
an increased head of steam, had been rapidly nearing the battery, which
could be distinctly seen about half a mile below, planted on the bank of
the river.

"Come ashore, if you surrender," shouted the rebel.

"Pilot," said the lieutenant, in a weak voice, "I order you"--

He never finished that order, for Frank seized him, and pulling him into
the pilot-house, closed the door. He made an attempt to draw a revolver,
but the pilot threw him to the deck, when Frank wrested the weapon from
him and retained it in his possession.

"All ready forward there?" he shouted to the men on the boiler-deck.

"Ay, ay, sir," answered the coxswain. "Mr. Nelson's in command," he
added, turning to his companions. "Douse my to'-gallant top-lights but
we'll have a skirmish now sure."

"Do you surrender?" shouted the man on the bank.

The reply he received was a shot from the pilot's revolver, which made
him beat a hasty retreat. He had scarcely disappeared when a cloud of
men arose from behind the levee, and a volley of bullets rattled into
the boat. It was answered by a shout of defiance from the men behind the
cotton-bales; but the pilot, who stood just in front of Frank, staggered
for a moment, and sank heavily to the deck. Frank was horrified. With
that man at the wheel, he had entertained no fears of their ability to
run by the battery; but now that he was left alone, with the duties of
both commander and pilot devolving upon him, his hopes fell again. But
he could not remain long inactive, for the boat, being without a guide,
began to swing toward the shore. Hastily seizing the wheel, he turned
her head down the river again, when the battery opened upon them, and a
storm of shells plunged into the water and whistled through the air
about the boat. Only one struck her, and that passed through one of the
smoke-stacks, and bursting, demolished part of the roof of the
pilothouse. Then, as fast as the guns could be loaded, the battery
played upon the transport, and Frank heard the shells crashing through
the cabin and exploding in the air above him. But he stood bravely at
his post, his only fears being of his inability to turn the point on
which the battery was planted, or that one of the shells might penetrate
the cotton-bales and strike the boilers or some part of the machinery.
But as he neared the battery, he discovered that the boat was struck
less frequently; that the rebels, in their excitement, were firing
wildly. His own men, cool and collected, encouraged by the example of
their officer, had not yet fired a shot; but when the boat arrived
opposite the battery, they opened upon it with the howitzers and small
arms with terrible effect. The point, which extended into the bend where
the battery stood, was long and sharp, a bad place for one unaccustomed
to handling a boat; but Frank passed it in safety, under a full head of
steam, and cheers of triumph arose from his men, which the rebels
answered with yells of rage, and continued to follow the transport,
sending bullets and shells after her as fast as they could reload. But
they were speedily left behind, and their yells died away in the
distance.

Frank's dispatches were safe.




CHAPTER VIII.

An unlucky fight.


As soon as Frank was certain that the rebels had given up the pursuit,
he called two of his men on deck, and directed them to carry the pilot,
who now began to show signs of returning consciousness, into the cabin.

During the fight the lieutenant had remained behind one of the
cotton-bales, where the pilot had thrown him, so completely overcome
with fear that he did not think of renewing his attempts to enforce his
authority. But now that the danger was over, he arose to his feet and
walked out of the pilot-house. As the sailors came up, in obedience to
Frank's order, they passed the lieutenant without giving the customary
salute, and acted as though they considered him beneath their notice.
They lifted the pilot tenderly in their arms, carried him down stairs,
and laid him on his bed.

There was no surgeon on board, and Frank was anxious to reach a gun-boat
as soon as possible, in order to place the pilot, who was the only one
injured, under the care of a medical man. He kept his place at the
wheel, his supper being brought up to him by one of his men, and shortly
after dark came within sight of the lights of a vessel which was lying
at anchor in the stream. He blew the whistle, to let her know that he
was approaching, to which the steamer, which proved to be a gun-boat,
replied by hoisting her signal-lights. Frank having no signals, whistled
again, and rang the bells for the engineer to run slowly. As soon as he
came within hailing distance, a voice called out:

"Steamer ahoy!"

"Ay, ay, sir!" shouted Frank, in reply.

"What steamer is that?"

"Army transport Key-West, bound for the mouth of the river, with
dispatches from the admiral."

"Come alongside, here," shouted the voice.

"Ay, ay, sir," replied Frank, and he commenced turning the boat's head
toward the vessel, while a hurrying of feet and a noise of dropping
handspikes on the gun-deck, told him in plain language that the captain
of the gun-boat was not at all satisfied with the report he had made,
and had called his crew to quarters, to be in readiness to sink the
transport if she should attempt to run by. It was an uncommon thing
during the expedition for boats to run in Red River after night, unless
supplied with the necessary signals, and the young officer was not at
all surprised at the precautions taken by the gun-boat.

Frank by this time had turned the transport around, and was coming up at
the stern of the gun-boat, when the lieutenant came on deck, and
entering the pilot-house, inquired:

"Are you the captain of this ship?"

"I have had no orders to act as such," replied Frank.

"Then why do you answer hails, and land here without my permission? I'll
have you court-martialed."

"I answered the hails because you were not on deck; and I land here
because I have been ordered to do so by the captain of that gun-boat."

"Well, I am not under his orders; he has no authority over me, and I
order you to turn around at once, and start down the river again."

"If I should undertake that," replied Frank, with a laugh, "this vessel
wouldn't last long. Every cannon on this aide of that gun-boat points
straight at us, and if we should turn around, they would blow us out of
water."

"They would, eh?" said the lieutenant, angrily. "I'll have the whole lot
of them up before a court-martial. I'm a second-lieutenant, sir, and
must not be detained, as I am on important business. Turn around at
once."

Frank made no reply, and at that moment the bow of the transport touched
the gun-boat, and one of the sailors sprang out with a line. As soon as
the boat was made fast, he put on his side-arms, and taking his
dispatches, walked out of the pilot-house, leaving the lieutenant almost
beside himself with rage. As soon as he stepped on board the gun-boat,
he was shown into the presence of Captain Wilson, the same who had
commanded the Ticonderoga when Frank was attached to her.

"Oh, is it you, Mr. Nelson?" he exclaimed, seizing the young officer's
hand and shaking it heartily. "Then it's all right. I did not know but
you were a rebel, and were going to run by; so I got my guns all ready
to sink you. Sit down. Are you in command?"

Frank replied that he was not, and then proceeded to repeat the orders
he had received from the admiral, telling the captain of the fight with
the battery, but carefully omitting any thing that related to the
conduct of the lieutenant, he ended by saying that the pilot was
wounded, and requesting that the doctor might be sent on board to attend
to him, which was done at once, the captain offering to send another
pilot to take his place.

The transport lay alongside nearly two hours, during which time the
pilot's wound, which was not dangerous, was dressed. The doctor then
declared that he was able to go on to the mouth of the river, where he
could be placed under the care of an army surgeon. Frank then took his
leave of the captain, and stepped on board the transport, accompanied by
one of the gun-boat pilots, who was well-known to the young officer, and
he was confident that the lieutenant, if he should again take it into
his head to give any unnecessary orders, would hear the truth plainly
told. He was an old acquaintance of the wounded pilot, from whom he had
heard the whole history of the trip from Alexandria; but as he had said
nothing about the matter to Frank, the latter was not aware that he knew
it.

The pilot took his station at the wheel, while Frank seated himself on
the boiler-deck railing. The lieutenant stood close by, and, without
waiting to hear whether or not the engineers were ready to start,
shouted:

"Untie that line."

"Hold on!" shouted the pilot. "Do you want to send us adrift without any
steam? Wait till I tell you we're all ready."

The engineers of the transport, taking advantage of the landing, had
allowed the steam to go down, in order to repair some part of the
machinery that was out of order, and had the line been cast off just
then, the boat would have been at the mercy of the current, and in
danger of sinking, for a short distance below lay an iron-clad ram,
anchored in the river. The lieutenant had given his command in a loud
tone, in order to be heard by the crew of the gun-boat, and the rebuff
he had met from the pilot did not tend to quiet his feelings, which were
considerably agitated by the thought that he was not in reality the
commander of the vessel. He was astonished at the pertinacity with which
his subordinates (as he considered them) countermanded his orders, and
wondered what was the use of being captain of a vessel if he was not to
be obeyed. But perhaps the new pilot did not know who he was. He would
inform him. With this determination, he walked up to the pilot-house,
and inquired:

"Do you know, sir, that I command this boat?"

"Yes," replied the pilot, "I know all about that. But you had better go
and turn in; you are only in the way here. All ready, Mr. Nelson," he
continued, as the engineer's bell rang at this moment.

Frank gave the necessary orders, and in a few moments they were again on
their way down the river, while the lieutenant walked into the cabin and
threw himself on a lounge, heartily wishing there were no gun-boat men
in existence. As soon as they were fairly under way, Frank, seeing that
the lieutenant took no further notice of what was going on, ran below to
set the watch; then, after satisfying himself that every thing was right
about decks, and that their weapons were ready for instant use, he
stretched himself on a blanket in the cabin, and with his precious
dispatches (which he had carried with him wherever he went) for a
pillow, was soon fast asleep.

About midnight he was suddenly awakened by a terrific crash, and sprang
to his feet to find the cabin shrouded in darkness and filled with
smoke. Hastily thrusting his dispatches into his pocket, he commenced
groping for his side-arms, which, on retiring, he had placed by his
side, while a commotion on deck told him that the crew were hurrying to
their stations. When he had found his sword, he ran out of the cabin,
and saw his men drawn up behind the cotton-bales, under charge of the
coxswain, who ran up to his officer and hurriedly asked for orders. The
latter did not long remain ignorant of the nature of the attack, for a
shell plunged into the cabin which he had just left, and, exploding with
a deafening report, filled the air with fragments of furniture, and tore
a large hole in the deck above the boilers. The night was very dark, but
still there was light enough for Frank to see that the boat, no longer
obeying her helm, was drifting broadside toward the battery, the
position of which could be easily determined by the flash of its guns;
and it was evident that unless those guns could be speedily silenced,
the transport would be altogether demolished, or disabled so that she
would fall into the hands of the rebels. Turning to the coxswain, Frank
inquired:

"Is that cutter ready for immediate use?"

"All ready, sir," was the answer.

"Let loose those guns, then. Fire!"

The two howitzers belched forth their contents, but while they were
being reloaded, another broadside from the battery plunged into the
boat, followed by the hissing and shrieking of steam. A shot had struck
the boilers! The thought had scarcely passed through Frank's mind, when
the pilot sprang down the steps, exclaiming:

"Mr. Nelson, the tiller-rope is shot away, sir, and the boat is on
fire!"

In short, much sooner than Frank had expected, the transport was a
complete wreck.

The cotton-bales on the guards had been set on fire by a bursting shell;
the tiller-rope shot away, rendering it impossible to steer the boat;
the boilers penetrated, and the engine-room filled with hot steam, which
now began to rise and envelop the men on the boiler-deck. Soldiers and
sailors at once deserted their quarters and ran about in confusion,
while Frank, with his handkerchief in his mouth, to prevent his inhaling
the steam, stood wondering, where so many things were to be done, which
ought to be done first. He was quickly called to action by the pilot,
who, as he ran down the steps that led to the forecastle, exclaimed:

"Let every man take care of himself!"

When that man, who had been in nearly all the battles fought on the
Mississippi River--who had run the batteries at Vicksburg, and had
twice, in the heat of action, swam from a sinking vessel--when _he_
deserted his post, it was useless for any one to remain. The transport
could be of no further use to them, and to stay on board was to court
either death from the hot, blinding steam, or the shells that all the
while came crashing into the boat, or capture and hard treatment at the
hands of the rebels. So thought Frank, as he followed his men to the
forecastle, intending to enter the cutter, and, if possible, run by the
battery and reach the Mississippi.

The steam rolled over the lower deck in thick clouds, rendering it
impossible for him to go aft. There was now but one way to reach the
cutter, and that was to jump overboard and swim to her. This order was
promptly given, and as promptly obeyed by the men, who sprang into the
water, one after another, followed by Frank, who, however, had lingered
a moment to pull off his side-arms and coat, which would only impede his
progress, and to secure his dispatches, which he tied to his waist with
a strong cord he happened to have in his pocket.

But when he reached the stern of the boat, he found that this means of
escape had been destroyed. A shell from the battery had struck the
cutter, and her wreck, still hold by the rope with which she had been
made fast, floated along with the steamer, which was slowly drifting
toward the bank. Only one of his men was to be seen, and that was the
coxswain, who was holding on to the wreck, awaiting the appearance of
his officer. The others, giving up all hopes of escape, had doubtless
turned toward the shore.

"Now, here's a job, sir," said the coxswain, apparently as unconcerned
as if there had not been a rebel within a hundred miles. "Here _is_
a job. What's to be done now, sir?"

Frank had just asked himself the same question. He could easily reach
the shore, which was but a few yards distant, but there he would
certainly be captured by the rebels, who were running along the bank,
yelling like demons.

There was but one course he could pursue and save himself and
dispatches, and that was to swim down the river and endeavor to pass the
battery. In the darkness he might escape undiscovered.

"Bob, are you a good swimmer?" he asked, turning to the coxswain.

"Yes sir! can swim all day," was the reply.

"Then follow me as silently as possible, and we may yet escape."

As Frank spoke, he swam down the river with swift, noiseless strokes,
anxious to get as far as possible from the boat before the fire, which
now began to make rapid headway, should light up the river and discover
them to the rebels. The latter had ceased firing, and were scattered
along the bank, making prisoners of the transport's crew as fast as they
touched the shore. When Frank had reached the place where the battery
was stationed, he turned upon his back, and allowed himself to float
along with the current, and, aided by the darkness and the smoke of the
burning transport, which blew down the river, he and his companion
passed the dangerous point undiscovered. Here Frank again struck out,
his every movement followed by the coxswain, who was close behind him,
and who floated through the water like a cork.

For nearly an hour they remained in the river, and it was not until the
shouts of the rebels could be no longer heard, that Frank, feeling for
the present safe from pursuit, swam to the shore and sat down to rest,
and to determine upon their future movements.




CHAPTER IX.

Up the Washita.


All noise of pursuit, if any had been made, had died away, and not a
sound disturbed the stillness of the woods. But Frank had learned, by
experience, that silence was not indicative of safety, for it might, at
any moment, be broken by the report of muskets, or a sudden demand for
surrender from enemies who had followed them so silently that their
approach had not been discovered. He bent suspicious glances upon the
woods on all sides of him, and was ready to plunge into the water again
upon hearing the least sounds of pursuit.

What had become of the wounded pilot, the lieutenant, and the rest of
the cutter's crew? All who had succeeded in reaching the shore, were,
beyond a doubt, prisoners.

Frank shuddered when he thought of the hard fare and harder treatment
that awaited the poor fellows, recalling to mind incidents of his own
capture and escape, which made him doubly anxious to reach the
Mississippi as soon as possible, where he would be safe among friends.

After resting nearly an hour, for their long swim had wearied them, they
continued their flight down the river, being careful to keep close to
the bank, so that in case of emergency they could again take to the
water. The shore was covered with logs and bushes, and their progress
was slow and laborious. But daylight came at length, and shortly
afterward they discovered a transport coming up the river. When she
arrived opposite to them, Frank hailed her, and the boat landed and took
them on board. Frank gave the information that there was a battery
above, and the captain, not liking the idea of trusting his unarmed
vessel within range of its guns, ordered the pilot to round-to and start
down the river again. The order was obeyed at once, and Frank and the
coxswain, who now began to breathe more freely, went below and stood
before the fire-doors to dry their clothing. About noon they arrived at
the Mississippi River, the transport landing alongside the vessel of the
commanding naval officer, to whom Frank delivered his dispatches in
triumph, at the same time apologizing for his appearance, for he was
without coat, hat, or side-arms.

Among these dispatches of the admiral were orders for two tin-clads to
report at Alexandria. These vessels were to be used to keep the banks
clear of rebels, to carry dispatches, and to convoy unarmed steamers up
and down the river. The necessary orders were promptly issued, and in a
short time the tin-clads came alongside; their commanders received their
instructions, after which the vessels steamed up Red River, one of them
having Frank and the coxswain on board. The former had in his possession
several official documents addressed to the admiral. If he could have
seen the inside of one of them, he would have found (greatly to his
surprise) that it contained a complete history of the run from
Alexandria, that it spoke in the highest terms of his skill and bravery,
and ended with a recommendation for a master's appointment. This letter
had been written by the captain to whom Frank had delivered his
dispatches, he having learned the full particulars from the coxswain,
whom he had summoned into his presence while Frank was in the wardroom
eating his dinner. The sailor described all that had happened in glowing
language, dwelling with a good deal of emphasis upon the "pluck"
displayed by his young officer, and the ignorance and cowardice of the
lieutenant, and ended with saying, "He didn't think of nothing, sir, but
them dispatches; and it an't every man that could have saved 'em, sir."
The captain fully agreed with the coxswain, and when the latter was
dismissed, he gave his pants a vigorous hitch, and said to himself, "If
Mr. Nelson don't get another stripe around his arm now, may I be
keelhauled." And one, to have seen him, would have thought that he was
as much pleased at the prospect as though he was about to receive the
appointment himself. Frank, of course, knew nothing of this, and little
imagining that he was carrying a recommendation for his promotion, he
put the letters carefully away in his pocket, thinking, no doubt, they
were all-important official documents.

A short time before dark they arrived at the junction of the Black and
Washita Rivers, where Frank found the Michigan anchored, in company with
four or five other gun-boats. He reported his safe return to his
captain, and then went into the wardroom and sat down to report to the
admiral by letter, according to his instructions. After all he had
passed through, one would suppose that his report would have been a long
one; but he wisely thought that all the admiral cared to know was that
his dispatches had been safely delivered. He therefore wrote, in the
briefest manner--

"I have the honor to report that, in obedience to your orders of the
20th inst., I took passage on board the United States army transport
"Key-West," for the mouth of Red River, with dispatches, which were
delivered into the hands of the commanding naval officer there. I have
to-day returned on board my vessel."

This was all. No glowing description of the gallant manner in which he
had taken the transport by the battery, no mention of the ever-watchful
eye he had kept upon his dispatches, or of his long swim from the
burning wreck, but a few simple lines, that told the admiral all he
wished to know; namely, that his letters had reached their destination.
This report Frank placed before the captain, who wrote upon it "approved
and respectfully forwarded," (for all letters from subordinate officers
to the admiral had to pass through the captain's hands,) and the letter
was put into the general mail. Frank then, in obedience to the captain's
order, proceeded to give that gentleman a minute account of the manner
in which he had executed his orders, together with the names of the men
belonging to the cutter's crew who were missing, and wound up with the
request that "something might be done for the coxswain," for he was a
brave man, and a good sailor. As the Michigan had but one boatswain's
mate, (she was entitled to two,) the captain determined to promote the
man, who was at once summoned into the cabin and presented with the
boatswain's whistle. He retired, proud of his promotion, and firm in his
belief that "the captain and Mr. Nelson were the best men afloat."

Frank, so weary that he could scarcely walk, was glad to get to bed; but
the captain sat for a long time at his desk, writing a letter to the
admiral, which contained the statement that, in his opinion, "Acting
Ensign Frank Nelson, by the gallant manner in which he had executed the
important business intrusted to him, had nobly earned his promotion,
and, by the skill and judgment he had exhibited in handling the
transport, had shown that he was fully capable of taking charge of a
_vessel of his own_, and that his past history, taken in connection
with his recent exploit, was sufficient guarantee that the honor of the
flag would never suffer in his hands."

Frank, all unconscious of the admiration his gallant behavior had
excited in the mind of the captain, slept soundly until daylight, when
he was called up to get the vessel under way. The expedition was
composed of five gun-boats, and its destination was Monroe, a small town
about two hundred miles up Washita River. Its object was to capture
cotton, and to destroy any fortifications that might be found along the
banks. The remainder of the fleet, which was at Alexandria when Frank
left, had gone up Red River, toward Shreveport. Had he been allowed his
choice in the matter, Frank would have preferred to accompany the latter
expedition, as he then would have been able, after Shreveport had been
captured, to visit the prison in which he had been confined, and from
which he had escaped in so remarkable a manner. He thought over all the
scenes through which he had passed--his capture, the march to
Shreveport, his flight from the prison, the bayonet-fight in the woods,
the chase by blood-hounds--and they seemed to him like a dream.

George Le Dell, who was the officer of the deck, stood close beside
Frank, gazing about as if every object that met his eye was a familiar
one. Every turn of the paddle-wheels was bringing him nearer to the home
of his childhood, from which he was now excluded by the stern mandate of
his rebel father. Ever since he had been attached to the Michigan, he
and Frank had been bosom friends. The dangers through which they had
passed while fugitives from a rebel prison--their hair-breadth escapes
from recapture--could never be forgotten. No one on board besides Frank
knew any thing of George's past history. In accordance with the latter's
desire, the secret was closely kept, and no one imagined that the pale,
quiet young officer was any relation to the rebel general whose house it
had been ordered should be burned. Ever since the receipt of that order,
every one remarked that George Le Dell had been unusually thoughtful,
but no one knew the cause.

"Mr. Nelson," said he, at length, "I wish I could have gone up Red
River. I want to see home once more, but I don't want to stand by and
see the old house burned over the heads of my mother and sisters. I
don't deny that the order is a just one, but I don't want to see it
executed. I begin to believe that I am a good prophet," he continued,
after a moment's pause. "I told father, in the last letter I ever wrote
to him, that this war would bring him nothing but suffering and
disgrace, and I think he will find that I told the truth."

As George ceased speaking, he turned and walked to another part of the
deck, to meet the captain, who at that moment came out of his cabin.

Among all the ship's company, there was but one that could sympathize
with George, and that one was Frank. The young officer cherished an
honest enmity toward the traitors whose bloody hands were stretched out
to pull down the Old Flag under which his ancestors had fought and died,
but when Frank looked upon the pale face of his messmate, and listened
to his oft-repeated sentiments of loyalty, and heard him, in his quiet
way, expressing his firm belief in the final triumph of the Government
and the total overthrow of the rebellion, and when he witnessed his
quiet submission to his cruel fate, knowing that he was cut off from all
further intercourse with his relatives, he could not help pitying both
him and his rebel parents. But he knew, from those letters he had read,
and which George still preserved, and from what he had witnessed on that
memorable night when he and his companions had stopped at the plantation
and asked for food, that the general and his family had taken part with
the rebellion, not to secure any rights which they imagined had been
denied them, but to assist in "establishing a confederacy of their own,
whose corner-stone should be slavery," and to destroy "every vestige of
the old Union." Like George, he knew that the order to burn the house
was a just one; but he would have been much better pleased had some
other boat been selected to execute it. He did not pity the rebels so
much, but he did not want to witness the sorrow his messmate would
experience when he saw the home of his boyhood enveloped in flames.

The next day, as the two friends stood together on deck, George suddenly
said--

"We're almost there. I know these woods well. I've caught many a string
of fish off that log that lies in the water just ahead."

About half a mile further on, the Michigan came round a sharp bend in
the river, and they saw the plantation before them. Every thing looked
just as it did on that long-to-be-remembered night when George had
suddenly presented himself before his relatives, who thought him safe in
the prison at Tyler. There were the broad stone steps that led up to the
portico on which the major had stood while making known his wants, and
just in front of them were the posts to which the general and his sons
had fastened their horses before entering the house.

The fleet did not stop, as they had expected, but kept on up the river,
and in a few moments more the plantation was out of sight. No doubt the
burning of the house was to be put off until their return.

The expedition reached Monroe without mishap, and without seeing a
single armed rebel, only stopping now and then to pick up cotton, which
was scattered all along the bank. The vessels remained at anchor in
front of the town for two days, and after burning the public buildings,
and picking up some escaped Union prisoners, started down the river
again. The Michigan led the way, and on the afternoon of the second day
came to anchor in front of General Le Dell's plantation.

"Mr. Nelson," said the captain, as he stepped down out of the
pilot-house, "order two companies of small-armed men to be called away,
and you and Mr. Le Dell get ready to go on shore with me. By the way,"
he added, turning to George, "I have orders to burn out this rebel
namesake of yours."

"So I have heard, sir," replied George, while not a muscle of his face
quivered to show the surprise and sorrow he felt at being obliged to
accompany the expedition ashore. He had hoped that some other officer
would be chosen to accompany the captain, but he could not ask to be
excused from duty without exciting suspicions. The reason why he did not
wish to go could be easily guessed, and if the truth became known, it
would be followed by what he particularly desired to avoid--the sympathy
of all his messmates. He would accompany the expedition, but he would
neither enter the house or go into the presence of his mother and
sisters, and he might return without being recognized. By the time he
had buckled on his sword and returned to the deck the men were ready,
when, in obedience to Frank's order, he marched them on board the tug,
which lay at the stern of the Michigan. When they reached the shore,
Frank instructed George to post sentries all around the house, both to
guard against surprise, and also to prevent the escape of any rebel
soldiers who might chance to be in the building, after which he
accompanied the captain to the door, where they were met by Mrs. Le Dell
and her daughters, who coldly received their salutations, and waited for
them to make known the object of their visit.

"Madam," said the captain, addressing himself to Mrs. Le Dell, "I am
ordered to burn your house."

"I have been expecting it for a long time," was the reply.

"I will give you a reasonable time," continued the captain, "to remove
your valuables."

The lady then requested that an hour might be allowed her to send for a
neighbor, who lived several miles distant, to come with his team to
remove the furniture to a place of safety, as all the wagons about the
plantation had been given up to the rebel army. This was granted, and a
note, which was first presented for the inspection of the captain, was
at once dispatched to summon the neighbor.

In the meantime, Frank and George were strolling about the plantation,
the latter feasting his eyes on every familiar object, and recalling to
mind incidents of the "good old times," as he expressed it. Frank also
recognized two objects; one was the barn where he and his
fellow-fugitives had halted to hold a consultation before going up to
the house; and the other was the fence behind which the captain had left
their prisoner, bound hand and foot. While thus engaged, a little boy,
who had approached them without being discovered, suddenly called out,

"George!"

The latter turned, as the familiar voice reached his ear, and held out
his hands to his brother, who sprang toward him, threw his arms around
his neck, and burst into tears. There was one among George's relatives
who still remembered and loved him.

"George," sobbed the little fellow, "are you a Yankee 'bolitionist?"

Tears choked George's utterance, and the boy, suddenly breaking from his
arms, ran toward the house, and scrambling up the steps, burst into the
room where the captain and ladies were seated, and astonished them all
with:

"Mother, mother! George is here! He's come back!"

Both mother and daughter appeared to be considerably agitated upon
receiving this news, and the captain noticing it, the suspicion flashed
across his mind that it was one of their rebel friends. He glanced out
at the door, and saw his two officers standing quietly together, the
sentinels walking their beats, and felt satisfied that the rebel,
whoever he was, might consider himself a prisoner.

"Who do you mean, my little man?" he asked, putting his hand on the
boy's head. "What is his other name?"

"George Le Dell," replied the boy, promptly. "He's my brother. He's out
there," and he pointed toward the place where George and Frank were
standing.

"Is that your brother?" asked the captain in surprise, as he turned
toward Mrs. Le Dell for an explanation.

"I have a son in the Federal navy," replied the lady.

"Then, madam," said the captain, "if that young man out there is your
son, allow me to say that you have every reason to be proud of him."

At this moment the neighbor for whom they had sent arrived, and he and
the captain held a long conversation; after which, to his surprise,
Frank was ordered to collect the men and march them on board the tug.
The Michigan remained at her anchorage until the flag-ship of the
expedition came down, when the two captains had a short consultation,
and both vessels got under way and steamed down the river. The reason
given why the order to burn the house was not executed was this: Unlike
the majority of rebel commanders, General Le Dell had always treated
Union prisoners who had fallen into his hands with the greatest
humanity. Although he seemed to be particularly spiteful toward George,
whom he called a "young traitor," he always endeavored to make the
condition of other prisoners as tolerable as possible. The truth of this
was attested by the soldiers they had picked up at Monroe, all of whom
were officers, and they had done much toward saving the property. The
captain of the Michigan had delayed to fulfill his orders until the
arrival of his superior, in order to communicate some news he had
received from the man who had been sent to remove the furniture, and
when the flag-ship arrived, the order had been countermanded.

"Perhaps every thing will come out right after the war," said George, as
the two friends stood watching the plantation as long as it remained in
eight. "If it does, we'll have the old house to live in."

On the way down the river, large quantities of cotton were captured,
which made both officers and men look forward to a good share of
prize-money, and one afternoon--about a week after leaving Monroe--they
reached Black River in safety.




CHAPTER X.

The Promotion.


The next day, in obedience to orders from the admiral, the Michigan
steamed up Red River, and came to an anchor in front of Fort De Russy. A
few rebel soldiers had taken possession of the fortifications, and the
vessel had scarcely dropped her anchor when they opened upon her with
muskets. All hands were ordered under cover, and for two days were kept
closely confined below. The bullets, which constantly whistled over the
deck, did no damage beyond cutting down the flag--which, however was
promptly hoisted again--and battering up the officers' rooms on the
quarter-deck, which were not iron-clad. Several attempts were made to
dislodge the rebels, but, as usual, without success. On the third day,
however, a heavy firing up the river, in the direction of Alexandria,
announced that the expedition was returning, and the rebels, fearing
capture, hastily withdrew. Toward evening the fleet came in sight, some
of the transports having gun-boats alongside of them for protection. The
entire fleet bore marks of the handiwork of the rebels, in the shape of
battered casemates, broken chimneys, and shattered upper works. Little
had been accomplished beyond the capture of cotton, and both officers
and men teemed delighted to find themselves once more on the way to the
Mississippi River.

In about an hour after the first boats of the fleet had made their
appearance, a tin-clad came down, bearing the admiral's flag, and
rounded-to and landed a short distance below the Michigan. Close behind
her came another of the mosquito fleet, towed by a transport. Both
vessels were badly cut up, especially the gun-boat, which was almost a
wreck. Both chimneys had either been broken off by branches of trees or
shattered by a shell, and her casemates were pierced in a hundred
places. Her engines had also been disabled, and her wheel hung
motionless in the water. Still she retained enough of her former
appearance for Frank to recognize in her his old vessel, the Boxer;
besides, he saw his cousin on the guards waving his handkerchief to him.
While Frank stood watching the vessel, wondering how any of her crew
could have escaped, and how Archie had conducted himself during the
fights through which he had passed, the captain came up out of his cabin
and exclaimed:

"Mr. Nelson, you're wanted on board the flagship! Don't wait to get your
side-arms, but go at once. The admiral is in a great hurry to see you!"

Frank, wondering what new orders he was about to receive, ran down the
ladder that led to the afterguard, reached the shore on a plank that
extended from the stern of the vessel to the bank, and in a short time
was in the presence of the admiral.

That gentleman was so busy that he did not notice Frank, until one of
his clerks exclaimed:

"Admiral! here's Captain Nelson, sir."

"Ah, yes," said the admiral, scarcely looking up from his work. "Sit
down, captain; I'm very busy just at present."

_Captain!_ Frank knew that neither the admiral nor his clerks were
in the habit of making mistakes, but he thought they were certainly
mistaken this time. Perhaps they were so busy they had not taken time to
see who he was. But he was not kept long in suspense, for the admiral,
after signing his name to several documents, turned in his chair, and
picking up some letters that lay on his desk, handed them to Frank,
saying:

"Captain, there are your orders. I only wanted to see you to say that I
wish them obeyed with the least possible delay. Have the Boxer back here
as soon as you can, for I want to use her. Get your baggage on board and
start at once."

Frank, so bewildered that he scarcely knew what the admiral was saying,
took the letters and hurried back to the Michigan. The captain met him
at the gangway, and extending his hand, said, with a smile:

"I'm sorry to have you leave us, Mr. Nelson. I suppose you have got it?"

"I have something, sir," replied Frank, "but I don't know what it is."

As he spoke, he tore open one of the envelopes, and hastily running his
eye over the letter it contained, found, to his astonishment, that he
was an acting master. The next one he opened was an order for him to
report "to the commanding officer of the U. S. S. Boxer for duty and
_command of that vessel_." The other contained instructions for him
to "proceed to Cairo without delay, and place his vessel under repairs,
and as soon as she was put in condition for service, to return and
report to the admiral."

"Just as I expected," said the captain, who seemed to be as highly
elated as Frank himself. "Just as I expected, sir. You deserve it, and I
congratulate you."

Frank made some reply, in his excitement he hardly knew what, and
hurried off to pack his trunk and bed-clothes. This being accomplished,
his baggage was carried to the cutter, which lay alongside, and after
taking leave of the captain and his messmates, he stepped into the boat
and started for his vessel, which still lay at the bank, below the
flagship, with the transport which was to tow her to Cairo. As he
stepped on board the Boxer, he was met by Archie, and several of his old
messmates, who greeted him cordially. The executive officer was in
command, and to him Frank showed his orders, and requested that his
baggage might be conveyed into the cabin. He then went on deck, and
after ascertaining that the transport was ready to start, ordered the
line cast off, and both vessels were soon on their course down the
river.

After finding they were fairly under way, Frank, accompanied by Archie,
went into the cabin, and sat down to collect his thoughts, for, in the
excitement of his unexpected promotion, he moved like one in a dream.
The cabin steward had already taken his trunk into his state-room, and
was engaged in making his bed. Captain Nelson! How strangely it sounded;
and Frank repeated it several times, and gazed about the cabin as if he
could scarcely believe that he was awake. He read his appointment and
orders over and over again, both to fully understand what was required
of him, and to convince himself that he was in reality the commander of
a vessel. When he was made the executive officer of the very boat he now
commanded, he had reached the height of his ambition, and his present
position was a step higher than he had dared to look.

The captain of a gun-boat generally lives in a little world of his own.
He has a cabin all to himself, messes alone, and rarely has intercourse
with his officers, except upon business. If he has a messmate, it is
either a clerk, or the paymaster or doctor of the vessel. Frank was not
entitled to a clerk, but he had a paymaster, and, at his request, Archie
at once commenced the removal of his baggage into one of the vacant
state-rooms in the cabin. While thus engaged, the orderly announced the
executive officer, who entered to inquire if Frank had any orders to
give. The latter replied that he had not, and for nearly an hour he
remained in conversation with the executive, during which he learned the
exact state of affairs about decks. Every thing appeared to be going on
smoothly, and Frank had no desire to show his authority by issuing
unnecessary orders. One by one the wardroom and steerage officers came
in to congratulate the young commander, and when bed-time came they
returned to their quarters, saying among themselves that "Captain Nelson
didn't feel any bigger in his new position than he would if he were
nothing but a Johnny master's mate."

One afternoon, after they had reached the Mississippi River, as Frank
sat at his desk, writing a letter to his mother, and Archie lay on the
sofa close by, engaged in reading, there was a commotion on deck, and
the orderly burst into the cabin, exclaiming--

"Rebels, cap'n! A battery just ahead, sir!" And he had scarcely spoken,
when there was a roar of cannon, and the shells burst over and about the
vessels.

"Call to quarters," said Frank, as he sprang to his feet and ran into
his room after his side-arms and the keys to the magazine.

The orderly disappeared, followed by Archie, who, throwing his book into
the furthest corner of the cabin, ran on deck, without even waiting to
get his hat.

After ordering the executive, who met him at the door, to have the lamps
in the magazine lighted, and to prepare for action, Frank ran into the
pilothouse, and looking up the river, discovered a smoke arising from a
point half a mile in advance of them.

"Captain," shouted the commander of the transport, who stood in his
pilot-house, "what do you want me to do?"

"Take us up the river as fast as you can," shouted Frank, in reply.

The captain had evidently seen some stirring times while up Red River.
He was not accustomed to the noise and confusion of battle, and his
actions indicated that he did not like the idea of attempting to run by
the battery. But his orders from the admiral were to take the Boxer to
Cairo as soon as possible, and he dared not disobey them.

"All ready below, sir," was the word at this moment passed up through
the trumpet.

All the guns on board the Boxer were pointed at the battery, and the
crew impatiently waited for the order to fire. Frank stood at his post,
watching the battery through a spy-glass, and waiting until they should
come to close quarters, so that he could make every shot count. All this
while the shells had been dropping into the water, and shrieking through
the air about the vessels, and one or two had found a lodgement in the
wheel-house of the transport. They kept on in silence until they arrived
almost opposite the battery, which stood out in plain view, unprotected
by levee or other breastwork, and Frank then gave the order to open upon
them. The crash that followed the order, as every gun that could be
brought to bear upon the battery belched forth its contents, was
terrific. Shells and canister rattled over the bank, cutting down the
rebel gunners, and disabling one of their cannon. As quickly as
possible, the guns were reloaded, and almost before the rebels had
recovered from their panic, another broadside was poured into them, and
when the smoke cleared away, the battery was standing deserted. Here was
an opportunity that, to Frank, had he possessed men enough to back him
up, would not have been lost; he would have landed, and captured the
battery. But he was ignorant of the force of the rebels. There might be
a regiment of them hidden away in the woods--enough to have captured the
vessels the moment they touched the bank--and to have lost the Boxer
scarcely a week after he had been placed in command of her would have
been a misfortune indeed. He kept on up the river, shelling the woods as
long as he could bring a gun to bear upon them.

In a few days they arrived at Cairo, where Frank reported to the
commandant of the station, and his vessel was at once placed in the
hands of the workmen at the navy-yard. The work was rapidly pushed
forward, and at the end of a month she was declared ready for service,
and after she had been furnished with a full crew from the receiving
ship, and Archie had laid in a stock of paymaster's stores, the Boxer,
in obedience to orders, started down the river to report to the admiral.




CHAPTER XI.

The Rival Spies.


They found the admiral at Natchez, and when Frank had reported his
arrival, he was ordered to take his station at Gaines' Landing--a place
noted for guerrillas--which they reached in safety. For two or three
days, nothing worthy of note transpired, the rebels, if there were any
about, being careful not to show themselves.

One night, while Frank was walking the deck, arm-in-arm with his cousin,
the officer on watch approached, and said, in a low voice:

"Look there, sir! What kind of a craft is that?"

Frank looked in the direction indicated, and an object about the size of
a man's head could be dimly seen in the water, silently but rapidly
approaching the vessel. It came from toward the nearest shore, and the
thought that it was a torpedo instantly flushed through his mind. Taking
the spy-glass from the quarter-master, he leveled it at the object, and
could distinctly see that it was a human head, and that it belonged to
some one who was an excellent swimmer, for he was making rapid progress
through the water.

"I don't see any torpedo there," said he, at length, handing the glass
to his cousin, "for the fellow, whoever he is, is using both hands."
Then raising his it voice, he called out, "Who comes there?"

"A friend," was the scarcely audible reply.

"Come on board here."

"That's just what I want to do," answered the man, who, with a few more
strokes, was near enough to be seized by the quarter-master--who had ran
below with a lantern--and lifted upon the guards.

"Who are you, and what are you doing here at this time of night?" asked
Frank, as soon as the man had come on deck.

"My name is William Striker," was the answer, "and I am an escaped Union
scout."

Frank took the lantern from the quarter-master's hand and held it up, so
that he could obtain a good view of the man's face. He was certain he
had seen it before, but could not remember where.

"I have a better memory than you, sir," said the man at length. "I have
seen you before. I met you in the trenches at Vicksburg."

As the man spoke, he produced a bundle of wet papers, from which he
selected one that he handed to Frank. It was the appointment of major,
and addressed to William Striker, United States Scout. But this was no
proof that the man was in reality what he professed to be, for Frank
remembered that he had once passed himself off as Lieutenant Somers, of
the rebel army, and had shown his appointment and orders to prove it. It
was true that he wore the dress of a Union major, but that might have
been obtained in the same manner that Frank once got his rebel uniform.
There was something suspicious in a man's presenting himself on board
the vessel at that time of night, and in so uncommon a manner.

"Well," said Frank, "if you were in the trenches at Vicksburg, tell me
something that happened there."

The soldier then told Frank of the experiment of which the latter had
made use to see "how far off the rebels were," during which he lost his
cap, the rebel who captured it offering to "trade" for it a tattered
slouch-hat with a bullet-hole in it, and informed him that he was the
scout who had told him the story of his "partner" Sam, and their raid
into the rebel camp, which resulted in the capture of Colonel Peckham.
He also related other little incidents which Frank had not forgotten,
and which proved that he was in reality the scout whom he had met in the
trenches, and not a rebel spy, as he had at first feared. Being fully
satisfied on this point, the major was conducted into the cabin, and
while he was exchanging his wet clothes for some that Frank and Archie
had provided for him, the former ordered his steward to prepare supper
for their guest, for he knew, by experience, that a man who had been a
prisoner among the rebels was hungry. The major sat down to the table
with a most ravenous appetite, and the good things the steward had
prepared rapidly disappeared. When he had finished his meal, in answer
to Frank's inquiry how he came to be a prisoner, he gave the following
account of his adventures, which he remarked were a "little ahead of any
thing he had ever gone through."

"In the first place," said he, "I must tell you what became of my
comrade, Sam, as it was in endeavoring to assist him that I was
captured. His career as a scout, although an exciting one, full of
stirring adventures and hair-breadth escapes, was brought to a close
soon after the capture of Vicksburg.

"When the army again took up its line of march, we made several
excursions into the rebel lines, and one night we stopped at a
plantation-house to shelter ourselves from the rain, for it was storming
violently, and also to see if we could not pick up some information that
might be of use to us. The only inmate of the house was an old woman,
who, believing us to be rebels, talked freely with us on all subjects;
and during the conversation, which finally turned upon scouting,
informed us that there was a scout in the rebel army who was far ahead
of any "Yank" that ever lived. He was described as a daring,
quick-witted fellow, and many a disaster that had befallen us was owing
to him. As I listened to the stories told of him, I came to the
conclusion that there was a good deal of truth in them, and that some
spy must indeed have been in our camp, for the woman was acquainted with
several moves we had made, and which had been defeated, the particulars
of which, I thought, were known only to the general and his staff. This
led me to believe that the scout, whoever he was, staid about
head-quarters, else how could he obtain so much information.

"The woman seemed to be well acquainted with him and his movements, and
told us of several of his exploits, which, if true, showed the spy to be
a man admirably fitted for his position. I listened attentively to all
she said, in hopes I should learn something of his personal appearance,
for I had made up my mind that as soon as I could find out his
movements, he and I would have a meeting, But all I could learn was that
his name was Bob Cole.

"'Well,' said I,'do you know that as long as I have been in the army, I
have never seen this man?'"

"'Haven't yer!' exclaimed the woman, in surprise. 'Wal, come to think, I
don't know as that is so funny, arter all, 'cause he's in the Yankee
camp most of the time, an', as they think he is one of them, he goes an'
comes when he pleases, He's a smart one, I tell yer. Some of the boys
told me that he is a goin' to bring in a prisoner this week, in the
shape of a Yankee scout an' spy. Bill Striker is his name, I believe. Do
yer know him?'

"I couldn't help starting when I found that I was known to this noted
rebel; but the woman didn't notice it, and I replied:

"Oh, yes! I've heard of him.'

"'Cordin' to all accounts,' continued the woman, 'this Yankee an't much
behind Bob, for he has often been in our camp, an' he don't allers go
back empty-handed. If he ketches a feller in an out-of-the-way place, he
is sartin to gobble him up. But his time is most up now, 'kase Bob never
fails in any thing when he onct gets his mind sot on it, an' when I
heerd that he was a goin' to ketch this Yank, I believed he would do it.

"It was very encouraging to sit there and listen to a person talk so
confidently of my speedy capture; but, as it happened, I had been put on
my guard, and another thing, I didn't have quite as much faith in Bob
Cole as his rebel friends had, and was in no way concerned about his
being able to fulfill his promise. It set me to thinking, however, and I
determined I would not sleep sound until I had found him, and then there
would be a prisoner taken, sure; but it wouldn't be Bill Striker.

"'What kind of a looking man is he?' I asked, at length.

"'Oh, he's a'--

"Just at this moment we heard several horsemen going by the house, and
Sam exclaimed:

"'There are some of our boys now. Perhaps we are wanted.'

"I knew well enough what he meant. Although we had frequently met rebels
while scouting about through their lines, we were not at all fond of
them, and did not want to be in their company if we could help it.

"Those who had just gone by might at any moment return and enter the
house; and besides, it occurred to me that if I was so well known to the
rebel spy, I was not safe except in our own camp. I might, at any time,
run into a trap he had laid for me. At any rate, we thought it best to
get within our lines as soon as possible; so, without waiting to hear
the woman's description of Bob Cole, we bid her good night.

"We reached our camp in safety, reported our return, and the next
morning I walked up to headquarters, where I remained until dark,
talking with the general's hostler, and keeping an ear open for news,
but was obliged to go away without hearing any. The next day I was kept
busy carrying dispatches, and when I returned at night, I learned that
Sam had gone into the rebel camp, as they were making some movement, the
particulars of which the general was anxious to learn. I thought nothing
of it at the time, but when night came and he did not return, I began to
fear that he had been captured or killed. It then occurred to me that if
I could get back to the house where lived the woman who had told us of
Bob Cole, I might learn something that would be to my advantage; so I
put on my rebel uniform, and in a few moments was out of the lines. I
reached the house in safety, and was delighted to find there were no
rebels about. The woman seemed glad to see me, brought me a cup of water
to drink, and after a few minutes' conversation exclaimed:

"'Wal, they've gobbled up one of them fellers!'

"'Which one?' I asked.

"'I don't know his name. Bob done it. He seed him leave the Yankee camp,
an' follered him, an' while they were ridin' along together, he tuk out
his pistol an' told the Yank to give up his we'pons; but the feller
wouldn't do it, an' Bob had to shoot him. But he didn't kill him; he
only shot him through the shoulder. He's sartin to be hung.'

"You can easily imagine my feelings as I sat there and listened to this.
It required a strong effort to subdue my feelings.

"'How does Bob Cole disguise himself?' I asked, in as firm a voice as I
could command. 'What does he do in the Yankee camp?'

"'That's what nobody, 'sides Bob an' the general, knows,' answered the
woman. 'Didn't you never see him? He's a little man, has black hair and
eyes, wears no whiskers, and allers rides a little gray horse. He's
smart, I tell yer.'

"After talking awhile longer with the woman without learning any thing
further, I mounted my horse and returned to camp. While I was eating my
supper, I called to mind all the scouts with whom I was acquainted, but
not one of them answered to the description of Bob Cole. There was one
man in camp, however, who _did_ answer the description, and that
was the general's hostler. Could it be possible that he was the spy?

"At this moment an orderly entered to tell me that I was wanted at
head-quarters. I followed him to the general's tent, received my orders,
and began to get ready for the journey. As I came out of the tent I met
the hostler, who inquired:

"'Are you off again to-night, Bill?'

"I replied in the affirmative, and he continued:

"'Well, good luck to you. Don't let the rebs get hold of you.'

"I mounted my horse and rode out of the camp, fully satisfied that if he
was the spy I would soon know it.

"The night was very dark, but I had traveled the road often enough to be
well acquainted with it, and in an hour after I left our camp, I had
passed the rebel sentries, and was fairly within their lines. As I was
riding quietly along, keeping a good look-out on all sides, and pausing
now and then to listen, I suddenly heard the clatter of horses' hoofs
behind me, and some one called out, in a low voice:

"Bill! Bill Striker!'

"I instantly stopped, and a moment afterward up galloped the hostler.

"'Don't make so much noise, Jim,' said I, nastily. 'But what on earth
brings you here? Where are you going?'

"'I'm after you,' he replied. 'The general told me to overtake you, and
say that he had neglected to give you some very important orders.'

"All this while he had been coming nearer and nearer to me, and having
now got within reach, he suddenly seized my bridle, and presenting a
revolver, exclaimed:

"'Bill Striker, your scouting is up now! You're my prisoner!'

"If he imagined that he had taken me by surprise he was very much
mistaken. In an instant I had knocked aside the revolver, which
exploded, sending the ball harmlessly past my head, and in a moment more
I had wrested the weapon from him. Then, almost before he had time to
think twice, I lifted him off his horse and laid him across my saddle,
in front of me, as if he had been a bag of corn. He was very strong, as
wiry as an eel, and struggled most desperately; but I had him at
disadvantage, and when I thought of Sam, who was now a prisoner through
the treachery of this fellow, I felt as if I had the strength of ten
men. By the time I had fairly got hold of him, I was tearing down the
road toward our lines, while his own horse had gone on toward the rebel
camp. My only danger was in being cut off by the pickets. These passed,
I would be safe, for I had no fears of being overtaken. There was no
time to avoid them in jumping over fences and running through fields,
for I knew that the report of the revolver had been heard, and that,
unless I could reach our lines in a very few moments, Bob Cole would
again be a free man and I would be the prisoner. I used my spurs freely,
and my horse, which seemed to understand that he was called upon to make
use of his best speed, carried us over the ground at a tremendous rate.
In a short time I came within sight of a fire burning by the side of the
road. I heard a loud command to halt, followed by the noise of a bullet
as it whistled by my head, and the pickets were passed in safety. Half
an hour afterward I dismounted in front of the general's tent, and
delivered up my prisoner. You can't imagine how surprised our boys were
to learn that we had had a rebel spy in our camp so long without knowing
it. Bob Cole had played his cards remarkably well, and if Sam and I had
not stopped at that house to get out of the rain, there's no knowing how
much longer he would have been at liberty. But he was safe in the
guard-house at last, and I must confess that I breathed more freely. If
he was the only rebel who knew me, there was now no danger of running
into a trap laid for my capture. My first hard work must be to attempt
Sam's release. I knew it would be worse than useless to return to the
rebel camp that night, for it had been aroused, and my own chances of
escape would be none of the surest; so I let two days pass before
setting out, and then I did not follow my usual course, but took a
roundabout way to get behind their camp, where I would not run so much
risk of meeting the pickets.

"I reached the lines in safety, and as I was riding along by the side of
the road, keeping my horse on the grass, to make as little noise as
possible, I heard horsemen approaching, and presently up galloped a
party of rebels. I thought they would pass without discovering me, but
was mistaken, for one of them drew in his horse and exclaimed--

"'Wal, ef here an't another,' and I was speedily surrounded, and
commanded to 'hand over my we'pons.'

"'Look here, boys,' said I, 'I've got a pass,' and I made a motion to
produce it.

"'Oh, we don't want to see your pass,' said the corporal who had charge
of the squad; 'we've seed a dozen to-night that wasn't no 'count. You
must go to the guard-house, 'cause you know it's the general's orders
that nobody goes out o' camp.'

"This showed me that I was not suspected of being a Federal, but was
arrested as one of their own men who was endeavoring to get out of the
lines.

"'I know it's mighty hard,' continued the corporal, 'not to let a feller
go home, when p'rhaps it an't five miles off; but orders is orders, you
know. Howsomever, you wont hev no trouble to get out o' the guard-house,
'cause--by gum! ef here an't some more,' and, as he spoke, he left me,
and rode up to three men who were crouching in the fence-corner by the
roadside. These were speedily secured, and we went on our way toward the
guard-house. The rebel army, it appeared, was encamped in a part of the
country where a number of regiments had been raised, and the men,
anxious to see home and friends once more, were deserting by
hundreds--'taking French,' as we call it. As we rode along, I learned
something, from the conversation of my captors, that made me wish I had
never taken Bob Cole prisoner, and that was, that Sam had died from the
effects of the wound he had received while resisting the rebel. This
was, perhaps, better than being hung, but how I wished I had known it
before taking the spy to camp. I had put myself in danger without being
able to be of any assistance to Sam, and I now set my wits to work to
conjure up some plan for escape.

"Finally, after capturing one more rebel who was about to 'take French,'
we reached the guard house, which was a rickety old barn. As we entered
the door, the rebels, with whom the house was filled, greeted us with
loud yells, and slapped us on our backs, as though they looked upon our
capture as a most excellent joke. The majority of our fellow-prisoners
were confined for attempting to leave the camp to visit their friends;
but putting them in the guard-house was only a farce, for I had not been
in the room fifteen minutes before I saw three men make their escape
through a window. I determined to try the same thing; so, after waiting
a few moments, to see that they were not brought back, I walked up to
the window and looked out. A sentinel was standing at the corner of the
building, but as soon as he saw me he shouldered his gun and walked off,
whistling. It was plain that he had no objections to my making my escape
if I wished to do so, and, as soon as he was out of sight, I crawled out
of the window, dropped to the ground, and walked off with an appearance
of unconcern I was very far from feeling.

"I had lost my horse, but that did not trouble me, for the camp was not
far off, and I had no fears of pursuit. I had scarcely got safely out of
their lines, however, before I became aware that I was followed. I
turned and saw a party of men, who, keeping their horses on the grass at
the side of the road, had succeeded in getting within pistol-shot before
I heard them. As I sprang over a fence I heard my name pronounced,
followed by the report of several revolvers and carbines, that sent the
bullets about me altogether too close for comfort.

"Well, to make a long story short, I laid about in the woods for a
month, making a raid now and then on a chicken-roost, to supply my
commissary department; but all this while the rebels followed me like
blood-hounds. I had gone miles out of my way--in fact, I did not know
where I was, until one day I was in with a party of guerrillas. I told
them I was a reb on French leave, and on my way to visit my friends, who
lived on the opposite side of the river. From them I learned that the
Mississippi was sixty miles distant, and was also informed that there
was a gun-boat at Gaines's Landing, and was advised to keep out of her
way. This was the best news I had heard in a long time, and I determined
to make the best of my way here. I came off to the vessel in the night,
because I did not know but there might be rebels on the watch, and as I
was entirely unarmed, I did not want to run any risks. Since leaving our
camp, I have traveled nearly two hundred miles without a weapon of any
kind, not even a pocket-knife; and if either of you has ever been a
prisoner, you can easily imagine that I am overjoyed to find myself safe
among friends once more. And now, captain," continued the scout, "I have
a proposition to make you. The leader of these guerrillas whom I met
back in the country makes his head-quarters in a deserted
plantation-house about forty miles from the river. He never has more
than two or three men with him, the others being scattered over the
country, stealing horses from both rebels and Union people. Now, I would
like to help capture him and break up his band of guerrillas, for he's a
perfect demon, and never takes any prisoners. There is a house about ten
miles from here where we can get all the horses we need, and three or
four men could do the job nicely. This guerrilla's brother was formerly
the captain of the band, but he was killed by a party of rebels, just as
he was about to hang a couple of Union prisoners he had taken--gun-boat
men, I believe. His name is Thorne, and--what's the matter, captain?"

Frank had started upon hearing the name of the guerrilla chief at whose
hands he and the mate had so nearly suffered death, and from which they
were rescued by the Wild-cats, and just as he finished relating the
story of the "Close Shave," the orderly entered the cabin and announced
the dispatch-boat "General Lyon" approaching.




CHAPTER XII.

A Scouting Party.


Frank, of course, could not agree to the scout's proposition without
first obtaining permission of either the admiral or Captain Wilson--the
commander of the division to which the Boxer belonged. He did not know
where to go to find the former, and besides, the latter had given him
strict orders not to leave his station until relieved by some other
vessel, and to allow no one to go ashore. The very nature of these
orders put it out of his power to obtain liberty to carry out the
proposed expedition. He went to bed pondering upon what the major had
told him, and fell asleep without being able to conjure up any plan by
which the capture of the rebel might be effected.

The next morning, while at breakfast, the orderly entered the cabin and
reported a gun-boat approaching. Frank at once went on deck, and when he
had made out her signals, he found, to his delight, that it was the
Manhattan, the flagship of the division to which the Boxer belonged.
After ordering the officer of the deck to have the gig called away,
Frank ran into the cabin, put on his side-arms, and, in company with the
major, put off to the iron-clad.

Captain Wilson received them cordially, listened with a good deal of
interest to the scout's plan for the capture of the guerrilla, and
finally gave Frank permission to "do as he pleased in the matter,"
adding, "You have never yet failed in an undertaking of this kind, and I
shall fully expect you to succeed in the present instance. I will be
here again in about a week, and you can turn the prisoner over to me."
The confident manner in which the captain spoke of his success, made
Frank more determined than ever to capture the guerrilla, if within the
bounds of possibility. After giving a short report of the state of
affairs on his station, he returned to the Boxer, highly delighted with
the result of the interview. Archie was no less pleased, for, although
he had not said a word about accompanying his cousin, he looked upon it
as a settled thing that he was to be one of the expedition. Frank, who
knew the danger of the undertaking, and was anxious to keep Archie out
of harm's way, would have preferred to leave him behind; but, as the
latter had shown, in a remarkable manner, that he was equal to any
emergency, the young commander could not deny him on the ground that he
had never "smelt powder."

The major advised Frank to take at least one more man; and this one was
soon forthcoming in the shape of Tom, the coxswain of the first cutter,
the same who had been left in charge of the boat on the night that Frank
and Archie had broken up the head-quarters of the "Louisiana Wildcats."
He was at once summoned into the cabin, and after the object of the
proposed expedition had been explained to him, Frank inquired: "Now,
Tom, do you want to go with us?" "Douse my to'-gallant top-lights! yes
sir," he replied, eagerly. "But, Cap'n Nelson, I wouldn't like to be
left behind, sir, when it comes to the dangerous part of the business,
like I was on the night when the paymaster burned that house. I want to
go with you to the end, sir, an' if I ever show the white feather, then
may I be keelhauled!"

Frank assured him that he would be allowed to accompany them wherever
they went, and the coxswain departed satisfied.

When night came, the gig was called away, and Frank, accompanied by the
major, Archie, and the coxswain, was set on shore. When the boat had
returned to the vessel, which was now in command of the executive
officer, the major led his companions through the woods toward the place
where the horses were to be obtained. They traveled in silence,
following the motions of their guide, who walked along as if he well
understood what he was about. The expedition certainly promised better
than any in which Frank had before engaged. It was led by a man
accustomed to scenes of danger, and was altogether composed of those
whose courage and determination had, more than once, been thoroughly
tested. They were all well armed, and, in addition to a brace of
revolvers, the coxswain carried a heavy saber; for, as he remarked, he
might be called upon to "repel boarders," and he wanted some weapon that
he knew how to use.

After three or four hours' walk through the woods they came to a fence,
where the major paused. Before them was a wide field, in which stood a
plantation-house. Bright lights gleamed in the windows, and the major
turned to his companions and said:

"There are more people in the house than there were last night."

They all listened intently, and could hear an indistinct murmur of
voices, and now and then the tramping of horses in the road that ran in
front of the house.

"There are some rebel soldiers in there," continued the major, "and we
can now get our horses without any difficulty, already saddled and
bridled."

As he spoke, he led the way along the fence toward the road, and they
presently came in sight of half a dozen horses which were tied in front
of the house. No orders were necessary, for each one knew what was
required of him. In a few moments they had quietly secured their horses,
and were riding noiselessly down the road. As soon as they were out of
sight of the house, they began to make an examination of their prizes,
and found that the rebels, who, no doubt, had little dreamed that any
one would disturb them there, had left their sabers attached to their
saddles, and their pistols in their holsters. Frank and Archie also
found themselves possessed, the former of a fine double-barrel shot-gun,
loaded with buck-shot, and the latter of a heavy carbine; and the
ammunition for each of these weapons had been left on the saddles. The
horses were splendid animals, evidently the fruits of a raid upon some
well-stocked barn-yard, for they appeared fresh and vigorous, and had
undoubtedly been accustomed to the best of care. As soon as they were
out of hearing of the people in the house, they put their horses into a
gallop, and as the road was excellent, they made rapid headway. For hour
after hour they kept on, stopping only now and then to water their
horses. Just before daylight the major, who had scarcely spoken during
the whole ride, suddenly came to a halt. As his companions gathered
about him, he said, almost in a whisper: "Now, boys, we are at our
journey's end. There's the house!" and as he spoke, he pointed to a
large building just ahead of them. "My advice, captain," he continued,
turning to Frank, "would be to ride carefully up in front of the house,
hitch our horses--for of course, we must not lose them--and then burst
open the door and gobble up the guerrilla before he has time to get out
of bed."

This plan was adopted. Riding noiselessly up to the gate, they
dismounted, and after tying their horses, they drew their sabers (as it
was their intention to rely entirely upon the _sight_ of these
weapons to bring the guerrilla to terms). Then they entered the yard,
and ascended the steps that led on to a wide portico. Here the major,
who was in advance, paused a moment, to see that his companions were
close behind him, and then, placing his shoulder against the door, with
one strong push, forced it open. They all sprang into the house, Frank
and Archie being close beside the major, and found themselves, to their
utter astonishment, in the presence of a dozen guerrillas, who started
from their blankets in alarm. So great was their surprise, that both
parties for an instant stood gazing at each other, as if suddenly
deprived of the power of action.

"Sink my tarry wig, Cap'n Nelson, but here's a scrape for honest men to
be in!" exclaimed the coxswain, who had kept as close to his officer as
possible. "Here _is_ a scrape!"

Their position was not an enviable one. There they were, forty miles
from their vessel, almost in the heart of an enemy's country, and
confronted by three times their number of armed rebels, who, no doubt,
could be speedily reinforced. It was too late to retreat, even had they
felt disposed to do so. But the idea never once entered their heads. So
intent were they upon the capture of the guerrilla chief, that they
thought of nothing else, and they were perfectly well aware that the
only way to get out of the house was to fight their way through their
enemies.

The period of inaction lasted only for an instant; then a few of the
rebels, springing to their feet, retreated precipitately through the
back door; but the others, recovering from their surprise, and
comprehending the nature of the attack, bravely stood their ground, and
one tall fellow sprang forward and struck savagely at the major with his
sword. But the scout was on the alert, receiving the blow upon his own
saber, and before the rebel had time to renew his attack, a shot from a
revolver stretched him lifeless on the floor.

This opened the fight. The example of the rebel was quickly followed by
his comrades, who, depending wholly upon their sabers, rushed upon the
officers with the utmost fury. But they were bravely met. The latter
stubbornly held their ground, and parrying the blows directed at them,
used their revolvers with deadly effect. At this moment a door at the
further end of the hall suddenly opened, and a man sprang out, carrying
a short, heavy sword.

"Give it to 'em, lads!" he shouted, hurrying forward to join in the
fight. "Give it to 'em. No quarter to the Yankees!"

This was the guerrilla chief, and the order he had just given told Frank
and his companions, in plain language, that if overpowered, no mercy
would be shown them.

The rebels, encouraged by the voice of their leader, redoubled the fury
of their attacks, and the officers were driven to the wall. The
coxswain, on entering, had closed the door to prevent the escape of the
guerrilla, and thus their retreat was cut off; but they had the
advantage of position, for the rebels, unable to get behind them, must
make their attacks in front. Already had their ranks been thinned by the
fire of the revolvers, but those who had at first retreated now began to
return and take the places of those who had been shot down. At last
Frank's revolver was empty. He had another in his pocket, but could not
get an opportunity to draw it. He must now depend upon his saber.
Grasping it with both hands, he bravely met the attack of the leader of
the guerrillas, who had succeeded in working his way in front of him.
The latter's heavy sword descended with terrible force. Frank's guard
was broken down, and he was sent reeling to the floor. The rebel again
raised his sword, and, as Frank was entirely unarmed, he gave himself up
for lost. One thought of home, of his mother and sister, flashed through
his mind, and then he saw the bright blade swiftly descending. It was
met, however, by the coxswain, who seeing the danger of his officer,
interposed his own sword, and turned the rebel's weapon aside. Frank was
on his feet again in an instant, and seeing a musket, with a bayonet
attached, standing in the corner, he seized it with a shout of joy. If
there was any thing he thoroughly understood, it was the
bayonet-exercise. He remembered that the knowledge of it had once saved
his life, and he had never let an opportunity to perfect himself in it
pass unimproved. He now felt safe; and seeing the coxswain gradually
retreating before the furious attacks of the guerrilla chief, he sprang
forward, and with one blow sent the sword flying from his hand and bore
him to the floor. This move was seconded by Archie, who sprang to his
cousin's side with a revolver in each hand, firing right and left among
the rebels, who, dismayed at the fall of their leader, began to retreat.
But so closely were they followed, that escape was impossible. The
chief, after trying in vain to regain his feet, and seeing the bayonet
pointed straight at his breast, shouted most lustily for quarter.

"Surrender!" shouted the major. "Throw down your arms!"

The rebels having lost more than half of their number, and knowing the
deadly effects of the revolvers which were aimed at their heads, gladly
complied, and the fight was at an end.

Although Frank and his companions had heard the order, "No quarter to
the Yankees!" the thought of taking vengeance upon those who, had they
been the victors, would have shown no mercy, never once entered their
heads--they were more humane.

With the surrender of the rebels the object of the expedition had been
accomplished--the guerrilla chief was their prisoner!




CHAPTER XIII.

Tom the Coxswain.


Now that the excitement was over, and Frank began to think more calmly,
he found that he was wounded. The blow which had broken down his guard
had spent its force on his head, which was bleeding profusely from a
long, ragged cut. His face and clothing were covered with blood, but the
wound had caused him no inconvenience. After Archie had bandaged it with
his handkerchief, Frank began to look about him. The force of the rebels
had originally consisted of fifteen men, of whom eight were lying,
either dead or wounded, upon the floor. He could scarcely believe his
eyes, and wondered how he and his companions had ever secured a victory
against such heavy odds. Had the rebels, instead of relying upon their
sabers and the superiority of their numbers, made use of the firearms
that during the fight had become scattered about the hall, the result
would have been far different. The fight, although a most severe one
while it lasted, was not of more than five minutes' duration, and during
that time eight rebels had been disabled, and six captured by four
determined men; one only had escaped. As Archie afterward said, in a
letter to his father, "It was the biggest _little_ fight" he was
ever engaged in.

"Now, boys," said the major, as soon as he had satisfied himself that
the remaining rebels were disarmed, "we've no time to lose. Paymaster,
you and the coxswain station yourselves in those doors, and keep a good
look-out, to prevent surprise. Captain, we will secure these prisoners."

One of the blankets that lay on the floor was speedily cut into strips,
and with these the rebels, one after the other, were bound hand and
foot. While this was going on, the leader of the guerrillas stood
leaning against the wall, no doubt looking into the future, and
pondering upon the punishment which, according to his own barbarous mode
of warfare, he was certain would be meted out to him. He well knew what
course _he_ would have pursued, had he been the victor instead of
the prisoner, and, judging his captors by himself, he fully expected a
speedy and terrible vengeance to be taken upon him. As these thoughts
passed through his mind, he determined to make one bold effort at
escape. Hastily glancing toward the door, where Archie stood looking up
and down the road, he suddenly sprang forward, and giving him a violent
push, that sent him headlong upon the portico, he jumped down the steps,
and started for the gate at the top of his speed; but before he had gone
half the distance, he was overtaken by the coxswain and thrown to the
ground. The sailor, instead of standing in the door, in his eagerness,
as he expressed it, to "ketch the first glimpse of any guerrilla craft
that might be sailin' about," had come round to the front of the house
just as the rebel had made his attempt to escape. Archie sprang to his
feet and ran to the assistance of the coxswain, and by the time Frank
and the major arrived, the rebel, who struggled most desperately, had
been overpowered, and his hands bound behind his back. In a few moments
more the prisoners were all secured, and, after a horse had been caught
and saddled, the guerrilla placed upon it, his hands still bound, and
the coxswain was ordered to take charge of him. The dead and wounded,
together with the other prisoners, were left in the house, the doors of
which were closed and fastened. They would, no doubt, soon be relieved
by their friends, for the rebel who had escaped would, of course,
procure assistance as soon as possible.

As soon as the major had satisfied himself that every thing was ready
for the start, he mounted his horse and led the way down the road. It
was now broad daylight, and their first thought was to place a safe
distance between themselves and the scene of the fight, and then halt in
the woods until night, when they would return to the vessel. But if this
plan was adopted, it would give the guerrillas, who, of course, would
hasten to the rescue of their leader, time to get between them and the
river, in which case their capture was certain. Frank, who believed that
every instant of time was valuable, and who delighted in dashing
exploits, was in favor of returning at once to the vessel. Their horses
were comparatively fresh, and, if they rode rapidly, they could make
good their retreat before a sufficient force could be collected to
pursue them. The major and Frank talked over these different plans as
they rode along side by side, and the latter course was finally adopted.
It was at once communicated to the others, and they pushed forward with
all possible speed. Frank and the major rode in front, followed by the
coxswain, who held fast to the horse which their prisoner rode, and
Archie brought up the rear. In this manner they dashed along, passing
several plantation-houses, whose inmates ran to the doors and gazed at
them in astonishment. Half a dozen miles were passed over in this way
without stopping, except to water their horses, and without seeing a
single armed rebel, and Frank began to hope that the dangerous part of
the undertaking was passed. If attacked by a superior force, the chances
were that they would not only lose their prisoner, whose capture had
been effected in so gallant a manner, but also their own liberty, and
the thought of the treatment they would receive, judging by the order
the guerrilla chief had given his men at the commencement of the fight,
was enough to nerve them to make the greatest exertions to effect their
escape. They had reloaded their pistols, the effective use of which had
gained them a victory over almost four times their number, and Frank and
Archie carried the shot-gun and carbine which they had found attached to
the saddles of their horses, ready for instant use.

The rapid pace at which they were traveling had, at the end of an hour,
put half a dozen miles more between them and the house where the fight
had taken place, and they began to hope that, if they were followed at
all, they were leaving the enemy behind. At length they came to a place
where the road ran through a deep ravine, the sides of which were
thickly covered with trees and bushes. They dashed along, their horses
hoofs ringing loud and clear on the hard road, but as they came suddenly
around a bend, almost before they were aware of it, they had run into
the very midst of a small band of rebels, who were traveling as rapidly
as themselves. They were not entirely unprepared for this encounter.
Although they had hoped that they might be able to avoid it, they had
held themselves in readiness for it, while the rebels, being taken by
surprise, scattered in every direction, as if fully expecting to see a
whole army of Federals close at their heels. As they dashed by, Frank
fired both barrels of his gun, which emptied more than one saddle, and
the others had just time to follow with a volley from their revolvers,
when another bend in the road hid them from sight. It was quickly done.
Before the rebels had time to think twice, the danger was over. The
enemy had met them, sent three of their number to the ground, and
disappeared as rapidly as they had come. But the rebels did not remain
long inactive. They quickly satisfied themselves that those who had just
passed were not the advance-guard of an army, as they had at first
supposed, and presently the officers heard the clatter of hoofs behind
them, accompanied with loud yells, and knew that the guerrillas had
commenced the pursuit. Although, as we have said, the rebels had but a
small force, they still greatly outnumbered Frank's party, and nothing
but the most rapid flight could save them. Frank's only fear was that
their pursuers would come in sight of them, and begin to pick them off
at long range with their carbines, a proceeding which nothing but the
numerous windings in the road prevented.

"If we do not get into a scrimmage, boys," said the major, speaking as
calmly as though he was at that very moment safe in the cabin of the
Boxer, "we must stick together, if possible; but if they come on us in a
heavy force, we must separate and every man take care of himself."

"Oh, you needn't look so mighty pleased, Johnny!" exclaimed the
coxswain, addressing himself to his prisoner, who now looking upon his
rescue as beyond a doubt, could not repress a smile of triumph. "Shiver
my timbers! you're not loose yet. You're just as safe here as though you
were in the brig [Footnote: The brig is a small dark apartment in the
hold of a vessel, in which culprits are confined.] and in double irons.
Look as mad as you please, Johnny," he continued, as the guerrilla
scowled savagely upon him, "a man who has smelt powder in a'most every
battle fought on the Mississippi River an't often skeered by looks."

The major had, several times during the retreat, cautioned the coxswain
to keep a fast hold of his prisoner, and not to allow him to escape
under any circumstances. But Frank, who knew his man, had never thought
the caution necessary. He had often seen the sailor in action on board
ship, and the gallant manner in which he had saved his officer's life
during the fight at the house, had fully satisfied the young commander
that the coxswain was not the man to shrink from his duty because it was
dangerous. His reply to the major had been:

"If this Johnny rebel an't safe in the brig tonight, sir, then Captain
Nelson will have to make a new cox'son for the first cutter, an' another
cap'n for that number two gun. I'll either take him safe through, or
I'll never hear the bo'son pipe to dinner ag'in."

All this while they had been tearing along the road as fast as their
horses could carry them, but rapidly as they went, the sounds of pursuit
grew louder, and the yells fiercer and more distinct, showing that the
guerrillas were gaining on them. Suddenly they emerged from the woods,
and found before them a long, straight road, with broad fields on each
side. Before they could pass this, the rebels would certainly come in
sight, and, if they did not overtake them, they would at least open fire
on them with their carbines.

Frank gradually drew in his horse and fell back beside his cousin.
Archie was deadly pale, but he sat firmly on his horse and handled his
carbine with a steady hand.

"Archie," said he, "you and I must cover the retreat of the others.
Don't waste your ammunition now."

They had accomplished perhaps a quarter of the distance across the road
when the foremost of their pursuers came in sight. In an instant Archie
turned in his saddle, and leaving his horse to pick out his own road, he
raised his gun to his shoulder and fired. A moment afterward a riderless
horse was rearing and plunging about among the rebels, throwing them
into confusion. This was the time for Frank, and he discharged both
barrels of his gun in quick succession. The buckshot must have done
terrible execution, for when the smoke cleared away, they saw the rebels
retreating to the cover of the bushes. One, more daring than the rest,
lingered a moment, to fire his carbine, and the fugitives heard the
bullet sing through the air above their heads.

Although they were not more than five minutes crossing the road and
entering the woods on the opposite side, it seemed an age to them, and
they had scarcely reached the cover of the trees, when the rebels again
coming in sight, fired a scattering volley after them, which rattled
through the trees and sent a shower of leaves and twigs about them. The
guerrillas then continued the pursuit as fiercely as ever, every time
they came in sight firing their carbines, which Archie answered with
effect; but they wisely kept out of range of the buck-shot in Frank's
double-barrel.

Hour after hour the chase continued, the guerrillas every time they
appeared having their ranks thinned by Archie's unerring rifle, until
finally the fugitives heard a sound that told them in plain language
that their danger was yet by no means passed. A whole chorus of hoarse
yells arose from the depths of the woods, showing that their pursuers
had received heavy reinforcements, and were urging forward their horses
to overtake them, But the river was not more than two miles distant, and
as the rebels were fully a quarter of a mile behind, they were confident
they would yet escape, if their horses could hold out fifteen minutes
longer. For some time past this had been their only fear. The rapid pace
was telling on the animals severely, and Frank's horse especially began
to show signs of distress, the young commander having several times been
obliged to use the point of his saber to compel him to keep pace with
the others. The rebels gained rapidly, and presently, just as the
fugitives emerged from the woods, in full view of the river, they could
hear the tramping of their horses behind them. Before them was a clear
space of fully a mile in extent, that must be crossed before they
reached the river, and their pursuers might overtake and capture them
within sight of their vessel. Presently several men were seen running
about on the deck of the Boxer, and then a puff of smoke arose from one
of the ports, and a shell went shrieking over their heads and burst in
the woods.

The crew of the vessel, in obedience to Frank's orders, had kept a good
look-out for them, and hearing the yells of the pursuing rebels, had at
once opened fire. When the smoke cleared away, Frank saw the crew of the
gig hurrying to their places. The boat was lowered into the water, and
pulled rapidly toward the shore. If they could but reach the bank of the
river they would be safe. At this moment the rebels appeared in sight,
and a volley from their carbines sent the bullets about the fugitives
like hail-stones. Frank turned in his saddle and fired one barrel of his
gun among them, and was about to give them the contents of the other,
when his horse stumbled and fell, throwing him at full length on the
ground. Frank had been expecting this, and for the last half hour had
ridden with his feet out of the stirrups, so that in case the accident
did happen, he would not be entangled in the saddle. As it was, he was
thrown some distance in advance of the horse, which, too exhausted to
rise, lay panting on the ground. Frank, however, instantly recovered his
feet, and was about to start after his companions, when he saw the
coxswain, with a knife in his hand, working desperately to free himself
from the saddle of his own fallen horse. Frank at once sprang to his
assistance, and catching the knife from his hand, severed the strap that
confined him, and set him at liberty. The coxswain, as soon as he had
regained his feet, ran up to the horse which the prisoner rode, and
which had stopped the moment the sailor fell, and pulling the guerrilla
from the saddle, lifted him in his arms as though he had been an infant,
and ran toward the boat. The rebels by this time were within easy
rifle-range, and in spite of the shells that burst about them, seemed
determined to effect the release of their leader, until one more
accurately aimed than the others, exploded in their very midst, cutting
down horses and riders with terrible slaughter; another and another
followed, and when Frank and his companions stepped into the gig, the
rebels were in full retreat. When they arrived on board the vessel, the
coxswain delivered his prisoner to the master-at-arms, who ironed him,
and lodged him safely in the brig.

Their long ride had taxed their endurance to the utmost; but, by the
next day, they had fully recovered from their fatigue, and shortly after
dinner Frank ordered the officer of the deck to have all hands mustered.
The crew speedily assembled on the quarter-deck, and among them stood
the coxswain, who, at a motion from Frank, stepped out from among his
companions, holding his cap in his hand, and looking altogether like a
man who expected "a good blowing up" for some grievous offense. But he
soon found that he was not to be reprimanded, for, to his utter
astonishment, Frank proceeded to give the officers and crew a full
account of the fight at the house, speaking in the highest terms of the
old sailor's bravery. He then addressed the coxswain, saying:

"Now, Tom, what can I do for you? What do you want? Would you like a
leave of absence, to go home and visit your friends?"

"Avast heavin' there, Cap'n Nelson, if you please!" answered the
coxswain, hastily. "I was brought up on board a man-o'-war, sir," he
continued, whirling his cap in his hand, "an' have follered the sea for
goin' nigh on to thirty-five year, but this is the first time I ever had
my cap'n say, 'Thank ye, Tom,' to me for doin' my duty. I an't the only
chap, sir, that wouldn't see harm come to you. There's many a man in
this crew that would have done the same thing, at the risk of his own
life. As for home an' friends, sir, I have none. But, cap'n, there's one
favor I have thought of askin' you for. There's no gunner's-mate on
board this vessel, an' I think I can take charge of the magazine--don't
you, sir?"

This was a small reward for a man to ask of the captain, who would
gladly have granted him any favor in his power; but promotion on board
ship, among the men, is given only to the most deserving, and the old
sailor made this request with a timidity he had never shown before an
enemy; and even after he had made it, he regarded his officer as though
he fully expected a refusal. But Frank, who could scarcely refrain from
smiling at the man's earnest manner, turned to Archie and said:

"Paymaster, please rate Thomas Willis on your books as gunner's-mate
from the time the other mate was discharged."

This was something more than the coxswain had expected. The former
gunner's-mate had been discharged from the service nearly two months
before, and this gave the old sailor a considerable amount of back pay.
Frank had delayed the appointment of a gunner's-mate, not because he did
not need one, but because there were many good men among his crew, and
he wished to give the appointment to the most deserving, and thus make
promotion something worth working for. Frank then dismissed the men, who
returned to the lower deck, fully satisfied in their own minds that
"Cap'n Nelson was the best man any crew ever sailed under."




CHAPTER XIV.

A Rebel Trick.


The next day Frank and the major made out their reports of the
expedition. The former's, as usual, was short and to the point,
conveying, in a few lines, the information that their object had been
accomplished. He described the fight in the house as a "short skirmish,"
and made it appear that their success was owing to the gallant behavior
of the major, Archie, and the coxswain. In fact, one, to have read the
report, would have supposed that Frank had been merely a looker-on,
instead of one of the principal actors. But the major went more into
details, and the part Frank had taken in the fight was described in
glowing language, and his bravery highly complimented. While thus
engaged, the orderly entered the cabin and reported a small party of
rebels approaching with a flag of truce. Frank went on deck, and saw
several men galloping toward the vessel, waving a white flag, to attract
their attention. When they reached the top of the bank, they dismounted
from their horses, and appeared to be waiting for some one to come
ashore.

For some moments, Frank was undecided how to act. He remembered that he
had once been sent on shore with a flag of truce which had not been
respected, he having been detained a prisoner, and he did not like the
idea of receiving a white flag from men whom he knew would not respect
it themselves; besides, he had received no orders in regard to
communicating with the rebels, and he did not know whether he had a
right to do so or not.

"Well, major, what do you think of this, sir?" he asked, turning toward
the scout, who stood close at his side.

"It's a trick of some kind, captain," replied the latter. "Depend upon
it, it's a trick."

"If that is so," said Frank, "I will try and find out what it is." Then,
raising his voice, he called out, "What do you want out there?"

"I want to come on board," shouted one of the rebels, in reply. "I want
to see the captain."

"Well, speak out; you can't come on board. What do you want?"

The rebels consulted together for a few moments, and then one of them
replied:

"We have a Yankee prisoner, and want to exchange him for Captain Thorne.
If you will let one of us come on board, perhaps we can make some
arrangements with you."

"You can't come on board," shouted Frank, "that's settled. But where's
your prisoner?"

"Out in the woods, under guard."

"They've got no prisoner, captain," said the major. "All they want is to
see the inside of your vessel, and find out how many men and guns you
have."

"Well, they'll have to go away without accomplishing their object," said
Frank. "I can't make any arrangements for an exchange," he shouted,
"until I see your prisoner."

The rebels lingered a moment, as if in consultation, and then mounted
their horses and rode away. Every one who had heard the conversation
laughed at the idea of attempting to deceive Captain Nelson with so
shallow a trick, and the circumstance was soon forgotten by all except
Frank, who knew that the guerrillas would not abandon their project
simply because their first attempt had failed. Although he made no
remark, he resolved to be doubly vigilant, and to be ready for any
emergency.

Two days afterward the dispatch-boat came alongside, on her way up the
river, and the major took passage on her for Cairo.

"I'm sorry to be obliged to leave you, captain," said he, as he stood
ready to start, "for, if I am not very much mistaken, you'll have lively
times here before long. The rebels are up to something, depend upon it.
Don't let them catch you off your guard. Good luck to you!"

It was lonesome in the cabin after the major left, for he was a good
companion, and both Frank and Archie had become very much attached to
him.

The dispatch-boat had scarcely left the Boxer, when the officer of the
deck reported a canoe approaching. It came from up the river, and, by
the aid of the spy-glass, they discovered that it contained two men and
was loaded with vegetables. It was customary for gun-boats to purchase
such provisions as they needed from the people who lived along the
banks, and in some places market-boats were received regularly every
day. The men were paid, either in money, or, as they generally
preferred, in coffee, flour, or sugar, from the paymaster's store-rooms;
but this was the first time the Boxer had ever been visited, and this
circumstance, taken in connection with the flag of truce, made Frank
suspicious.

"Shall we allow them to come alongside, sir?" asked the officer of the
deck.

"Yes," replied Frank, who had already determined upon his plans, "allow
them to come on board, if they wish to do so;" and here he gave the
officer a few rapid orders, which the latter hurried below to execute.
The Boxer had a full crew of sixty-five men, who were in an admirable
state of discipline; but Frank had sent the officer below to order the
most of the men into the hold, out of sight, and to remove the small
arms about the deck. The major's warning was still ringing in his ears,
and the young commander could not rid himself of the impression that the
market men who were now approaching were in some way connected with
guerrillas. If it was a trick, he resolved to help it along. As the boat
approached, it was hailed by the sentinel on the fore-castle, who asked
the men their business, and was informed that they had "garden truck"
which they wanted to "swap for sugar, flour, an' sich like."

The men were then permitted to come alongside, and one of them was at
once conducted into the cabin, where a bargain was soon concluded, Frank
agreeing to take the whole boatload of vegetables, and to give the man
two pounds of flour, three pounds of sugar, and six pounds of coffee.
The young commander was now fully satisfied that the only object of the
men in visiting the vessel was not to dispose of their vegetables, for
the man rather overdid his part. He gazed with open mouth at every thing
he saw, in regular country style, but it was not natural, most of his
wonder, as Archie expressed it, being "put on." The latter went below to
order his steward to procure the provisions, and the man inquired--

"Will yer let a feller look about a leetle? This is the fust time I was
ever on a gun-boat."

"Certainly," replied Archie, who had received his instructions from
Frank; "look about all you please;" and while the steward was weighing
the coffee and sugar, he accompanied the man about the vessel. There
were not more than a dozen sailors on deck, and most of these appeared
to be asleep.

"Be these all the fellers you-uns hev got?" asked the man.

"What's the use of having any more?" replied Archie. "There's no danger
here."

"That's so," was the answer; "I haint seed a rebel round for more 'n six
months, dog-gone if I hev."

The man walked slowly about the deck, carefully examining every thing he
saw, and acting altogether like a backwoodsman who had never seen a
gun-boat before. Finally, he said:

"I've heered as how all these 'ere boats hev got hot water; has yourn?"

"Oh, yes, we've got plenty of hot water, but it takes an hour to screw
the hose on, so that we can use it."

By this time the provisions were ready, and the market men took their
departure, expressing themselves fully satisfied that it wouldn't be a
"healthy job" for any rebels to attempt the capture of the Boxer, and
promising to be on hand the next day but one with more "garden truck."

As soon as their boat was out of sight, the hatches were raised, the
crew poured up out of the hold, and in a short time the Boxer's deck
presented its usual appearance of neatness and order. Frank's object had
been accomplished, for the market men had gone away satisfied that
twenty determined men could easily effect the capture of the gun-boat,
and they seemed determined to make the most of what they had seen.
Gaines's Landing had been a regular mail station, and the rebels had
only been deterred from sending it across the river by the presence of
the Boxer. The market men, however, had discovered, as they supposed,
that the vessel was but poorly manned, and this being communicated to
their leader, (for, as Frank had suspected, they belonged to a
regularly-organized band of guerrillas,) the latter determined to
dispatch his mail at once.

That night, about ten o'clock, as Frank and Archie sat in the cabin
reading, the orderly reported that lights were seen moving about on
shore. This was something unusual, and when Frank had watched the light
for a moment, he came to the conclusion that the rebels were making some
movements, the nature of which he was, of course, unable to determine;
but he resolved, if possible, to find out what was going on, and turning
to the officer of the deck, ordered the cutter to be called away and
furnished with an armed crew. This order was speedily and quietly
executed, and when the boat was ready, Frank and his cousin stepped into
it, and were pulled noiselessly up the river. The place where the light
shone was about half a mile from the vessel, and when they came opposite
to it, the crew rested on their oars, giving only an occasional stroke
to keep the cutter from floating down the stream, and waited impatiently
for the rebels to show themselves.

The light, which gleamed from the shore opposite to the town, seemed to
come from a dark lantern, for it would blaze up brightly for a moment,
and then disappear. Presently an answering light was shown from the
shore nearest to them, when Archie whispered--

"There's a boat coming!"

Frank listened, and could hear the slow, measured strokes of oars, which
grew louder and louder as the boat approached. It seemed to be heading
directly toward them, and in a few moments more it could be dimly seen,
moving through the darkness.

"Give way together!" commanded Frank, and the cutter, propelled by
twelve oars, shot alongside the approaching boat, and the sailors seized
the gunwale and held her fast. Resistance was useless. Three rebels
quietly delivered up their weapons, and one large, well-filled mail-bag
was stowed away under the stern sheets of the cutter. The prisoners were
taken on board the Boxer, and delivered into the charge of the
master-at-arms, while their boat, a leaky affair, requiring constant
bailing to keep it afloat, was unceremoniously allowed to sink. The
light on the opposite shore was still shown, now at shorter intervals,
as if the persons who were managing it had begun to grow impatient. This
was the source of much merriment among the sailors, who hoped the
"rebels would not grow tired of waiting for their mail."

The next day the Manhattan again came up the river, and, as she
approached, made signals for Frank to go on board of her. The gig was
called away, and taking the reports of the expedition the young officer
and his prisoners shortly stood in the presence of Captain Wilson, who,
as soon as he had secured the prisoners, conducted Frank into the cabin.
The latter, after presenting his reports, proceeded to give the captain
a history of the expedition which had resulted in the capture of the
guerrilla chief, of the interview with the flag of truce, and of the
manner in which he had deceived the market men and captured the mail,
upon hearing which the captain sprang from his chair, and giving Frank a
hearty slap on the back, exclaimed:

"Well done, sir! well done! Then you are not entirely unprepared to hear
what I have to tell you. I picked up a runaway darkey yesterday, who
informs me that the rebels are making preparations to capture the
Boxer!"

"I knew something was going on, sir," replied Frank, "and if that is
what they are up to, they will not find me unprepared."

"Well, that is what they intend to do. They have been building two large
boats, into which they are going to put a sufficient force to overpower
you. The attempt is to be made on Wednesday night. Of course, they hope
to be able to take you by surprise. This contraband I picked up says he
worked on the boats, and that they will hold about forty men each. I
shall not be far off when the fight takes place, although I do not
suppose you will need any assistance."

The two officers then began an examination of the mail, in hopes it
would throw some further light upon the movements of the guerrillas; but
most of the letters were unofficial, and not a word was said about the
proposed attempt to capture the Boxer.

At the end of an hour, Frank returned on board his vessel, and the
Manhattan steamed down the river toward her station.




CHAPTER XV.

Honorably Discharged.


When Frank reached the Boxer, he sent for the executive officer, told
him of what he had heard, and also laid before him the plans he had
adopted to defeat the rebels, which met the hearty approval of that
gentleman. Frank did not think it best to delay putting the vessel in a
state of defense, for the rebels might make the attempt at any time; so
he instructed the executive officer to see that the men were kept under
cover, so that the rebels, if any were on the watch, might not be able
to judge of their numbers. When hammocks were piped that night, not more
than a dozen men answered the call, and when bedtime came, the sailors
stretched themselves out on deck, ready to take their posts at a
moment's warning. The guns were all carefully loaded, the hot-water hose
got ready for use, and the anchor fixed so that it could be slipped in
an instant. Outside, the appearance of the vessel was not changed, the
only thing noticeable being the quantity of smoke that came out of her
chimneys. At eight o'clock Frank inspected the boat, and after seeing
that every man was in his place, he lay down on the sofa in the cabin,
without removing his clothes, and fell asleep. When he awoke, he arose
and went on deck, just as the ship's bell was striking midnight. It was
very dark, and the only sound that broke the stillness was the splashing
of the wheels of a steamer as she went on her way up the river. For an
hour he remained on deck, listening, but without hearing any thing
suspicious until just as he was about to return to the cabin. He had
started down the stairs, when he heard a slight splashing ahead of the
vessel, like a heavy oar dipped carefully into the water. He listened a
moment, and the sound was repeated.

"There they are! They're coming, sure!" said Archie, who stood at his
cousin's side.

"Yes, sir," said Tom, the gunner's-mate, who, in his eagerness to be the
first to announce the approach of the rebels, had remained on deck
during the whole night. "That's them, sir!"

"Tell the officer of the deck to call all hands to quarters as quietly
as possible," said Frank.

The officer ran below, and the young commander heard the sound again,
still faint, but nearer and more distinct than the others. It was well
that he had not put off his preparations to receive the rebels, for they
were certainly approaching. Presently the pilots came up and took their
stations at the wheel, and a moment afterward the executive officer came
up and reported the crew ready for action. So quietly had the men been
aroused, that Frank had not heard them as they moved to their stations.
Nearer and nearer came the sound of oars, and suddenly a large flatboat,
crowded with men, loomed up through the darkness.

"On deck, there!" whispered Frank, leaning over the rail and speaking to
a sailor on the forecastle. "Slip that anchor."

There was the rattling of a chain as this order was executed, and as the
man sprang through one of the ports, a sheet of flame covered the
forecastle, and two twenty-four pound shells went crashing and shrieking
among the rebels.

The pilots rang the bell for the engineers to "come ahead," and as the
Boxer turned out into the river, thus bringing her broadside guns to
bear on the boat, two more shells completed the ruin. The rebels were
caught in their own trap. Their boat was sinking, half their number
either dead or wounded, and all who were able to swim were springing
into the water and making for the nearest shore.

It was so dark Frank could not see the havoc that had been made among
the guerrillas, and he was about to give them another broadside, when he
heard loud cries for quarter. That boat was disposed of, and he turned
to look for the other, (for Captain Wilson had said there were two of
them,) but it was not to be seen. As he afterward learned, the
guerrillas, having been completely deceived as to the force of the
Boxer, had crowded sixty men into one boat, thinking that force
sufficient to insure an easy victory. After running up the river nearly
a mile without seeing any signs of the boat, the Boxer returned to her
station, and found the rebel craft hard and fast aground. Her deck was
covered with dead and wounded, and Frank at once turned his attention to
taking care of the latter. Twenty-three wounded guerrillas were conveyed
on board the vessel, and delivered into the charge of the doctor and his
steward, together with nearly a dozen prisoners, who, being unable to
swim, had not dared to leave the boat. The dead were left where they had
fallen. The Boxer then returned to her anchorage, and Frank, feeling
safe for the remainder of the night, ordered hammocks to be piped, a
command which the sailors gladly obeyed, for their soft mattresses were
much more comfortable than the hard deck. By the time every thing had
been restored to order, the quarter-master reported the Manhattan
approaching. Frank answered her signals, and as she came alongside,
Captain Wilson sprang on board.

"How is it, captain?" he inquired, as Frank met him at the gangway.
"Mercy!" he exclaimed, as he entered the door and saw the wounded rebels
lying in rows on the deck. "Lively while it lasted, wasn't it? How many
men have you lost?"

"None, sir," replied Frank. "If the rebels fired a shot at us, I don't
know it."

"When I heard the firing," continued the captain, "I was afraid you had
neglected to make preparations to receive them, and had got yourself
into a bad scrape. But I see you are able to take care of yourself."

The captain then returned on board his vessel, which moved out into the
river and came to anchor at a short distance from the Boxer, while Frank
retired to his room and fell asleep, well satisfied with his night's
work.

Early the next morning, a single rebel appeared on the bank, with a flag
of truce, and a boat being sent out from the Manhattan, he was conveyed
on board that vessel. In a short time, however, it returned and set the
rebel on board the Boxer.

"I want permission to bury our dead," said the guerrilla, on being shown
into the cabin.

"You must see Captain Wilson about that," replied Frank. "I have no
authority while he is here."

"I have just been to see him," replied the rebel, "and he sent me to
you. He says you command this station."

This was a compliment seldom paid a young officer; but the fact was,
Captain Wilson was so elated at Frank's success, that he determined to
take every opportunity to make his approval known. The young commander,
of course, granted the request, and soon after the Manhattan steamed
down the river.

About a week afterward, a tin-clad came up, and her captain came on
board the Boxer and presented Frank with written orders to report to
Captain Wilson without delay.

"I expect," said he, "that you will take my old station. If you do, you
will have your hands full, for boats are fired into every day; but,
somehow, I was always at the wrong end of my beat to meet the rebels."

When the captain had returned on board his vessel, the Boxer got up
steam, and, in obedience to her orders, started down the river. They
found Captain Wilson the next day, and Frank was assigned a new station.
His beat was about five miles in length, and was a noted place for
guerrillas. Steamboat captains dreaded to pass it, for their boats were
fired into, and often badly cut up. The rebels had a battery of three
guns, with which they were constantly dodging from one point to another,
always taking good care, however, to keep out of reach of the gun-boats.
On the second day Frank arrived at his station, and while running idly
about--for his orders from Captain Wilson were to "keep moving"--a
steamer passed them on her way up the river, and Frank ordered the pilot
to round-to and follow her. The order was obeyed, but they had not gone
more than half a mile, when a battery, mounted on a point which ran for
some distance out into the river, opened on the steamer. The Boxer was
at that moment behind the point and out of sight of the rebels, who,
however, were soon made aware of her presence; for they had scarcely
fired two rounds before a shell dismounted one of their guns. Their
surprise was complete, and abandoning their battery, they ran into the
woods for protection. The Boxer rounded the point, all the while
shelling the woods, and Frank, seeing the guns deserted, landed with his
vessel and secured them. That guerrilla station was, for the present,
broken up. So thought Frank, who ordered the pilot to proceed up the
river until he found the Manhattan. The next day the battery was
delivered up to Captain Wilson, who sent it by the dispatch-boat to
Mound City, which was then the naval station.

From that time hostilities along the river gradually ceased. The Boxer
for nearly a year ran from one end of her beat to the other without
encountering a single armed rebel. Then came the news of the glorious
success of the Army of the Potomac, followed by the intelligence of a
general surrender of the rebel forces. The Boxer was dressed with flags,
salutes fired, and officers and crew looked forward with impatience to
the time when they would be permitted to return home. At length came the
long expected order to report to the admiral at Mound City, where the
reduction of the squadron was rapidly going on.

Although Frank was impatient to see his quiet little home once more, he
was reluctant to part from his crew, whom, upon his arrival at the
navy-yard, he had received orders to discharge. One by one the sailors
came into the cabin, and the hearty grasp of their hands, and the
earnest manner in which they wished their commander "plain sailing
through life," showed that their feelings were not unlike his own.

One morning, upon inquiry at the navy-yard post-office, Frank was
presented with two official documents, which proved to be leaves of
absence for himself and Archie for three months, "At the expiration of
that time," so read the document, "if your services, are no longer
required, you will be honorably discharged from the navy of the United
States. Acknowledge the receipt of this leave, and send your address to
the department."

As soon as this order had been complied with, the cousins began to make
preparations to start for home. Their trunks had been packed several
days before, in readiness for an immediate departure, and in three hours
after the receipt of their leaves they had taken their seats in the
train bound for Portland. The ride had never seemed so long, nor had the
cars ever moved so slowly: but, in due time, they reached the city in
safety. Frank remained but one day in Portland, for he was anxious to
reach home. The "Julia Burton" still made her regular trips from Augusta
to Lawrence, and on the third day he reached the village. Brave was the
first to welcome him as he stepped out of the hack that had conveyed him
from the wharf to the cottage, and not recognizing his master, muffled
up as he was in his heavy overcoat, he stood at the gate, growling
savagely, as if to warn him that he had ventured close enough. But one
word was sufficient. The faithful animal had not forgotten the sound of
the familiar voice, and bounding over the fence, he nearly overpowered
his master with caresses.

The meeting with his mother and sister we shall not attempt to describe.
Those who have passed through similar scenes can easily imagine that joy
reigned supreme in that house.

About a week after his arrival at home, Archie Winters and his parents
reached the village, the latter having "taken a holiday" in honor of the
young paymaster's safe return. The cousins spent their furlough in
visiting their old hunting and fishing-grounds, and in calling upon
their friends. George and Harry Butler had returned, the former with an
empty sleeve, having lost his arm in the Battle of the Wilderness. But
all their companions had not been as fortunate as themselves. More than
one had been offered upon the altar of their country, and many a
familiar face was missing.

At the expiration of their three months' leave, Frank and Archie
received their honorable discharges from the service, the sight of which
recalled vividly to their minds many a thrilling scene through which
they had passed. How changed the scene now from that when they had first
bid adieu to their homes, to join the ranks of their country's
defenders! "Then a gigantic rebellion was in progress; armed men
sentineled each other from Virginia to the Rio Grande; and the land was
filled with the crash of contending armies. Now, the rebel forces are
vanquished, their banner in the dust; the slave empire that was to rise
upon the ruins of the Republic is itself in ruins; and the soldiers and
sailors of the Union, returning their weapons to the arsenals, have
exchanged their honored blue for the citizen's garb, and resumed their
peaceful avocations, as modest and unassuming as though they had never
performed the deeds of valor that have filled the whole civilized world
with wonder."

Frank and Archie are proud of the part they have borne in the war of the
Rebellion, and will never forget their varied and eventful experience in
the MISSISSIPPI SQUADRON.










End of Project Gutenberg's Frank on the Lower Mississippi, by Harry Castlemon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRANK ON THE LOWER MISSISSIPPI ***

***** This file should be named 6958.txt or 6958.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/9/5/6958/

Produced by David Garcia, Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

