The Project Gutenberg EBook of Telling Fortunes by Tea Leaves, by Cicely Kent

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Telling Fortunes by Tea Leaves

Author: Cicely Kent

Posting Date: March 21, 2013 [EBook #6964]
Release Date: November, 2004
First Posted: February 18, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TELLING FORTUNES BY TEA LEAVES ***




Produced by David Garcia, Tiffany Vergon, Juliet Sutherland,
Charles Franks, and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team.










Telling Fortunes By Tea Leaves

HOW TO READ YOUR FATE IN A TEACUP

BY CICELY KENT

_With Twenty Illustrations_




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER

       I. INTRODUCTION TO THE DIVINATION BY TEA-LEAVES

      II. PRACTICE AND METHOD OF READING THE CUP

     III. GENERAL THEORIES IN READING THE CUP

      IV. DIVINATION BY TEA-LEAVES AS AN AMUSEMENT
          AND AS A MORE SERIOUS STUDY

       V. SOME HINTS FOR DIVINERS. REMARKABLE INSTANCES OF PROPHECY
          BY THE TEA-LEAVES

      VI. WRITING IN THE TEA-LEAVES. SOME FREQUENT SYMBOLS

     VII. THE "NELROS" CUP. TWO EXAMPLE READINGS OF ITS SIGNS

          A DICTIONARY OF SYMBOLS

          SOME COMBINATIONS OF SYMBOLS AND THEIR MEANING

          SOME EXAMPLE CUPS WITH THEIR INTERPRETATIONS






TELLING FORTUNES BY

TEA-LEAVES




CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION TO THE DIVINATION BY TEA-LEAVES


At no time in the history of the world has there been such earnest
searching for light and knowledge in all matters relating to Psychic
Phenomena as in the present day. The desire to investigate some new
disclosure has resulted in yet other discoveries. Such will be handed on
in their various forms to be studied and used by those who seek to
learn.

Few subjects need more patience than those dealing with Psychology. Even
those who put their knowledge to a practical use in such studies as
divination by tea-leaves, must still plod patiently along a path thickly
strewn with new knowledge. The powers of clairvoyance, for instance,
cannot be forced or hurried; such arbitrary laws as time have no meaning
for the subconscious self, therefore the need for hurry does not exist.

I was once told by a very mediumistic woman that she had sat in the same
room at the same time for an hour every day for seven years, because she
"wished to develop Clairvoyance." Here was patience indeed! In some
manifestations of the clairvoyant powers within us, it is spontaneous,
the closing of the eyes to shut out all material surroundings being all
that is necessary to bring a vision of what is happening, or shortly to
happen, possibly hundreds of miles away.

In all dreams the clairvoyant powers are spontaneous; but for the
development of clairvoyance at will, great perseverance is necessary.
Its interests and powers are unlimited, so that it is well worth the
patience and time spent upon it.

In the use of tea-leaves as a means of divination, the more developed
the "clear sight," the more interesting and accurate will be the
interpretation. Practice is most necessary, especially for those who
have less natural clairvoyance than others.

The desire for knowledge on all Psychic matters has led to an increased
demand for various methods of bringing into symbols and pictures that
hidden knowledge of the present and the future. That this knowledge can
be translated to us symbolically is apparent to everyone--who could
doubt it, and still believe in anything at all?

Tea-leaves are habitually used by many people as a means of divination.
To some it is an easier method than the cards, there is less to
memorise, or the crystal.

There is in Paris a famous clairvoyant who always uses tea-leaves as the
medium for her powers of divination. Some are inclined to jeer at the
fortune in the teacup, but if the language of symbolism is rightly
understood, the medium through which it is seen matters little.

Tea-leaves have the advantage of being simple, inexpensive, and within
the reach of everyone. It cannot be claimed that the cult is of the
greatest antiquity; for although it seems to have been used in China
from very early times, tea was not brought into Europe until about the
middle of the sixteenth century. For many years after its introduction
into this country, tea was far too costly to be used except by a
comparatively small proportion of the population. It has, however,
proved its extreme usefulness as a means of divination, as well as its
merits as a beverage, for close upon three centuries.

It is a very favourite method with the Highlanders, where it is
customary for the "guid wife" to read in her cup of tea at breakfast the
events she may look for during the day. Simple though they may probably
be, there are to be seen in the tea-leaves, a letter, a parcel, a
visitor, a wedding, and so on. It is said that no Highland seer would
take money for making prognostications as to the future. This, no doubt,
is one good reason for their powers as clairvoyants.

It is a misfortune that clairvoyance should ever have to come into the
material necessities of money transactions, as it tends to mar the clear
vision.

It is said by some that tea-leaves can foretell the events for
twenty-four hours only. As clairvoyance has no restrictions as to time
or space, I cannot see how it can be thus laid down as a fact that it is
limited to man-made laws of time! Certainly there is much evidence of
the "tea leaves" being capable of foreseeing events of an important
nature at a considerable distance ahead.

One of the most difficult points in interpreting visions of clairvoyance
is the time element; simply because time, as we know it, does not exist.
The intuitive faculty is needed for any accurate definition of time, so
important to us in our present conditions, so absolutely unimportant to
the subconscious self. Let us decide at once, then, that divination by
tea-leaves may, and often does, extend to a further vision than that of
the twenty-four hours. Much depends upon the methods used.

Our individual past, quite apart from the arbitrary laws of heredity,
makes the road of our future. Possibly this may account for the curious
fact that in dreams the setting is often in childhood's surroundings,
while the dream itself is obviously of the present or the future. This
shows how the first beginnings of the event which is to come were
brought about. It is somewhat like unwinding a cotton reel!

There are, no doubt, some who look upon the tea-leaves merely as a form
of amusement, and who entertain their friends in that way. Well, it is a
harmless amusement, and is often useful at a very dull tea party! But
for those who take it seriously, and regard it as one of the many means
of divination, it will be treated with the respect due to such matters.

As in other forms of divination, so with the reading of the tea-cup, a
great deal depends on the seer. Those who are naturally clairvoyant will
read many events and scenes in the cup which would be passed over by
others not so gifted. Even without this "clear sight," however, the
tea-leaves may be read by anyone who has learned the principles and the
symbolic meanings given in this book. With a certain amount of intuition
and imagination, the tea-cups may be most successfully used to reveal
the future.




CHAPTER II

PRACTICE AND METHOD


A wide, shallow cup is the best kind to use for tea-leaf
divination--white if possible. A narrow cup adds to the seer's
difficulties, as the tea-leaves cannot be plainly seen. Small cups, too,
are objectionable for the same reason, and a fluted cup is even worse. A
plain, even surface is required, with no pattern of any kind, as this
has a tendency to confuse the symbols. Indian tea and the cheaper
mixtures, which contain so much dust and twigs are of no use for reading
a fortune, as they cannot form into pictures and symbols that can easily
be distinguished.

Those who desire to have their tea-leaves interpreted should leave about
a teaspoonful of tea at the bottom of the cup. It should then be taken
in the left hand, and turned three times from left with a quick swing.
Then very gently, slowly, and with care, turn it upside down over the
saucer, leaving it there for a minute, so that all the moisture may
drain away.

Some divinators of the tea-leaves insist on a concentration of the mind
during this turning of the cup, as do many cartomantes whilst the cards
are being shuffled; others prefer the mind to be as far as possible free
from any definite thought or desire, simply allowing it to dwell on such
abstract subjects as flowers or the weather. Personally, I advocate this
for both systems of divination; it enables the subconscious mind to
assert itself unhindered, whilst the normal mind is in abeyance.

The turning of the cup before inverting it over the saucer is equivalent
to the shuffling of the cards. It is as a direct result of those few
seconds turning that the pictures and signs are created, the
subconscious mind directing the hand holding the cup. The following
simple ritual is all that is necessary to those consulting the
tea-leaves.

The cup to be read is held by the seer and turned about as necessary, so
that the symbols may be read without disturbing them. This is important,
but no disturbance will take place if the moisture has been properly
drained away. The handle of the cup represents the consultant, also the
home, or, if the consultant be away from home the present abode.

It is necessary to have a starting point in the cup for the purpose of
indicating events approaching near to, or far distant from, the person
consulting. The leaves near the rim denote such things as may be
expected to occur quickly; those directly beneath the handle indicate
present and immediate happenings; those on the sides of the cup suggest
more distant events; whilst those at the bottom deal with the far
distant future.

This method of fixing the time, coupled with intuition, renders it
possible to give a consultant some idea as to when an event may be
expected; but if there be no intuitive sense of time, it will be found
wiser not to be too positive.

The turning of the cup and the draining of the moisture having been
carried out as directed, the tea-leaves will be found distributed at the
sides and bottom of the cup.

For those who wish to use the saucer as a further means of divination,
the following suggestions will be useful.

There must be a definite point to represent the consultant, and for this
reason the saucer is usually rejected. There is also the objection that
it is more difficult to manipulate in the turning. Nevertheless, it is
found to give excellent results, and, if the cup is bare of events, it
is useful to be able to find information in the saucer.

First of all, then, to determine the position of the consultant. Take
the centre of the saucer for this purpose. The circle round it
represents the home, or if the consultant is away from home, the present
abode, and also events near at hand. The more distant circle indicates
those things which are not to be expected for some time. The outer
circle and rim suggest events as yet in the misty future.

When the saucer is used as an additional means of seeking knowledge of
coming events, after the symbols in the cup have been exhausted, it will
often be found that this secondary divination confirms or enlarges upon
that which has already been foretold in the cup.

The moisture and leaves drained from the cup, having remained in the
saucer, should be turned by the consultant three times with the same
swirling motion as for the cup, and the moisture carefully poured away.
The saucer should be held inverted for a few seconds, otherwise when it
is placed upright, the remaining moisture will disturb the tea-leaves.
The symbols are read in exactly the same way as in the cup, the only
difference being the positions representing the consultant, the home,
and the indications of time. These have already been explained.




CHAPTER III

GENERAL THEORIES IN READING THE CUP


At first sight the interior of the cup will show the leaves scattered
about apparently haphazard and with no arrangement; just a jumble of
tea-leaves and nothing more. In reality they have come to their
positions and have taken on the shapes of the symbols for which they
stand, by the guidance of the subconscious mind directing the hand in
the turning of the cup.

The various shapes and the meanings to be attached to them will at first
be puzzling to beginners. A good deal of practice is necessary before
the tea-leaf symbols can be accurately interpreted at a glance. That,
however, will come later, and in time it will be as easy as reading a
book.

If you wish to be a proficient reader of the tea-leaves, practise
constantly this interpretation of the shapes and positions of the
leaves. Take a cup and follow out the simple instructions for the
turning and draining of it, and then carefully study the result.

It is an excellent plan to make a rough copy of the leaves as they
present themselves to you in each cup, making notes of the various
meanings.

Do not feel dismayed if, when you begin looking at the tea-leaves, you
are unable to discover in them anything definitely symbolic. It is
certain that nothing will be found if the seer is feeling nervous! Keep
a calm, open mind, and do not be in a hurry, for it is under such
conditions only that a clear reading of the leaves will be possible. In
some cases the symbols are more easily read than in others. Much depends
upon the consultant.

The gift of imagination (by no means to be confused with invention) is
of the greatest possible importance in discerning the symbols which are
of such endless shapes and variety. The seer has to find in the forms of
the tea-leaves a resemblance, sometimes it may be but a faint one, to
natural objects, _e.g._, trees, houses, flowers, bridges, and so
forth. Figures of human beings and animals will frequently be seen, as
will squares, triangles, circles, and also the line of fate.

These signs may be large or small, and the importance of them must be
judged by their relative size and position. Suppose, for instance, that
a small cross should be at the bottom of the cup, the only one to be
seen, the seer would predict that a trifling vexation or a tiresome
little delay must be expected; but not for the present, as it is at the
bottom of the cup. An alphabetical list of symbols is given later on, so
it is not necessary to define them here. The various points of a more
general character, however, must be studied before it is possible to
give an accurate reading.

It will constantly be found that the stems, isolated leaves, or small
groups of leaves, form a letter of the alphabet, sometimes a number.
These letters and numbers have meanings which must be looked for in
connection with other noticeable signs. If an initial "M" appears, and
near to it a small square or oblong leaf, both being near the rim of the
cup, it would indicate a letter coming speedily from someone whose name
begins with an "M." If the initial appears near the bottom of the cup it
shows that the letter will not be coming for some time.

If there be a clear space at the bottom of the cup devoid of tea-leaves,
it shows water, and that, in all probability, the letter is coming from
abroad. If the symbol of the letter comes very near to a bird flying, it
shows a telegram. If the bird is flying towards the consultant (the
handle), the telegram has been received. The news in it is to be judged
by other signs in the cup. If flying away from the handle, the telegram
is sent by the consultant. A single bird flying always indicates speedy
news.

In a cup with various ominous signs, such as a serpent, an owl, or many
crosses, the news coming is not likely to be pleasant. In a cup without
bad signs, it can safely be said that the news is good.

As a general rule large letters indicate places, whilst smaller ones
give the names of persons. Thus a large letter "E" would stand for
Edinburgh and a smaller "E" for Edwards, for instance. To all rules
there comes the occasional exception, and this principle holds good with
regard to the letters in the tea-cup. It is said that these smaller
letters always point to the first letter of the surname. Usually it is
so; but I have constantly found from experience that it is the first
letter of the Christian name, or even a pet name, to which the letter
refers. It is well to keep this possibility in mind, otherwise the seer
may give misleading information to consultants.

Sometimes numbers mean the date for an event to be expected, a "5" for
instance, very near the brim of the cup, or the handle (the consultant),
means in five days; or five weeks if it come on the side, possibly as
far off as five months if the figure be at the bottom of the cup.

As dots around a symbol always indicate money in some form or another,
according to the character of the symbol, a figure beside the dots would
signify the amount of money to be expected. If the symbol were that of a
legacy with the figure "90" near, it would show that a little legacy of
ninety pounds might be anticipated.

Clearly defined symbols that stand out separately are of more importance
than such as are difficult to discern. Clusters of shapeless leaves
represent clouds marring the effect of an otherwise fortunate cup.

Journeys are shown by lines or dots formed by the dust and smaller
leaves of the tea. The length and direction of the journey may be known
by the extent of the line and, roughly speaking, the point of the
compass to which it leads, the handle in this case representing south.
If the line of dots ascends sharply to the brim of the cup, a journey to
a hilly country will be taken.

Supposing the consultant to be at home, and the dots form a line from
the handle all round the cup and back to the handle, it signifies a
journey for a visit and the return. If the line were to stop before
reaching the handle again, with an appearance of a house where the line
ends, a change of residence might safely be predicted. A wavy line shows
indecision as to arrangements. Crosses upon the line indicate that there
will be vexation or delay in connection with the journey. Large flat
leaves some distance apart along the line stand for important stations
to be passed through.

For some consultants there seems very little of interest to be read in
their cup. There are no events, merely trivialities. It is therefore
difficult to find anything that could be considered as "future," when it
seems to be just a dead level "present," the daily life, nothing more.
It is sad for those who have such a dull life, but there is usually some
sign, a small happening such as a parcel, or a visit from a friend.
These must be made the most of. The pleasure of anticipation will add to
the realisation.

A confused looking tea-cup, without any definite symbols, just a muddle
of tea-leaves, is useless for the purpose of divination, beyond giving
an indication of the state of the consultant's mind, so vague and
undecided in its character that it obscures everything. Tell such a one
the reason for the failure of divining, and recommend a more reliable
state of mind. Then let them try their "fortune" again in a few months,
when it may be found quite different.

It is of course a great mistake to be always "looking in the
tea-leaves," as some foolish people do twice a day. It is sure to lead
to contradictions though there is no harm in the habit of "looking in
the cup" each morning as others do, for finding the events likely to
happen in the course of the day. This is as permissible as the reading
of the cards each morning for the day's events by those who consider it
a safeguard, remembering that to be forewarned is to be forearmed.

Some people use the tea-cup simply for the purpose of asking a definite
question, such as, "Is the sum of money I am expecting coming soon?"
When this is the case, the consultant should be told before turning the
cup in the hand to concentrate the thoughts on this one point, as in the
case of wishing while shuffling the cards for a definite wish. Then the
seer must look only for the signs that will give the answer to the
question, ignoring all other points. This is necessary for the giving of
a satisfactory answer to the question asked.




CHAPTER IV

DIVINATION BY TEA-LEAVES AS AN AMUSEMENT AND AS A MORE SERIOUS STUDY


The need for patience cannot be too strongly impressed upon those who
are beginning to learn the language of tea-leaves. Some of the most
interesting symbols are very minute, and will certainly be missed by the
seer who is in a hurry.

When tea-leaf reading is indulged in merely as an amusement to while
away a few moments after a meal, a hasty glance at the cup, or cup and
saucer, will suffice. The seer will just note the chief features, such
as a journey, a letter, a parcel, or news of a wedding, and pass on to
the next cup. But this is far from being a really interesting method of
divination by tea-leaves, wherein so much knowledge is to be found, and
so much useful information gained.

Those who closely study this fascinating subject will certainly be well
rewarded by a deep personal interest, in addition to the pleasure they
give to others.

It is wonderful how rapidly converts are made to this form of
divination. Some who in the past have been heard scornfully to assert
that they "have no belief in tea-leaves," become the most regular
inquirers. Moreover, these sceptics have proved to be very efficient
students.

There is always a satisfaction in persuading another to one's own point
of view. The more obstinate the opposition, the more glorious the final
conquest!

It is a rare occurrence nowadays to meet with three people in the course
of a day, and not to find that one at least is deeply interested in
fortune-telling in some of its various forms.

Quite recently I had a letter from a girl who has gone on a visit to
British Columbia, asking me if I would "do the cards" for her, as she
could not find anyone in her vicinity who was particularly good at
divination. She went on to say that "there is a perfect rage for
fortune-telling out here, and everyone is keen on it." Another instance
of this universal popularity was given to me by a friend who had
recently been to America. She was amazed at the numbers of women whom
she saw absorbed in the reading of their tea-cups each day of the
voyage.

The male sex holds aloof and leaves us to "perform these follies." Some
ascribe it to man's superiority. Or as briefly summed up by a delightful
member of their sex, who when declaiming against the possibility of the
future being made visible, said, "With all apologies to you, I must say
I am not so profoundly stupid as to believe in these things; it cannot
be anything more than rot."

It is remarkable how such protests die away when clairvoyant evidence,
either by cards, tea-leaves, or other means, has accurately predicted
some event of the distant future that at the time appeared absurd and
impossible of happening.

Woman may lawfully claim superiority with regard to her intuitive
faculty, and thus she is well equipped for exercising her divinatory
powers.

Who need be dull or bored when the language of symbolism remains to be
learned? Perhaps I should say, studied; for completely learned it can
never be, seeing that fresh events are constantly occurring in the
world, and new symbols appear representing each.

There are few things more fascinating than personal discovery, and those
who become students of divination by tea-leaves, or cards, may safely be
promised a taste of this pleasing sensation of achievement. It is
limited to the few to discover the marvels of radium, or the discomforts
of the South Pole, but a fragment of their glory is shared by those who
find new evidence of the far-reaching knowledge of symbolism.




CHAPTER V

SOME HINTS FOR DIVINERS

REMARKABLE INSTANCES OF PROPHECY BY THE TEA-LEAVES

  "For a man's mind is sometimes wont to tell him more
  than seven watchmen that sit above in a high tower."


To those of an inquiring or doubting turn of mind, there may arise the
very natural question as to _why_ one shaped tea-leaf should mean
"a hat" and another "a table." It is useless to point out that these
objects are perfectly represented by the leaves. That is of no practical
satisfaction. The simple fact that each language has its alphabet, its
spelling, and its words, which must be learned before there can be any
reasonable understanding of it, seems the best and obvious reply.

Symbolism is a wide subject with many branches. Who can expect to master
even its alphabet in a moment? To those who cannot accept the symbols in
the tea-leaves on the authority of past experience, reaching over
several centuries, I would recommend a careful study of their cups for,
say, three months. Let them make notes of such signs as appear and
beside them place their meanings and predictions.

At the end of this time, compare all that has taken place with these
notes, and I think there will be no further lack of faith in the
tea-leaf symbols.

Before very many years have passed the language of symbolism by cards,
tea-leaves, crystal gazing, etc., will probably be almost universally
understood. The day will undoubtedly come when it will be accepted as
naturally as the English language, and we shall cease to worry ourselves
as to the why and wherefore of it all.

It is important that those who are learning the art of divination by
tea-leaves should realise the necessity for consistently attributing the
same meanings to the symbols. Do not be tempted to change their
interpretation for what may seem a more probable, or pleasant,
prediction for your client. It is a fatal mistake.

Remember that you are dealing with conditions and events of the future
which are outside the limited knowledge of the normal mind, whose power
of vision is limited to physical sight.

A simple instance of what may occur, should you thus change the meanings
of the symbols, will suffice to show the folly of such a practice.

A consultant comes to have her "fortune read." She is known to you
personally, and you are aware that she is anxious to hear a hopeful
report of someone dear to her who is ill. The tea-leaf symbols are
obstinately unfavourable, and display ominous signs of forthcoming
sorrow. If you gloss over this fact completely, and predict a rapid
recovery from the illness, what becomes of your client's faith in the
power of foretelling the future? Certain it is that the symbols would be
right in their verdict, and you would be wrong.

It is usually easier to prophesy smooth things rather than unpleasant
facts, but to do this in the face of obvious contradictions will lead to
disaster in foretelling the future.

Divination by tea-leaves or cards has the candour to be frankly
disagreeable when necessary. This is one great argument in favour of its
unerring truthfulness. There is no means by which symbols may be coaxed
into proclaiming false statements.

The most practised clairvoyant may occasionally make mistakes in her
reading of the symbols, but no genuine seer should ever deliberately
give a wrong interpretation of them to please her consultant. The
business of the diviner is to give what she believes to be a correct and
unprejudiced translation of the symbols before her.

It is sometimes a vexed question as to what extent information of a
gloomy nature, which may appear in a divination, should be given to a
client. Some are in favour of withholding such matter altogether, whilst
others announce it frankly without modification. It seems impossible to
lay down any hard and fast rule. There are so many things to be taken
into account, and each case should be treated on its merits and
according to its peculiar circumstances. There are some who would fret
themselves ill at the least mention of coming misfortune, others would
be the better prepared to meet it by having been warned of its approach.

One rule can be safely made for guidance on this point. Do not minimise
danger when a timely warning may avert an accident, or other misfortune,
nor should symbols of ill omen be exaggerated. As students become
proficient, they will find many meanings in the tea-leaves in addition
to those which they learn from this book. Much will depend upon
circumstances and individual temperaments.

These personally discovered meanings should be carefully noted and
verified with events as they occur.

It is necessary to remember that divination by the tea-cup is by no
means limited to personal information. Forthcoming public events are
frequently revealed. This adds largely to the interest and usefulness of
the divination. It is important to point out this to consultants, so
that they may not be too ready to fix the whole reading of their cups to
purely personal matters. It will be found that public news is usually
foretold in the cups of those who seek information of the future as a
regular practice.

For those who rarely do so, private affairs alone will appear, probably
without even a forecast of the weather to be expected within the next
few days.

It is a curious fact that the wider knowledge should seem to be reserved
for those who practise divination constantly, but so it is.

Some remarkable instances of the accurate foretelling of public events,
which have quite recently been brought to my notice, may be interesting.

For some weeks before the coal strike of 1920 was declared, a pickaxe
was seen on several occasions in the cups of two persons, both of whom
read their tea-leaves regularly. This symbol, as will be seen in the
dictionary which follows, stands for "labour trouble and strikes." A
spade was also in evidence at intervals, a further sign of "trouble and
unrest." So that it was through no fault of the tea-leaves if some of us
were not in the superior position of knowing all about the strike before
it came to pass.

The symbols already mentioned would of course apply equally to railway
disturbance, and some time before the threat of a strike was announced,
these symbols appeared again, together with an engine, and a signal at
the angle of "Danger." This seemed ominous. But within a few days the
signal was evident once more; but on this occasion set at "All Clear."
So it was easy to decide that the threatened strike would not take
place. The accuracy of this prediction by means of the tea-leaves was
shortly afterwards made evident.

Again, a week before there seemed to be even a hope of a settlement of
the coal strike, a mining shaft presented itself in one of the tea-cups
which had previously been indicating the strike. This symbol appeared at
the top of the cup standing out clearly by itself, evidently predicting
the miners' return to work within a short time. There was no need to
depend upon information from the newspapers as to the end of the strike,
for here in the tea-leaves was all necessary evidence of the fact.

Another very remarkable instance of symbolism was given to me by a
friend a short time ago. On Monday morning, October 26th, 1920, the
three following symbols appeared in her cup:--

  A vulture resting on a rock.
  An eagle.
  A monkey.


In the evening of that day the death of King Alexander of Greece was
announced.

It will be seen, on referring to the dictionary, that an eagle and a
vulture signify "the death of a monarch." The monkey who lay at the
bottom of the cup, apparently dead, was of course the third symbol as
having caused the King's death. It was particularly gratifying that
these signs should have appeared in my friend's cup for she is a
mathematical genius, and rejects every symbol which she cannot recognise
at once. She was so struck by these signs that she called them to the
attention of her mother, who also immediately perceived and identified
them. The only regrettable omission was that the cup was not
photographed. It would have been valuable evidence for the wonders of
the tea-leaves.

This same friend had another interesting experience. The head of an
Indian appeared in her cup, with other signs pointing to news of a
personal nature. She was puzzled, for, as far as she knew, there was no
one in India from whom she would be in the least likely to hear.

Very shortly afterwards, however, her mother went on a visit to London.
There she quite unexpectedly met someone who had recently come from
India, and who had brought back messages of remembrance and affection
from a girl who my friend had no idea was in India at that time. Hence
the Indian in her tea-cup!

Whilst on this subject, I am reminded of another occasion when India was
represented in the tea-leaves. I was looking into my tea-cup one day,
when I saw most clearly depicted two natives creeping stealthily, their
attitude making this evident. In their hands were what appeared to be
knives, and they were making towards a figure that was unmistakably that
of an officer. He was standing upon what looked like a raised platform
with a barricade round him. He held a revolver in his hand.

I am quite aware that some may think this a tall tale for the tea-leaves
to relate! But fortunately my reading of the cup was witnessed by two
others, one of them being a man, who, although interested in psychic
subjects, despises the tea-leaves! Without remarking upon what I saw, I
suggested that he should look at my cup and see what he made of it.
Without a moment's hesitation he said, "There is an officer defending
himself against some natives who are about to attack him."

My readers will appreciate the satisfaction this testimony gave me,
coming as it did from one who had never before looked into a cup.
Moreover, that this witness should have been one of the male sex added
to its value! This prediction of danger for someone in India was borne
out by facts that were disclosed shortly afterwards. These instances
which I have given illustrate the variety and interest which are to be
found in divination by tea-leaves.




CHAPTER VI

WRITING IN THE TEA-LEAVES

SOME FREQUENT SYMBOLS


Another source through which messages are received by the tea-leaves
will be found in the writing which will be seen from time to time.
Moreover, it has the great advantage of being clear and easy to
decipher, so that there may be no doubt of what is intended to be
understood by it. The tea-leaves can never be accused of being
illegible. Occasionally it is very minute writing, and would probably be
passed over by those who read their cups in a superficial manner. To
those who study them carefully the future is revealed.

No one would reasonably expect to find a speech from the Prime Minister
or an invitation to a tea-party written for them in the tea-leaves. But
words they certainly will find.

A short time ago I saw in my cup, in perfect copperplate writing, the
word "wait." I was annoyed by it, for what is more annoying than having
to wait? Sometimes it may happen that the tea-leaves--as with their
relatives, the tumbler and automatic writing--become a little shaky in
their spelling. But this is not a serious defect, and the trifling
errors do not prevent the word from being translatable. It is a
recognised fact that writing seen through a medium, whether it be
tea-leaves, or a dream, is of importance, and should always be regarded
with attention and with an endeavour to understand its message.

I should like to point out that certain figures and symbols are of so
frequent occurrence that it may be well to emphasise their general
significance by referring to them here, in addition to their meaning
being given in the dictionary.

Among those which threaten misfortune, or sorrow, are the following:
Crosses, snakes, spades, pistols, guns, toads, cats.

Joy and success are indicated by such symbols as a crescent moon, clover
leaves, flowers, trees, anchors, fruit, circles, stars.

Having learned the symbols and the combined symbols by heart, it will
require only a little practice to interpret their meanings without
hesitation. For those who find difficulty in committing the dictionary
to memory, an essential for proficient reading of the cup, I would
suggest that they write down any meaning which may seem specially hard
to remember, roughly drawing its symbol beside it. In this way the
difficulty will soon be overcome.




CHAPTER VII

THE "NELROS" CUP

TWO EXAMPLE READINGS OF ITS SIGNS

  "If thou wouldst learn thy future with thy tea,
   This magic cup will show it thee."


Some readers may find an additional interest in divination by
tea-leaves, if they use a cup marked with the planetary symbols,
patented as the "Nelros Cup of Fortune." A short explanation of the
symbols, and the method of using this cup, will be helpful for those who
are not familiar with its signs. I am not suggesting the use of the
"Nelros" saucer, for the reason that its signs are somewhat obscure, and
students who have no experience in the science of astrology would find
it confusing, if used in addition to the cup, in which all needful signs
are illustrated.

As in the case of the ordinary tea-cup, the handle remains as the
representative of the consultant. The turning of it and draining of the
moisture should be carried out in the usual way.

Immediately under the handle, and above the space given to the Sun, are
seen a Diamond and a Horseshoe. Next on the left are a Snake twisted
round a stick, and a Spade, these being placed over the space given to
Saturn.

Following them are a Bell and a Club, seen over the sign of Venus. Next,
an Eye and Envelope, above the space given to Jupiter.

Then comes a Cross, with the sign of Pisces, the Fishes, these being
over the sign of Mercury.

Next are a Winecup and a Spider above the space of Mars.

Followed by a Cat's Head and a Heart, above the Moon.

Each one of these signs round the brim has a symbolic meaning, though
their meaning must also be judged by the position they occupy in the
cup.

Now, taking the signs round the brim of the cup, and connecting them
with the planetary symbols beneath.

Beginning at the handle is a Diamond, this being a token of wealth,
which, with the sign of the Sun below, indicates much prosperity,
favours, and general well-being, the Horseshoe over the Sun also
betokening good luck and successful projects.

In the next space, reading to the left, is the Snake twisted round a
stick, over the sign of Saturn. This is emblematical of a risk of
poverty coming through deceit, and with a Spade over Saturn, whose
characteristic is privation, there is a further indication of toil,
loss, undoing.

The next sign is a happier one; the Bell over the sign of Venus, with
the Club beyond, indicates joyful news, events meaning much happiness,
love and peace, the characteristic of Venus being peace or placidity.

Next is the sign of Jupiter, whose characteristic is expansion; above it
are placed an Eye and an Envelope, the Eye showing the power of
penetration, seeing things in a right perspective, and light thrown on
difficult questions, the letter showing that news from all parts of the
world is made possible by its expansion.

Next come the Latin Cross and the watery sign Pisces, the Fishes. These
being in connection with Mercury, whose characteristic is activity, show
much alertness and desire for knowledge; the Cross meaning obstacles and
hindrances in the chosen path, whilst the sign of Pisces denotes
interesting news from distant lands, with much desire for travel and
exploration.

In the next space the Winecup and Spider, in connection with the sign of
Mars, the characteristic of Mars being energy, show the strength,
courage, and perseverance needed to carry out a successful career; the
Spider being a symbol of concentration, patience, and achievement,
whilst the Wine-cup tells of joy and realised ambition.

Following these signs are the Cat's Head and the Heart, with the
Crescent Moon below. The characteristic of the Moon is change, mobility;
it is also a symbol of good fortune in the tea-leaves. In combination
with the Heart it indicates a romantic love affair. The Cat's Head shows
interference by those who are mean and spiteful.

Having learned from this brief explanation the symbols of the "Nelros
Cup," the reading of the tea-leaves in relation to those symbols will be
easy. For instance, suppose the wife of a sailor to be the consultant.
Her husband is on his ship in the North Sea, and she is eagerly awaiting
news of him. In the cup she has "turned," the symbol of a letter comes
in the watery sign [Symbol: )-(] with a large ivy leaf beneath it.
Further patience will be necessary, the ivy leaf tells us, as the
wished-for letter is still far away. The distance from the handle (the
consultant) shows this, also the letter symbol being in the watery sign
indicates the fact that it will come from across the sea. The waiting
for the news causes a feeling of disappointment and sadness; these will
vanish later on, and the waiting be compensated by the happy news that
will come in the longed-for letter. This is seen by the tea-leaves which
appear on other symbols of the cup.

The form of a man is seen between the signs of the Bell and Club; near
this form is the letter "A," the first letter of the consultant's name.
Round this initial letter is a well-formed circle; a trident lies at a
little distance from it.

Here is evidence of the joyful news coming from her husband, the
tea-leaves in the spaces of the Bell and Club making a prediction of the
satisfactory news a safe one. The circle round the letter "A" and the
symbol of the trident near, enable the seer to prophesy a good
promotion, much success and happiness.

This example reading of the "Nelros" cup is a fortunate one. We will now
consider one of a less satisfactory character.

The consultant is a widow; opposite the handle of the cup she has
"turned" is the Envelope over Jupiter, upon the Envelope tea-leaves
forming an Owl are seen, beneath is a small arrow pointing towards the
handle. These signs foretell bad news probably coming from a far
country; the sign of Jupiter and distance from the handle (the
consultant) would show this. The symbol of the Owl indicates the anxiety
caused by the arrival of the letter and its news. The arrow pointing
towards the handle would show that the matter is personal, and will much
affect the consultant.

Upon the sign of Saturn, with an arm stretched towards the Spade above
it, is the figure of a man. The characteristic of Saturn being
privation, and the Spade being a symbol of toil, it is evident that the
figure of the man represents someone related to the consultant for whom
the present prospects are very bad. It may well be this man from whom is
coming the news in the letter which will cause her so much anxiety.

Fortunately, on the Anchor at the bottom of the cup is a well-formed
key. Being in this position, it shows that someone at a distance, having
the welfare of the consultant much in their mind, will be the means in
the future of helping her out of the difficulties. The key being on the
Anchor indicates the security she may feel in the friends, who will be
instrumental in giving her happiness and peace of mind.

These two example divinations will illustrate the manner in which the
tea-leaves are read in relation to the signs upon the cup. To some it
may appear an easier means than that of the ordinary tea-cup.

In any case it is very useful to have an alternative method of
foretelling the future. Variety is always acceptable, and for this
reason I commend the "Nelros Cup of Fortune" to my readers.





A DICTIONARY OF SYMBOLS


A

ABBEY.--A sign of increasing wealth and comfort; you will gain much
success in your life.

ACE OF CLUBS.--This signifies good news through the post.

ACE OF DIAMONDS.--You will be gratified by a good present or sum of
money.

ACE OF HEARTS.--Shows affection and happiness in the home.

ACE OF SPADES.--A large town or building.

ACORN.--This is a symbol of health, strength and gain through industry,
a sowing of which you will see the reaping, a short journey from which
there may be great results; good fortune and ease are predicted by
several acorns.

AIRCRAFT.--If flying towards consultant, hasty news or an unexpected
journey; if stationary it gives warning that you will have but little
success in your life unless you come out of the rut into which you have
fallen.

ALBATROSS.--If seen with the sign of a ship or water it portends
distress for those at sea; to sailors or to those associated with them
it is an omen of sadness, meaning sorrow and sometimes death.

ALDERMAN.--To workers this is a sign that if they proceed with caution
they will become prosperous.

ALLIGATOR.--This is a bad sign of personal danger and distress possibly
caused by those nearest to you; it also shows much mental disturbance
and worry; if very near consultant a catastrophe is imminent.

ALMONDS.--These denote festivities and social enjoyment, good and
generous friends.

ALTAR.--If with a figure near, sorrow and distress are foreshown.

ANCHOR.--A pleasing symbol of good and loyal friends, constancy in love,
and the realisation of your wishes; an emblem of safety to a sailor.

ANEMONE.--These flowers often indicate an event to be expected in the
early autumn; the nature of it must be judged by other signs in the cup.

ANGEL.--This is a symbol of good fortune in love, radiance, happiness,
and peace.

ANGEL (FLYING).--A token of love and joy which are swiftly approaching
you.

ANTLERS.--An accident is predicted by this symbol.

ANVIL.--Your strength and energy will bring you much success in new
plans or enterprises.

APE.--This animal points to the fact that you have a secret enemy; it
denotes malicious and dangerous persons whose tongues are to be feared;
it is also a sign of despondency, care, anxiety, and fraud.

APPLES.--A pleasant sign of happiness, cheerful conditions, good health,
and fortune.

APPLE TREES.--These predict a happy event in the apple season.

APRON.--Near consultant brings a new friend; at a distance new work or
acquaintances.

ARAB.--This symbol points to a need for caution in choosing your
friends, or you may find yourself in the power of someone who will prove
to be an undesirable companion.

ARCH.--Things which you desire are developing in the wished-for
direction; the arch is a sign of hope; your ambition may be gratified in
a most unexpected manner. See also TRIUMPHAL ARCH.

ARK.--This symbol assures you of security and of finding refuge in times
of distress and turmoil.

ARM.--If curved, it signifies love, protection, care and strength;
stretched out, that a new influence will come into your life which will
prove to be an endless source of joy and love.

ARMOUR.--A suit of armour foretells that you will be called upon to face
difficulties and dangers and that you will come through them with
courage. See KNIGHT IN ARMOUR.

ARROW.--Unpleasant news or a disagreeable letter from the direction in
which it comes.

ARTICHOKE.--This signifies sadness, disappointment and delay; sometimes
a secret trouble is indicated by this symbol.

ARTIST.--To see an artist at work, indicates association with those who
study art; also a happy nature finding much joy and beauty in life.

ARTIST'S MAHL STICK.--This implies an artistic temperament, a dislike of
daily duties or irksome tasks, and a fretting under any routine; a lack
of attention to detail is also a usual characteristic of this symbol.

ARUM LILY.--This flower stands for dignity, expectancy, and calm; its
fuller meanings must be judged by other symbols around it.

ASS.--If its head is towards consultant, a piece of good news or an
event which has long been waited for is near; if its tail, then further
patience is necessary, for there will be delay; if it gallops, it gives
warning that if people allow themselves to become too boring their
friends may reasonably, be expected to avoid them.

ASTERS.--These flowers indicate a smooth though possibly a somewhat
monotonous life; they also show a settled state of mind and sound
judgment; if seen in the form of a wreath a death is predicted.

AUTOMATIC MACHINE.--This signifies a lack of initiative and consequent
failure in arriving at any great achievement.

AXE.--This shows mastery and power to overcome difficulties; sometimes
separation.


B

BABY.--A naked baby near consultant is a sign of sadness and
disappointment caused by those who are nearest and dearest; to some it
is a sign of money worries; a baby in arms means reconciliation.

BACON.--Pieces of bacon signify good luck and profitable business.

BADGER.--For a maid, or a bachelor, this symbol predicts a single life,
but one of freedom, health and success; for the married, it implies
regret that they did not remain unmarried.

BAGPIPES.--This symbol gives warning of coming sorrow or much agitation
and disturbance.

BALL.--See FOOTBALL.

BALLET DANCE.--This is a forecast of unsuccessful plans.

BALLOON.--A symbol which indicates that much is attempted but little
achieved; there is a passing enthusiasm for various experiments and new
ideas, but the interest soon flags, and finally vanishes as the balloon
in the clouds.

BANANAS.--These promise gratification and the occurrence of those things
which are most pleasing to you; also a prediction of much happiness and
success in love affairs.

BANNER.--This is a symbol of a prosperous life for a man and of a
wealthy marriage for a woman.

BARBER.--This signifies the approach of a new interest coming into your
life, which will lead you to be most particular as to your personal
appearance.

BARREL.--Festivity, possibly a picnic; several barrels, prosperity.

BARREL ORGAN.--Melancholy and a distaste for present circumstances.

BASIN.--This symbol stands for small ailments and minor worries; a
broken basin, domestic annoyance.

BASKET.--Domestic duties and family cares; if full, a present given or
received.

BASKET OF FLOWERS.--Happiness and contentment, fulfilled desires.

BASSOON.--This musical instrument implies that your energy is apt to
exceed your wit.

BAT.--See CRICKET BAT.

BATH.--This indicates grief or dismay.

BATS.--An ill omen showing sickness and trouble in the home; with other
signs, a prediction of death.

BAYONET.--A sign to be feared; it shows danger of operation, wounds, and
pain.

BEANS.--These show quarrels and disputes with relations.

BEAR.--A journey north, sometimes prolonged travel. See also POLAR BEAR.

BED.--A visit, illness; or death, according to other symbols.

BEEF.--A round of beef foretells coming financial worries.

BEEHIVE.--This is a symbol of eloquence, mental capacity, and much
energy in forming new schemes and carrying them through; also of
attainment to power and honour.

BEES.--These foretell success through your own ability, many friends and
enjoyment of life to the full. See also BUMBLE BEE.

BEETLE.--This signifies unrest, domestic tribulation, or disagreements;
several beetles, that there is a risk of slander and abuse by those whom
you regard as friends.

BEETROOT.--This symbol indicates that someone will try to do you a bad
turn, but it will fail in its object and rather turn out as a benefit.

Bell.--Amazing news according to other signs in the cup; several bells
indicate a wedding. See also CANTERBURY BELLS, DIVING BELL, HANDBELL.

BELLADONNA LILY.--This flower is a sign of hope, love, happiness, and
the leading of an upright and honourable life.

BELLOWS.--These show an endeavour to make the best of a bad business.

BESOM.--This gives a caution to avoid meddling in other people's affairs
or you may find yourself regarded as an unpleasant busybody.

BIER.--A symbol of death; if near consultant, a personal sorrow,
otherwise of a less personal nature.

BILLIARD TABLE.--Pleasure followed by regret.

BIRD FEEDING YOUNG.--After a time of patient waiting, your desires will
be fulfilled.

BIRD OF PARADISE.--Difficulties and trials are vanishing and a future of
comfort and pleasure awaits you.

BIRD ON A PERCH.--If near consultant, news resulting in pleasant plans;
if at some distance, there is a doubt of the news being sent.

BIRDS.--These are significant of happiness and joyful tidings; a single
bird flying means speedy news, telegrams; birds in a row on a branch or
line show that there will be vexatious delay in receiving some
wished-for news; birds in a circle denote cogitation followed by swift
decision. See also CLAPPER FOR SCARING BIRDS and STUFFED BIRDS.

BIRDS IN CAGE.--This implies that a variety of causes prevents you from
obtaining your dearest wish; should the cage door be open, obstacles
will shortly be removed and great happiness will be yours.

BIRD'S NEST.--This signifies a happy discovery, leading to a fortunate
enterprise brought about to a great extent by your own patience and
ability; it is also a good omen of love, friends, and increase of
fortune.

BISCUITS.--These seen in various shapes and sizes foretell the
occurrence of pleasant events.

BISHOP.--A sign of benevolence, authority, and progress; in cope and
mitre, preferment and honour.

BLUEBELLS.--These indicate that an event bringing you much satisfaction
and pleasure may be expected to take place in the spring.

BLUEBOTTLE FLY.--Unpleasantness and jealousy will be aroused by your
success.

BOAR.--This animal shows much energy and push though not always in the
right direction to bring you unqualified success; it is also a sign of
obstacles in your path.

BOAT.--Success in a new enterprise; seen with clouds, troubles and
disappointment. See also FERRYBOAT.

BOMB.--This foretells a personal disaster or news of an explosion and
loss of life.

BONES.--These are an indication of misfortune surmounted with courage.

BONNET.--This implies that youth will be past before you have the best
happiness of your life. See also WIDOW'S BONNET.

BOOK.--An open book shows a desire for information and a mind ever on
the alert to understand new theories and facts; a closed book is a sign
of expectancy.

BOOKCASE.--This is a pleasing symbol of coming success through study and
perseverance.

BOOMERANG.--This sign means news from Australia, or that some unexpected
development will lead to your having a great interest in that country;
with signs of travel, that you will make your home there.

BOOTBLACK.--A bootblack is a sign of failure in your work.

BOOTS.--These show fortunate business, a good income, and the
gratification of your tastes and pleasures; boots of a curious shape
foretell an unfortunate enterprise ending in failure.

BOOT-TREE.--A lucky surprise.

BORDER.--See FLOWER BORDER.

BOTTLE.--A sign of happy days; several bottles indicate extravagant
tastes; small bottles, illness.

BOUQUET.--This is a most fortunate symbol of coming happiness, love,
fulfilled hope, and marriage.

BOW.--A sign of reunion after absence or estrangement.

BOW AND ARROW.--This denotes that there is unpleasant talk of your
personal affairs which may do you harm.

BOWER.--Happiness in love is proclaimed by this symbol.

BOX.--An open box foreshows a troubled love affair; a closed box, that
you will find something which you had lost.

BOY.--This symbol must be read in accordance with other signs in the
cup.

BRACELET.--A discovery made too late.

BRANCH.--A large branch is a sign of much independence and of success in
carrying out an undertaking; the larger it is the greater your success;
a broken branch signifies an attempt to organise a project or new scheme
which will end in failure.

BREAD.--A loaf of bread is a sign of the commonplace and of monotony;
several loaves give warning against waste and extravagance, for a
shortage of corn is threatened; loaves of bread with crossed swords
above them predict mutiny and disaffection among those whom the world
trusted.

BRICKLAYER'S TROWEL.--A task which you have in hand will be successfully
carried out.

BRICKS.--These signify new plans and enterprises which will lead to
prosperity.

BRIDE.--This sign indicates a wedding, coming joy, or a rival in your
affections, according to other symbols around it.

BRIDGE.--An advantageous opportunity; a fortunate journey. See also
SUSPENSION BRIDGE.

BRIDLE.--This points to the fact that you greatly object to interference
or authority, and that you will always be "top dog" with your friends.

BROOCH.--This indicates that you are likely to make a discovery greatly
to your advantage, and may in time turn it to good account in the
development of a patent; a brooch with dots around it predicts a
present.

BROOM.--This signifies that there is need for you to be careful in the
choice of your friends, and to avoid rushing into an intimacy which you
might later have cause to regret.

BUBBLES.--See CHILD BLOWING SOAP BUBBLES.

BUCKLES.--These foretell that some important arrangement of much
personal advantage will fall through in an unforeseen manner, causing
disappointment and dismay.

BUFFALO.--A most unexpected and unusual happening, possibly causing
agitation and uncertainty as to the best way to proceed.

BUGLE.--This shows a desire for admiration and notice from all whom you
meet; it also implies that it is high time to arouse yourself and become
more energetic and industrious.

BUILDING.--A sign of removal.

BULL.--An ill omen of misfortune, attacks of pain, or of slander by some
enemy; if it gallops with tail up, personal danger or illness of someone
dear to you.

BUMBLE BEE.--This shows a cheerful disposition, making the best of
everyone and everything, easily gratified tastes and pleasures; many
friends and social success; with other signs, travel is indicated.

BUNS.--These signify social amusements and duties, also that you usually
take a cheery view of things even in troublesome circumstances.

BUOY.--This is a symbol of hope; you have a good friend in all weathers.

BUSH.--Invitations and social enjoyments.

BUTTER.--This signifies good fortune and success, the comforts of life,
and a desire for the best of everything.

BUTTERFLY.--Passing pleasure, power of attraction, many admirers, and
flirtations; to the lover it speaks of inconstancy.

BUTTONHOOK.--An exchange between friends, successfully organised plans,
and a propitious meeting.

BUTTONS.--If of various size and shape they mean that there will be many
suggestions as to arrangements and new plans without anything definite
being settled.


C

CAB.--A sign of gloom, sadness and parting.

CABBAGE.--This symbol points out that in spite of thrift and diligence,
you will never be very rich.

CABINET.--An unexpected and fortunate discovery, giving you much
pleasure and satisfaction, possibly wealth and unthought-of prosperity.

CAGE.--An empty cage shows that you expect to find all manner of amiable
qualities in others which are entirely lacking in yourself. See also
BIRDS IN CAGE.

CAKES.--New friends, social success, invitations, and hospitality. See
also WEDDING CAKE.

CALF.--This signifies a need for gentleness and kindness to those with
whom you associate.

CAMEL.--A responsibility satisfactorily carried out; sometimes
frustrated plans and endless delays; a camel laden means wealth from an
unexpected source abroad.

CAMERA.--This proclaims the fact that you are too fond of gathering new
or clever ideas from others, with a view to passing them off as your own
original thoughts whenever the opportunity arises.

CAMPANULAS.--These flowers indicate that your hope is centred on one
desire, and assure you of the certainty of obtaining your wish.

CANDLE.--This is significant of trials, worries, or illness.

CANDLE EXTINGUISHER.--An uncomfortable incident or episode which will
put you out considerably.

CANDLESTICK.--You have need to look at things from a wider point of
view; to make the best of yourself you must cultivate perception.

CANNON.--This denotes military and naval display and good fortune; with
pleasant symbols around or near, such as a crown or star, promotion for
someone dear to you in the service.

CANOE.--This implies that a new friendship will eventually lead to a
happy love affair.

CANOPY.--This brings success through the help and interest of those who
are socially or mentally your superiors.

CANTERBURY BELLS.--These graceful flowers indicate that your happiness
is to a great extent dependent upon others; if the figure of a woman
appeared beside the flowers it will be through a woman that your best
happiness comes, if a man were seen it will be one of the male sex to
whom you must look for your chief joy in life.

CAP.--This warns you to be cautious in your dealings with those of the
opposite sex; it also points to the fact that those things which you
desire to hide will become known. See also PEAKED CAP.

CAPSTAN.--To those associated with the sea, this symbol gives warning of
storms; to others, it predicts association with sailors or yachtsmen.

CARAFE.--A pleasure which will depend entirely upon yourself is the
meaning of this symbol.

CARAVAN.--This signifies an independent nature, desiring to live a
roaming life free of restrictions; should a horse be harnessed to the
caravan your ambitions will be fulfilled.

CARDS.--See ACE OF CLUBS, ACE OF DIAMONDS, ACE OF HEARTS, ACE OF SPADES.

CARNATIONS.--These sweet-scented flowers bring happiness, faithfulness,
love, and good friends.

CARPENTER AT WORK.--Necessary arrangement of your affairs is the meaning
of this symbol.

CARRIAGE AND HORSES.-This foretells that your affairs will prosper and
that you may reasonably expect the comforts of life; a carriage without
horses means that your riches will be transitory, leaving you in
poverty; with other signs it denotes that you may be the victim of
scandal.

CARRYING CHAIR.--An omen of illness or accident.

CART.--A symbol of fluctuation in fortune and of a tedious waiting for
any settled improvement in financial affairs.

CARVING.--Handsome carving is a sign of satisfaction and development.

CASTLE.--You may expect fortune to smile upon you; a crumbling castle
denotes disappointment and ill success in love and marriage.

CAT.--This is an uncomfortable sign of trickery, meanness, and quarrels
among relations, money matters probably being the disturbing cause; a
cat jumping shows worries and difficulty.

CATERPILLAR.--You are likely to be criticized unkindly by those who are
envious of you, although you have no suspicion that these people are
anything but friendly in their feeling towards you; there is slyness and
deception, and it would be well to be on your guard or you may find
unpleasant gossip has been spread about you.

CATHEDRAL.--Prosperity, contentment, and happiness with those whom you
love is the meaning of this symbol.

CATTLE.--Profitable transactions.

CAULDRON.--New opportunities which need careful consideration.

CAULIFLOWER.--This signifies that even your best friends cannot describe
you as constant or reliable.

CAVE.--Unless you rouse yourself and use a little more push, you are
likely to remain in obscurity all your life.

CELERY.--A vigorous body and active mind which will preserve the
energies of youth to a good old age.

CHAIN.--An engagement or wedding; an entangled chain means a dilemma
which will tax your ingenuity to the utmost; a long, thick chain
indicates ties that you wish to undo; a broken one, trouble in store.

CHAIR.--A small chair shows an arrival; a large one, deliberation over a
new plan. See also CARRYING CHAIR, ROCKING CHAIR.

CHATELAINE.--This signifies that a variety of people will be
instrumental in your career; it is also an indication that you are
somewhat inclined to depend too much on sentimental and demonstrative
affection.

CHAMPAGNE GLASS.--This is a symbol of good fortune and delight; to the
sick, a good omen of recovery.

CHEESE.--A large cheese denotes that you will benefit by the generosity
of prosperous friends.

CHERRIES.--A love affair, happiness, and health, are the meanings of
this symbol.

CHESSMEN.--These announce the fact that you will be troubled by matters
which are difficult to adjust to your satisfaction, and you must expect
a certain amount of anxiety and worry.

CHESTNUT TREE.--An event of interest and importance may be expected in
the spring.

CHESTNUTS.--These show determination in carrying out a scheme which you
think will benefit you.

CHICKEN.--This shows new interests and pleasures; if roosting, domestic
tribulation; if flying, troublesome matters.

CHILD.--This is a sign that you will soon be making fresh plans or
forming new projects; a child running means bad news or threatened
danger; at play, tranquillity and pleasure.

CHILD BLOWING SOAP BUBBLES.--Occasions of sadness and joy in quick
succession.

CHILD WITH DANCING-DOLL.--The gratification of a wish through an
entirely unexpected means.

CHILD WITH TAMBOURINE.--Pleasure, lightheartedness, coming good news.

CHIMNEY.--Unless you are cautious you will take a false step; a chimney
with smoke to be seen means that you are content, and find pleasure in
daily routine and a somewhat commonplace life.

CHINAMAN.--There is someone who appears eager to serve you but in
reality is far from being trustworthy.

CHINESE LANTERN.--False security, the evidence of which will soon be
brought to your notice.

CHISEL.--A symbol of losses, dismay, and trouble.

CHRISTMAS TREE.--This sign indicates that you may expect some special
happiness at the Christmas season.

CHRYSANTHEMUMS.--These beautiful flowers assure you of a long desired
hope in connection with someone dear to you which will be realised in
the autumn.

CHURCH.--Courage, honour, and tranquillity; a legacy.

CHURNING.--This is a happy omen for good and successful results in all
you undertake; you will be fortunate and will always take a turn in the
right direction for your own happiness.

CIGAR.--A wealthy friend or lover who will absorb all your thoughts; a
broken cigar signifies a disagreeable incident or a quarrel.

CIRCLE.--Money, presents, an engagement, faithful friends.

CLAPPER FOR SCARING BIRDS.--This sign proclaims that you are offended at
small faults or failings in others, and are always eager to bring them
into notice, but are blind to your own more obvious deficiencies.

CLARIONET.--A pleasure which will be gratified in an unlooked-for
manner.

CLAW.--This symbol foretells scandal or evil influence.

CLENCHED HAND.--Indignation; disputes.

CLERGYMAN.--Reconciliation in a long-standing feud.

CLOCK.--A sign that you desire to hurry over the present and arrive at a
time to which you are looking forward.

CLOUDS.--These denote disappointment, failure of plans, and dismay.

CLOVER.--A very lucky sign of coming good fortune.

CLOVES.--This symbol proclaims the desire for appreciation and the wish
to appear at your best on all occasions.

CLOWN.--Your folly is apparent to everyone.

CLUBS.--See GOLF CLUBS, ACE OF CLUBS.

COACH.--If with horses, you may look forward to a time of ease and
luxury; if without horses, it warns you against an act of folly or a
harmful indiscretion.

COAL.--Prosperity and good fellowship

COAL-SCOOP.--This signifies domestic difficulties or vexation at the
turn things have taken.

COAL SCUTTLE.--You will adapt yourself to unaccustomed circumstances
requiring much energy.

COAT.--Sadness caused through a parting; if the coat is ragged,
distressing news; without sleeves, failure in a new undertaking.

COBBLER.--This predicts a life of arduous and ill-paid work, poor
health, and a struggle to make both ends meet.

COBRA.--A warning of grave danger to you or yours.

COCK.--A sign of forthcoming good news, of conquest and triumph.

COCKATOO.--This bird indicates disturbance in the home and some vexation
with friends.

COCKCHAFER.--This predicts a bad harvest season; flying, the arrival of
sudden news of a somewhat disagreeable nature.

COCOANUT.--Travel or interesting discoveries.

COFFEE POT.--Dependence on creature comforts; slight indisposition.

COFFIN.--A bad omen of coming bereavement; a coffin with a sword beside
it shows death of a soldier; with a flag, that of a sailor; with
snowdrops, death of a child or infant.

COLLAR.--Perseverance in the face of obstacles will bring you a great
reward.

COLLAR-STUD.--A reminder of some tiresome or disagreeable little duty
which you would fain forget.

COLUMBINE.--These flowers foretell the renewal of a former friendship
which is brought about by means of an unthought-of meeting.

COMB.--You will find out that your confidence in someone was misplaced
and this discovery will cause you much distress.

COMET.--Favourable weather; unusual and interesting events; to lovers it
is an unfavourable omen of separation and blighted hope.

COMPASSES.--This sign implies that you may expect to travel and to spend
your life in interesting activities.

CONCERTINA.--This symbol proclaims dilatory habits and feeble wit.

CONDUCTOR.--See MUSIC CONDUCTOR.

CONVOLVULI.--This flower shows feelings of sadness; love and hope which
have lasted but a short time now leave only memories to which you cling.

CORKS.--This sign shows the power of adapting yourself to your company,
and of proving yourself useful in awkward situations.

CORKSCREW.--This denotes that you will be vexed by inquisitive people
who trouble you with questions.

CORMORANT.--This bird is a symbol of agility, swift decisions, and the
attainment of your ambition through the power of rapid thought and work.

CORN.--This is a pleasant omen of wealth and success.

CORNUCOPIA.--This symbol predicts great happiness and unqualified
success.

COVER.--See MEAT COVER.

COW.--A calm, contented state of mind, peaceful and prosperous days.

COWSLIPS.--A sign of joy; to the married it foretells a birth.

CRAB.--Strife, family disagreements, an enemy.

CRADLE.--A birth; a broken cradle, sorrow or anxiety about a child.

CRANE.--Heavy burdens and anxiety are indicated by this symbol.

CRESTS.--These are often to be seen and must to some extent be read in
connection with other signs in the cup; large crests indicate news of,
or communications with, those in positions of authority; small crests,
interesting family developments.

CRICKET BAT.--A love of sport and a keen desire for fair play in all
matters.

CRINOLINE.--This predicts that unless you retrench in your expenditure,
you will have but a pittance to spend upon your dress.

CROCUSES.--These flowers are an emblem of joy, and of radiant happiness
in love.

CROQUET-MALLET.--A cheerful and patient disposition, always making the
best of things, is the meaning of this symbol.

CROSS.--You must expect to meet with hindrances and obstacles in the way
of your desires; sorrow and misfortune are also indicated by this
symbol. See also MALTESE CROSS.

CROSSED KEYS.--A sign of authority, power and honour, and an assurance
of comfort and help in times of difficulty or doubt.

CROWN.--Advancement and honour; the attainment of your highest ambition.

CRUTCHES.--This is an unpleasant sign of forthcoming illness or accident
which causes lameness for the time being.

CUCUMBER.--A new plan successfully carried out.

CUP.--A large cup tells of a splendid opportunity coming your way which
will insure your future success; a small cup means that a little anxiety
is before you.

CUPBOARD.--Disappointment in money affairs.

CURTAIN.--This symbol proclaims that someone is hiding a matter from you
which it would be to your advantage to learn; with other signs in the
cup which are good you may conclude that the matter will be revealed to
you shortly.

CUSTARD-GLASSES.--A signal of illness, possibly chicken pox or measles.

CYPRESS.--This tree indicates that you bravely face a difficulty, and
finally overcome it by your own endeavours.


D

DAFFODILS.--A long-desired hope is about to come to pass, or a
delightful holiday spent in the company of those most congenial to you.

DAGGER.--If near and pointing towards consultant, it would be a bad sign
of danger from wounds or an operation; if more distant, it shows a much
less personal danger.

DAHLIAS.--A sign of some important event which you may expect to take
place in the autumn; it also denotes thrift and increase of fortune.

DAISIES.--These imply that you have an attractive, child-like nature,
finding happiness in simple pleasures; a circle of daisies means that
you attract someone to you of the same nature as yourself who will
become all the world to you.

DAMSONS.--These denote complication of your affairs.

DANCE.--See BALLET DANCE.

DANCER.--A pleasant omen of coming pleasure and gratification, good
news, happiness in love and friendship; it also means that you will
receive an unexpected invitation; several figures dancing in happy
abandonment foretell that your hopes and desires will be fulfilled, and
that many changes will occur, all tending to your success and future
happiness.

DANCING-DOLL.--See CHILD WITH DANCING DOLL.

DANDELION.--Unexpected news of the marriage of an old friend whom you
had always supposed would never marry.

DATES.--A pleasure which is unlikely to come up to your expectations is
the meaning of this symbol.

DEER.--An unfortunate indication that your ventures in new directions of
work or business will end in failure; if running, a fruitless endeavour
to undo your past mistakes; a dead deer, that you will be the innocent
cause of distress to someone you love.

DESK.--You will receive a letter which will upset you, or you will lose
the friendship of someone with whom you have corresponded regularly for
many years.

DEVIL.--This symbol gives warning that reformation is needed, or you may
find yourself so tightly in the grip of bad influence that it will be
well-nigh impossible to extricate yourself.

DIADEM.--This ensign of royalty shows that your ambition is realised
beyond your expectations; wonderful good fortune and influential friends
assure you of an unusually successful career.

DIAMONDS.--See ACE OF DIAMONDS.

DISH.--Anxiety in household matters; a broken dish is a foretaste of a
greater loss.

DIVER.--A great and unexpected piece of news which will lead to a
fortunate discovery; to the lover, it reveals deception.

DIVING-BELL.--This sign predicts that you may one day find yourself in
danger on the sea or river.

DOG.--This symbol has many meanings which must be read in accordance
with the other symbols; in a general way this sign indicates adverse
conditions, the thwarting of life's chances, unfortunate love affairs,
family misfortune and money troubles; a large dog sometimes signifies
protection and good friends; a small dog, vexation and impatience.

DOLL.--A festivity at which you will endeavour to conceal your feelings
of boredom under somewhat foolish hilarity. See also CHILD WITH DANCING
DOLL, RAG DOLL.

DOLPHIN.--A cheerful and optimistic character, pleasure on the sea or
river.

DOVECOT.--Peace in the home.

DOVES.--These birds give a personal message of happiness and an
assurance of faithfulness in love, peaceful circumstances, high ideals,
and progress; to those who are at enmity this symbol proclaims
reconciliation; to the sick or anxious, comfort and hope; to a business
man, a fortunate omen of success.

DRAGON.--Great and sudden changes about which there is an element of
danger.

DRAGON-FLY.--Tidings of unexpected occurrences, unlooked-for events, new
and advantageous opportunities, sometimes new clothes or furniture.

DRUM.--A hazardous enterprise or expedition is the meaning of this
symbol.

DRUMMER.--To a man, this foreshows popularity and a successful public
career; to a woman, social success, a large following of friends and
admirers, and power of gaining her own ends.

DUCK.--A sign of a taste for speculation; if more than one duck, success
in work and enterprise, profitable undertakings.

DUMB BELL.--A chance meeting which will lead to the making of a new
friend.

DUSTPAN AND BRUSH.--You will be certain to hear of domestic tribulation
amongst your friends or relatives; if this symbol appears in your cup
with other signs of vexation, it would indicate personal domestic
annoyance.

DWARF.--This portends calamity, accident, or disgrace.


E

EAGLE.--This predicts that you may expect most beneficial changes, the
realisation of a long-cherished hope, and possibly an inheritance of
wealth from an unexpected source; a flying eagle shows the coming of
wealth and honour after a change of residence; with a vulture, death of
a monarch; a dead eagle, public loss and mourning.

EAGLE'S NEST.--An eagle on its nest foretells association with those in
places of authority and honour; it also denotes a life of wealth and
ease.

EAR.--A large ear shows that you will be shocked by hearing of some
scandal or abuse; a normal ear means that you will receive some
interesting and pleasant piece of news or valuable information.

EAR-RINGS.--To a man this symbol proclaims the displeasure of one of the
opposite sex; to a woman, the humiliation of unrequited affection.

EARWIG.--A sign of uncomfortable discoveries in the home, troubles with
domestics, deceit and prying.

EASEL.--A sign of marriage to widows and maids; to the married, increase
of worldly goods; this symbol must be read in connection with other
indications in the cup.

EELS.--This is an unpleasant symbol meaning malicious tongues and
treacherous friends, also gossip over money matters.

EGG-CUP.--A sign of an escape from a threatened disaster.

EGGS.--New plans and ideas, or a birth.

ELEPHANT.--A sign of power, travel, promotion, happiness and stability
in love and friendship.

ELF.--This symbol should put you on your guard or you may be the victim
of an unpleasant practical joke.

ELM TREE.--A good omen of prosperity and coming happiness.

EMU.--Lack of caution will not be one of your failings.

ENGINE.--Journeys, trouble on the railway, strikes, accident, and hasty
news are the meanings of this symbol.

ENSIGN.--See FLAG.

ESCAPE.--See FIRE ESCAPE.

EXTINGUISHER.--See CANDLE EXTINGUISHER.

EYE.--This signifies penetration and the solving of difficulties; it
also shows depth of character and love.

EYEGLASSES.--You will make a beneficial discovery through surprising
means.


F

FACES.--Several of these denote an invitation to a party or wedding;
ugly faces mean disturbances or bad news; pretty faces, pleasure and
love; two faces upon one head, looking diverse ways, indicate that you
may hear yourself accused of deception and falseness, or that these
things may be practised upon you; a bearded face, health and strength,
but an indolent nature, which is a source of vexation to those around
you.

FALCON.--This bird warns you to be on your guard, for you have an enemy.

FAN.--Love of admiration, frivolity, pleasure with the opposite sex.

FATE.--This is indicated by a straight thin line of tea leaves which
ascends towards the consultant; what may be expected of fate must be
judged by the line itself and other signs in the cup.

FEATHERS.--Large feathers signify achievement and prosperity; to
authors, literary success; small feathers denote something of which you
are afraid, but which you will meet with courage.

FEET.--You will be called upon to take a decisive step in some matter
which may lead up to an eventful change in your life.

FENCE.--This means that there is but a step between you and success.

FENDER.--You will constantly come in contact with someone to whom you
feel a strong antipathy.

FERNS.--Dignity, peace, and steadfast love are the meanings of this
symbol.

FERRET.--Jealousy and enmity are likely to cause you distress.

FERRY-BOAT.--This symbol implies that difficulties will be smoothed away
for you by the aid of good and useful friends.

FIELD MARSHAL'S HAT.--To a soldier, or those who are associated with
them, this is a sign of coming promotion, triumph, and of the attainment
to honour.

FIGS.--These indicate joy and abundance of the good things of this
world; to those in business it is an omen of success and prosperity.

FIGUREHEAD OF A SHIP.--A good omen for your future Welfare; this symbol
predicts that you will be enabled to steer your course through smooth
waters.

FIGURES.--See NUMBERS, HUMAN FIGURES, RUNNING FIGURES.

FINGER.--This usually indicates a special need for attention to be paid
to adjoining symbols.

FIRE-ENGINE.--An evidence of a serious fire of which you will hear or
from which you will suffer; this must be judged by other indications in
the cup.

FIRE-ESCAPE.--An urgent warning to take all precautions against fire.

FIREPLACE.--Your chief interests in life will probably lie in your home;
small duties, simple pleasures, and a circle of friends.

FISH.--News from abroad; with other signs of movement, emigration; a
starfish is a sign of good luck.

FLAG.--Danger, rebellion, and war are the meanings of this symbol.

FLOWER-BORDER.--That for which you have long hoped and waited is about
to come to pass.

FLOWERS.--Many pleasant meanings may be given to this symbol, good
fortune, happiness, love, marriage, and a large circle of admiring
friends, being among them. See also BASKET OF FLOWERS, FOXGLOVES, LILY,
FORGET-ME-NOT.

FLY.--This signifies small vexations and annoyances which will ruffle
you considerably. See also BLUEBOTTLE FLY, DRAGON FLY.

FONT.--News of a birth or an invitation to a christening party.

FOOT.--This indicates a journey; a swollen foot, injury, or news of an
accident to the foot.

FOOTBALL.--Love of outdoor games, or a keen interest in the welfare of
those who take part in them, is shown by this symbol.

FORGE.--This implies a need for refinement and of reconstructing your
ideas on many subjects.

FORGET-ME-NOT.--This flower speaks of the attainment of a cherished
hope, also that you will probably find your truest happiness in love and
marriage.

FORK.--This warns you against those who constantly flatter you; it would
be well for you to be on your guard or you may one day awake to the fact
that all this flattery was used as a tool to harm you.

FOUNTAIN.--A most favourable omen foretelling happiness, success in love
and marriage, prosperity in business, and good fortune in all you
undertake; this symbol also points to an unexpected legacy.

FOX.--This denotes that you may have an unsuspected enemy, possibly
disloyal dependents; sometimes it means theft and trickery.

FOXGLOVES.--These show ambition and attainment; if broken or bending,
defeated plans and hopes.

FROG.--A change of residence; with other signs, new work or profession;
with bad symbols around, unpleasant sights and stories.

FRUIT.--A happy sign of forthcoming prosperity and general advancement.


G

GAITERS.--Your chief interests will be in outdoor work and amusements;
intellectual pursuits will not attract you; to clergy, or to those
associated with them, gaiters indicate promotion.

GALLOWS.--An omen of great distress and tragedy.

GARDEN ROLLER.--An indication that things around you are liable to
become somewhat unmanageable, and that you will need tact and strength
to avoid being crushed by circumstances.

GARLAND.--A sign of happiness, love and honour.

GARTERS.--A contempt for feminine weakness is the meaning of this sign.

GATE.--An excellent opportunity awaits you, perhaps the chance of a
lifetime; massive high gates denote restriction, misery, or
imprisonment.

GEESE.--These indicate the arrival of unexpected and rather troublesome
visitors.

GENTIAN.--A memory which is interwoven with sorrow and joy.

GERANIUM.--This flower shows a strong will and determined character,
contentment, and happiness; it also denotes two opposite natures who
have a great bond of affection between them.

GIANT.--There is, or will be, a serious obstacle in your path.

GIMLET.--You will be unpleasantly reminded of a disagreeable fact.

GIRAFFE.--You are apt to cause mischief through blundering and the
making of incorrect statements.

GLADIOLI.--These flowers indicate courage in the face of difficulty;
hope and tenderness.

GLASSES.--These show that you will entertain your friends on a lavish
scale, and delight in hospitality, but will occasionally be confronted
by difficulties in your arrangements. See also CHAMPAGNE GLASS,
CUSTARD-GLASSES, EYEGLASSES, HAND GLASS.

GLEANER.--You will always endeavour to make the best of the
circumstances in which you find yourself but will seldom possess the
most desirable things in life.

GOAT.--A new enterprise which has an element of risk about it; a goat is
an unfortunate sign to sailors or to those connected with them.

GOLF CLUBS.--These indicate a life so full of work that there is but
little leisure for recreation.

GONDOLA.--A visit to Italy, or a romance are the meanings of this sign.

GONG-AND-STICK.--This symbol warns you to expect little else than the
"trivial round and common task" for the present.

GOOSE.--A venture needing much discussion and arrangement; plans are
made only to be upset again, and unless you proceed with caution, you
are likely to make a bad mistake.

GRAMOPHONE.--This usually portends vexation at being drawn into a
somewhat disorderly and noisy pleasure.

GRAPES.--These signify pleasure, abundance, fulfilment, and a life free
from care.

GRASSHOPPERS.--These insects give warning of a poor harvest season; for
an old person the risk of chill leading to severe illness.

GRAVE.--This symbol must be read in accordance with its position, also
with reference to other signs in the cup; as a general rule, with gloomy
signs it would bring a message of coming sorrow, or with cheerful
symbols that a death would benefit the consultant.

GREYHOUND.--This sign stands for energy and untiring activity which will
bring you unqualified success; it also denotes that you may expect
favourable tidings of the result of a new enterprise.

GRINDSTONE.--The aftermath of an indiscretion.

GUITAR.--This symbol displays strong power of attraction for the
opposite sex, also pleasant adventures ending in a happy love affair.

GUN.--A very disquieting symbol, grave danger of a sudden calamity; with
other bad signs, a violent death.


H

HAMMER.--Troublesome little tasks which you are reluctant to undertake.

HAMMOCK.--A mournful ending of something to which you had looked forward
with delight.

HAM WITH FRILL.--This denotes a nice invitation, hospitality, pleasure
with your friends; also enjoyment followed by dismay; a ham without a
frill means increasing fortune and success.

HAND.--A sign of good fellowship, loyalty, and affection; it may also
indicate a parting, a meeting or a bargain concluded; other signs around
it must be noticed in order to read its special meaning. See also
CLENCHED HAND.

HANDBELL.--You would much like to startle the world by a wonderful
discovery or amazing theory by which your name would be known for all
time but you will need every possible good symbol to appear in the cup
to give you any assurance of your ambition being gratified.

HANDCUFFS.--Disgrace, imprisonment, misfortune, and dishonesty; this
sign must be read in connection with others around it.

HANDGLASS.--An illusion quickly dispelled is the meaning of this symbol.

HANDSCREEN.--Even small demands sometimes necessitate great effort on
the part of those to whom the demand is made.

HARE.--The return of an absent friend after a long absence; if it is
running, a journey is indicated; a dead hare foreshows money acquired
through industry.

HAREBELL.--Peace, a placid existence, and faithfulness in love are the
meanings of this lovely little flower; with other signs you may expect
news of a birth.

HARP.--This is a sign of melancholy and predicts the possibility of a
nervous breakdown.

HARRISSI LILY.--These graceful flowers predict peace, joy, hope, and a
wedding.

HARROW.--This shows that much of your time will be given endeavouring to
make the lives of those around you smooth and happy, whilst you
cheerfully spend your days in a somewhat monotonous manner.

HARVEST.--A shock of corn is a somewhat sad emblem showing that you have
sown that of which the reaping will be tears; it is also a warning of
illness, especially to the aged.

HASTENER FOR ROASTING MEAT.--You are reminded that you should endeavour
to move with the times, and not cling so tenaciously to ideas and habits
which are now obsolete.

HAT.--A symbol of luck, presents, success in new work or enterprise;
sometimes it foreshows the arrival of a visitor.

HAWK.--This is an unfortunate symbol, as it denotes circumstances in
which people and things seem to be working against you, placing you in
awkward and embarrassing predicaments.

HAYRICK.--This indicates a desire for mastery and preeminence; it also
shows that a doubt will arise as to how best to proceed, but you will
find the right way out and will come to a wise decision.

HEAD.--A large head gives warning of family trouble or of serious
illness; a very small head, waning ability or power; several heads,
mental distress or derangement.

HEARSE.--A sign of bereavement or of sad news of those who are bereaved.

HEART.--A sign of coming happiness through the affections bringing joy
into your life, or satisfaction through money, according to other signs
near.

HEARTS.--See ACE OF HEARTS.

HEATHER.--A most fortunate sign of gratified wishes and of coming good
luck; to lovers it is an assurance of much happiness.

HEDGE.--This shows that through energy and perseverance you will
surmount obstacles and carry all before you.

HEDGEHOG.--You will be immensely surprised by hearing that someone whom
you had always thought of as a confirmed bachelor is about to be
married.

HEMLOCK.--The shadows of your past life have an inconvenient habit of
appearing at the most awkward moments.

HENS.--Comfort and domestic felicity; a hen roosting shows domestic
annoyance and money worries.

HIGHLANDER.--This is a sign of sound business capacity and a plodding
contriver in transactions.

HIVE.--See BEEHIVE.

HOCKEY-STICK.--A keenness for games and success in the playing of them.

HOE.--This means that you will often have more to do than you can well
accomplish; each day things will occur needing your attention and
increasing your work, but in spite of it you will have good health and
cheerfulness.

HOLLY.--This indicates that something of importance may be expected to
occur in the winter; unless gloomy signs appear in the cup, it may be
assumed that the event will be a happy one.

HOLLYHOCK.--You will have a friend, or lover, who will never disappoint
you.

HONEYCOMB.--Prosperous undertakings, honour and renown, and much which
is delightful are foreshown by this symbol.

HOOP.--You will find immense satisfaction in doing things that require
energy even if they are of little importance.

HORNS.--You have a powerful enemy, or at least someone who has feelings
of animosity towards you, which may prove to be unpleasant in their
result.

HORSE.--Comforts, loyal friends, and pleasure; galloping horses mean
that events are hurrying towards you over which you have no control,
bringing many changes into your life. See also CARRIAGE AND HORSES.

HORSE-COLLAR.--To those who own horses, or do business with them, this
sign is a pleasant indication of success in some transaction; to others
it would imply toil and a strenuous effort to keep things going.

HORSEMAN.--See MOUNTED HORSEMAN.

HORSESHOE.--An unexpected piece of good fortune, the achievement of your
wish, and good luck in all you undertake; a double horseshoe hastens the
arrival of your desires; a horseshoe reversed means an upset of plans
causing much disappointment and vexation; a broken one denotes a
dilemma, trials, or discomforts.

HOT-WATER BOTTLE.--You will always find compensation in all trials and
discomforts.

HOT-WATER CAN.--Indisposition, irritability, annoyances.

HOURGLASS.--A warning against delay in arrangements or thought-of plans;
with other signs, the hourglass is a grave warning of peril through
illness or accident.

HOUSE.--A successful transaction, a visit, a new home.

HUMAN FIGURES.--These must be judged with regard to what they appear to
be doing.

HYACINTH.--This flower predicts love, joy, and gratified ambition.


I

IBEX ON ROCK.--After a time of strenuous effort and struggle, you will
achieve triumph and a position of security and peace.

INDIAN.--This symbol predicts news from India; the nature of the
information, whether personal, public, pleasant, or the reverse, must be
judged by other indications in the cup.

INITIALS.--These frequently occur, and usually point to names of people
from whom you may expect to hear shortly; or they may indicate places.

INKPOT.--Expectancy.

IRIS.--These flowers bring a message of hope and pleasure.

IRON.--Small vexations or troubles which will quickly pass, is the
meaning of this symbol.

IVORY.--This foretells increased wealth and a well-merited reward for
past industry.

IVY.--Patience, understanding, steadfastness, and loyal friends are
indicated by this sign.


J

JACKDAW.--Sagacity, dependable friends, and knowledge acquired by
persevering study.

JAM.--Pots of jam caution you against extravagance and waste.

JELLY.--This foreshows a time of pleasure and a time of pain.

JEMMY.--A bad attack of toothache is indicated by this weapon.

JEWELLERY.--You may expect an increase of wealth, possibly good presents
also.

JOCKEY.--Successful dealing and good money enterprise; luck in racing
and speculation.

JOHN BULL.--This figure implies that you are likely to witness, or
partake in, an event of national importance.

JUDGE IN ROBES.--Legal affairs, personal or otherwise according to other
indications in the cup; this sign is often seen during a famous trial or
when such is about to take place.

JUG.--This shows good health and money making.

JUMPING FIGURE.--Change which will be greatly to your advantage.


K

KANGAROO.--You will receive an unlooked-for and interesting piece of
news; sometimes it indicates that you have a rival.

KETTLE.--This is a sign of illness; unless a human figure appears beside
it, the illness is probably for the consultant; it is an omen of coming
trouble.

KEY.--Circumstances will improve, things will become easy, and your path
will be made smooth; you may hope for success in whatever you have on
hand; a key at some distance from the consultant denotes the need for
the assistance of good and influential friends in times of difficulty.
See also CROSSED KEYS.

KEYHOLE.--This gives warning of a need for caution, for someone of whom
you feel no suspicion is untrustworthy.

KINGFISHER.--This beautiful bird signifies the return of someone for
whom you have been longing; if flying, news of a surprising nature will
speedily arrive.

KING ON HIS THRONE.--Security and peace; it may also mean that you gain
a high position through influential friends.

KITE.--Vanishing pleasures and benefits, or scandal, are the meanings of
this sign.

KNEELING FIGURE.--A new enterprise or project; care should be taken to
think it over well; do nothing rashly and seek reliable advice.

KNIFE.--This is an unpleasant sign of quarrels, broken friendship, and
tears.

KNIGHT IN ARMOUR.--This sign predicts good fortune, success in love, and
loyalty to your friends.

KNIVES.--These signify danger of wounds, attacks of pain, and dismay.


L

LABURNUM TREE.--A sign of delight and the fulfilment of a cherished
hope, probably occurring in the spring.

LADDER.--This signifies advancement, influential friends, and the
attainment of good fortune.

LAMB.--An indication that you will be amazed by the success of a
doubtful undertaking. See also PRANCING LAMB.

LAMP.--This sign provides an assurance of good success in business. See
also STREET LAMP.

LANTERN.--This shows that fear and doubt will mar your happiness and
progress. See also CHINESE LANTERN.

LAUREL.--This tree points to power, ability and health.

LEAVES.--Prosperous results of your diligence, new friends, and
satisfaction.

LEEK.--This implies that you are anxious to come to the root of some
matter of which at present you have only an inkling; with good signs
around, you may expect to come to a satisfactory understanding.

LEG.--This foretells a successful race with fortune.

LEG OF MUTTON.--Depression and pecuniary worries is the meaning of this
sign.

LEOPARD.--This animal foreshows triumph over adverse circumstances or an
evil report; two leopards, fortune and misfortune following each other
in quick succession.

LETTERS.--These are shown by oblong or square tea-leaves, initials near
give the name of the writer; with dots around they will contain money.

LETTUCE.--This shows sleeplessness, possibly from the receiving of some
perturbing news.

LIGHTHOUSE.--A good sign of security and of light on your path whenever
it is most needed; if crooked or broken, disaster at sea.

LIGHTNING.--Forked lightning seen in a zig-zag up the side of the cup
shows bad weather conditions; if near the figure of a man or woman, it
may possibly indicate death from lightning or electrical mechanism; if
seen at the bottom of the cup and with a clear space indicating water,
it would mean bad storms abroad causing damage and loss.

LILAC.--This is an emblem of radiant happiness; joys shared with
another, with whom there is perfect oneness of purpose and love.

LILY-OF-THE-VALLEY.--A fortunate omen of realisation, love, and
marriage. See also ARUM LILY, BELLADONNA LILY, MADONNA LILY, HARRISSI
LILY, WATER LILY.

LIMPETS.--These denote that you endeavour to wrest from others some
valuable secret which they possess, but without success; limpets are a
sign of good luck to fishermen and promise a big haul of fish.

LINES OF DOTS.--These indicate journeys and their probable length and
direction; to be read in connection with other signs of movement; wavy
lines mean tiresome journeys or difficulties likely to be encountered;
if the lines ascend sharply to the brim of the cup, a journey to a hilly
country will be taken.

LION.--One of the most fortunate symbols indicating high hopes and
excellent prospects, association with distinguished persons, honour, and
fame.

LIZARD.--This suggests treachery and the probability of a plot being
laid against you by false and deceitful friends.

LOBSTER.--A pleasant event, or a good present, is shown by this symbol.

LOCK AND KEY.--You are warned against the loss of something which you
value.

LOOKING-GLASS.--This implies a desire to know the truth, even if it be
unpleasant to you.

LORD MAYOR'S COACH.--You will receive a good offer from an unexpected
quarter.

LUTE.--This is a sign of a secret sadness of which those around you know
nothing; to musicians, a good omen of success.

LYNX.--To the married a bad omen of estrangement, possibly divorce; to
others it denotes treachery or episodes of a painful nature.


M

MACARONI.--This proclaims the sad fact that you must endeavour to make
sixpence do the work of a shilling.

MACE.--Promotion, a position of authority and achievement.

MACHINE.--See AUTOMATIC MACHINE.

MADONNA LILY.--This flower means perfection and peace, and the assurance
of love and truth.

MAGNET.--You will be drawn by an irresistible attraction towards someone
for whom you will eventually feel more dislike than affection.

MAGNIFYING GLASS.--You are given to such exaggeration that it amounts to
untruthfulness.

MAGNOLIA.--This tree brings calm and peaceful conditions after a time of
unrest.

MAGPIE.--"One for sorrow, two for mirth, three for a wedding, four for a
birth"; this ancient saying well explains the meaning of seeing magpies
in the tea-leaves.

MAHL STICK.--See ARTIST'S MAHL STICK.

MALLET.--You will arrive at a wise conclusion in a difficult matter. See
also CROQUET MALLET.

MALTESE CROSS.--You will emerge from one source of vexation or trouble
only to fall into another.

MAN.--You may expect a visitor.

MAN CARRYING A BURDEN.--An unhappy marriage or an unfortunate love
affair.

MAN CARRYING MACE.--This points to personal promotion or the advancement
of someone dear to you.

MAN SPEAKING FROM A PLATFORM.--Public news or developments which will
specially interest or concern you.

MARROW.--See VEGETABLE MARROW.

MARS.--This sign will often be seen, and indicates a courageous,
energetic nature, fond of exploits and freedom, and shows a capacity for
strenuous work; a fortunate symbol for a soldier.

MASK.--For a lover, this predicts that unpleasant facts will come to
light, of which at present there is no suspicion, leading to an abrupt
ending of the love affair.

MASS OF LEAVES.--Arrivals and departures about which there are little
difficulties.

MAST.--This symbol must be read in connection with the surrounding
signs.

MASTIFF.--This dog warns you of an unexpected emergency in which there
is danger of your being overpowered by the arguments of those who are
masterful.

MAYPOLE.--This shows that you find but little satisfaction in your
amusements and gaiety; for whilst you appear to enter into them in a
light-hearted manner, you are craving for further excitement.

MAY TREE.--This signifies the receiving of a joyous message.

MEAT.--A sign of financial worry.

MEAT COVER.--An unpleasant emergency or discovery.

MEDAL.--You will be rewarded for past industry by future prosperity.

MEDICINE BOTTLE.--An unpleasant sign of illness.

MEDLAR.--This tree predicts a condition of transient happiness.

MEERSCHAUM PIPE.--You will be disturbed by some news from a man who has
much influence in your life.

MELON.--This means gratification and good news, and the deriving of much
pleasure from the appreciation of those whose good opinion is of value
to you.

MERCURY.--This planet is constantly seen in the tea-leaves and is a
symbol of ceaseless activity of striving to attain great things; it also
indicates good business capacity.

MERMAID.--To those associated with the sea, this is a warning of
shipwreck or other peril.

MERRYTHOUGHT.--The attainment of a wish or small pleasure.

MICE.--These indicate danger of poverty through fraud or theft.

MILK-CANS.--These show an agricultural enterprise that will be to your
advantage.

MILK-CHURN.--A good emblem of future comfort and increased happiness.

MILKING-STOOL.--A new venture about which you will feel somewhat dubious
but which with care will be carried out successfully.

MINE-SHAFT.--This is a hopeful sign of coming peace after a time of
discontent amongst miners, or a coal strike.

MIRROR.--Prophetic dreams; a love of truth.

MISTLETOE.--This signifies that a cherished hope is unlikely to be
fulfilled, or at any rate it will only be after many months have passed,
and when you have become weary of waiting.

MITRE.--A prediction of honour and promotion for a clergyman.

MONK.--Religious controversy and disturbances.

MONKEY.--This is an unpleasant indication that ugly rumours and scandal
will be spread about you or yours; sometimes public notoriety; with
other signs, it foreshows grief and pain.

MONKEY-ON-ORGAN.--Difficult circumstances and a hard struggle are the
meanings of this sign.

MONKEY PUZZLE TREE.--A task lies before you which you will find hard,
but for which you will afterwards be rewarded by meeting with great
success.

MONOGRAMS.--These will often be found in the tea-leaves and will
indicate someone of much importance in your life, whose initials are
shown by the monogram.

MONUMENT.--Someone in whose career you are much interested will rise to
fame.

MOON.--A crescent moon denotes good news, fortune, and romance; for a
man it predicts public recognition and honour.

MORTAR.--A sign of gloom, illness, emergencies.

MOTOR CAR.--Short journeys by road or rail, visits from friends; with
other signs, some increase of fortune may be expected.

MOUNTAIN.--This gives promise of the realisation of a great ambition and
of the influence of powerful friends; many mountains indicate
obstructions and sometimes powerful enemies in your career.

MOUNTED HORSEMAN.--A sign of good friends, luck, and advantageous
offers.

MOUSE.--This invariably indicates that there is need for a trap to be
set; it also gives warning that domestic worries are to be expected.

MUFF.--This implies caprice and ostentation.

MUG.--This symbol predicts a merry meeting.

MUSHROOM.--This predicts that you will take a small risk and achieve a
great success; to lovers, it foreshows a quarrel and possibly a broken
engagement.

MUSIC CONDUCTOR.--A good sign to a musician; to others it suggests that
enthusiasm and good spirits will carry them through life very happily.

MUTTON CHOP.--Fruitless discussion or indisposition are the meanings of
this sign. See also LEG OF MUTTON.

MYRTLE TREE.--This speaks of affection and peace; a declaration of love,
and a happy marriage.


N

NAIL.--Toothache and painful dentistry are foreshown by this sign.

NAMES.--To see the name of a person or place, signifies events occurring
in connection with such person or place; if good symbols appear,
pleasant happenings may be expected; if gloomy signs, then trouble will
arise associated with the name seen.

NARCISSUS.--This flower shows sentiment and coming joy; also that some
new idea will unfold itself to you in the spring and will prove to be of
much advantage to you.

NATIVE WITH "TOM-TOM".--This foreshows news of disturbance in India or
news of a personal nature which will cause anxiety.

NECKLACE.--A good present or money; a broken necklace shows that you
will break a bond which you have grown to feel is unendurable.

NEEDLES.--These denote mischief and deceit; sometimes disappointment in
love.

NEPTUNE.--This planetary symbol indicates a condition of chaos.

NEST.--See BIRD'S NEST, EAGLE'S NEST.

NET.--Toil or anxiety followed by amazing achievement and good fortune.

NINEPINS.--These show a mind determined to gain success whatever the
cost in drudgery.

NOSE.--A large nose denotes dissipation; a crooked one shows a wayward
and untrustworthy character; a long, thin nose implies that you change
your ideas on various subjects and alter your mode of life in accordance
with your new ideas.

NOSEGAY.--See BOUQUET.

NOTICE-BOARD.--Your attention will be called to some fact which it will
be to your advantage to learn.

NUMBERS.--These are frequently found in the tea-leaves, and must be read
in conjunction with surrounding symbols. If the consultant has a lucky
number, and this appears with good signs, it promises much success. An
unlucky number with gloomy signs predicts misfortune. A journey with a
five near obviously points out that it will be taken in five days, or
weeks, and so on. Ten dots, close together, means ten pounds or
shillings, according to the size and number of the dots. Numbers with
the symbol of a legacy show the amount to be expected.

NUN.--This is a sign that you will probably remain unmarried through
your own choice; to the married it implies unjust suspicion.

NURSE.--A nurse in uniform usually foretells illness for yourself or for
someone dear to you.

NUT-CRACKERS.--This portends that you will strive to solve a difficult
problem, the result of which is of much importance to you.

NUTS.--Gratified ambition and wealth are indicated by nuts.


O

OAK TREE.--This is a good omen of wealth, strength, and attainment of
cherished hopes; for a lover, it predicts happiness and prosperity in
marriage.

OAR.--Sport; amusements; a broken oar denotes recklessness for which you
will pay dearly; for a lover or husband, this means affliction.

OBELISK.--This foreshows honour and wealth.

OIL-CAN.--Work and worry are foretold by this sign.

ONIONS.--You may expect that something which you supposed was a secret
will be discovered, possibly through treacherous friends.

OPERA-GLASSES.--You are in danger of losing the confidence of your
friends because of your inquisitive questions.

ORCHIDS.--These give a pleasing assurance of coming good fortune and a
life of ease and wealth.

ORGAN.--This must be read in connection with other signs around it;
sometimes it means a wedding, death, or realised ambition; to a
musician, it is a good omen of achievement. See also BARREL ORGAN.

OSTRICH.--This symbol points to achievement in creative work; if
running, you may look for startling news and rumours of public
upheavals.

OTTER.--You must expect to receive a disagreeable shock through some
unpleasant spite on the part of those of whom you have always thought
well, and regarded as loyal and affectionate friends.

OVERCOAT.--You may expect to have changes in your life and become of
much importance.

OWL.--A bad omen of illness, misfortune, and poverty; if flying, you
will receive tidings of grief; to lovers this bird is a symbol of bad
news or unpleasant rumours; to those who are contemplating new work or
enterprise the owl should be regarded as a warning to proceed with
caution.

OX.--An ox in his stall implies hospitality, domestic peace and
abundance.

OYSTERS.--These are a sign of enjoyment and expensive tastes, also that
you will appreciate the pleasures of life more in your later years than
in your youthful days.


P

PADLOCK.--An open padlock means a surprise; a closed one, a need for
precaution.

PAGODA.--Foreign travels.

PAIL.--You will be called upon to undertake a variety of things which
you dislike.

PAILS ON YOKE.--In the future you may hope for compensation for past
trials and weariness.

PALACE.--This portends good fortune and favours.

PALETTE.--A hopeful sign of success to an artist or to those associated
with one; to others, it suggests a need for deliberation and advice
before embarking upon a new work or enterprise.

PALM TREE.--This is a symbol of honour, fame, and victory; increase of
wealth, love, and marriage.

PAMPAS GRASS.--This is a sign that you will make a pathetic endeavour to
find happiness in a life which is cast in a somewhat dreary lot.

PAN AND HIS PIPES.--A most cheering symbol which gives an assurance of
happiness, future prosperity, and delight.

PANSY.--This flower is a symbol of understanding, modesty, and
contentment; it is also a pleasant indication of faithful friends and
happy days.

PANTHER.--You may expect to be shocked at the treacherous behaviour of a
friend whom you had always regarded as honourable.

PARADISE.--See BIRD OF PARADISE.

PARALLEL LINES.--These predict well-thought-out and smoothly running
plans.

PARCELS.--These are shown by thick, square or round leaves.

PARROT.--This is a sign of foreign travel, the making of many friends,
and much mental energy; sometimes it gives a hint that there is an
inclination to gossip and spread scandal.

PARSLEY.--Small events will bring you satisfaction.

PEACOCK.--A sign of the acquisition of property; a prosperous and happy
marriage; with other signs, an unfortunate friendship.

PEAKED CAP.--The arrival of a male visitor.

PEARS.--Improved social condition and other advantages; this fruit
brings success to a business man and to a woman a rich husband; one pear
signifies a birth or new plans.

PEDESTRIAN.--An important appointment or urgent business.

PELICAN.--This bird is a symbol of loneliness, separation, and yearning
for the unattainable; if it is flying you will receive news from those
who are far away in isolated parts of the world.

PEN.--See QUILL PEN.

PENGUIN.--This strange bird indicates interesting news of expeditions
and discoveries in the northern regions.

PENKNIFE.--This is an unfortunate symbol of enmity, disloyalty, and
jealousy.

PEONIES.--You will probably be called upon to make a decision of much
importance before another summer is past; broken peonies predict that
you may possibly throw away your chance of happiness by coming to a
wrong conclusion.

PEPPER-POT.--This means vexation and unreasonable irritation which you
will endeavour to conceal.

PERAMBULATOR.--News of a birth.

PESTLE.--A sign of decisive measures; a remedy for a grievance or an
ill.

PHEASANT.--Good fortune; new friends; if flying, speedy and propitious
news.

PIANO.--This is a sign that you will make the most of your opportunities
and will gain that for which you have aimed; to musicians, a sign of
advancement.

PICKAXE.--This sign proclaims labour troubles and strikes.

PIG.--This assures you of gain and success in agricultural interests; it
also denotes that you may expect a present of money or a legacy.

PIGEONS.--These show reconciliation with someone dear to you from whom
you have been estranged; if flying, important and pleasant news is on
its way; if stationary, delay in the arrival of important news.

PILLAR.--A symbol of strength, protection from danger, and of good and
powerful friends; a broken pillar predicts sorrow and despair.

PILLAR BOX.--Important or specially interesting correspondence is the
meaning of this sign.


PINCERS.--A painful experience; an injury; toothache.

PINCUSHION.--Thrift, order, and a well-regulated household.

PINEAPPLE.--A pleasing indication of wealth, rich friends, and good
presents.

PINE TREES.--Happiness followed by an aftermath of regret.

PIPE.--A visit from a dear friend; several pipes foreshow news from a
man who is much in your thoughts. See also MEERSCHAUM PIPE, PAN AND HIS
PIPES.

PISTOL.--An ominous warning of disaster; with other bad signs, of a
violent death.

PITCHER.--This shows an endeavour to relieve a rather dull and
monotonous life, by throwing your energy into somewhat unnecessary work.

PITCHFORK.--A sign that you are apt to stir up feud, and make peace and
quiet impossible.

PLATE.--For the present, you will merely jog along in an ordinary way.

PLAYING CARDS.--See ACE OF CLUBS, ACE OF DIAMONDS, ACE OF HEARTS, and
ACE OF SPADES.

PLOUGH.--You must expect to go through toil and frustration before you
finally conquer your difficulties and achieve triumph.

PLUM PUDDING.--This denotes festivity and cheerfulness.

PLUMS.--These foretell a new development of plans.

POLAR BEAR.--This sign means a journey to a cold climate.

POLICEMAN.--This tells you to beware of theft and underhand practices;
with other signs, it would indicate trouble probably caused by those
with whom you are most closely associated.

POPE.--Unexpected gain and future happiness are foretold by this sign.

POPPY.--This flower is significant of a pleasant occurrence in the early
summer.

PORTER AND TRUCK.--This indicates a pending journey or the arrival of a
traveller.

POST.--This signifies a formidable obstacle; if broken, that you will
encounter a storm of opposition to your plan.

POSTMAN.--Important and profitable news.

POT.--See COFFEE POT.

POTATO.--You will have need of patience in your daily life, and will
sometimes be troubled by pecuniary difficulties.

PRANCING LAMB.--This is a symbol of trouble which will have beneficial
results and will lead to contentment and happiness.

PRAWNS.--These bring pleasures, presents and satisfactory arrangements.

PRINCE OF WALES' PLUMES.--This is a symbol of pleasant events, stirring
topics and sometimes of personal honour and distinction.

PUDDING.--See PLUM PUDDING.

PUFFIN.--This bird denotes timidity and a desire for solitude; if
flying, news from abroad.

PULPIT.--A love of talking and a dislike to listening is the meaning of
this symbol.

PUMP.--Your own efforts will bring about a fortunate result.

PUNCH-AND-JUDY.--You will read, or hear, of a sensational case in
married life.

PURSE.--This cautions you against theft, or carelessness that may lead
to losing money.

PYRAMIDS.--These foreshow attainment to honour, fame and wealth.


Q

QUEEN.--A queen upon her throne indicates security, peace, and honour;
sometimes the attainment to a high position through powerful friends.

QUERY.--This shows doubt, indecision; if this sign were seen with a
letter the doubt would be with regard to some correspondence; if with a
journey, uncertainty about it; and so on.

QUILL PEN.--This shows that you may expect, before long, to sign your
maiden name for the last time in a marriage register; with other signs,
a legal document.

QUOITS.--This sign indicates a journey to the country on pleasure.


R

RABBIT.--An indication of illness for a child; a dead rabbit means
domestic duties which will bore you, sometimes financial worry; several
rabbits suggest that you must depend upon your own efforts for your
amusements and must be content with simple ones; a rabbit on its hind
legs predicts that a new plan or idea will bring you great success.

RAG DOLL.--This implies a simplicity that sometimes verges on folly.

RAILWAY SIGNAL.--This symbol may be seen at "danger" or "all clear." Its
meaning must be read in accordance with other signs.

RAM.--An unpleasant person whom you would do well to avoid is indicated
by this sign.

RAKE.--This implement denotes a persevering nature which should bring
you a liberal measure of success in whatever you undertake; it also
indicates luck in speculation.

RAT.--Treachery and other impending troubles, are foreshown by this
unpleasant symbol.

RAVEN.--This bird is an omen of gloom and despondency, disappointment in
love, separation, failure in work; it is also a symbol of death for the
aged.

RAZOR.--Quarrels, also a warning against interference in other people's
affairs; to lovers this sign foretells disagreement and separation.

RED-HOT POKER.--This flower suggests that you are likely to bring
yourself within the range of unpleasant criticism by your flaunting
manner.

REPTILE.--This is a bad omen of coming misfortune, treachery, or
illness.

RHINOCEROS.--This animal denotes a risky proceeding into which you
plunge without hesitation, although your friends and relations will try
to persuade you to give up your scheme, but your indifference to the
opinion of others prevents any chance of their being successful.

RIDER.--This brings good news from overseas of business and financial
affairs.

RIFLE.--Strife and calamity are shown by this sign.

RING.--With dots around, a contract or a business transaction; with the
figures of a man and woman, an engagement or wedding is foretold.

RIVER.--A sign of trouble and perplexity, sometimes illness and
bereavement.

ROBIN.--A symbol of much good fortune, loyal friends, and happiness in
love.

ROCKET.--This foretells joy and gladness at some event about to happen.

ROCKING CHAIR.--This indicates contemplation of a new idea or scheme
about which you are somewhat doubtful.

ROCKING HORSE.--Happy associations will be renewed; pleasure with
children.

ROCKS.--These prepare you for alarms and agitation, but if good signs
appear, you will eventually find a smooth path through your fife.

ROLLER.--See GARDEN ROLLER.

ROLLING PIN.--This is an indication that you will be capable of
smoothing out your difficulties and will usually find an easy path in
which to tread.

ROSE.--A token of good fortune, joy, and love.

ROSEMARY.--Memories of the past will mar your future.

RUNNING FIGURES.--You may expect an emergency in which you will need to
have all your wits about you; sometimes this signifies urgent messages.


S

SACK.--This predicts an unlooked for event which will turn out to be
most fortunate.

SADDLE.--The successful solving of a troublesome matter is the meaning
of this sign.

SAILOR.--You may expect news from overseas of an interesting nature.

SALMON JUMPING IN A POOL.--This is a fortunate sign of propitious news
which will mean a great deal to you.

SANDWICH MAN.--After a time of irksome tasks and pecuniary worry, you
will be rewarded by a time of ease and wealth.

SAUCEPAN.--This is an indication that many troubles will befall you, and
your courage will be tested in meeting them.

SAUSAGES.--These show complaints or affliction.

SAW.--Interference which will bring a good deal of trouble upon you, is
signified by a saw.

SCAFFOLD.--This signifies that you will enter into a rash speculation.

SCALES.--This symbol stands for legal proceedings.

SCARECROW.--This warns you to avoid interfering in the private affairs
of others, or you may find that you will receive the cold shoulder from
them.

SCEPTRE.--This is a fortunate sign of distinction and honour.

SCIMITAR.--You will hear of murders, horrible treachery, and riots.

SCISSORS.--An unlucky sign of friction between friends; disputing and
disagreeableness with married couples; quarrels between lovers; trouble
in business.

SCOOP.--See COAL SCOOP.

SCREW.--With a little ingenuity and perseverance, you will arrive at
that for which you aim.

SCREW-SPANNER.--Troublesome affairs and vexations are before you.

SCUTTLE.--See COAL SCUTTLE.

SCYTHE.--This sign foreshows grief and pain.

SEAGULL.--A sign of storms; if flying, news from abroad.

SEAKALE.--A satisfactory conclusion to a vexed question is the meaning
of this symbol.

SEAL.--An indication that a considerable amount of patience will be
necessary before your hopes are realised, but eventually you will gain
success and wealth.

SEALING-WAX.--Theoretically you are wise, but you seldom bring your
wisdom to bear on practical matters.

SEE-SAW.--Unless you endeavour to become more decisive and reliable, you
will lose any good opportunities which may come your way.

SEAWEED.--This denotes a joy in the past of which only the memory
remains.

SHAMROCK.--A sign of good luck.

SHARK.--An ominous sign of death.

SHAVING-BRUSH.--This sign suggests that you are apt to turn molehills
into mountains.

SHEEP.--To landowners or those engaged in any agricultural pursuits
sheep are an omen of success and prosperous dealing; to others this sign
implies that they will receive assistance from unexpected quarters.

SHELL.--Good luck from an unexpected source; with other signs, a visit
to the seaside.

SHEPHERD.--The appearance of this symbol warns you against taking
unnecessary risks in all matters.

SHIP.--News from distant lands; a successful journey; a voyage.

SHIRT.--This sign is considered an omen of good fortune.

SHOES.--These indicate speedy new arrangements which are likely to turn
out extremely well.

SHRIMPING NET.--Pleasures and amusements, unconventionality, and good
spirits.

SHUTTERS.--This sign proclaims the fact that there is need for secrecy,
and that there may be things in your life of which you trust nothing
will be known.

SICKLE.--A sign that you will experience sorrow and pain through the
callous behaviour of someone you love.

SIGNPOST.--This symbol must be read in conjunction with surrounding
symbols; it usually emphasises the importance of other signs; a broken
signpost indicates, that you take a wrong turning in your life and
afterwards have much cause to regret it.

SKELETON.--This implies a feeling of disgust at some information which
is told to you and which you are asked not to reveal.

SKIPPING ROPE.--Pleasure with children and popularity with them.

SLEIGH.--A spell of cold weather; an interesting event or piece of news
to be expected in the winter.

SLUG.--Petty annoyances; bad weather.

SNAIL.--This is a sign of infidelity; several snails, that mischief is
going on around you of which you are unaware.

SNAKE.--This is an unpleasant sign of treachery, disloyalty, and hidden
danger, sometimes caused by those whom you least suspect; if its head is
raised, injury by the malice of a man is predicted; it is also an
indication of misfortune and illness.

SNIPE.--This bird signifies the discovery of a useful fact; if flying,
hasty news of a great friend.

SNOWDROPS.--These are a symbol of youth and innocence; this sign may
point to some event affecting you and yours which will probably take
place about February; if seen in a cross it would foreshow the death of
an infant or young child.

SOAP.--Cakes or blocks of soap predict temporary trouble in business.

SOAP BUBBLES.--See CHILD BLOWING SOAP BUBBLES.

SOFA.--This foreshows indisposition or a small illness, sometimes
disturbed nights or emergencies.

SOLDIER.--This signifies that you may count upon the loyalty and
affection of your friends; sometimes it indicates that you may expect
speedy news of a soldier.

SOLOMON'S SEAL.--This plant is a symbol of understanding, devotion, and
coming joy.

SOUP LADLE.--It will be through the assistance of others that you will
arrive at success.

SOUP TUREEN.--To the mature, this symbol points to a return of good
fortune; to the young, a small illness and loss of appetite.

SPADE.--This means toil, care, unrest, disappointment, and failure. See
ACE OF SPADES.

SPANNER.--See SCREW SPANNER.

SPHINX.--This denotes that your hopes will be set on things far beyond
your reach, and that as nothing but the very best in life has any
attraction for you, it is improbable that you will ever attain to
complete happiness.

SPIDER.--You may expect to receive an inheritance; with other signs,
that you will be triumphant in disputed will or money settlement;
several spiders foretell profitable transactions, sometimes a heritage
of much wealth.

SPUR.--This symbol foretells that as the result of endurance and honest
labour you will attain to honour.

SQUARE.--This formed of dotted lines indicates perplexity and dismay,
and endeavour to extricate yourself from an embarrassing situation.

SQUIRREL.--This is a sign of contentment and cheerfulness; although you
may never be rich you will be loved by those around you and, on the
whole, will lead a happy life.

STAR.--A lucky sign; if surrounded by dots, wealth and honour are
foretold.

STEAMER.--A voyage, news from overseas, interesting events, according to
other signs.

STEEPLE.--This denotes misfortune, bad luck; if it is crooked or bending
it foreshows a coming disaster or crushing blow to your hope.

STEPS.--Unaccustomed work which will fall to your lot as a result of the
illness of someone with whom you work or associate.

STILE.--With a small amount of perception you will arrive at a right
conclusion.

STILTS.--These show a desire to appear different in the eyes of your
friends from that which you really are, and you will often fail in an
effort to keep up this subterfuge.

STOCKS.--These sweet scented flowers foreshow an unexpected happiness
with someone whom you have not seen for a long while.

STOCKINGS.--A present received or given is the meaning of this symbol.

STONES.--Little worries and vexations.

STOOL.--A large stool is a symbol of honour; a small one signifies that
your success in life will be meagre.

STORK.--In summer, this bird tells you to beware of robbery or fraud; in
winter, prepare for bad weather and a great misfortune; a stork flying
predicts that whilst you hesitate in coming to a decision, a profitable
chance is lost, the news of which will speedily reach you.

STOVE.--This symbol calls attention to the fact that trials and
tribulations await you.

STRAW.--A bundle of straw foretells gain through industry.

STRAWBERRIES.--Pleasure and the gratification of your wishes are shown
by this fruit.

STRAW HAT.--Modesty and simple pleasures.

STREET LAMP.--This is a sign of a foolish desire to draw attention to
yourself.

STUD.--See COLLAR STUD.

STUFFED BIRDS.--A discovery that something upon which you had set your
heart proves unsatisfying.

SUBMARINE.--Swiftly arriving news or events; sometimes the disclosure of
a secret which will be of much personal value to you.

SUN.--This promises happiness, health, success in love, prosperity, and
the beneficial discovery of secrets.

SUN BONNET.--A sign of originality, personal charm and attraction,
sometimes coquetry.

SUNDIAL.--You are warned to take heed as to the way in which you spend
your time.

SUNFLOWER.--This flower proclaims learning and a satisfactory conclusion
in matters which are most interesting to you; it also implies that you
may reasonably expect a scheme to work out greatly to your advantage.

SUSPENDERS.--These show precaution.

SUSPENSION BRIDGE.--A venture in which much is at stake but after a time
of anxiety you arrive at final triumph.

SWALLOW.--A journey with a happy result; if flying, joyful tidings from
someone you love; if several swallows are flying, they indicate a
journey to a warm climate under very pleasant conditions.

SWAN.--This bird is significant of tribulation, troublesome conditions
in the home, and sometimes of separation from those whom you love.

SWEEP.--The performing of an urgent disagreeable business will shortly
fall to your lot.

SWEET WILLIAM.--This flower signifies that happiness in the past has
tinged your future with sadness.

SWIMMING.--A brave endeavour to overcome your fear of an undertaking
which must be faced.

SWING-BOAT.--By an act of folly, you forfeit the good opinion of someone
with whom you most desire to be on terms of friendship.

SWORD.--This is a sign of danger, sudden illness, or even death; it also
betokens slander and dangerous gossip; to lovers it is a bad omen of
quarrels; a sword in its sheath shows honour and glory for someone dear
to you; a broken sword predicts the triumph of an enemy.


T

TABLE.--This means suggestions and consultation; note the subject from
the surrounding signs.

TAMBOURINE.--A symbol of lighthearted gaiety which will follow a time of
gloom or worry. See also CHILD WITH TAMBOURINE.

TEA COSY.--To the unmarried, this is a sign that they will probably
remain single; to the married, affection and comfort in the small things
of life.

TEA-CUP AND SAUCER.--You may expect to hear something of much interest
and pleasure in your "fortune."

TEETH.--These call attention to the fact that probably a visit to the
dentist is required.

TELEGRAPH POST.--Hasty news by telephone or telegram.

TELEGRAPH WIRES.--You will transact important business by telephone or
telegram.

TELEPHONE.--You will be put to considerable inconvenience through
forgetfulness.

TELESCOPE.--This predicts the probability of trouble with your eyesight.

TENNIS NET.--This shows pleasures and social entertainments.

TENT.--A symbol of travel.

THIMBLE.--For a girl, this symbol implies that she will probably never
marry; to the married, it predicts changes in the household.

THISTLE.--This is a pleasant sign of strength, endurance, and affection;
it also shows a desire to remove obstacles from the path of those who
are in difficulties.

THRONE.--An empty throne denotes public misfortune. See also KING ON
THRONE.

THUMB.--A large and powerful thumb foretells an opportunity in which you
prove yourself superior to those who hitherto somewhat despised you.

TIGER.--You will be placed in a perilous position possibly through the
bad behaviour or folly of those who should protect you.

TIMBER.--Logs of timber are a sign of well-being and prosperity in your
affairs.

TIN TACKS.--An agreement about to be satisfactorily concluded.

TOAD.--You may expect deceit and the discovery of disagreeable facts;
this sign should caution you to be on your guard, for malicious talking
causes much discomfort and may separate the best of friends.

TOADSTOOL.--You are warned against making rash and unguarded statements,
a bad habit of gossiping and encouraging scandal.

TOM-TOM.--See NATIVE WITH TOM-TOM.

TOMATOES GROWING.--An increase of worldly goods is foreshown by this
sign.

TOMBSTONE.--This sign must be judged in accordance with other symbols
around it.

TONGS.--A pair of firetongs indicates anxiety and disturbance in the
home.

TONGUE.--This signifies that unless you amend you will make mischief by
your indiscreet and unkind words.

TOOTH.--One large tooth is a symbol of bereavement.

TOPIARY WORK.--Trees and hedges cut into the forms of birds, animals,
etc., are often to be seen in the tea-leaves; this sign assures you of
the fact that those things for which you must wait longest are those
which will give most joy.

TORCH (FLAMING).--This is a hopeful symbol that some unexpected piece of
good fortune will come to you; it also indicates the discovery of an
undeveloped talent.

TORPEDO.--Acts of violence, disaster, or distressing news are the
meanings of this symbol.

TORTOISE.--This means that you attempt that of which you have no
knowledge.

TOWER.--This predicts an advantageous opportunity through which you may
rise to a good position in life.

TOYS.--Pleasure with children.

TRAIN.--Arrivals, removals, a journey.

TRAM.--A roadway journey on business or pleasure.

TRAM LINE.--This is indicated by two thin, straight lines which run near
together up the side of the cup.

TREES.--Good health and a pleasing assurance of coming prosperity and
happiness; if surrounded by dots an inheritance of property in the
country is foreshown! See also CHESTNUT TREE, CHRISTMAS TREE, ELM TREE,
OAK TREE, YEW TREE.

TRIANGLE.--A fortunate meeting, good luck; sometimes an unexpected
legacy.

TRIDENT.--A hopeful sign of honour and promotion to those in the Navy.

TRIUMPHAL ARCH.--This is a fortunate omen of your future honour and high
position; a decorated arch foretells a wedding.

TROWEL.--This gardening implement foretells good weather conditions;
seen in the winter, it indicates unusual mildness. See also BRICKLAYER'S
TROWEL.

TROUSERS.--A pair of trousers foretells news of misfortune or sorrow for
a man.

TRUE LOVER'S KNOT.--This is a happy omen of faithfulness in love, and of
enduring friendship.

TRUMPET.--This denotes good fortune to a musician; to others,
entertainment, large assemblies of people, public speaking, sometimes
the setting on foot of new schemes.

TRUNK.--Arrivals and departures.

TUB.--You have evil to fear, is the meaning of this sign.

TULIPS.--A symbol of radiance, health, and constancy in love and
friendship.

TUNNEL.--This suggests that you are likely to make a wrong decision in
an important matter.

TURKEY.--That you are in danger of committing injurious follies is the
meaning of this sign.

TURNIP.--The discovery of secrets and domestic quarrels are indicated by
this sign.

TURNPIKE.--This implies that the reminiscences which you relate of the
past are of more interest than your topics of the present.

TURNSTILE.--This is a sign that you cleverly evade a disagreeable
incident or unpleasant discussion without offending anyone.

TURTLE.--This is significant of wealth and luxury.

TWINS.--This is a symbol of sympathy and the perfection of happiness;
with other signs, news of the birth of twins.


U

UGLY FACES.--These show domestic quarrels or unpleasant news.

UMBRELLA.--If it is open, bad weather and grumbling are foretold;
closed, a bit of bad luck which may be avoided.

UNICORN.--This is an indication of scandal.

URN.--A sign of illness.


V

VAMPIRE.--This brings a message of gloom and sorrow, or also means that
you await the expected news of a death.

VAN.--This sign denotes an interesting experiment in which you succeed.

VANITY BAG.--A large circle of admiring friends, and much pleasure with
them.

VASE.--This sign brings you a promise of good health.

VEGETABLE MARROW.--This means sad news or monetary losses through bad
crops, either at home or abroad.

VEGETABLES.--These indicate toil, followed by a time of leisure and
affluent circumstances.

VENUS.--This planet which is sometimes seen in the tea-leaves, brings a
message of peace or placidity.

VISE.--A carpenter's vise signifies that you will need powerful
assistance to extricate you from the mess in which you will find
yourself through your folly.

VIOLETS.--This is a symbol of high ideals and of the finding of
happiness in its fullest sense; several violets assure you of coming
joy; if in the form of a cross, death is predicted.

VIOLIN.--A symbol of coming success to a musician, and of pleasure and
entertainment to others.

VULTURE.--This bird is a forewarning of evil and unrest in various
quarters of the globe; it also means a powerful enemy, sometimes death;
if it flies, tragedy, sorrow, and tears are predicted.


W

WADING BOOT.--This is a warning to be cautious in swimming or boating,
or you may meet with an accident; with other signs it denotes a home by
the sea.

WAGGON.--This implies a fortunate outlook and changes for the better.

WALKING STICK.--The arrival of a male visitor.

WALL.--A thick, high wall denotes many difficulties in your life, and
that much courage will be needed to overcome them.

WALLFLOWER.--This sign indicates the serious consideration of a new
plan.

WARMING PAN.--This is a sign of comfort in small things and domestic
peace.

WASPS.--These insects are significant of distress caused by the sharp
tongues of those around you.

WATER.--This is usually recognised by a clear space entirely free from
tea-leaves at the bottom of the cup.

WATER LILY.--This flower proclaims a declaration of love.

WEASEL.--This animal shows cunning, and points to the sly behaviour of
someone with whom you associate, and of whom you feel no suspicion.

WEATHERCOCK.--This is a sign that you feel incapable of making up your
mind definitely on any matter without first consulting each one with
whom you come in contact, and in the end you settle upon an entirely
different course of action.

WEDDING CAKE.--This proclaims a speedy and prosperous marriage.

WHALE.--A prediction of personal danger which may be averted if you are
cautious.

WHEEL.--This is symbolic of the wheel of fortune and foreshows a
prosperous career or an inheritance of wealth; a broken wheel predicts a
bad disappointment as to an expected increase of income or a legacy.

WHEELBARROW.--This sign foretells a visit to the country or a pleasant
renewal of friendship with those who live in it.

WHIP.--To a woman this sign foretells vexation and trials in her
marriage; for a man, it has much the same meaning, and severe
disappointment will befall him.

WICKET GATE.--A small incident leads up to an important future event.

WIDOW'S BONNET.--This sign must be read in connection with other
symbols; sometimes it foreshows grief and mourning, or if dots are round
it, that a sum of money or a legacy may be expected from a widow.

WINDMILL.--A sign that you may hope to succeed in a doubtful enterprise.

WINDOW.--An open window shows that you are regarded with favour by many;
a closed one means embarrassment.

WINE CUP.--Joy and realised ambition.

WITCH ON BROOM.--You will be reproved by some of your friends who
consider that your interest in psychic matters is dangerous, but later
on you will be able to prove to their satisfaction that no harm has come
to it.

WITNESS BOX.--With bad signs around it, this would point to a personal
matter ending in a law court; otherwise, it denotes the taking place of
a trial in which you will feel special interest.

WOLF.--Beware of an avaricious and hard-hearted neighbour or friend.

WOMAN CARRYING A BURDEN.--An unhappy marriage or unfortunate love
affair.

WOMAN CARRYING A CHILD.--This shows distress, sometimes illness of
someone dear to you, or sadness through separation.

WOMAN HOLDING A MIRROR.--Clairvoyance and prediction of the future are
signified by this symbol.

WOMEN.--With bad signs, several women mean scandal; otherwise, society.

WOOD.--Much happiness with someone dear to you, a forthcoming wedding,
or a fortunate and favourable event.

WOODPECKER.--This bird brings pleasant news from those who live in the
country.

WORMS.--These warn you of coming misfortune, or of treachery, and evil
by secret foes.

WREATH.--This is a symbol of marriage, and of much happiness being in
store for you.


Y

YACHT.--This is a favourable sign of increased wealth or happiness.

YEW TREE.--You may expect to attain to a prominent position in life, and
to receive a legacy from an aged relative or friend.


Z

ZEBRA.--Something for which you have long waited is now within sight,
but you are likely to be disappointed, for you will find that it was not
worth waiting for after all.




SOME COMBINATIONS OF SYMBOLS AND THEIR MEANING


ACE OF DIAMONDS, A CIRCLE.--An engagement.

ACE OF DIAMONDS, A BUSH.--A pleasant invitation.

ACE OF CLUBS, AN OBELISK.--The offer of a good promotion.

ACE OF HEARTS, A TRAIN, A QUERY.--Indecision about a removal.

ACE OF HEARTS, AN URN, A BED.--Illness in the home.

ACE OF SPADES, BRICKS.--An advantageous offer from a large town.

ARM, A MYRTLE TREE, BIRD ON A PERCH.--New plans which bring about a
meeting with someone who will become all the world to you.

ARUM LILY, BELLS, A CHURCH.--A wedding.

ARUM LILY, A BAT, A BED, A WIDOW'S BONNET.--Death of a widow.

BACON, PAGODA.--You will make your fortune abroad.

BANANA, A PEACOCK, ACE OF HEARTS, TREES.--A happy marriage to someone of
wealth and property in the country.

BED, AN ENGINE, LABURNUM TREE.--A happy visit to the country in the
spring.

BESOM, UGLY FACES.--You will make many enemies by mischief-making.

BONNET, A BOUQUET.--Marriage late in life.

BRIDE, A CRESCENT MOON, A SWALLOW.--A journey which leads to a romantic
love affair.

BRIDE, PENKNIFE, AN OWL.--Jealousy terminates an unhappy engagement.

CAB, A SQUARE, A CAP.--A gloomy outlook brought about by one of the
opposite sex.

CAMEL (LADEN), A SMALL "T," A COFFIN.--An unexpected fortune through the
death of someone abroad whose name begins with "T."

CHAIN (ENTANGLED), ONION.--You will be placed in an embarrassing
position by the discovery of a secret.

CHINESE LANTERN, A PAIR OF STILTS.--Pride brings about a fall.

CLOVER, PLUMS, A BRIDGE.--A new and excellent opportunity will come your
way necessitating a journey.

DAFFODILS, THE SUN.--A joyful occurrence in the spring.

DOVES, A BOOK, A BEEHIVE.--You will advance rapidly and become a
well-known writer.

DUCK, A VEGETABLE MARROW.--Rash investments.

EAGLE (FLYING), A STEAMER, A TENT, A LARGE "E."--A position of honour in
Egypt.

EAR, A BEEHIVE, A TRUMPET.--Fame as a public speaker.

FATE LINE, A SWORD IN ITS SHEATH, THE SIGN OF MARS, A CHAIN.--A happy
fate awaits you, and marriage to a soldier who will rise to the top of
the tree in his profession.

FROG, A FISH, A SHIP, A LARGE "C."--Emigration to Canada.

GOAT, A RUNNING FIGURE, A LAMB.--There need be no doubt as to the
successful outcome of your venture.

GRASSHOPPERS, A SLEIGH, A WREATH OF ASTERS.--Death of an elderly friend
or relative in the winter.

KEY, A FLAMING TORCH.--Some discovery or the development of a patent
leads to your becoming famous.

KING ON HIS THRONE, AN EAGLE IN A CAGE, A MACE.--An important public
ceremony in which you take a part.

LADDER, RING, A MAN AND A WOMAN.--Marriage will be the means of
advancement and good fortune.

LADDER, A PALETTE.--Attainment to a position of honour as an artist.

LADDER, THE SYMBOL OF MARS.--A most fortunate career as a soldier.

LION, A LUTE.--Rising to the top of the tree, as a musician, is assured
by these symbols.

LION, A MAN SPEAKING FROM A PLATFORM.--Great success in a public career
and the attaining to an influential position.

LION, A MAN BESIDE A PESTLE AND MORTAR.--Excellent prospects and fame as
a doctor.

LIZARD, A PEAKED CAP.--An expected visitor is not to be trusted.

MACE, A MALLET.--Through wisdom and clear judgment you will rise to a
position of authority.

MAN CARRYING A BURDEN, A PAIR OF SCISSORS, A MUSHROOM.--Quarrels in an
unhappy love affair ending in a broken engagement.

MAGNET, A MEAT COVER.--An unpleasant discovery leads to the abrupt
ending of an infatuation.

NAIL, A PAIR OF PINCERS.--A visit to the dentist and the removal of a
tooth.

NOTICE-BOARD, A LEEK, AN OPEN PADLOCK.--In a surprising manner you will
get the information for which you are seeking.

ONIONS, AN OTTER.--Those in whom you trusted have betrayed your
confidence and divulged a secret.

OWL, A PAIL.--Loss of income will necessitate your undertaking
distasteful work.

PAGODA, A PALM TREE, WATER.--A voyage to a warm climate under very happy
conditions.

PESTLE AND MORTAR, A WALKING STICK.--Illness and the arrival of the
doctor.

PULPIT, OPERA GLASSES.--Those who weary others by undue curiosity will
always remain in ignorance.

QUERY, A LETTER, INITIAL "B," A GRAVE STONE.--You will be consulted as
to the erecting of a headstone on the grave of a relative or friend.

QUILL PEN, LILIES OF THE VALLEY, AN ORGAN.--Great happiness through
marriage.

RABBIT, AN ARROW, A LARGE LETTER "L," A DAGGER.--News of severe illness
and a probable operation for a child who lives in London.

RHINOCEROS, AN OVERCOAT, A STEAMER, A LARGE LETTER "I."--The undertaking
of a somewhat hazardous enterprise necessitates a voyage to India;
through this much will happen which will eventually lead to your
becoming famous.

ROCKET, A PEAR, A SNOWDROP.--News of a birth of which you may expect to
hear in February.

ROCKING CHAIR, A PEDESTRIAN, A MUSHROOM.--Deliberation over important
matters brings you to the conclusion that a great venture, which may
mean enormous gain, is worth a small risk, and success will await you.

SAILOR, A FLYING SWALLOW, A TRIDENT, A RING.--Happy news of good
promotion for a sailor and a proposal of marriage.

SCAFFOLD, LEG OF MUTTON.--Gambling or speculation will bring you to
poverty unless you pay heed to this warning.

SHARK, A PISTOL, A FLYING SEAGULL.--News from abroad of a tragic death.

SNAKE, A RAM, A WOMAN, A WIDOW'S BONNET.--Overwhelming evidence against
some widow who is a dangerous enemy.

SOFA, A SLEIGH.--A cold in the head or a chill.

SWORD, A RING, A MAN, A WOMAN, A TOAD.--Separation of lovers brought
about by slander and malicious talk.

TABLE, A QUILL PEN, A CAT, A RING WITH DOTS AROUND.--Legal business
over money matters which leads to family quarrels.

THRONE, AN OSTRICH RUNNING, A FLYING SEAGULL, A FLAG.--Serious news from
abroad of disturbances and rebellion.

TRAM LINES, A BUILDING WITH DOTS AROUND IT, A PURSE.--You will take a
roadway journey to a bank and are warned to beware of pickpockets.

URN, HOSPITAL NURSE, A MAN, A LARGE HEART.--Serious illness affecting
the heart is predicted for a man.

VEGETABLE MARROW, A STEAMER, NATIVE WITH "TOM-TOM," A BROKEN
PILLAR.--Distressing news of misfortune for someone dear to you in
India.

VIOLET, A WATER LILY, A ROBIN, A CRESCENT MOON, A RING.--A romantic love
affair which ends in a happy marriage taking place in the early spring.

WADING BOOT, THE SIGN OF NEPTUNE, SEVERAL PENGUINS, A MAST.--News of a
disaster in the North Sea.

WIDOW'S BONNET, A PIG, A DOTTED CIRCLE, THE FIGURES "100."--A small
legacy of a hundred pounds may be expected from a widow.

WOODPECKER, TREES, A ROSE, A MAN.--A prospective visit to the country in
the summer, when you will meet with someone who will become very dear to
you.

YEW TREE, AN OPEN PADLOCK, A WALLFLOWER, A PINEAPPLE.--A new plan of
life is made necessary as the result of an unexpected inheritance of
much wealth.

SOME EXAMPLE CUPS WITH THEIR INTERPRETATIONS

The following twenty illustrations are photographs of cups which on
various occasions have been turned by consultants and interpreted by a
seer. The student will find these of much practical value in learning
what symbols to look for, and how to discern them clearly as the cup is
turned about in the hand.

The divination of each cup should be carefully studied with its
illustration; by this means the student will be enabled to grasp the
principles upon which to form a judgment of the cup as a whole.

Having mastered this, the knowledge gained can be supplemented by
reference to the alphabetical Dictionary of Symbols and Their Meanings
in the previous chapter.

To study the illustrations and their descriptions correctly, the former
must be turned about and about until each symbol has been identified.




TWENTY ILLUSTRATIONS

WITH THEIR INTERPRETATIONS




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE I


The most noticeable feature of this cup is the clear evidence given that
the chief interests of the consultant are bound up in some man in India.
That there is delay in receiving important news from him is shown by the
symbol of the pigeon on the stone immediately beneath the handle. But
that most favourable news may be expected later is certain, for the
figure of a man upon an elephant with a pineapple beyond gives proof of
this. The natives with the large "P" in conjunction show that the
Punjaub is indicated, and this is further emphasised by the sign-post
which points towards these symbols. The child's toys show the
consultant's association and happiness with children. The figure of the
woman seated on the edge of a rock with its curious peak behind her, and
the seagull below, suggest that storms at sea will cause distress to
some woman known to the consultant. The small figure "11," close to this
symbol, points out that it is likely to be eleven days before there is
hope of the anxiety being relieved.

[Illustration: FIGURE I]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_On sides_.--Natives on post. Large letter "P." Child's toys. Woman
with uplifted hands on curious shaped rock. Small numeral "11" above.
Seagull perched on small rock beneath.

_In centre_.--Pigeon standing on large stone, man in sun helmet on
elephant. Sign-post pointing to letter "P."

_Near rim and handle_.--A pineapple on dish.




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE II


This cup shows that a variety of events may be expected, with a fair
proportion of pleasure and success to be anticipated from them.

The finger beyond the handle pointing to the ark indicates that in all
trials the consultant will find a refuge. The hanging lamp is also a
guarantee of coming success, and prosperous undertakings, in some new
plan which is under consideration.

The clouds, the symbol of the goat beyond which is facing into the open
gateway, signify that an advantageous opportunity, to which a certain
amount of risk is attached, awaits the consultant; the prominent
figurehead upon the stone pillar gives assurance that all will turn out
well, and that there is no need for hesitation in embarking upon this
new opportunity; that it will necessitate a removal is shown by the
buildings beyond. The quill pen and dots point to the fact that some
legal business will be transacted over money affairs.

The dove-cot in the centre, with the form of a widow with dots around,
signifies that a benefit to the home may be expected in the future,
through a widow. The clergyman in conjunction, holding a paper, shows
that the benefit will probably come about through a reconciliation. The
bank of clouds behind the ferry boat shows that some trouble, to be
expected in the future, will be lightened by the help of good friends.
Whilst the bird stationary upon the piece of wood, at some distance from
the consultant, and in conjunction with the letter "L," means
uncertainty as to some desired information, which should come from
someone whose name begins with "L."

[Illustration: FIGURE II]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_On sides_.--Finger. Small ark. Hanging lamp and shade. Large
arm-chair. Bank of clouds. Goat. Large open gateway. Curious shaped
figurehead upon a stone pillar. Low curved wall and buildings. Small
quill pen and dots.

_In centre_.--Dove-cot. Widow in flowing veil seated in chair. Dots
around. Man in clerical hat holding an open paper in his hand.

_Near rim_.--Shapeless leaves. Small ferry boat on water. Bird
standing on log of wood. Letter "L."




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE III


The cat with dots around being near the handle indicates financial worry
in the home. The bone beyond shows that the misfortunes will be met with
courage, and eventually overcome. The cockatoo, with the cauliflower
appearing on the opposite side, signifies that an unreliable friend will
cause the consultant a little uneasiness, and as a small symbol of a
mushroom is beside it, a quarrel with this undesirable friend may be
expected.

The pear may be linked to the symbol of the font in the centre of the
cup, showing that the consultant may expect news of a birth; the carving
indicates that the news will give much satisfaction; the wine-cup, with
the leg in conjunction, points out that the ambitions of the consultant
will certainly be realised in the future. That a certain amount of
waiting will be necessary is shown by the distance from the handle.

The motor boat, and monument in the centre, foretell the successful
outcome of a new venture, which at present is unthought-of. The rocks
show that a certain amount of mental agitation is aroused by the setting
out on this undertaking, but, with the reassuring symbols in this cup,
no alarm is necessary.

[Illustration: FIGURE III]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_On side under handle_.--Cat. Scattered dots.

_On side_.--Bone. Cockatoo upon a stump of wood. Small symbol of a
leg. Wine-cup held in hand. Small symbol of a mushroom. Pear.
Cauliflower.

_On circle under handle_.--Curious shaped rocks.

_On circle beyond_.--Monument.

_In centre_.--Motor boat. Font. Carved figures.




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE IV


The symbol of the seal being directly under the handle, with the large
arch and carving beyond, show that the consultant will soon enjoy the
fulfilment of a long desired hope; everything is going smoothly, and
will turn out as desired. The only obstacle is seen in the symbol of the
weasel, which appears beyond the seal, pointing to the fact that the
consultant has someone who is not to be trusted in the home, but this
will not result in anything serious.

The figures of the two women opposite the handle show the arrival of
friends to the "house," bringing presents with them. The inkpot, pen,
and numeral "7," with the bird's nest in connection, show that happy
news, as the result of personal effort on the part of the consultant,
may be looked for within seven days.

The rock, motor, and wavy lines being in conjunction, warn the
consultant of some forthcoming vexation, and possibly alarm, in
connection with a motor expedition, but the episode is in the distance,
and will not be more than a passing cloud.

The slug, at the bottom of the cup, predicts a future disturbance with
someone, but the matter will be trifling. The large symbol of the king
and queen upon the throne, opposite the handle, foretells a future of
honour and wealth, and the assurance of every happiness for this
fortunate consultant.

[Illustration: FIGURE IV]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_Opposite handle on circle_.--Two women, inside figure carrying
basket, outside figure with parcel under arm.

_On sides_.--Line of wavy dots. Large rock. Motor. Bird's nest.
Pen. Numeral "7." Inkpot.

_On circle_.--Large arch with carving.

_In centre_.--Slug. Figures of King and Queen on throne.

_Under handle_.--Seal. Weasel.




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE V


The large rock on the side, with the letter "J" beside it, speaks of a
forthcoming vexation or trouble caused by someone whose name begins with
"J." The necklace and jewellery beyond, with scattered dots around, give
a cheerful assurance to the consultant of coming prosperity. This is
further emphasised by the circle of dots above the letter "C" in the
centre. As the initial is large, it probably indicates the name of the
place from which the source of wealth may be anticipated; and that much
happiness will come to the consultant in the future, is shown by the
dancing figure and carved figures being in conjunction.

The small basket, the sausage, and roll of bread, with the query and "2"
beyond, all point to the fact that the consultant will have little
complaints and grumbles to put up with, and there will be some doubt as
to which of two people is most to blame. But it will be only a small
ripple upon the otherwise smooth surface of the consultant's outlook.

[Illustration: FIGURE V]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_On sides_.--Large rocks. Letter "J" in conjunction. Necklace.
Jewellery.

_In centre_.--Large ornamental "C." Circle of dots above. Figure of
girl dancing with arm upraised beneath. Carved figures.

_In centre near circle_.--Basket. Large sausage with roll of bread
in conjunction. Small query. Numeral "2."




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE VI


The numeral "4," beside the shapeless leaves, and the line leading from
this to the flat rock beyond, indicate that in about four days the
consultant may expect to meet with obstacles in the way of some
prospective outing or pleasure, which will probably fall through.

The corkscrew, with the letter "C" in conjunction, signifies vexatious
curiosity as to the consultant's private concerns, on the part of
persons whose names begin with these initials. But that it is merely a
passing annoyance is shown by the symbol of the arch, and dancing
figures above it, and, with the fig tree beyond, foretells the
development of things most wished for, and much future happiness and
prosperity.

The anvil in the centre, with the branches of a tree in conjunction,
suggests that it will be largely owing to the consultant's energy that
this hopeful outlook in the future may safely be predicted.

[Illustration: FIGURE VI]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_On sides_.--Corkscrew. Letter "C." Arch. Dancing figures above.
Fig tree.

_Near rim_.--Shapeless leaves. Numeral "4." Line leading to flat
rock.

_In centre_.--Anvil. Branches of a tree.

_Under handle_.--Scattered dots.




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE VII


Although the small symbol of the dagger points towards the consultant,
it would not in this case predict a personal danger, as there are no
further signs of illness or misfortune. So that it may safely be taken
to mean that the consultant will shortly be going to see a friend who
has had an operation; this fact is borne out by the short dotted line
beyond, leading to the door knocker, under which is written the word
"in."

The numeral "7" coming at the end of the dotted line would show that it
will probably be seven weeks before this friend recovers from the
illness. This friend's name is shown to begin with "L," as that letter
is also near the end of the lines.

The more distant signs of a brooch and a cabinet beyond both foretell
the unexpected development of good fortune. If the consultant is
married, the thimble in the centre would show future changes in the
household; that they will be advantageous is shown by the large feather
which gives assurance of a prosperous future.

That this may come about through a friend, or lover, is shown by the
cigar, and is further emphasised by the large dots beside it.

A warning against extravagance, however, is given to the consultant by
the crinoline, which appears amidst these signs of future wealth.

[Illustration: FIGURE VII]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_Near rim_.--Small dagger. Short dotted line leading to door
knocker, with "in" written beneath. Numeral "7." Letter "L." Dots.

_On sides near circle_.--Group of dots and small symbols showing
presents. Brooch. Cabinet.

_In centre_.--Crinoline. Large feather. Small cigar. Thimble.

_Under handle_.--Symbols of letters and parcels.




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE VIII


The only definite indication of future prospects is shown by the symbol
of the organ, and acorn, upon the circle at the bottom of the cup, the
position of these signs showing that hope will not be realised for some
time.

But these symbols make the prediction of ultimate success a safe one.
Should the consultant be a musician, triumph in the profession would be
assured.

The coal scoop and beetle are significant of domestic worries and
household cares. But the tea cosy in the centre promises compensation in
the way of small comforts and affection.

[Illustration: FIGURE VIII]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

Small symbol of a coal scoop.

_On circle_.--Organ. Acorn beside it. Beetle.

_In centre_.--Tea cosy.




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE IX


This cup would be singularly disappointing from the consultant's point
of view, as it is devoid of incident.

The large spray of thistle on the rim indicates an unselfish life of
endurance. For the present, there is no sign of a more eventful
existence.

The dust-pan, brush, and duster, in the centre, point to future domestic
vexations, but the large spray of iris beside it promises a pleasure
which will far outbalance the trifling disturbance.

[Illustration: FIGURE IX]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_Near rim_.--Thistle.

_Centre_.--Dust-pan and brush. Duster. Large spray of iris.

_Under handle_.--Shapeless leaves.




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE X


The most striking features of this cup are the various indications of
pleasure and social enjoyment. These being shown by the cake and
butterfly, while the orchid in conjunction predicts that the
consultant's personal charm and power of attraction will result in a
future of wealth and social distinction.

The pillar, near the rim and handle, gives a pleasing assurance of
security and loyal friends. The bird flying from the cage brings joyful
news, that something which has been an obstacle in the way of the
consultant's desires is about to be removed, and much future happiness
may be looked for.

The figure of the man fishing from a rock foreshows the arrival of a
visitor, who will have some pleasant news to tell.

The toque opposite the handle, but at the bottom of the cup, gives
further evidence of the good luck coming to this fortunate consultant.

[Illustration: FIGURE X]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_Near rim_.--Small stone pillar. Cake on dish. Man on rock fishing.

_On sides_.--Bird cage, small bird flying from it.

_On circle_.--Butterfly. Lady's hat.

_In centre_.--Orchid with long stalk.

_Under handle_.--Shapeless leaves.




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE XI


This cup indicates that the consultant is apt to be ruffled by trifles
and to become upset by anything unexpected. As, for instance, in the
case of the arrival of visitors, shown by the mass of leaves and chair.
The query beside it shows the indecision of the consultant's mind as to
necessary arrangements. The boots on the opposite side denote that lack
of income will not trouble the consultant.

But that there is some misfortune or hindrance in the future is shown by
the symbol of the broken cross in the bottom of the cup; the head and
shoulders of the woman beside it suggest that this trouble will be
caused by a woman. Compensation will be found in the happy love affair,
which is clearly predicted by the cherries, the figures of the man and
woman embracing, and the man's hat and pipe.

Large dots signify that wealth will be added to happiness. This event
must not be expected for some months, as the symbols are in the bottom
of the cup.

The letter "N" with the dots and small tree beyond show an immediate
pleasant happening, in connection with a person whose name begins with
that letter.

[Illustration: FIGURE XI]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_Near rim_.--Mass of leaves. Stones.

_On sides_.--Chair. Query. Two boots.

_On circle_.--Figure of man and woman embracing. Small bunch of
cherries beneath. Several dots. Man's hat and pipe in conjunction.

_In centre_.--Broken cross. Head and shoulders of woman.

_Under handle_.--Letter "N." Small tree beyond.




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE XII


The present conditions of this consultant are not cheering. The large
cloud, associated with dots, the small dog on the opposite side, and the
policeman beyond, all point to grievous money worries, possibly caused
by dishonesty.

The somewhat indistinct axe implies a brave effort to overcome, and
final mastery of, some of the difficulties.

However, the future has more pleasant prospects, and may be looked
forward to with hope. The symbols of the clover and cherries, give
assurance of this.

The spray of ivy speaks of the patience with which the present trials
are borne, also that true friends are a source of comfort to the
consultant.

[Illustration: FIGURE XII]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_On side_.--Small dog lying down.

_Near rim_.--Policeman. Indistinct symbol of an axe. Large cloud.
Dots.

_Centre_.--Two small butterflies. Small symbol of a stocking. Small
bunch of cherries. Spray of ivy. Clover.




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE XIII


The consultant who has "turned" this cup must be prepared for delays,
and must not expect real happiness until rather late in life, this being
shown by the bonnet and strings on the side of the cup.

The small symbol of birds on a perch gives further evidence that having
to wait is a feature of the consultant's lot. The rock and pipe beyond
show some dismay with regard to a dear friend.

The large spray of mistletoe and holly at the bottom of the cup, with
the letters "F" and "L" in conjunction, implies that some event of
importance to the consultant, in connection with persons whose names
begin with these initial letters, will occur in the winter. If the cup
has been "turned" during the autumn or winter, probably a year will pass
before the event takes place, as the mistletoe indicates delay. But this
consultant is prepared to hear the truth, and faces it calmly, even if
it is a little unpleasant; the symbol of the woman looking into the
glass brings this fact to light.

The child playing with its toys foreshows future pleasant plans which
will result in tranquillity and satisfaction.

[Illustration: FIGURE XIII]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_On sides_.--Bonnet and strings. Birds on perch. Pieces of rock. A
pipe.

_On circle_.--Child with toys.

_Centre_.--Large sprays of mistletoe and holly. Letters "F" and
"L." Figure of woman looking in glass.




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE XIV


This cup was "turned" by a well-known authoress. Its sinister appearance
is accounted for by the fact that at the time of "turning" the cup, she
was arranging mentally a murder plot for the book she was then writing.

The symbols speak for themselves and need no explanation.

It is a most interesting specimen, as being absolutely unique.

[Illustration: FIGURE XIV]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_On side overlapping circle_.--Tail and hindquarters of rat, with
head in a hole. Monster with a man's head and bear's paws.

_On side_.--Dead fish beyond.




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE XV


The consultant who "turned" this cup was sorrowful and had either just
passed through a bereavement, or such will take place in the immediate
future. The rough cross and the grave near the handle point to this. The
bed, with the figure of the woman in nurse's cloak near it tells of
serious illness in the home. But this is a future trouble, as the
symbols appear at some distance from the handle. The saucepan also bears
witness to the general gloom.

The ivy leaves beyond the rough cross show the patience with which the
consultant bears the trials; also that good and loyal friends will be a
source of comfort.

The small bit of wood and the closed book are symbols of hope, and
assure this sad consultant that the expected improvement in affairs will
certainly take place and will relieve some of the present anxieties.

This is the most that can be foretold of the future, for there are no
signs of pleasant events or definite changes. Indeed, the symbol of the
loaf of bread in the centre of the cup shows that monotony and ordinary
routine are all that can be predicted from the divination.

[Illustration: FIGURE XV]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_Near rim_.--Rough cross. Ivy leaves beyond. Large closed book.

_On sides_.--Log of wood. Bed. Figure of a woman in nurse's cloak
beside it. Grave, with small cross.

_In centre_.--Loaf of bread. Small symbol of a saucepan.




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE XVI


This cup gives an impression of a somewhat undeveloped character which
is further brought into notice by the stump of a tree on the circle; the
hen on a nest, near the handle, points to a home life of comfort and
affection.

The egg in the cup, and the duck, show that a risk of threatened
disaster, as a result of rash speculation will be averted, and with the
symbol of the three boots, fortunate prospects, and the guarantee of
hope fulfilled, may safely be predicted for the future.

[Illustration: FIGURE XVI]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_On sides_.--Hen on nest. Shapeless leaves. Egg in cup.

_Near circle opposite handle_.--A duck.

_On circle_.--Stump of tree. Three boots.




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE XVII


The figure of the child, with its toys beyond, implies that new plans,
to be made very soon, will be most beneficial, and will bring much
pleasure to the consultant. But as the sausages and snail are not far
distant, there is likely to be a marring of the pleasant conditions,
caused by an act of unfaithfulness on the part of someone with whom the
consultant is closely connected.

The bellows beyond suggest that the matter is treated with as much
philosophy as possible, and with a resolve to make the best of a bad
business; the ham also, being in conjunction, it is evident that the
episode will not interfere with the consultant's success in life.

The sign post, with the running figure beside it and the large letter
"M" beyond, prepare the consultant for startling news, the result of
which will be of great importance. The news will come from a place
beginning with the letter "M." There is no doubt that the matter will
turn out admirably and bring about many advantages, as shown by the
spreading branches of the tree; while the grapes beneath promise
abundant success and joy.

The large boot-tree and latch-key on the circle beneath the handle
predict a fortunate and unexpected gain in the near future. This
consultant may look forward with confidence to the pleasures which fate
has in store.

[Illustration: FIGURE XVII]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_On sides_.--Child seated. Toys beyond. Sausages. Snail. Ham.
Bellows.

_In centre_.--Sign post. Running figure beside it. Large letter "M"
in conjunction.

_On circle_.--Tree with spreading branches. Bunch of grapes
beneath. Large boot-tree. Latch-key.




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE XVIII


The shadow beneath the haycock shows that the consultant will soon be
placed in a somewhat trying position and will have considerable
difficulty in finding a way out of it.

The future is full of promise and there can be little doubt that the
consultant will enjoy the pleasures of prosperity.

A journey to a cold climate to be taken later will result in very
propitious news as shown by the symbol of the pheasant.

[Illustration: FIGURE XVIII]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_On sides_.--Shapeless leaves. Haycock. Shadow beneath.

_In centre_.--Pair of boots. Spreading branches of a tree. Pheasant
flying.

_Near circle_.--Head of a polar bear.




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE XIX


The doll on the side, with the small symbol of a toadstool beside it,
gives a warning to the consultant against folly and a bad habit of
gossiping when feeling bored in society. The stuffed head of the deer,
in this case, shows that much distress is caused by the unguarded talk,
and the consultant certainly cannot be described as an "innocent cause."

The various scattered shapeless leaves point to confusion, and a
somewhat "happy-go-lucky" nature. The spray of poppies on the circle
beneath the handle foreshows that a pleasant experience may be expected
in the summer.

The broken gate, with the cross above it, denotes that a new opportunity
which awaits the consultant at a future date, will coincide with a time
of perplexity and trouble, which fact is further borne out by the
running figure below. This being in conjunction with a large letter "Y,"
implies that the disturbance will arise in connection with a place, the
name of which begins with "Y."

[Illustration: FIGURE XIX]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_On sides_.--Small symbol of a toadstool. Doll. Head of a stuffed
deer.

_Near rim_.--Many shapeless leaves.

_On circle_.--Spray of poppies.

_In centre_.--Broken gate with cross above it. Large "Y." Running
figure.




INTERPRETATION

FIGURE XX


This cup shows confusion and that the consultant was in a state of
mental turmoil at the time of "turning" it. But in spite of this
drawback there are some interesting facts to be found.

The dotted circles and large ornamental arch point to a most hopeful
outlook and to the successful development of some desire at present
unattainable.

The various initials and small numerals scattered about show
correspondence as to plans and fixing of dates. The bush apple tree
speaks of some pleasure which may be looked forward to in the summer.

The dancing figures predict much future happiness; the numerous changes
which are likely to come about will all tend to success and the
gratifying of the consultant's wishes. And what more cheerful outlook
than this can be desired?

[Illustration: FIGURE XX]

PRINCIPAL SYMBOLS

_On sides_.--Scattered shapeless leaves. Several initials. Small
numerals. Dotted circles. A large ornamental arch.

_Near circle_.--Bush apple tree.

_In centre_.--Dancing and grotesque figures.




CONCLUDING NOTE

It may be safely promised to those who follow the simple instructions
given in this book that within a short time they will find themselves
encircled by a halo of popularity. For few things provide a more certain
guarantee of this pleasant condition than that of being able to "tell
fortunes." Divination by tea-leaves will bring to those who study it
deeply a fund of knowledge beyond the radius of normal understanding.

For those who use it as a means of amusement only, it will give pleasure
which is dependent upon nothing more difficult to obtain than a cup of
tea! With this recommendation I will leave these pages, in the sincere
hope that this little book may be of real value to those who desire to
be initiated into the fascinating art of reading the future in a
tea-cup.









End of Project Gutenberg's Telling Fortunes by Tea Leaves, by Cicely Kent

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TELLING FORTUNES BY TEA LEAVES ***

***** This file should be named 6964.txt or 6964.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/9/6/6964/

Produced by David Garcia, Tiffany Vergon, Juliet Sutherland,
Charles Franks, and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
