The Project Gutenberg EBook of Made-Over Dishes, by S. T. Rorer

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: Made-Over Dishes

Author: S. T. Rorer

Release Date: November, 2004  [EBook #6978]
[This file was first posted on February 19, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO Latin-1

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, MADE-OVER DISHES ***




Produced by Arjan Moraal, David Starner and the Online Distributed

Proofreading Team.



MADE-OVER DISHES

BY MRS. S. T. RORER

Author of Mrs. Rorer's New Cook Book, Philadelphia Cook Book, Bread and
Bread-Making, and other Valuable Works on Cookery.

Revised and Enlarged Edition




CONTENTS


Preface
Stock
Cooked Fish
Meat
  Beef--Uncooked
  Beef--Cooked
  Mutton--Uncooked
  Mutton--Cooked
  Chicken--Uncooked
  Chicken--Cooked
Game
Bread
Eggs
Potatoes
  Cold Boiled
Cheese
Sauces
Salads
Cereals
Vegetables
Fruits
Sour Milk and Cream




PREFACE


Wise forethought, which means economy, stands as the first of domestic
duties. Poverty in no way affects skill in the preparation of food. The
object of cooking is to draw out the proper flavor of each individual
ingredient used in the preparation of a dish, and render it more easy of
digestion. Admirable flavorings are given by the little leftovers of
vegetables that too often find their way into the garbage bucket.

Economical marketing does not mean the purchase of inferior articles at a
cheap price, but of a small quantity of the best materials found in the
market; these materials to be wisely and economically used. Small quantity
and no waste, just enough and not a piece too much, is a good rule to
remember. In roasts and steaks, however, there will be, in spite of
careful buying, bits left over, that, if economically used, may be
converted into palatable, sightly and wholesome dishes for the next day's
lunch or supper.

Never purchase the so-called tender meat for stews, Hamburg steaks or
soups; nor should you purchase a round or shoulder steak for broiling, nor
an old chicken for roasting. Select a fowl for a fricassee, a chicken for
roasting, and a so-called spring chicken for broiling. Each has its own
individual price and place.

Save for stock, every bone, whether beef, mutton, poultry or game, as well
as all the juices that are left in the meat carving dishes on the table,
and the water in which meats are boiled and in which certain vegetables
are boiled. Into this storehouse--for such a stock pot is--will go also
the tough ends from the rib roasts, which would become tasteless and dry
if roasted; the bits that are taken from the French chops; the bone that
is left on the plate from the sirloin steak; and every piece of the
carcass left on the general carving plate of all sorts of game and
poultry. After the meat has been taken from the roast, these bones will
also be used.




STOCK


In all good cooking there is a constant demand for a half pint or a pint
of stock. Brown sauce and tomato sauce, in fact, all meat sauces, are
decidedly better made from stock than water, and as it comes to every
household without the additional cost of a penny, there is no excuse
whatever for being without it. Save the bones collected on Saturday,
Sunday and Monday. Chicken and veal bones may be kept together; beef,
mutton and ham in another lot; one makes a white stock, the other brown.
If the quantity is small, put them all together. Crack the bones, put them
in the bottom of a large soup kettle, cover with cold water, bring slowly
to boiling point and skim. Push the kettle to the back part of the stove,
where the stock may simmer for at least three hours, then add an onion
into which you have stuck twelve cloves, a bay leaf, a few celery tops, or
a little celery seed, and a carrot cut into slices; simmer gently for
another hour and strain. Tuesdays and Saturdays are the best days for
making stock, as they are the days on which you have long, continuous
fires; Tuesdays for ironing purposes; Saturdays for bread baking; in this
way you will economize in coal, heat and time.

In making tomato soup, to each pint of tomatoes add a pint of this stock
instead of water; or the stock may be simply heated, nicely seasoned and
used as clear soup. By adding a little cooked rice or macaroni, you will
have a rice or a macaroni soup.

In cream soups, where stock takes the place of water, less milk gives
equal, perhaps better, results. For instance, in cream of celery soup,
cover the celery with cold stock instead of water, using a quart instead
of a pint of water, and then use only a pint of milk, having in the end
the same quantity of a much more tasty soup at a less cost. One soon
learns that all made-over dishes are more savory where stock is used in
place of water. If peas, beans or cabbage are being cooked, this water may
be added to that in which beef or mutton has been boiled, the whole
reduced carefully by rapid boiling, strained and put aside for use.




COOKED FISH


Canap�s

Cold boiled fish makes excellent canap�s. To each half pint of fish allow
six squares of toasted bread. If you have any cold boiled potatoes left
over, add milk to them, make them hot and put them into a pastry bag.
Decorate the edge of the toast with these mashed potatoes, using a small
star tube; put them back in the oven until light brown. Make the fish
into a creamed fish. Rub the butter and flour together, add a half pint of
milk, add the fish and a palatable seasoning of salt and pepper. Dish the
centers on top of the toast with this creamed fish and send at once to the
table. A very little fish here makes a good showing, and is one of the
nicest of the hot canap�s.


Baked Sardines

After sardines have once been opened it is best to remove them from the
can and make them into some dish for the next meal. They may be broiled
and served on toast, or made with bread crumbs into sardine balls and
fried, or baked. To bake them, stir the oil from the can into a half
cupful of water, add a teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce, a half
teaspoonful of salt and a dash of pepper. Put the fish into a baking pan,
run them into the oven until very hot, then dish them, baste them with the
sauce and send them at once to the table.


Fish Croquettes

Any cold boiled fish that is left over may be made into croquettes. To
each cupful of the cold fish allow one level tablespoonful of butter, two
level tablespoonfuls of flour and a half cupful of milk. Rub the butter
and flour together, add the milk; when boiling take from the fire. Add to
the fish a level teaspoonful of salt, a dash of black pepper, a
tablespoonful of chopped parsley and a few drops of onion juice; mix this
carefully with the paste and turn out to cool. When cold, form into small
cylinders, dip in beaten egg and fry in deep hot fat.


Fish � la Cr�me

One pint of cold boiled fish, mixed with a half pint of white sauce. Turn
this into a baking dish and brown. Or when the two are carefully heated
together, serve in either ramekin dishes or in a border of browned mashed
potatoes.




MEAT


As meat is the most costly and extravagant of all articles of food, it
behooves the housewife to save all left-overs and work them over into
other dishes. The so-called inferior pieces--not inferior because they
contain less nourishment, but inferior because the demand for such meat is
less--should be used for all dishes that are chopped before cooking, as
Hamburg steaks, curry balls, kibbee, or for stews, ragouts, pot roasts and
various dishes where a sauce is used to hide the inferiority and ugliness
of the dish. We have no occasion here to spend money on good looks.

If one purchases meat for soup, the leg and shin are the better parts.
This, however, is not necessary in the ordinary family, as there are
always sufficient bones left over for daily stock. All meat left over from
beef tea, tasteless as it is, may be nicely seasoned and made into curries
or into pressed meat, giving again a nice dish for lunch or supper.
Remember, that where the flavoring of the beef has been drawn out into the
water, as in making beef tea, another decided flavor must be added to make
the made-over dish palatable. For this reason, curries, pressed meats,
served with either Worcestershire or tomato sauce, are chosen.

Cold mutton may be made into pilau, hashed on toast with tomato sauce,
hashed with caper sauce, made into escalloped mutton, barbecued mutton,
casserole, or macaroni timbale; all sightly dishes, quite handsome enough
to place before the choicest guest. Spiced meats, as beef _� la
mode_, may be served cold with cream horseradish sauce and aspic jelly.
If warm, they will be made into ragouts, or some form of dish with a brown
or tomato sauce. It is well to bear in mind that white meats will be
served with white or yellow sauces; dark meats with brown or tomato
sauces. The coarse tops of the sirloin steak, the tough end of the rump
steak, if broiled, cannot possibly be eaten, as the dry heat renders them
difficult of mastication. Cut them off before the steak is broiled, and
put them aside to use for Hamburg steaks, curry balls, timbale or
cannelon, making a new and sightly dish from that which would otherwise
have been thrown away.

If you use ham, and have had a piece boiled, after the even slices are
taken off, chip the remaining tender pieces for frizzled ham, making it as
frizzled beef is made. The bits around the bone that cannot possibly be
sliced, will be chopped and made into potted or deviled ham. Throw the
bone into the stock pot.

A meat chopper or grinder, which costs but a dollar and a half or two
dollars, will save its price in the utility of these scraps in less than a
month.

The water in which you boil a leg of mutton, chicken, turkey or a fresh
beef's tongue, or such vegetables as string beans, peas, rice, macaroni or
barley, put aside and use in place of plain water to cover the bones for
stock-making. The water in which cabbage is boiled should be saved alone
and used the next day for a soup Cr�cy; the flavor of the cabbage, with a
carrot that has been slightly browned in butter, makes a delightful soup
without the addition of meat.




BEEF--UNCOOKED


The uncooked tough bits or pieces of beef may be made into any of the
following dishes:


Kibbee

Chop uncooked tough meat very fine; put it twice through a grinder. To
each pound, allow a tablespoonful of grated onion, a tablespoonful of
chopped parsley, a teaspoonful of salt, just a dash of pepper, and a half
cup of toasted pi�on nuts. Form into balls about the size of an egg,
stand in a baking pan, add a half pint of strained tomatoes, a
tablespoonful of butter, and bake slowly thirty minutes, basting three or
four times. If more than one pound of meat is used, all the ingredients
must be increased accordingly.


Hamburg Steaks

The genuine Hamburg steaks are rich in onion and very rich in fatty
matter, too much so to be wholesome; so we will modify them, that they may
be eaten even by dyspeptics or persons with weak digestion. Put twice
through a meat chopper the tough ends of steaks or bits of the round. To
each pound of this meat allow a half teaspoonful of celery seed, a
teaspoonful of grated onion. Form into thick even cakes, being sure that
the center and sides are the same thickness. These may now be broiled
over a clear fire, or under the gas lights in your gas broiler, or they
may be dropped into a thoroughly heated iron pan. As soon as browned on
one side, turn and brown the other. If the steaks are an inch thick, it
will take eight minutes for perfect cooking. An exceedingly satisfactory
way is to brown them quickly over a hot fire, then put the pan in the oven
and allow them to cook for five minutes. Dust with salt, season with a
little butter and pepper, and send to the table on a very hot dish; or
serve with brown or tomato sauce. If they have been cooked over the fire,
or in the oven, put a tablespoonful of butter into the pan in which they
were cooked, add a tablespoonful of flour, a half cup of stock, and a half
cup of strained tomatoes. When boiling, add a teaspoonful of salt, a dash
of pepper, and pour over the steaks.


Cannelon

Put twice through the meat chopper one pound of tough meat, season with a
teaspoonful of salt, a dash of pepper, and, if you like, a little celery
seed or chopped celery top; take this chopped meat into your hands, and
form it into a roll about four inches in diameter and six inches long.
Roll this in a piece of oiled paper, put it in a baking pan, bake in a
quick oven thirty minutes, basting the paper with melted butter three or
four times. When done, remove the paper, dish the cannelon, and pour
around plain tomato sauce.


Brown stew

Cut any left-over pieces of uncooked tough meat into cubes of one inch.
Put a couple of tablespoonfuls of suet into a saucepan; when rendered out,
remove the cracklings. Dust the bits of meat with a tablespoonful of
flour, throw them into the hot suet, and shake until brown. Draw the meat
to one side, and add to the fat in the pan a second tablespoonful of
flour; mix, add one pint of water or stock, stir until boiling, add a
teaspoonful of salt, a bay leaf, slice of onion, a teaspoonful of browning
or kitchen bouquet; cover and simmer gently until the meat is tender,
about an hour and a half. The proportions given here are for one pound of
beef. This may be served plain, or in a border of rice, or with dumplings.
If dumplings, put a pint of flour into a bowl, add a teaspoonful of salt
and one of baking powder; mix thoroughly and add sufficient milk to just
moisten; drop by spoonfuls over the top of the stew, cover the saucepan
and cook for ten minutes. Do not lift cover during the ten minutes or the
dumplings will fall.


Beef Timbale

Chop fine any left-over tough bits of lean beef. Cook together for a
moment a gill of strained tomatoes and one cup of bread crumbs; add to the
meat, rub to a smooth paste, season with a quarter of a teaspoonful of
celery seed, a half teaspoonful of salt and a dash of pepper; mix, and
then stir in carefully the well-beaten whites of two eggs; fill into
custard cups, stand in a pan of boiling water, and cook in a moderate oven
twenty minutes. Serve with tomato sauce. This recipe is for one pound of
beef.




BEEF--COOKED


Ragout

Cut pieces of cold boiled or roasted beef into cubes of one inch; to each
quart of this allow two tablespoonfuls of butter, two of flour and a pint
of stock. Rub the butter and flour together, add the stock, stir until
boiling; add a tablespoonful of onion juice, a teaspoonful of browning or
kitchen bouquet, a teaspoonful of salt, a tablespoonful of tomato catsup,
a tablespoonful of chopped parsley; add the meat; stand over the back part
of the stove until thoroughly hot; serve on a heated platter garnished
with triangular pieces of toasted bread. A few left-over olives,
mushrooms, or even a chopped truffle, may be added.


Bresleau

Chop sufficient cold cooked meat to make one pint, season it with a
teaspoonful of salt and a quarter of a teaspoonful of pepper. Put a half
cup of stock or water, two tablespoonfuls of bread crumbs and a
tablespoonful of butter over the fire; when hot, add to it the meat; take
from the fire and stir in carefully two well-beaten eggs. Put this in
greased custard cups, stand them in a baking pan half filled with boiling
water, and bake in a moderate oven fifteen or twenty minutes; serve with
tomato sauce or sauce B�chamel.


Beef Croquettes

Chop sufficient cold cooked beef to make one pint; add to it a teaspoonful
of salt, a teaspoonful of onion juice, a dash of cayenne, a quarter of a
teaspoonful of pepper, and a grating of nutmeg. Put a half pint of milk
over the fire. Rub together one tablespoonful of butter and two
tablespoonfuls of flour, add them to the hot milk, stir until you have a
smooth thick paste; take from the fire; mix with it the meat, and turn out
to cool. When cold, form into croquettes. Beat one egg, add to it a
tablespoonful of warm water, and beat again. Dip the croquettes first into
this, then roll them in bread crumbs, and fry them in smoking hot fat.
They may be served plain or with tomato sauce.


Beef Steak Pudding

Cut cold cooked steak into cubes of a half inch. To each pint of these
allow a half pint of milk, six tablespoonfuls of flour, two eggs, and two
tablespoonfuls of chopped suet. Put the flour into a bowl; beat the eggs,
add to them the milk, then add gradually to the flour; make perfectly
smooth. Cover the bottom of a baking dish with a layer of the batter, put
in the bits of steak, sprinkle over the chopped suet, then a dusting of
salt and pepper, and, if you like, a few drops of onion juice; now put
over the remaining quantity of the batter, and bake in a moderately quick
oven an hour and a half.


Potato Dumplings

Take any pieces of cold cooked meat, chop them fine, season carefully with
salt, pepper, chopped parsley or celery. To each pint allow two
tablespoonfuls of melted butter. For the crust you may use left-over cold
mashed potatoes; if so, add a little milk and stir them over the fire
until smooth and hot. If potatoes are boiled for the purpose, add salt,
butter and milk, and beat them until light. Line to the depth of one inch,
a baking dish, put the meat in the center, cover the top with mashed
potatoes, smooth, brush with milk and bake in a moderate oven a half hour.


Gobbits

Scrape and cut into fancy pieces one good-sized carrot and one turnip. Put
these into a saucepan, cover with a pint of stock, and cook slowly until
the vegetables are tender. Have ready, cut into cubes of one inch,
sufficient cold cooked beef to make a quart; add it to the vegetables,
simmer a few minutes until the meat is hot; have ready also one cup of
rice that has been boiled thirty minutes in clear water, drained and
dried. Arrange this in a border around the meat dish. Put two
tablespoonfuls of butter and flour into a saucepan; mix. Drain the liquor
from the meat and vegetables, which should now measure one pint; if not,
add sufficient stock to make a pint; add this to the butter and flour, and
stir until boiling. Dish the meat and vegetables in the centre of the rice
border. Take the sauce from the fire, add a teaspoonful of salt, a dash of
pepper and the yolks of two eggs. Reheat for just an instant, strain over
the meat mixture, dust with chopped parsley, and serve at once.


Beef Fritters

Chop sufficient cold cooked beef to make one pint; add to it a teaspoonful
of salt, and a quarter of a teaspoonful of pepper. Beat two eggs until
light, add to them a half pint of water or stock; stir into this one and a
half cups of flour, beat until smooth, add a teaspoonful of baking powder
and the meat. Drop this by spoonfuls into smoking hot fat; cook about
three minutes, drain on brown paper, and serve either on a folded napkin,
or in a dish with tomato sauce.


Minced Beef on Toast

Take the meat from between the bones of a rib roast, or any little bits
that would not be serviceable in other dishes, chop them fine, and to each
pint, allow one tablespoonful of butter, one of flour and a half pint of
tomatoes or stock. Mix the butter and flour together, then add the
tomatoes strained or stock; when boiling add the meat, and a palatable
seasoning of salt and pepper. Stand the mixture over hot water until
smoking hot, and serve on squares of toasted bread.


Barbecue of Cold Beef

Cut cold-roasted or boiled beef into thin slices. Put into your saucepan
two tablespoonfuls of butter, two tablespoonfuls of catsup and two
tablespoonfuls of sherry; stir until hot; drop the slices of beef into
this, cover the saucepan, shake occasionally for a minute, until the beef
is smoking hot, and send at once to the table. This is exceedingly nice
made and served from a chafing dish. This dish may be made by omitting the
sherry and using a teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce, a teaspoonful of
mushroom catsup and two tablespoonfuls of stock.


Salt Beef Hash No. 1

Cold cooked corned beef is best made into hash. Chop sufficient to make
one pint. Chop the same quantity of cold boiled potatoes; mix the two
together, put them into a saucepan, add a half pint of stock, a
tablespoonful of butter, teaspoonful of onion juice and a quarter of a
teaspoonful of black or white pepper. Stir carefully and constantly until
the mixture reaches the boiling point. Serve at once on buttered toast.


Salt Beef Hash No. 2

Chop enough cold cooked corned beef to make a pint; chop the same quantity
of cold boiled potatoes; mix the two together. Put them into a stewing
pan, add one pint of stock; simmer for just a moment; take from the fire,
add two eggs well beaten, a dash of pepper; turn the mixture into a baking
dish and bake in a quick oven twenty minutes.


Rechauffee of Beef

Cut any left-over cold beef into thin slices. Cut into slices three cold
boiled potatoes. Peel two tomatoes, cut them into halves, squeeze out the
seeds, and then cut the tomatoes into small bits. Chop one good sized
onion. Put a layer of tomato in the bottom of a baking dish, then beef,
then a seasoning of onion, salt and pepper, and if you have it, a little
chopped celery, then potatoes, then again tomatoes, beef, and so continue
until you have used the materials, having the last layer tomatoes. Dust
the top with bread crumbs, put over a few bits of butter and bake a half
hour in a moderately quick oven.


Steak Pudding

Cut any cold left-over steak into thin slices, and cut these slices into
bits one inch long. Put one quart of flour in a bowl, and add to it one
cupful of chopped uncooked suet. Chop the suet and flour together for a
minute, add a level teaspoonful of salt, a saltspoonful of black pepper,
and sufficient cold water to just moisten. Take the dough on the board and
roll it out into a sheet; make it a little larger than an ordinary pie
dish. Season the bits of meat, put them on one-half the sheet, lay over
the top twelve good fat oysters, brush the under half of the dough with
the white of egg or water; fold over the other half and make two or three
holes in the top. Put it in a cheese cloth and steam for two hours. Remove
the cloth, brush the pudding with the yolk of the egg and bake in a quick
oven a half hour.


Panada of Beef

Chop sufficient cold cooked beef to make one pint; season it with a
teaspoonful of salt, a tablespoonful of chopped parsley and a dash of
pepper. Put this in the bottom of a baking dish. Crush six Uneeda
biscuits, pour over them a half pint of milk, let them stand a minute or
two, add one egg, well beaten, a half teaspoonful of salt and a
saltspoonful of pepper. Pour this over the beef and bake in a moderate
oven twenty minutes to a half hour.

Other meats may be substituted for beef.




MUTTON--UNCOOKED


Tough pieces of uncooked mutton may be put twice through the meat chopper
and used for curry balls or for stuffing for tomatoes or egg plant; in
fact, in almost any way that one would serve uncooked beef. Having fewer
pieces of uncooked scrap mutton than of beef, we are less accustomed to
seeing them used.


Curry Balls

Put any pieces of tough uncooked mutton twice through the meat chopper;
season the meat with salt, pepper and onion juice. Form into little balls
the size of an English walnut. Put two tablespoonfuls of butter into a
saucepan; when hot, throw the balls into the butter, and shake until
carefully browned. Lift them from the saucepan, and to the butter in the
pan add a teaspoonful of curry, a tablespoonful of flour, mix and add a
half pint of stock; stir carefully until boiling; pour this over the
balls, cook, slowly for twenty minutes, add two tablespoonfuls of lemon
juice and serve in a border of rice. Cocoanut milk may be used instead of
stock.




MUTTON--COOKED


While mutton belongs to the red meats, when carefully cooked it may be
used in many ways in which you would use chicken or veal. Capers and
tomato, with a slight flavoring of mint, are more agreeable with mutton
than with almost any other meats.


Bobotee

Chop sufficient cold boiled mutton to make a pint. Put two tablespoonfuls
of butter and one onion sliced into a saucepan; stir until the onion is
slightly brown; then add a half pint of stock or milk and four
tablespoonfuls of bread crumbs. Stand this on the back of the stove for
about five minutes while you blanch and chop fine a dozen almonds. Add
these to the meat, then add a teaspoonful of curry powder, and a
teaspoonful of salt. Beat three eggs until light, stir them into the meat,
then turn the whole into the saucepan. Rub the bottom of the baking dish
first with a clove of garlic, then sprinkle over a tablespoonful of lemon
juice and put here and there a few bits of butter; put on this the
mixture, and bake in a quick oven twenty minutes. Serve in the dish in
which it is baked, and pass with it plain boiled rice.


Boudins

Chop sufficient cold cooked mutton to make a pint. Put a half cup of
stock, two tablespoonfuls of bread crumbs and a tablespoonful of butter
over the fire. When hot, take from the fire, add the meat and three eggs
well beaten; add a teaspoonful of salt and a dash of pepper. Put the
mixture into greased custard cups, stand in a baking pan half filled with
boiling water, and cook in a moderate oven fifteen to twenty minutes.
Serve with sauce B�chamel. The bottom of the cups may be garnished with
chopped mushrooms, capers, or chopped truffles, or dusted thickly with
chopped parsley.


Klopps

Chop sufficient cold boiled mutton to make a pint; add to it a half pint
of bread crumbs and sufficient white of egg to bind the whole together;
add a teaspoonful of salt and a dash of white pepper. Form into balls the
size of English walnuts; drop into a kettle of boiling water; pull the
kettle to one side of the fire where it cannot possibly boil, and cook the
klopps slowly for five or six minutes. When done they will float on the
surface. Lift, drain carefully, put on to a heated dish, pour over cream
celery or cream oyster sauce, and serve with them peas and boiled rice.


Curry of Mutton

Put two tablespoonfuls of butter and one sliced onion into a pan; cook
slowly until the onion is perfectly tender; add one clove of garlic
mashed, a teaspoonful of curry powder and a teaspoonful of turmeric; mix
thoroughly, add a half pint of stock, or, better, cocoanut milk; stir
until boiling, add one quart of cold cooked mutton chopped fine; heat
thoroughly, add a tablespoonful of lemon juice, and pour at once into a
platter that has been garnished with boiled rice.


Mutton with Anchovy

Chop sufficient cold boiled mutton to make one pint; mash fine three
anchovies. Put two tablespoonfuls of butter into a saucepan, add one
sliced onion, cook until the onion is soft and yellow, add a clove of
garlic mashed, add to this the anchovies and a half pint of stock; simmer
gently for fifteen minutes, and press through a sieve. Add a tablespoonful
of capers, two or three leaves of mint that have been bruised, and the
mutton chopped fine. Heat over boiling water for fifteen minutes, and
serve on squares of toasted bread. This may be served plain or the top of
each piece may be capped with a carefully poached egg.


Pilau

Cut into bits any pieces of cold cooked mutton; put them into a saucepan,
cover with water, add a grated onion, a bay leaf and two or three cardamom
seeds. Sprinkle over a half cup of rice that has been carefully washed;
cover the kettle and simmer slowly until the rice is tender. Dish the
mutton, putting the rice over the top, cover the whole with a nicely made
tomato sauce, and send at once to the table.


Mutton Salad

Any pieces of cold-roasted or boiled mutton may be cut into dice and used
for an ordinary mutton salad. At serving time arrange this neatly on
lettuce leaves, or any accessible green; season with salt and pepper, and
cover with mayonnaise dressing to which has been added a tablespoonful of
capers.

Where celery, lettuce or other fresh greens cannot be procured, canned
asparagus may be mixed with the mutton or may be served with it as a
garnish; giving an exceedingly agreeable accompaniment. Where asparagus
cannot be obtained, a can of peas may be drained, washed, drained again,
and added to the mutton before it is mixed with the mayonnaise dressing,
or the mutton may be mixed with mayonnaise and filled into tomatoes that
have been peeled and the centers scooped out. Stand each on a little nest
of lettuce leaves or on a bunch of cress, and garnish the top with capers.


French Lamb Stew

1 quart of bits of cold left-over lamb or mutton
1 pint of green peas
1 quart of water
3 stalks of mint
1 teaspoonful of onion juice
1 teaspoonful of salt
1 saltspoonful of pepper

Put the lamb, water and all the seasoning into a saucepan. Shell and wash
the peas, put them over the top, cover the pan and bring quickly to a
boil, lift the lid, and boil rapidly twenty minutes until the peas are
tender. Rub together the butter and flour, stir them carefully into the
stew, bring again to boiling point and serve.


Lamb Stew with Tomatoes

Follow the preceding recipe, using a quart of strained tomatoes in place
of a quart of water.




CHICKEN--UNCOOKED


In purchasing a chicken for timbale, select a large one, but not an old
fowl. After the chicken has been drawn, remove the white meat, which is
used uncooked for timbales. The dark meat may be cooked at once and
utilized for boudins, croquettes, salad, cecils, creamed hash, or served
on toast with sauce Bordelaise, or used in chafing dish next day. Or if
you prefer to use it raw, devil the legs and use the bones for soup.


Timbale

Chop fine the uncooked white meat of a chicken; this should weigh a half
pound. Then rub it with the back of a wooden spoon against the side of a
bowl until perfectly smooth. Put one cup of white bread crumbs and a half
cup of milk over the fire; stir until boiling; when cold, rub this
thoroughly with the meat, and press it through an ordinary flour sieve.
Stir into it carefully the well-beaten whites of five eggs, add a
teaspoonful of salt, a dash of white pepper; fill into greased timbale
cups, stand in a baking pan of boiling water, cover with oiled paper, and
bake in a moderate oven fifteen to twenty minutes. The bottoms of the cups
may be garnished with chopped truffle, chopped mushrooms, chopped parsley,
or nicely cooked green peas. Serve with the timbales either a plain cream
sauce or a cream mushroom sauce. Peas are the usual accompaniment.

Or the timbale molds may be lined with this mixture, and the centers
filled with creamed mushrooms; put enough of the timbale mixture over the
top to hold in the stuffing; they will then be cooked and served in the
usual manner.


Deviled Chicken Legs

Carefully remove the bones from the legs of an uncooked chicken. To a half
cup of bread crumbs add twelve chopped almonds, two tablespoonfuls of
toasted pi�on nuts, a tablespoonful of parsley, a half teaspoonful of salt
and a dash of cayenne; moisten with two tablespoonfuls of butter. Stuff
this into the spaces from which you have taken the bones, tie the legs top
and bottom to keep in the stuffing. Place the bones from the carcass of
the chicken in the soup kettle, cover with cold water, and when the water
reaches boiling point place the legs on top of the bones and cook
continuously for two hours. They may be served hot with sauce, or cold,
cut into thin slices garnished with aspic.


English Chicken Balls

Chop fine the dark meat left over from timbales, add a half can of finely
chopped mushrooms, a teaspoonful of salt, a half teaspoonful of pepper, a
tablespoonful of chopped parsley, a dozen blanched and finely chopped
almonds and one raw egg; mix thoroughly and form into balls the size of an
English walnut. Arrange these over the bottom of a saucepan, cover with
stock, add a bay leaf, a slice of onion and of carrot; cook slowly a half
to three-quarters of an hour; drain, saving the stock. Dish the balls in
the center of a platter, put around the edge a row of potato bullets,
outside of that small triangles of toast. Put a tablespoonful of butter
and one of flour into a saucepan; mix, add a half pint of stock in which
the balls were cooked, stir until boiling, take from the fire, add the
yolk of one egg beaten with two tablespoonfuls of cream; add a half
teaspoonful of salt and a dash of pepper; strain this over the balls and
serve.




CHICKEN--COOKED


The remains of cold chicken or turkey may be used in precisely the same
manner, or made into croquettes, using the same rule as for beef
croquettes. With an accompaniment of mayonnaise of celery, or mayonnaise
of tomato, they make an extremely good luncheon dish. For an evening
entertainment they may be simply garnished with cooked peas. Meat
croquettes are usually made into pyramid forms; they may, however, be made
into cylinders. Boudins of chicken or turkey are also exceedingly nice.


Creamed Hash on Toast

This is one of the tastiest of all the warmed-over chicken dishes. Chop
the chicken fine, and to each pint allow one tablespoonful of butter, one
of flour and a half pint of milk. Rub the butter and flour together, add
the milk, stir over the fire until boiling, season the meat with a
teaspoonful of salt and a dash of pepper, add to the milk sauce, and stir
over hot water for fifteen minutes. The flavoring may be changed by adding
three or four chopped mushrooms, or, if you have it, a chopped truffle;
but it is exceedingly good plain. Heap this on squares of nicely toasted
bread, serve at once, or you may garnish the tops with carefully poached
eggs.


Casserole

Wash a half cup of rice; throw it into boiling water, boil for twenty
minutes, drain, add a half cup of milk, a tablespoonful of butter, a level
teaspoonful of salt and a quarter of a teaspoonful of pepper; stir until
you have a rather smooth thick paste. Brush custard cups, line them to the
depth of a half inch with this rice mixture; make a plain milk sauce, as
in preceding recipe, and add a pint of seasoned chicken. Fill the space in
the rice cups with this cream mixture, put over a covering of rice, stand
the cups in a pan of boiling water, and bake in a moderate oven for twenty
to twenty-five minutes. Turn these carefully on a heated dish, pour
around cream sauce and serve. They may be garnished with green peas,
mushrooms or truffles. While this is an exceedingly economical dish it is
at the same time an elegant one.


Indian Hash

Chop fine sufficient cold-roasted duck, chicken, or turkey to make one
pint. Cut a good-sized onion into very thin slices. Pare, core, and chop
fine one apple. Put two tablespoonfuls of butter in a saucepan, add the
apple and the onion; toss until brown, then add not more than an eighth of
a teaspoonful of powdered mace, a half teaspoonful of salt, a teaspoonful
of curry powder, a tablespoonful of flour, a teaspoonful of sugar; mix and
add a half pint of stock or water; now add the meat, stir constantly until
smoking hot, then stand over hot water, covering closely for twenty
minutes. Add two tablespoonfuls of lemon juice and serve in a border of
rice.


Mock Terrapin or � la Newburg

Pieces of cold-roasted chicken, turkey or duck may be used for making
terrapin or � la Newburg. Cut the meat into pieces of fairly good size;
measure, and to each pint of this allow a half pint of sauce; rub together
two tablespoonfuls of butter and one of flour. Rub to a smooth paste the
hard boiled yolks of three eggs; add to the butter and flour a gill and a
half (three-quarters of a cup) of milk; stir until smoking hot. Do not
let the mixture boil; then add this a little at a time to the yolks of the
eggs, rubbing until you have a perfectly smooth golden sauce; press this
through a sieve. Before beginning the sauce, sprinkle the chicken with
four tablespoonfuls of sherry or Madeira, the latter preferable. Add the
chicken to the sauce, stir until each piece is thoroughly covered; add a
half teaspoonful of salt, just a drop of extract of nutmeg or a grating of
nutmeg, an eighth of a spoon of white pepper (black pepper, of course, may
be used); cover and stand over hot water, stirring occasionally until the
mixture is smoking hot.


Chicken Supr�me

This may be made from either chicken or turkey cut into dice; add an equal
quantity of canned mushrooms; for instance, to one pint of cold chicken,
add one can of mushrooms. Put two tablespoonfuls of butter and two of
flour in a saucepan; mix without browning, then add two cups (one pint) of
chicken stock; stir constantly until boiling, add two tablespoonfuls of
thick cream, and the yolks of four eggs; strain, add the chicken and
mushrooms, a level teaspoonful of salt, a quarter of a teaspoonful of
white pepper, ten drops of celery extract or just a little celery seed.
Stand this mixture over hot water, watching carefully until it is
thoroughly heated; remember that any boiling will curdle the egg. Serve
this on a heated dish either in a border of rice or garnished with squares
of toasted bread. This mixture is also served in bread pat�s, or it may be
served in chicken muffin cases.


Chicken Cutlets

Chop cold cooked chicken or turkey very fine; to each pint allow a half
can of mushrooms chopped fine. Put one tablespoonful of butter and two of
flour into a saucepan, mix, and add a half pint of chicken stock. When
smooth and thick take from the fire, add the yolks of two eggs, the
chicken and mushrooms, a teaspoonful of salt, quarter of a teaspoonful of
pepper, a teaspoonful of onion juice, a grating of nutmeg and a
tablespoonful of chopped parsley; stir over the fire for a moment; turn
out to cool; when cold form into cutlet-shaped croquettes, dip in egg and
bread crumbs, and fry in smoking hot fat. These may be served plain, with
a garnish of peas, or they may be served with sauce B�chamel.


Duck Bordelaise

Portions of cold duck may be cut into convenient pieces, sprinkled with
wine, about four tablespoonfuls to the pint, and allowed to stand while
you make sauce Bordelaise. Put one tablespoonful of butter and one of
flour into a saucepan; mix, add a teaspoonful of browning or kitchen
bouquet and a half pint of stock; stir until boiling, add a tablespoonful
of grated onion, a half teaspoonful of salt, a dash of pepper and, if you
have it, a tablespoonful of finely-chopped ham; cook for five minutes and
strain; add three or four fresh mushrooms or a half dozen canned mushrooms
and the duck. Stand over boiling water until the mixture is thoroughly
heated. Send to the table garnished with triangles of toasted bread. A few
stoned olives or sliced olives may be added in the place of the mushrooms,
and you would then have salmi of duck.




GAME


Bits of cold broiled or roasted game may be chopped very fine, rubbed to a
smooth paste either in a bowl or mortar. To each half pint of this mixture
allow two tablespoonfuls of brown sauce thoroughly rubbed with the game,
and the unbeaten white of one egg; press the whole mixture through an
ordinary flour sieve; then stir in the well-beaten whites of two eggs,
four mushrooms chopped almost to a powder, and a seasoning of salt and
pepper. Fill this into little greased molds or cups; the cups may be
garnished with chopped truffle or mushrooms, or served plain. Fill in the
mixture, stand the cups in a baking pan half filled with boiling water;
cook in a moderate oven twenty minutes. The little bomb-shaped molds are
the better sort to use for these. Serve with brown sauce either plain or
flavored with mushrooms.




BREAD


The better way is to cut just sufficient bread for each meal so that there
will be really no left-overs. If, however, a few slices are accidentally
left, put them aside in a can or jar, never in the regular bread box with
the bread; one or two slices will invariably be missed until sufficiently
old to mold and contaminate the remaining quantity of bread in the box,
and then, too, they are more apt to accumulate in this way than in a
separate box. The neater pieces may be used for toast for breakfast or
lunch or supper. The next best pieces use for bread and butter custard;
the crusts dry, roll and put aside to be ready for breading articles to be
fried, or for escalloped dishes. In this way every piece, no matter what
its condition, will be utilized.


Bread and Butter Custard

Beat two eggs, without separating, until light, add four tablespoonfuls of
sugar and a pint of milk, mix and add a grating of nutmeg; turn into an
ordinary baking dish, cover the top with buttered bread, butter side up;
bake in a moderate oven just as you would a cup custard, until you can put
a spoon handle down in the center of the custard and it will come out free
from milk.


Little Puddings � la Grand Belle

Roll slices of stale bread into fine crumbs. Brush small custard cups, or
a border mold with melted butter, sprinkle over a few currants or raisins,
or any fruit that you may have left over. Fill the cups with crumbs. Beat
three eggs, without separating, until light; add three tablespoonfuls of
sugar, a teaspoonful of vanilla and a pint of milk. Pour this carefully
over the bread crumbs, let them stand for about five minutes until the
mixture has been soaked up and the bread crumbs soft; then stand in a pan
of boiling water, cover with oiled paper and cook in the oven a half hour.
Turn out and serve hot with egg sauce.


Bread Croquettes

Rub sufficient stale bread to make one quart of crumbs; add four
tablespoonfuls of sugar, a half cup of cleaned currants, or any fruit that
you have left over, and a grating of nutmeg; sprinkle over a teaspoonful
of vanilla, and add sufficient beaten eggs (about three) to moisten the
crumbs. Form into small cylinder-shaped croquettes, dip in egg and roll in
bread crumbs and fry in smoking hot fat. Serve hot with sugar sauce.


Bread Muffins

Cover a quart of bits of bread that have been broken apart, with one pint
of milk; soak for fifteen minutes, then with a spoon beat until you have a
smooth paste; add the yolks of three eggs, a tablespoonful of melted
butter and one cup of flour that has been sifted with a heaping
teaspoonful of baking powder. Fold in carefully the well-beaten whites of
the eggs, and bake in muffin pans in a quick oven about twenty minutes.

Muffins left from breakfast may be pulled apart and toasted for lunch or
supper. Pieces of stale sponge cake, in fact, any stale cake may be used
for cabinet puddings, for cream puddings, or for croquettes.




EGGS


The soft boiled eggs that are left from breakfast will be at once hard
boiled, put into the refrigerator, and when four have accumulated, use
them for Beauregard eggs, � la Newburg dishes or garnishes. Poached eggs
that are left over may be dropped at once into boiling water, cooked
slowly until perfectly hard, and put aside for chopping, to use as a
garnish for a curry or some vegetable dish with which they will nicely
blend.

The tablespoonful or two of stewed tomatoes left in the dish from dinner
will be put aside to use for tomato omelet, or they may be added to the
roasted beef gravy for dinner, converting a plain homely gravy into one of
better flavor. The half cup of peas may be added to to-morrow's consomm�,
or used as a garnish for the breakfast omelet. The green portions of
celery will be put aside for stewing; the tender white part for serving
raw; while the leaves and roots will be used for flavoring soups and
sauces.

The yolk of egg left over, if put into a cup or saucer will, in less than
two hours, become hard, dry and useless. This same yolk dropped into a cup
half filled with cold water will keep for several days, and may be used
for mayonnaise or added to a sauce. When needed, it may be carefully
lifted with a spoon and used the same as a fresh yolk.


Whites of Eggs

The yolks of eggs are quite easily disposed of, as sauces frequently call
for the yolk of one or two eggs; then they may be used for mayonnaise
dressing, or added to various dishes. The whites of eggs, however,
accumulate. One of the ways of getting hard-boiled yolks, without wasting
the whites, is to separate the white and the yolk before the egg is
cooked; drop the yolk down into a kettle of boiling water; then stand on
the back part of the stove for fifteen or twenty minutes until it is hard.
The yolk will cook in this way just as well as with the white in the
shell. Now, you have the uncooked whites, which may be used for a simple
white cake, apple float, souffl�s, plain or with fruit.


Beauregard Eggs

Separate the whites and yolks of five hard-boiled eggs, press through an
ordinary fruit press, or chop very fine. Make a half pint of cream sauce;
when boiling, add the whites of the eggs. Have ready on a heated platter
five squares of toasted bread; heap the white sauce over these squares,
dust the top with the yolks of the eggs, then with a little salt and
pepper, and send at once to the table.


Egg Croquettes

Put five hard-boiled eggs through a vegetable press, or chopper. Put one
tablespoonful of butter and two of flour into a saucepan, add a half pint
of milk, stir until boiling, add a half cup of stale, unbrowned bread
crumbs, a teaspoonful of salt, a tablespoonful of chopped parsley, a dash
of pepper and a half teaspoonful of onion juice; add the eggs, mix and
turn out to cool. When cold form into cutlets, dip in egg and then in
bread crumbs and fry in smoking hot fat. Serve with plain cream sauce.
These with peas make an exceedingly nice luncheon dish.


Gold Cake

One frequently has four or five yolks left after having used the whites
for some light dish, as mock charlotte. Beat a half cupful of butter to a
cream, add gradually one cupful of sugar. When very, very light, add the
yolks of the eggs and beat for ten or fifteen minutes; then add one cupful
of water, and two and a half cupfuls of flour, sifted with three level
teaspoonfuls of baking powder. Beat thoroughly, and bake in a small round
or square pan.


German Slaw

This will use the yolks of two eggs and any little sour cream that may be
left over. Shred the cabbage and soak it in cold water, changing the
water once or twice. When crisp, wring it perfectly dry in a towel. Beat
the yolks of two eggs, add a half cupful of sour cream, four
tablespoonfuls of vinegar; stir this over the fire until it thickens. Take
from the fire, add a half teaspoonful of salt and a dash of pepper; mix it
with the cabbage and turn it into the serving dish. This quantity of
dressing will be quite sufficient for about one quart of cabbage.


Apple Snow

In making sauce Hollandaise or mayonnaise one always has quite a quantity
of the left-over whites. These may be made into various sponges, or used
for fruit snow. Beat the whites of four or five eggs until light, then
add two level tablespoonfuls of sifted powdered sugar to the white of each
egg and beat until dry and glossy. Grate into this one tart apple, fold it
quickly, float it on a little dish of good milk or cream, and send it at
once to the table. If you have one or two little stale cakes, or a bit of
sponge cake, stale, grate it, dust the top, and if you have just a little
jelly, you may dot it here and there with the jelly. This must be made
just before the dinner hour, or the apple will lose its color. Grated
pear, or two or three peaches pressed through a sieve, or one or two soft
bananas may be beaten and used in the place of the apple.




POTATOES


Cold baked potatoes will be converted at once into stuffed potatoes, and
put aside for rewarming. Two cold boiled potatoes will make a comfortable
dish of hashed browned potatoes, or may be served with cream sauce or au
gratin.


Stuffed Potatoes

Baked potatoes that are left over must be made into stuffed potatoes
before they are heavy and cold. At the close of the meal at which they
were first served, cut the potatoes directly into halves, scoop out the
inside portion, put it through an ordinary vegetable press, or mash it
fine; add a little butter, salt, pepper and sufficient milk to make a
light mixture; stand this over hot water and beat until light and smooth.
Put it back into the shells, and stand them aside in a cold place. When
ready to serve, brush the top with beaten egg, run them into a quick oven
until hot and golden brown.


Potato Croquettes

Cold mashed potatoes may be made into croquettes by adding to each pint
four tablespoonfuls of heated milk, the yolks of two eggs, a tablespoonful
of chopped parsley, a teaspoonful of grated onion, a quarter of a
teaspoonful of pepper; stir over the fire until the mixture is thoroughly
heated; form into cylinder-shaped croquettes, dip in egg and rolled bread
crumbs and fry in smoking hot fat. Potato croquettes are more difficult to
fry than meat croquettes; the fat must be at least 365 degrees (Fahr.) and
the rolling carefully done.


Potato Puff

The above mixture may have the whites of the eggs beaten and stirred in,
and baked in the oven; serve in the same dish in which it was baked.


Potato Roses for Garnishing

Cold boiled potatoes may have added sufficient milk to make a soft paste;
stir it over the fire until smooth; put it into your pastry bag, using a
star tube; hold the bag firmly, pressing out on greased papers these
little potato roses; brown in the oven and use them for garnishing fish
dishes.


Potato Custards

Stir two cups of cold mashed potatoes, with four tablespoonfuls of milk,
over the fire until they are warm and light; take from the fire and add
three eggs beaten light with four tablespoonfuls of sugar. Add a
teaspoonful of vanilla, stir in carefully a pint and a half of milk. Put
this mixture into greased custard cups; stand in a baking pan of boiling
water and bake in a moderate oven until set, about twenty or thirty
minutes.

Where a little cooked meat and, at the same time, mashed potatoes, are
left over, the meat may be seasoned with a savory sauce, turned into a
baking dish, the mashed potatoes slightly thinned with hot milk and then
slightly thickened with flour, and used as a crust. This makes what we
call a potato pie. Four tablespoonfuls of milk and four of flour would be
a good allowance to each cupful of mashed potatoes.




POTATOES--COLD BOILED


Hashed Brown Potatoes

Chop two cold boiled potatoes rather fine, season with salt and pepper.
Put a tablespoonful of butter in an ordinary saut� pan; when hot, put in
the potatoes, smoothing and patting them down; stand over a moderate fire
and allow them to cook undisturbed for at least eight minutes; then with a
limber knife fold over one half as you would an omelet; stand again over
the fire for about three minutes and turn at once on to a heated dish.
These are exceedingly difficult to make. Directions must be carefully
followed; the butter must be hot when you put in the potatoes; the whole
must be packed firmly down so that it will not break when turning out.


O'Brien Potatoes

Chop one green pepper rather fine. Chop sufficient red pepper to make two
tablespoonfuls. Put two tablespoonfuls of butter in a frying pan, add the
peppers, which must be sweet; shake until the peppers are soft, cover over
four cold boiled potatoes, chopped rather fine, that have been seasoned
with a teaspoonful of salt and a dash of pepper. Press them down as you
do hashed brown potatoes, let them stand for a moment, stir them up, mix
well, without breaking, and press down again. Let these stand until brown,
fold over as you would an omelet and turn out on a heated platter.


Potatoes au Gratin

To each four good-sized cold potatoes chopped fine allow a pint of cream
sauce, to which you have added four tablespoonfuls of grated cheese; mix
the potatoes with the sauce, turn them into a baking dish, dust with
cheese, and brown in a quick oven.


Scalloped Potatoes

Cut cold boiled potatoes into dice; to each pint allow a half pint of
cream sauce. Put a layer of the sauce in the bottom of a baking dish, put
in the potatoes, season with salt and pepper, cover with another layer of
cream sauce, dust the top with bread crumbs, dot here and there little
bits of butter, and bake in a moderate oven until a golden brown.


Potatoes in Milk

Cold boiled potatoes may be cut into slices and cooked in milk in a double
boiler until the whole is thoroughly heated; season with salt and pepper
and serve.


Sweet Potatoes

Cold boiled or roasted sweet potatoes may be mashed while warm, seasoned
with salt, pepper and butter and formed at once into croquettes; dip and
fry the same as white potato croquettes.


Lyonnaise Potatoes

Cut cold boiled potatoes into small dice; to each pint allow a
tablespoonful of butter; put the butter in an ordinary saut� pan, melt it,
add a tablespoonful of chopped onion, shake until the onion is golden
brown; throw in the potatoes, shake or toss over a hot fire until each
piece is slightly browned; sprinkle lightly with a half teaspoonful of
salt, a tablespoonful of parsley, and a dash of pepper; dish and serve.


Broiled Potatoes

Cut cold boiled potatoes into thin slices lengthwise; dip each slice in a
little melted butter, dust it with salt and pepper, and broil it over a
clear fire until a golden brown. For dyspeptics it is better to broil the
potato first and add the butter after, as the heating of the butter
renders it indigestible. Sweet potatoes may be broiled after this same
rule, and would be less greasy than when fried.


Vegetable Browned Hash

Chop two or three cold boiled potatoes rather fine, add an equal quantity
of chopped carrot, and either string beans or peas, which ever you happen
to have left over. You can add to this a cupful of stewed cabbage. Put
two tablespoonfuls of butter into a shallow frying pan, mix the
vegetables, put them into the butter, let them stand over a slow fire
until they are browned thoroughly and crusted in the bottom. Fold one half
carefully over the other, and press the two halves together; cook just a
moment longer, and turn out on to a heated platter. This is a nice dish to
serve with omelet and tomato sauce for luncheon or supper.




CHEESE


The shells of Edam, or pine-apple cheese, after all the available cheese
has been scooped out, will be used as a baking dish for stewed spaghetti
or macaroni or rice. If care is taken, one shell may be used for three or
four bakings. Boil the macaroni in plain water until tender; then drain,
cut it into small pieces and add it to cream sauce. Pour this into the
cheese shell, stand the shell on a piece of oiled paper in a baking pan
and run into a moderate oven for fifteen or twenty minutes. Lift the shell
carefully, put it on to a heated dish, and send at once to the table.
After the macaroni has been taken out, the shell will be cleaned and put
aside in a cold place for the next baking. There is just enough cheese
imparted by the toasting of this shell to give ah agreeable flavor to the
macaroni. Plain boiled rice may be heaped into the shells and steamed, or
baked in the oven for a few moments.

Any scraps or bits of common cheese, when too hard and dry to serve on the
table should be grated, put into a jar and put aside for cheese balls to
serve with lettuce, cheese souffl�, for baked macaroni, or spaghetti, or
for croquettes, cheese sauce, or Duchess soup.


Cheese Souffl�

Put one cup of stale bread crumbs with a gill of milk over the fire for
just a moment; take from the fire, add the yolks of three eggs, six
tablespoonfuls of grated cheese, a half teaspoonful of salt and a dash of
red pepper; stir in the well-beaten whites of the eggs; put into
individual baking dishes; bake in a quick oven about eight minutes and
send at once to the table.


Cheese Balls

Grate or chop sufficient common cheese to make a half pint; add to it one
pint of stale bread crumbs, a half teaspoonful of salt, a dash of red
pepper and the whites of two eggs slightly beaten. Form these into small
balls the size of an English walnut; dip in egg and then in bread crumbs
and fry in smoking hot fat. These may also be made into small
cylinder-shaped croquettes, and served with cream sauce.


Duchess Soup

Put two tablespoonfuls of butter and a sliced onion in a saucepan; cook
until the onion is soft and yellow; add to this two tablespoonfuls of
flour, mix, and then add one quart of milk, a level teaspoonful of salt
and a palatable seasoning of red pepper. Add six tablespoonfuls of grated
cheese; stir in a double boiler until it is smoking hot; press through a
fine sieve; reheat and send at once to the table.


Cheese Pudding

Toast slices of stale bread until a golden brown and crisp to the center.
This is best done in the oven. Put a layer of this toasted bread in the
bottom of a baking dish; put over a quarter of a cup of grated or chopped
cheese, sprinkle with salt and red pepper; then another layer of bread,
another of cheese and the last of bread. Pour over sufficient milk to
moisten the bread; bake in a quick oven fifteen minutes, and serve at
once.




SAUCES


All meat sauces are made after the same rule, changing the liquids to give
varieties; for instance, one tablespoonful of butter (which means an
ounce), and one tablespoonful of flour (a half ounce) are always allowed
to each half pint of liquid. The butter and flour are rubbed together
(better without heating), then the liquid added, cold or warm, the whole
stirred over the fire until boiling. A half teaspoonful of salt and an
eighth of a teaspoonful of pepper is the proper amount of seasoning.


White Sauce

If you wish to make a white sauce, use one tablespoonful of butter, one
tablespoonful of flour and a half pint of milk. Called also milk or cream
sauce.


Tomato Sauce

Tomato sauce will have the same proportions of butter and flour and a half
pint of strained tomatoes.


Sauce Bechamel

For sauce Bechamel, fill the cup half full of stock, then the remaining
half with milk, giving again the half pint of liquid and usual quantity of
butter and flour.


Sauce Supr�me

This is one of the nicest of all sauces to use with warmed-over chicken,
duck or turkey. Rub together a tablespoonful of butter and one of flour,
then add gradually a half pint of chicken stock; stir constantly until
boiling, take from the fire, add the yolks of two eggs, strain through a
fine sieve, add the seasoning, and serve immediately.

Sauces containing the yolks of uncooked eggs cannot be reboiled after the
eggs are added.


English Drawn Butter

For English drawn butter, use a tablespoonful of butter, a tablespoonful
of flour, and a half pint of water. We usually have the water boiling, and
add it gradually to the butter and flour, stirring rapidly. As soon as it
reaches boiling point, take from the fire and add carefully another
tablespoonful of butter. This may be converted into a plain


Sauce Hollandaise

by adding with the last tablespoonful of butter, the yolks of two eggs,
the juice of half a lemon, a teaspoonful of onion juice and a
tablespoonful of chopped parsley.


Brown Sauce

This is made by rubbing butter and flour together in the above
proportions, then adding a half pint of stock; stir until boiling, add a
teaspoonful of browning or kitchen bouquet and the usual seasoning of salt
and pepper. To change the character of this sauce add garlic, onion,
Worcestershire sauce, mushroom catsup, etc.


Brown Tomato Sauce

An exceedingly nice sauce for Hamburg steaks. After you have taken the
steaks from the pan, add a tablespoonful of butter and one of flour; mix.
Fill your measuring cup half full of strained tomatoes, the remaining half
with stock, making a half pint; add this to the butter and flour, stir
until boiling, add a seasoning of salt and pepper and pour over the
steaks.


Roasted Beef Gravy

Roasted beef gravy, which really should be a sauce, is improved by adding
a little tomato to the stock before adding it to the fat and flour. In
roasting meats, we do not use butter for the sauce; there is always
sufficient fat in the bottom of the pan. Pour from the pan all but one or
two tablespoonfuls of fat (the amount required) and add to that the flour.
A rounding tablespoonful of butter to which we refer weighs an ounce; of
liquid fat, as in the pan, you must allow two even tablespoonfuls to the
ounce; so, if you are going to make a half pint of sauce take out all but
two tablespoonfuls of fat; add one tablespoonful of flour and then the
half pint of water or stock.


Browning

Plain burned sugar (caramel) may be used to color soups and sauces, thus
saving the trouble of browning the flour or butter. It is also used as a
flavoring for sweets. Put one cup of sugar, dry, into an iron saucepan.
Stand it over a hot fire, and stir continually until it is reduced to a
dark brown liquid. When it begins to burn and smoke, add hastily a cup of
boiling water, stir and cook until a thin syrup-like mixture is formed.
It must not be too thick. Bottle, and it is ready for use, and will keep
any length of time.


Kitchen Bouquet

Add one chopped onion and a teaspoonful of celery seed to one cup of dry
sugar, and then proceed as for ordinary browning. Strain and bottle. A
very good mixture under this name can be purchased at the grocers.


Mushroom Sauce

Where just a few mushrooms are left over, either fresh or canned, they may
be chopped fine and added to a brown sauce and served with steak or beef;
or they may be chopped fine and added to a cream sauce and served with
chicken or sweetbreads.


Cold Meat Sauces

It is the fashion when one is serving cold meat to pass with it some
condiment like Worcestershire sauce, mushroom, walnut or tomato catsup. Of
course, these used in any great quantity are more or less injurious. A
number of little left-overs in the house may be used to take their place,
adding zest to the meat, and are more economical and more wholesome.


Chopped Tomato Sauce

Peel a good-sized tomato, cut it into halves and press out the seeds; chop
the flesh of the tomato fine, add a quarter of a teaspoonful of salt, a
dash of pepper, or, if you have it, a little sweet pepper chopped fine;
you may add also a little celery chopped very fine, or celery seed, and a
teaspoonful of onion juice; rub your spoon with a clove of garlic, and mix
the ingredients thoroughly; add a teaspoonful of lemon juice and dish.
Pass and use as ordinary catsup.


Grated Cucumber Sauce

Grate three or four large cucumbers; drain them on a sieve; to this
drained pulp add a half teaspoonful of salt, a dash of red pepper, a
teaspoonful of onion juice, a tablespoonful of lemon juice, and their stir
in carefully two or three tablespoonfuls of very thick cream; if you can
whip the cream a little first, so much the better. Cream may also be added
to the tomato.


Chopped Celery Sauce

Chop fine sufficient celery to make a half pint; season it with a quarter
of a teaspoonful of salt, a teaspoonful of onion juice, a dash of pepper.
Rub the spoon with garlic, mix thoroughly, stir into it the yolk of an egg
that has been beaten light with two tablespoonfuls of cream; add a few
drops of lemon juice or tarragon vinegar and serve.


Cream Horseradish Sauce

This is one of the most delightful sauces to serve with left-over meats,
especially beef. Press from the vinegar four tablespoonfuls of
horseradish, add a quarter of a teaspoonful of salt, and work in the yolk
of an egg. Whip six tablespoonfuls of cream to a stiff froth, stir it
gradually into the horseradish and dish at once.


Pudding Sauces

The simple method of making a pudding sauce is to add to a half cup of
sugar, a tablespoonful of flour; mix thoroughly, and then add hastily a
half pint of boiling water; boil for a moment and pour while hot into one
well-beaten egg, beating all the while. This may now be seasoned with any
flavoring, as orange, lemon or vanilla.

To change the character of this sauce, a tablespoonful of butter may be
added. Where butter enters largely into the composition of a pudding
sauce, it is better that it should be beaten to a cream, the sugar added
gradually, then the egg and last the liquor. Heat it over a double boiler
just at serving time, or the froth will float on the surface and the
liquid be rather dense at the bottom.

Melted sugar with lemon juice and a little water is called sugar sauce.




SALADS


There comes a time during the week, even in careful housekeeping, when
there is an accumulation of little things, a few olives, a slice or two of
beet, perhaps two or three pieces of cooked carrot, a cold potato, a tiny
little bit of cold fish, or cold meats, and not more than a tablespoonful
or two of aspic jelly; these may all be utilized in a


Russian Salad

Chop or cut carefully the vegetables; mix together, add two or three
tablespoonfuls of toasted pi�on nuts, and the meat and fish; dish on
lettuce leaves, or, if you have tomatoes, peel and take out the centers,
and fill the salad into the tomatoes. Serve with French or mayonnaise
dressing; garnish with blocks of aspic jelly.




CEREALS


Cold boiled rice left over may be mixed with a small quantity of meat, and
used for stuffing tomatoes or egg plant; or it may be re-heated or made
into pudding, or added to the muffins for lunch, or added to the corn
bread.

A cup of oat meal or cracked wheat or wheatlet may also be added to the
muffins or ordinary yeast or corn breads. These little additions increase
the food value, make the mixture lighter, and save waste.


Southern Rice Bread

Separate two eggs, beat the yolks until light, and add one cup (a half
pint) of milk; add a tablespoonful of melted butter, a half teaspoonful of
salt, and one and a half cups of corn meal; beat thoroughly, and stir in
one cup of cold boiled rice; add a teaspoonful of baking powder; beat for
two or three minutes; stir in the well-beaten whites of the eggs, and bake
in a thin sheet in an ordinary baking pan.


Rice Muffins

Separate two eggs; add to the yolks one cup of milk and a cup and a half
of white flour; beat thoroughly, add a half teaspoonful of salt, a
teaspoonful of baking powder and one cup of cold boiled rice; stir in the
well-beaten whites, and bake in gem pans in a quick oven twenty minutes.


Rice Croquettes

To make cold boiled rice into croquettes, the rice must be re-heated in a
double boiler with a gill of milk and the yolk of an egg to each cup; you
may season with sugar and lemon or salt and pepper, and serve as a
vegetable. Form into cylinder-shaped croquettes; dip in egg and bread
crumbs, and fry in smoking hot fat.


Simple Rice Pudding

Put into a double boiler one quart of milk; allow it to cook for thirty
minutes; then add two tablespoonfuls of sugar, a grating of nutmeg, and
one cup of cold boiled rice; turn this into a baking pan, and bake in a
quick oven thirty minutes. Serve cold. Raisins may be added when it is
put into the baking pan.


Lemon Rice

Into one cup of cold boiled rice stir one pint of milk; beat the yolks of
three eggs with a half cup of sugar together until light; add to them the
rice and milk; add the grated yellow rind and the juice of one lemon. Turn
this into a baking pan; bake in a moderately quick oven twenty to thirty
minutes. Beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth, add three
tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar, and beat again. Heap these over the
pudding, dust thickly with powdered sugar; return to the oven to slowly
brown; serve cold.


Paradise Pudding

Pare, core and grate three apples. Separate three eggs; add to the yolks
four tablespoonfuls of sugar; beat until light; add a grating of nutmeg
and a teaspoonful of lemon juice; stir in a half cup of cold boiled rice;
mix with this quickly the apples, and beat well; add a half cup of milk;
turn into a baking dish, and bake for thirty minutes. Make a meringue as
in preceding recipe, from the whites of the eggs; heap it over the top,
and brown. This pudding may be served warm or cold.


Compote of Pineapple

Throw a pint of boiling water over one cup of cold boiled rice; stir for a
moment; drain, and stand at the oven door. Have ready, picked apart, one
small pineapple; add to it a half cup of sugar; heat quickly, stirring
constantly. Arrange the rice in the center of a round dish, making it into
a mound, flat on top; heap the pineapple neatly on this; pour over the
syrup, and send at once to the table. Small quantities or different kinds
of fruits that have been left over may be blended and used in this way.


Monday Pudding

Cut bits of whole wheat bread into dice. Use a half cup of any fruit that
may have been left over, prunes, raisins, chopped dates or candied fruit.
Grease an ordinary melon mold; put a layer of the bread in the bottom,
then a layer of the fruit, and so continue until you have the mold filled.
Beat three eggs, without separating, with four tablespoonfuls of sugar;
add a pint of milk; pour this carefully over the bread; let it stand for
ten minutes; then put the lid on the mold, and steam or boil continuously
for one hour. Serve with lemon or orange sauce.


Apple Farina Pudding

Pour the left-over breakfast porridge into a square mold and stand it
aside. At luncheon or dinner time cut this into thin slices, cover the
bottom of a baking dish with these slices, and cover these with sliced
apples, and so continue until you have the ingredients used, having the
last layer apples. Beat an egg, without separating, until light, add a
half cupful of milk and a saltspoonful of salt, then stir in a half cupful
of flour. When smooth pour this over the apples and bake in a quick oven
a half hour. Serve with milk or with hard sauce.


Cranberry Farina Pudding

2 cupfuls of cold left-over farina porridge
1/2 cupful of cranberries
1/2 cupful of sugar

It is wise to pour the porridge into a mold as soon as you finish
breakfast. At serving time turn this out in a glass dish, pour over the
cranberry that has been pressed through a sieve; dust thickly with the
sugar. Stir the remaining sugar into a half pint of milk or cream and
serve as a sauce with the pudding.


Plain Farina Pudding

2 cupfuls of milk
1/2 cupful of sugar
2 eggs
1 cupful of left-over farina or cream of wheat
1 teaspoonful of vanilla

Put the milk in a double boiler, add the sugar and cold farina porridge.
Stir until thoroughly hot, then add the eggs, well beaten, and the
vanilla. Turn into a baking dish and run in the oven until brown. Serve
cold, with milk or cream.


Farina Gems

2 eggs
1 cupful of milk
1 cupful of cold boiled farina
1 cupful of flour
4 level teaspoonfuls of baking powder
1/2 teaspoonful of salt

Separate the eggs, add the milk and stir this gradually into the cold
farina. When smooth add the salt, baking powder and flour, mixed. Beat,
and then fold in the well-beaten whites of eggs. Bake in gem pans in a
quick oven a half hour.


Hominy Pone

1 cupful of boiled hominy
1 cupful of white corn meal
2 cupfuls of milk
2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
2 eggs
1/2 teaspoonful of salt

If the hominy is cold left-over hominy, add to it the milk, and when
thoroughly smooth add the eggs, well beaten, then the butter, melted, and
the corn meal. Pour into a greased pan and bake in a very hot oven about
twenty to twenty-five minutes.


Oat Meal Muffins

The ordinary muffin recipes, which are always about alike, no matter what
flour is used, may have added to them a cup of well-cooked oat meal; for
instance, separate two eggs as for rice muffins; add to the yolks a cup of
milk; then add one and a half cups of whole wheat flour; beat thoroughly;
add a teaspoonful of baking powder; beat again; add one cup of well-cooked
oat meal, or you may substitute wheatlet or any of the breakfast cereals;
fold in the whites of the eggs, and bake in gem pans in a quick oven
twenty to thirty minutes.


Sandwiches

Little bits of fruit, crisp pieces of celery, cold meats of all kinds, may
be chopped, properly seasoned, and used for making fruit, vegetable and
meat sandwiches.




VEGETABLES


String beans, cauliflower, carrots, beets, peas and even a cold boiled
potato may all be cut into neat pieces, mixed together, and served on
lettuce leaves, dressed with French dressing as a salad. One cold boiled
beet may be used as a garnish for a potato salad. String beans, if you
have sufficient quantity, may be served alone as a salad.


Stuffed Egg Plant

Throw a good-sized egg plant into a kettle of boiling water; boil ten
minutes; when cold cut into halves and with a blunt knife scoop out the
center. Chop this scooped-out portion fine, mix with it an equal quantity
of finely-chopped uncooked meat, add a grated onion, a clove of garlic
mashed, a teaspoonful of salt, a little chopped parsley, if you have it,
and a dash of pepper. Fill this into the egg plant shells, stand them in a
baking pan, add a cup of stock and a tablespoonful of butter, bake slowly
one hour, basting every ten minutes.


Cucumbers

Raw cucumbers are easily wilted, and are then unfit for serving. Soak them
in pure cold, unsalted water until serving time. Pass French dressing in a
separate dish. In this way the "left-overs" may be placed in the
refrigerator and used next day as an addition to the dinner salad.


Left-Over Tomatoes

A half cup of stewed tomatoes may be used with stock for brown tomato
sauce, or for making a small dish of scalloped tomatoes, helping out at
lunch when perhaps the family is less in number. The Italians boil down
this half cup of tomatoes until it has the consistency of dough; then
press through a sieve, add a little salt, pack down into a jelly tumbler
and stand in the refrigerator to use as flavoring. A tablespoonful in a
soup, or in an ordinary sauce, or mixed with the water for baked beans, or
added to the stock sauce for spaghetti or macaroni, adds greatly to the
flavor as well as appearance.


Corn Oysters

6 ears of cold boiled corn
2 eggs
1 cupful of milk
1/2 cupful of flour
1/2 teaspoonful of salt
1 saltspoonful of pepper

Score the corn, press it out, add the eggs, well beaten, and the oil or
butter; then stir in the milk, salt and pepper. Sift the flour, stir it
in, and drop by spoonfuls into shallow hot fat.


Chicken Corn Pie

6 ears of cold cooked corn
4 eggs
1 level tablespoonful of butter, melted
1 cupful of milk
1 teaspoonful of salt
1 saltspoonful of pepper
1 young chicken

Score the corn and with a dull knife press it out. Carefully beat the
eggs, without separating, until light, add the milk, melted butter, salt
and pepper. Pour this into a casserole mold or pudding dish. Have the
chicken drawn and disjointed; make two pieces of the breast, cut it into
four pieces, dust with salt and pepper, brush with melted butter. Lay the
chicken on top of this mixture and stand the baking dish in a moderately
quick oven about one hour. Serve in the dish in which it was cooked. Some
prefer to broil the chicken on the bone side before they put it into the
pudding, the pudding may be baked, and then put it in the pudding and
brown it with the pudding. This is a good way to use cold left-over corn,
and cold bits of chicken may be used in the place of the fresh chicken.


Green Corn Cakes

4 ears of left-over cooked corn
1 egg
2 tablespoonfuls of milk
1 tablespoonful of melted butter
1/2 cupful of flour
1/2 teaspoonful of salt

Score the corn, press out the cooked pulp, add to it the beaten egg, milk,
melted butter and salt. Stir in the flour, and drop by tablespoonfuls into
a little thoroughly heated fat.




FRUITS


Small quantities of fruit that are not sufficiently sightly to put again
on the table may be put aside and made into fruit pot-pie. All sorts of
fruits may be blended. Put them into a saucepan, and to each pint of this
fruit allow one quart of water and a palatable seasoning of sugar, and you
may flavor it with a little grated lemon or orange rind; bring to boiling
point. During this time put one pint of flour into a bowl, add a half
teaspoonful of salt and a teaspoonful of baking powder. Beat one egg until
light, add to it a half cup of milk, then add this to the flour; there
should be just enough to moisten and make a dough. Take this out on the
board, knead lightly, roll out and cut into biscuits. Put these biscuits
over the top of the fruit; cover the kettle and cook slowly for fifteen
minutes; do not lift the lid during the cooking. Serve hot with plain
milk or cream, or with a hard sauce made from sugar and butter.


Fruit Souffl�

Beat the whites of six eggs until light, but not dry; add three
tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar; mix quickly; line the bottom of the
baking dish with any sort of fruit, such as chopped dates or figs, or
left-over candied fruits or preserves. Heap over the whites of the eggs,
dust thickly with powdered sugar, and bake in a hot oven for five minutes.
Serve immediately. To give variety, where stale biscuits or bread, or
sponge cake are left over, line the bottom of the dish with the stale
bits; pour over enough milk to moisten, put in a layer of fruit and the
whites of the eggs as above.


Fruit Jambolaya

Put one cupful of cold boiled rice in a little sieve or colander and stand
it over the tea kettle where the steam will pass through it. Chop fine any
left-over fruit at hand, an apple, pear, plum, banana, and the pulp of an
orange; they may be all mixed together and slightly sweetened. Put a
little of the rice into four serving dishes, put in the center of each a
tablespoonful of the chopped fruit and send to the table. This is rather
nice for children, and is a good way to use up both the rice and the
fruit, as it makes a good combination.


Plain White Cake

Beat a quarter of a cup of butter to a cream; add gradually one and a half
cups of sugar. Sift two cups of flour with a teaspoonful of baking powder;
measure a half pint of water; add a little water and a little flour, and
so continue until the ingredients are used; beat thoroughly, then stir in
the well-beaten whites of five eggs. Bake in a loaf or layers. Put layers
together with chopped fruit, soft custard, or a soft icing.


Chicken Muffin Cases

Boil together a half pint of water and two tablespoonfuls of butter, add
hastily a half pint of sifted flour, stir over fire until a smooth dough
is formed. Take from the fire and when cool, add one unbeaten whole egg;
beat, add another and so continue until four eggs have been added. Bake in
gem pans until light and hollow, about a half hour. This quantity will
make twelve. Cut a round from the top and fill the muffin with any creamed
mixture.


To Make Cocoanut Milk

Cover one quart of grated cocoanut with one pint of boiling water. Stir
and mash; strain and press. The milk thus produced may be used for
curries. Throw away the pulp.




SOUR MILK AND CREAM


Corn Cake

2 eggs
1 cupful of thick sour milk
1 level teaspoonful of baking soda
2 cupfuls of corn meal
3/4 cupful of white flour
2 cupfuls of sweet milk
3 level teaspoonfuls of baking powder

Beat the eggs until very light, without separating. Moisten the soda in
two tablespoonfuls of cold water, stir it into the cupful of sour milk;
add this to the eggs, then add the meal and beat thoroughly. Sift the
baking powder and flour; stir these into the other mixture, and then add
the two cupfuls of sweet milk. Pour into a shallow greased pan and bake in
a moderately quick oven about three-quarters of an hour. This should have
a custard on top.


Sponge Corn Cake

1 cupful of corn meal
1/2 cupful of flour
1 cupful of thick sour milk
2 eggs
1 level tablespoonful of butter, melted
1/2 teaspoonful of salt
1/2 teaspoonful of baking soda

Moisten the soda in a tablespoonful of water and stir into the thick sour
milk. Separate the eggs; beat the yolks, add the sour milk, with the
butter, melted, corn meal and flour. Beat thoroughly, then fold in the
well-beaten whites, add salt and bake in a shallow greased pan in a quick
oven a half hour.


Old Virginia Batter Cakes

2 eggs
1 cupful of sour milk
1 cupful of water
2 cupfuls of white corn meal
1 cupful of flour
1/2 teaspoonful of salt
1 level teaspoonful of baking soda
1 teaspoonful of baking powder

Beat the eggs, without separating, until very, very light. Dissolve the
soda in a little water, add it to the sour milk; stir until this is well
mixed, add it to the egg; add the water, the corn meal, salt and flour
sifted with the baking powder. Mix thoroughly and bake on a very lightly
greased griddle.


Plain Corn Dodgers

1 egg
1/2 teaspoonful of salt
1 cupful of thick sour milk
1 level teaspoonful of baking soda
1 cupful of corn meal
1/2 cupful of flour

Beat the egg, without separating. Dissolve the soda and add it to the sour
milk; add this to the egg; add the salt, then the corn meal and flour.
Beat until well mixed, and drop by spoonfuls in a shallow pan in which you
have a little bacon or ham fat.  When cooked on one side, turn quickly and
cook on the other.




INDEX


Anchovy, Mutton with
Apple Farina Pudding
      Snow

Baked Sardines
Balls, Cheese
       Curry
       English Chicken
Barbecue of Cold Beef
Batter Cakes, Old Virginia
Beauregard Eggs
Bechamel Sauce
Beef, Cold, Barbecue of
Beef--Cooked
    Barbecue of Cold
    Bresleau
    Croquettes
    Fritters
    Gobbits
    Minced on Toast
    Panada
    Potato Dumplings
    Ragout
    Rechauffee
    Salt Hash No. 1
              No. 2
    Steak Pudding
Beef Croquettes
     Fritters
     Gravy, Roasted
     on Toast, Minced
     Panada of
     Rechauffee of
     Salt Hash No. 1
               No. 2
     Steak Pudding
     Timbale
Beef--Uncooked
    Brown Stew
    Cannelon
    Hamburg Steaks
    Kibbee
    Timbale
Bobotee
Bordelaise Duck
Boudins
Bouquet, Kitchen
Bread
      and Butter Custard
      Croquettes
      Muffins
      Southern Rice
Bresleau
Broiled Potatoes
Browned Hash, Vegetable
Browning
Brown Sauce
      Stew
      Tomato Sauce
Butter, English Drawn

Cake, Corn
     Gold
     Plain White
     Sponge Corn
Cakes, Green Corn
       Old Virginia Batter
Canap�s
Cannelon
Cases, Chicken Muffin
Casserole
Celery Sauce, Chopped
Cereals
Cheese
       Balls
       Pudding
       Souffl�
Chicken Balls, English
Chicken--Cooked
    Casserole
    Creamed Hash on Toast
    Cutlets
    Indian Hash
    Mock Terrapin
    Supr�me
Chicken Corn Pie
        Cutlets
        Legs, Deviled
        Muffin Cases
        Supr�me
Chicken--Uncooked,
    Deviled Legs,
    English Balls,
    Timbale,
Chopped Celery Sauce,
        Tomato Sauce,
Cocoanut Milk, To Make,
Cold Beef, Barbecue of,
     Boiled Potatoes,
     Meat Sauces,
Compote of Pineapple,
Cooked Beef,
       Chicken,
       Fish,
       Mutton,
Corn Cake,
          Sponge,
     Cakes, Green,
     Dodgers, Plain,
     Oysters,
     Pie, Chicken,
Cranberry Farina Pudding,
Cream Horseradish Sauce,
Creamed Hash on Toast,
Croquettes, Beef,
            Bread,
            Egg,
            Fish,
            Potato,
            Rice,
Cucumber Sauce, Grated,
Cucumbers,
Curry Balls,
      of Mutton,
Custard, Bread and Butter,
Custards, Potato,
Cutlets, Chicken,

Deviled Chicken Legs,
Dodgers, Plain Corn,
Drawn Butter, English,
Duchess Soup,
Duck Bordelaise,
Dumplings, Potato,

Egg Croquettes,
    Plant, Stuffed,
Eggs,
     Beauregard
     Whites of,
English Chicken Balls,
        Drawn Butter,

Farina Gems,
       Pudding, Apple,
                Cranberry,
                Plain,
Fish � la Cr�me,
Fish--Cooked,
    � la Cr�me,
    Baked Sardines,
    Canap�s,
    Croquettes,
French Lamb Stew,
Fritters, Beef,
Fruit Jambolaya,
      Souffl�,
Fruits,

Game,
Garnishing, Potato Roses for,
Gems, Farina,
German Slaw,
Gobbits,
Gold Cake,
Grated Cucumber Sauce,
Gravy, Roasted Beef,
Green Corn Cakes,

Hamburg Steaks,
Hash, Creamed, on Toast,
      Indian,
      Salt Beef No. 1,
                No. 2,
      Vegetable Browned,
Hashed Brown Potatoes,
Hollandaise Sauce,
Hominy Pone,
Horseradish Sauce, Cream,

Indian Hash,

Jambolaya, Fruit,

Kibbee,
Kitchen Bouquet,
Klopps,

Lamb Stew, French
    with Tomatoes
Left-Over Tomatoes
Lemon Rice
Little Puddings � la Grand Belle
Lyonnaise Potatoes

Meat
     Sauces, Cold
Milk, Cocoanut, To Make
      Potatoes in
Minced Beef on Toast
Mock Terrapin or � la Newburg
Monday Pudding
Muffin Cases, Chicken
Muffins, Bread
         Oat Meal
         Rice
Mushroom Sauce
Mutton--Cooked
      Bobotee
      Boudins
      Curry of
      French Stew
      Klopps
      Pilau
      Salad
      Stew with Tomatoes
      with Anchovy
Mutton, Curry of
      Salad
Mutton--Uncooked
      Curry Balls
Mutton with Anchovy

Oat Meal Muffins
O'Brien Potatoes
Old Virginia Batter Cakes
Oysters, Corn

Panada of Beef
Paradise Pudding
Pie, Chicken Corn
Pilau
Pineapple, Compote of
Plain Corn Dodgers
      Farina Pudding
      White Cake
Pone, Hominy
Potato Croquettes
       Custards
       Dumplings
       Puff
       Roses, for Garnishing
Potatoes
        au Gratin
        Broiled
        --Cold Boiled
        Hashed Brown
        in Milk
        Lyonnaise
        O'Brien
        Scalloped
        Stuffed
        Sweet
Pudding, Apple Farina
         Beef Steak
         Cheese
         Cranberry Farina
         Monday
         Paradise
         Plain Farina
         Sauces
         Simple Rice
         Steak
Puddings, Little � la Grand Belle
Puff, Potato

Ragout
Rechauffee of Beef
Rice Bread, Southern
     Croquettes
     Lemon
     Muffins
     Pudding, Simple
Roasted Beef Gravy
Roses, Potato, for Garnishing
Russian Salad

Salad, Mutton
       Russian
Salads
Salt Beef Hash, No. 1
                No. 2
Sandwiches
Sardines, Baked
Sauce, Bechamel
       Brown
       Tomato
       Chopped Celery
       Tomato
       Cream Horseradish,
       Grated Cucumber
       Hollandaise
       Mushroom
       Supr�me
       Tomato
       White
Sauces,
        Cold Meat
        Pudding
Scalloped Potatoes
Simple Rice Pudding
Slaw, German
Snow, Apple
Souffl�, Cheese
         Fruit
Soup, Duchess
Sour Milk and Cream
     Corn Cake
     Old Virginia Batter Cakes
     Plain Corn Dodgers
     Sponge Corn Cake
Southern Rice Bread
Sponge Corn Cake
Steak Pudding,
      Beef
Steaks, Hamburg
Stew, Brown
      French Lamb
      Lamb, with Tomatoes
Stock
Stuffed Egg Plant
        Potatoes
Supr�me Chicken
        Sauce
Sweet Potatoes

Terrapin, Mock
Timbale
        Beef
To Make Cocoanut Milk
Tomato Sauce,
       Brown
       Chopped
Tomatoes, Lamb Stew with
          Left-Over

Uncooked Beef
         Chicken
         Mutton

Vegetable Browned Hash
Vegetables

White Cake, Plain
      Sauce
Whites of Eggs




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, MADE-OVER DISHES ***

This file should be named 6978-8.txt or 6978-8.zip

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext04 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext04

Or /etext03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

