The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Treaties of Canada with The Indians of
Manitoba
and the North-West Territories, by Alexander Morris

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: The Treaties of Canada with The Indians of Manitoba
and the North-West Territories

Author: Alexander Morris

Release Date: December, 2004 [EBook #7126]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on March 13, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TREATIES OF CANADA ***




Produced by Andrew Sly, Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





THE TREATIES OF CANADA WITH THE INDIANS OF MANITOBA AND THE
NORTH-WEST TERRITORIES, INCLUDING THE NEGOTIATIONS ON WHICH
THEY WERE BASED, AND OTHER INFORMATION RELATING THERETO.

BY THE HON. ALEXANDER MORRIS, P.C., LATE LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR
OF MANITOBA, THE NORTH-WEST TERRITORIES, AND KEE-WA-TIN.


TO HIS EXCELLENCY
The Right Honorable the Earl of Dufferin,

Her Britannic Majesty's Ambassador at St. Petersburg, K.P.P.C.,
K.C.B., G.C.M.G., &c., &c., &c.

My Lord,--

Encouraged by the earnest interest, your Lordship ever evinced, in
the work of obtaining the alliance and promoting the welfare of the
Indian tribes in the North-West of Canada, and in opening up the
Territories for settlement, by obtaining the relinquishment of the
natural title of the Indians to the lands of the Fertile Belt on
fair and just terms, I have the honor, by your kind permission, to
dedicate this collection of the treaties made with them, to your
Excellency, in the belief that its publication will be timely, and
that the information now supplied in a compact form, may prove of
service to the Dominion of Canada.

      I have the honor to be
          Your Lordship's obedient servant,
                   ALEXANDER MORRIS,

Late Lieut.-Gov. of Manitoba, the North-West Territories, and
Kee-wa-tin.

TORONTO, March, 1880.



PREFACE

The question of the relations of the Dominion of Canada to the
Indians of the North-West, is one of great practical importance The
work, of obtaining their good will, by entering into treaties of
alliance with them, has now been completed in all the region from
Lake Superior to the foot of the Rocky Mountains. As an aid to the
other and equally important duty--that of carrying out, in their
integrity, the obligations of these treaties, and devising means
whereby the Indian population of the Fertile Belt can be rescued
from the hard fate which otherwise awaits them, owing to the speedy
destruction of the buffalo, hitherto the principal food supply of
the Plain Indians, and that they may be induced to become, by the
adoption of agricultural and pastoral pursuits, a self supporting
community--I have prepared this collection of the treaties made
with them, and of information, relating to the negotiations, on
which these treaties were based, in the hope that I may thereby
contribute to the completion of a work, in which I had considerable
part, that, of, by treaties, securing the good will of the Indian
tribes, and by the helpful hand of the Dominion, opening up
to them, a future of promise, based upon the foundations of
instruction and the many other advantages of civilized life.

M.



CONTENTS

       Introduction
    I. The Selkirk Treaty
   II. The Robinson Treaty
  III. The Manitoulin Island Treaty
   IV. The Stone Fort and Manitoba Post Treaties, Numbers One
          and Two
    V. Treaty Number Three; or, the North-West Angle Treaty
   VI. The Qu'Appelle Treaty, or Number Four
  VII. The Revision of Treaties Numbers One and Two
 VIII. The Winnipeg Treaty Number Five
   IX. The Treaties at Forts Carlton and Pitt
    X. Treaty Number Seven; or, the Blackfeet Treaty
   XI. The Sioux in the North-West Territories
  XII. The Administration of the Treaties--The Half-breeds--The
          Future of the Indian Tribes
       APPENDIX--Texts of the Treaties and Supplementary
          Adhesions thereto



THE TREATIES WITH THE INDIANS OF MANITOBA, THE NORTH-WEST
TERRITORIES, AND KEE-WA-TIN, IN THE DOMINION OF CANADA.


INTRODUCTION

One of the gravest of the questions presented for solution by the
Dominion of Canada, when the enormous region of country formerly
known as the North-West Territories and Rupert's Land, was
entrusted by the Empire of Great Britain and Ireland to her rule,
was the securing the alliance of the Indian tribes, and maintaining
friendly relations with them. The predecessors of Canada--the
Company of Adventurers of England trading into Hudson's Bay,
popularly known as the Hudson's Bay Company--had, for long years,
been eminently successful in securing the good-will of the
Indians--but on their sway, coming to an end, the Indian mind was
disturbed. The events, that transpired in the Red River region, in
the years 1869-1870, during the period when a provisional
government was attempted to be established, had perplexed the
Indians. They, moreover, had witnessed a sudden irruption into the
country of whites from without. In the West, American traders
poured into the land, and, freighted with fire-water, purchased
their peltries and their horses, and impoverished the tribes. In
the East, white men took possession of the soil and made for
themselves homes, and as time went on steamboats were placed on the
inland waters--surveyors passed through the territories--and the
"speaking wires," as the Indian calls the telegraph, were erected.
What wonder that the Indian mind was disturbed, and what wonder was
it that a Plain chief, as he looked upon the strange wires
stretching through his land, exclaimed to his people, "We have done
wrong to allow that wire to be placed there, before the Government
obtained our leave to do so. There is a white chief at Red River,
and that wire speaks to him, and if we do anything wrong he will
stretch out a long arm and take hold of us before we can get away."
The government of Canada had, anticipating the probabilities of
such a state of affairs, wisely resolved, that contemporaneously
with the formal establishment of their rule, there should be formed
alliances with the Indians. In 1870 the Parliament of Canada
created the requisite machinery for the Government of the Province
of Manitoba and of the North-West Territories respectively, giving
to the former a Lieutenant-Governor and Legislature, and to
the latter, a Lieutenant-Governor and Council, Executive and
Legislative--the Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba being ex officio
Lieutenant-Governor of the North-West Territories. Subsequently the
North-West Territories were erected into a distinct government,
with a Lieutenant-Governor and Executive, and Legislative Council.
The District of Kee-wa-tin, "the land of the north wind," was also
established, comprising the eastern and northern portions of the
Territories, and placed under the control of the Lieutenant-Governor
of Manitoba, and an Executive and Legislative Council. Since 1870,
no less than seven treaties have been concluded, with the Indian
tribes, so that there now remain no Indian nations in the North-West,
inside of the fertile belt, who have not been dealt with.

It is the design of the present work to tell the story of these
treaties, to preserve as far as practicable, a record of the
negotiations on which they were based, and to present to the many
in the Dominion and elsewhere, who take a deep interest in these
sons of the forest and the plain, a view of their habits of thought
and speech, as thereby presented, and to suggest the possibility,
nay, the certainty, of a hopeful future for them.

Prior to proceeding to deal, with the treaties of the Dominion of
Canada, it will render this book more complete to present the
reader, with information as to three treaties which preceded those
of the Dominion, viz., the treaty made by the Earl of Selkirk in
the year 1817, those popularly known as the Robinson Treaties, made
by the late Hon. William B. Robinson, of the City of Toronto, with
the Indians of the shores and islands of Lakes Superior and Huron
in the year 1850, and that made by the Hon. William Macdougall, for
the surrender of the Indian title, to the great Manitoulin Island,
both acting for and on behalf of the Government of the late
Province of Canada.

Ere however entering upon an explanation of these two first-mentioned
treaties, I submit a few brief observations.

The Indians inhabiting the region covered by the treaties in
question, extending in Canadian territory from Lake Superior to the
foot of the Rocky Mountains, are composed of distinct tribes having
different languages.

The Ojibbewas, Chippawas, or Saulteaux as they now call themselves,
are found in numbers in the District of Kee-wa-tin and the Province
of Manitoba. In the North-West Territories they are not numerous
except within the limits of Treaty number Four. These Indians
migrated from the older Provinces of Quebec and Ontario many years
ago.

The Crees, inhabit the North-West Territories and are divided into
Plain, Wood and Swampy Crees, according to the region of the
country they dwell in. The Swampy Crees reside in Manitoba and
Kee-wa-tin.

The Black Feet nation are to be found towards the slope of the
Rocky Mountains, in the region comprised within the limits of the
Treaty number Seven.

A few Chippawayans, or Northerners, dwell within the North-West
Territories.

The once powerful nation of the Assiniboines, or Stonies--a kindred
tribe to the Sioux--are greatly reduced in numbers, and are now
only to be met with in the North-West Territories.

The Sioux in the Dominion are refugees from the United States, the
first body having come over some fourteen years ago. A large influx
of similar refugees, have recently fled to the Dominion from, the
same country, as the issue of the recent war between the United
States and the Sioux.



CHAPTER I

THE SELKIRK TREATY


In the year 1811, the Earl of Selkirk purchased [Footnote:
Vide Appendix for copy of the agreement in question.] from the
Governor and Company of Adventurers trading into Hudson's Bay,
in consideration of ten shillings and certain agreements and
understandings contained in the Indenture, a large tract of
territory within Rupert's Land described in the Indenture as
follows:

"All that tract of land or territory being within and forming part
of the aforesaid lands and territories of the said Governor and
Company, bounded by an imaginary line running as follows, that
is to say, beginning on the western shore of the Lake Winnipic,
otherwise Winnipeg, at a point in fifty-two degrees and thirty
north latitude and thence running due west to the Lake Winnipegoos,
otherwise called Little Winnipeg, then in a southerly direction
through the said Lake so as to strike its western shore in latitude
fifty-two degrees, then due west to the place where the parallel of
fifty-two degrees north latitude intersects the western branch of
Red River, otherwise called Assiniboine River, then due south from
that point of intersection to the height of land which separates
the waters running into Hudson's Bay from those of the Missouri and
Mississippi, then in an easterly direction along the said height
of land to the source of the River Winnipic, or Winnipeg (meaning
by such last named river the principal branch of the waters which
unite in Lake Sagenagos), thence along the main stream of these
waters and the middle of the several lakes through which they
flow to the mouth of the Winnipic River and thence in a northerly
direction through the middle of Lake Winnipic to the place of
beginning." The deed is accompanied by a map intended to show the
tract of country, and there is an endorsement on the map that
as the surveys were not sufficient to ascertain with precision
whether, latitude 52 degrees does intersect the river called Red or
Assiniboine River, it was agreed, that in case the waters of of Red
River, shall on more accurate survey be found, not to extend so far
north as latitude 52 degrees, then the west boundary of the tract
of land intended to be within the grant, should be a line drawn due
north and south, through the post upon the Red River, marked on the
plan is "Carlton House."

The Company reserved the right to call upon the Earl to set off
one-tenth, however, of the tract for the use of the servants of
the Company--and the Earl covenanted, within ten years, to settle
within the tract one thousand families, each of them consisting of
one married couple at the least, on pain of revocation of the
grant, if on receipt of notice to that effect from the Company he
did not, within three years after the receipt of the notice,
complete the settlement of the one thousand families.

In pursuance of his obligations, Lord Selkirk, in the autumn of the
year 1811, sent out a number of families from the County of
Sutherland, in Scotland, who spent the winter at Fort Churchill on
the western shore of Hudson's Bay. On the arrival of spring, they
travelled thence to the confluence of the Assiniboine and Red
Rivers, and thus was commenced the interesting settlement of the
Red River, which is now included in the Province of Manitoba. It is
not my purpose to notice here the eventful history of the Selkirk
colonists, and I will only note the fact that in 1836, the Company
bought back the whole tract, from the heirs of Lord Selkirk, for
the sum of L84,000, the rights of colonists who had purchased land
between 1811 and 1836, being respected.

In the year 1817 the Earl of Selkirk, visited his wide domain,
and entered into negotiations with the Indian tribes, for the
extinction of their title, to a tract of land described as follows:

[Footnote: A large portion of the ceded territory is now
comprehended in the Territory of Dakota, United States.] "All
that tract of land adjacent to Red River and Assiniboine River,
beginning at the mouth of Red River and extending along the same
as far as Great Forks at the mouth of Red Lake River and along
Assiniboine River as far as the Musk Rat River, otherwise called
Riviere des Champignons, and extending to the distance of six miles
from Fort Douglas on every side, and likewise from Fort Doer, and
also from the Great Forks and in other posts extending in breadth
to the distance of two English statute miles back from the banks of
the river."

The Indians then inhabiting the region were described as being of
the Chippawa or Saulteaux and Killistine or Cree nations. They were
made to comprehend, the depth of the land they were surrendering,
by being told, that it was the greatest distance, at which a horse
on the level prairie could be seen, or daylight seen under his
belly between his legs. The consideration for the surrender, was,
the payment of one hundred pounds of good merchantable tobacco, to
each nation annually.

The treaty was signed by Lord Selkirk and by five Indian chiefs,
who affixed thereto drawings of the animals after which they were
named, by way of signature, a fac simile of which will be found
elsewhere. The surrender was to the Sovereign Lord, King George the
Third. The treaty was accompanied by a map which shows that the
tract surrendered extended to Grand Forks in what is now United
States territory. A copy of the treaty will be found in the
Appendix and will prove of interest.



CHAPTER II

THE ROBINSON TREATIES


In consequence of the discovery of minerals, on the shores of Lakes
Huron and Superior, the Government of the late Province of Canada,
deemed it desirable, to extinguish the Indian title, and in order
to that end, in the year 1850, entrusted the duty to the late
Honorable William B. Robinson, who discharged his duties with great
tact and judgment, succeeding in making two treaties, which were
the forerunners of the future treaties, and shaped their course.
The main features of the Robinson Treaties--viz., annuities,
reserves for the Indians, and liberty to fish and hunt on the
unconceded domain of the Crown--having been followed in these
treaties. A special feature of the Robinson Treaties, was the
adjustment of a claim made by the Indians to be paid, the amount
received, by the Government, for the sale of mining locations. This
was arranged, by Mr. Robinson, agreeing to pay them, the sum of
L4,000 and an annuity of about L1,000, thus avoiding any dispute
that might arise as to the amounts actually received by the
Government. The number of Indians included in the treaties were
stated by Mr. Robinson to be: on Lake Superior, 1240, including 84
half-breeds; and on Lake Huron 1422, including 200 half-breeds.
[Footnote: The census return of the Department of the Interior
for the year 1878 gives the numbers of these Indians as follows:
Chippawas of Lake Superior ... 1,947. Chippawas of Lake Huron ...
1,458.] The relations of the Indians and half-breeds, have long
been cordial; and in the negotiations as to these initial treaties,
as in the subsequent ones, the claims of the half-breeds, to
recognition, was urged by the Indians.

I cannot do better, in giving information with regard to these
treaties, than simply to reproduce the Report of Mr. Robinson to
the Honorable Colonel Bruce, Superintendent-General of Indian
Affairs, in which he describes the course of his negotiations and
communicates their results. A copy of the treaties will be found in
the Appendix. The Report is as follows:

TORONTO, 24th September, 1850.

Sir:--I have the honor herewith to transmit the Treaty which on
the part of the Government I was commissioned to negotiate with
the tribes of Indians inhabiting the northern shore of Lakes Huron
and Superior; and I trust that the terms on which I succeeded in
obtaining the surrender of all the lands in question, with the
exception of some small reservations made by the Indians, may be
considered satisfactory. They were such as I thought it advisable
to offer, in order that the matter might be finally settled,
without having any just grounds of complaint on the part of the
Indians.

The Indians had been advised by certain interested parties to
insist on such extravagant terms as I felt it quite impossible to
grant; and from the fact that the American Government had paid
very liberally for the land surrendered by their Indians on the
south side of Lake Superior, and that our own in other parts of the
country were in receipt of annuities much larger than I offered, I
had some difficulty in obtaining the assent of a few of the chiefs
to my proposition.

I explained to the chiefs in council the difference between the
lands ceded heretofore in this Province and those then under
consideration, they were of good quality and sold readily at
prices which enabled the Government to be more liberal, they were
also occupied by the whites in such a manner as to preclude the
possibility of the Indian hunting over or having access to them
whereas the lands now ceded are notoriously barren and sterile, and
will in all probability never be settled except in a few localities
by mining companies, whose establishments among the Indians,
instead of being prejudicial, would prove of great benefit as they
would afford a market for any things they may have to sell, and
bring provisions and stores of all kinds among them at reasonable
prices.

Neither did the British Government contemplate the removal of the
Indians from their present haunts to some (to them) unknown region
in the far West, as had been the case with their brethren on the
American side.

I told them that the two chiefs who were in Toronto last winter
(Shinguacouse and Nebennigoebing) only asked the amount which the
Government had received for mining locations, after deducting the
expenses attending their sale. That amount was about eight thousand
pounds which the Government would pay them without any annuity
or certainty of further benefit; or one-half of it down, and an
annuity of about one thousand pounds.

There were twenty-one chiefs present, about the same number of
principal men, and a large number of other Indians belonging to
the different bands, and they all preferred the latter proposition,
though two of them (Shinguacouse and Nebennigoebing) insisted on
receiving an annuity equal to ten dollars per head.

The chiefs from Lake Superior desired to treat separately for their
territory and said at once in council that they accepted my offer.
I told them that I would have the treaty ready on the following
morning, and I immediately proceeded to prepare it, and as agreed
upon they signed it cheerfully at the time appointed.

I then told the chiefs from Lake Huron (who were all present when
the others signed) that I should have a similar treaty ready for
their signature, the next morning when those who signed it would
receive their money; and that as a large majority of them had
agreed to my terms I should abide by them.

I accordingly prepared the treaty and proceeded on the morning of
the ninth instant to the council-room to have it formally executed
in the presence of proper witnesses--all the chiefs and others were
present. I told them I was then ready to receive their signatures;
the two chiefs, Shinguacouse and Nebennigoebing, repeated their
demand of ten dollars a head by way of annuity, and also insisted
that I should insert in the treaty a condition securing to some
sixty half-breeds a free grant of one hundred acres of land each.
I told them they already had my answer as to a larger annuity, and
that I had no power to give them free grants of land. The other
chiefs came forward to sign the treaty and seeing this the two who
had resisted up to this time also came to the table and signed
first, the rest immediately following.

I trust his Excellency will approve of my having concluded the
treaty on the basis of a small annuity and the immediate and final
settlement of the matter, rather than paying the Indians the full
amount of all moneys on hand, and a promise of accounting to them
for future sales. The latter course would have entailed much
trouble on the Government, besides giving an opportunity to evil
disposed persons to make the Indians suspicious of any accounts
that might be furnished.

Believing that His Excellency and the Government were desirous
of leaving the Indians no just cause of complaint on their
surrendering the extensive territory embraced in the treaty, and
knowing there were individuals who most assiduously endeavored to
create dissatisfaction among them, I inserted a clause securing to
them certain prospective advantages should the lands in question
prove sufficiently productive at any future period to enable the
Government without loss to increase the annuity. [Footnote: The
annuities under these treaties have recently been increased, the
following item having been inserted in the Supplies Act of Canada,
viz., "Annual grant to bring up annuities payable under the
Robinson Treaty to the Chippawas of Lakes Huron and Superior, from
96 cents to $4 per head, $14,000."] This was so reasonable and just
that I had no difficulty in making them comprehend it, and it in a
great measure silenced the clamor raised by their evil advisers.

In allowing the Indians to retain reservations of land for their
own use I was governed by the fact that they in most cases asked
for such tracts as they had heretofore been in the habit of using
for purposes of residence and cultivation, and by securing these to
them and the right of hunting and fishing over the ceded territory,
they cannot say that the Government takes from their usual means of
subsistence and therefore have no claims for support, which they no
doubt would have preferred, had this not been done. The reservation
at Garden River is the largest and perhaps of most value, but as
it is occupied by the most numerous band of Indians, and from its
locality (nine miles from the Sault) is likely to attract others
to it, I think it was right to grant what they expressed a desire
to retain. There are two mining locations at this place, which
should not be finally disposed of unless by the full consent of
Shinguacouse and his band; they are in the heart of the village and
shew no indications of mineral wealth, they are numbered 14 and 15
on the small map appended to Messrs. Anderson and Vidal's report.
I pledged my word on the part of the Government that the sale of
these locations should not be completed, and as the locatees have
not, I believe, complied with the conditions of the Crown Lands
Department there can be no difficulty in cancelling the
transaction.

The chiefs are desirous that their several reservations should
be marked by proper posts or monuments, and I have told them the
Government would probably send some one next spring for that
purpose. As I know many of the localities I shall be able to give
the necessary information when required.

When at Sault Ste. Marie last May, I took measures for ascertaining
as nearly as possible the number of Indians inhabiting the
north shore of the two lakes; and was fortunate enough to get
a very correct census, particularly of Lake Superior. I found
this information very useful at the council, as it enabled me
successfully to contradict the assertion (made by those who were
inciting the chiefs to resist my offers) that there were on Lake
Superior alone, eight thousand Indians. The number on that lake,
including eighty-four half-breeds, is only twelve hundred and
forty--and on Lake Huron, about fourteen hundred and twenty-two,
including probably two hundred half-breeds, and when I paid the
Indians they acknowledged they knew of no other families than
those on my list.

The number paid, as appears on the pay list, does not show the
whole strength of the different bands, as I was obliged at their
own request to omit some members of the very large families.
I have annexed to this Report the names of the chiefs, their
localities, and number of souls in each band as recognized by me
in apportioning the money, thinking it will be useful when paying
the annuity hereafter.

This information may I believe be fully relied on for Lake
Superior, but the census for Lake Huron is not so perfect; and I
would suggest that Captain Ironside should be furnished with copies
of that document and also of the pay-lists in order that he may
correct in time any errors that are found to exist.

As the half-breeds at Sault Ste. Marie and other places may seek to
be recognized by the Government in future payments, it may be well
that I should state here the answer that I gave to their demands on
the present occasion. I told them I came to treat with the chiefs
who were present, that the money would be paid to them--and their
receipt was sufficient for me--that when in their possession they
might give as much or as little to that class of claimants as they
pleased. To this no one, not even their advisers, could object,
and I heard no more on the subject. At the earnest request of the
chiefs themselves I undertook the distribution of the money among
their respective bands and all parties expressed themselves
perfectly satisfied with my division of their funds.

On my arrival at Penetanguishene I found the chiefs Yellowhead and
Snake, from Lake Simcoe, and Aissance, from Beausoleil's Island,
waiting to see me, to prefer their claim to a small tract of land
between Penetanguishene and the vicinity of the River Severn. I
was aware of their intending to make such a claim and took the
precaution of asking the chiefs assembled in council at the Sault
whether it was well founded, they emphatically declared that those
chiefs had no claim on Lake Huron, that they had long since ceded
their lands and were in the receipt of a large annuity, this I
believe to be the case and Captain Anderson, whom I met there,
is of the same opinion; but I promised to inquire into it and
give them an answer, and I will therefore thank you to cause the
necessary information from your office to be furnished to me on the
subject. Should it appear that these chiefs have any claim I think
I could get their surrender of it for a small amount, and there
remain sufficient funds at my disposal for the purpose.

The Canadians resident on the lands just surrendered at Sault Ste.
Marie are very anxious to obtain titles to the land on which they
have long resided and made improvements; they applied to me after
the treaty and I advised them to memorialize the Government the
usual way setting forth the manner in which they were put in
possession by the military authorities of the time, and that I had
little doubt that the Government would do them justice. I think the
survey of the tract should be made so as to interfere as little as
possible with their respective clearings and that those who can
show a fair claim to the favorable consideration of the Government
should be liberally dealt with.

It will be seen on referring to the treaty that I have kept within
the amount at my disposal. Of the L4,160 agreed by me to be paid
to the Indians of both lakes, there remains L75 unexpended. I could
not from the information I possessed tell exactly the number of
families I should have to pay, and thought it prudent to reserve a
small sum to make good any omissions, there may still be a few who
will prefer claims, though I know of none at present. If not, the
amount can be paid next year with the annuity to such families as
are most deserving; or it may be properly applied in extinguishing
the claim made by the Lake Simcoe Indians, should it appear on
inquiry to be just.

The whole amount given to me in August was L5,033 6s. 8d., of this
sum their remains L800, which I have placed in the Bank of Upper
Canada to the credit of the Receiver-General, and I have prepared
a detailed account of the whole, which with the proper vouchers, I
shall deliver to the Accountant of the Crown Lands Department.

I have much pleasure in acknowledging the valuable assistance
afforded me by all the officers of the Honorable the Hudson's Bay
Company resident on the lakes; and the prompt manner in which their
Governor, Sir George Simpson, kindly placed their services at my
disposal.

The report made last year by Messrs. Anderson and Vidal I found of
much use to me, and the long services and experience of the former
gentleman in Indian affairs enabled him to give me many valuable
suggestions.

Captain Cooper and his officers by attending at the council, and
otherwise, gave me most cheerfully all the aid in their power;
and Captain Ironside, of your Department, with his assistant,
Assickinach, were of essential service to me.

I found it absolutely necessary to have the aid of some one in
taking the census of the Lake Huron Indians at the time they were
receiving their presents at Manitoulin; and as Captain Ironside
was fully occupied in attending to his own duty, I requested Mr.
Keating, who had long known the Indians on that lake, to give me
his assistance. This he cheerfully and very efficiently did, and
afterwards was with me in distributing and paying out the money.

I have, in course of my negotiations with the Indians on the
present occasion, collected some information which may be useful
to your Department and will at an early day send it to you.

I will thank you to lay the two treaties accompanying this Report
before His Excellency, and trust they may meet with his approval.

                                    I have, &c.,
                                (Signed)       W. B. ROBINSON.
  THE HON. COL. BRUCE,
       Superintendent-General, Indian Affairs.



CHAPTER III

THE MANITOULIN ISLAND TREATY


Some years after the completion of the Robinson Treaties, the then
Government of the old Province of Canada deemed it desirable to
effect a treaty with the Indians dwelling upon the Great Manitoulin
Island in Lake Huron, as a complement to the former treaties, and
with the object of rendering available for settlement the large
tract of good land upon the Island. The duty was entrusted to the
Honorable William McDougall, then Superintendent-General of Indian
Affairs, who, in the month of October, 1862, proceeded to the
Island, accompanied by the late William Spragge, Esq., Deputy
Superintendent of Indian Affairs, and Mr. F. Assicknack, of the
Indian Office, Toronto, as interpreter. Mr. McDougall encountered
considerable difficulties, but by firmness and decision eventually
succeeded in obtaining a surrender from the Indians of the Island,
excluding however from the surrender that portion of it easterly of
Heywood Island and the Manitoulin Gulf.

The terms of the treaty, which will be found in the Appendix, were
adapted to the peculiar circumstances of the Indians and were well
and wisely framed. The result has been to render available for
settlement a large tract of land on the Island, much of which is
now occupied by a prosperous and thriving population. I conclude
this brief notice of an important treaty by submitting, to the
attention of the reader, the report of the Hon. W. McDougall, to
His Excellency the Governor-General in Council, of the results of
his mission.

MANITOULIN ISLAND, November 3rd, 1862.

The undersigned has the honor to state for the information of
His Excellency the Governor-General in Council, that, under the
authority of the Order in Council of the twelfth day of September,
1862, he proceeded early in the month of October last to visit the
Great Manitoulin Island, accompanied by William Spragge, Esq.,
Deputy Superintendent of Indian Affairs, and Mr. F. Assicknack of
the Indian Office, Toronto, as interpreter.

The resident agent, Captain Ironside, under instructions from the
Department, had caused the Indians residing on the Island to be
notified of the intended visit of the undersigned, and of its
object and had summoned them to attend at Manitowaning on the
fourth ultimo.

The Chiefs and principal men, with the exception of one or two
detained by illness and nearly all the males above the age of
eighteen years, were present at the council.

The undersigned stated the object of his visit, explained the
wishes of the Government in regard to the settlement of the Island,
and proposed the terms in respect to the Indians specified in the
Order in Council authorizing the negotiation. The Indians had
selected one of their Chiefs to reply to the overtures of the
Government, and without taking time to consider these overtures he
proceeded to announce the determination of the Indians to reject
them unconditionally.

The undersigned made some further explanations and directed an
ajournment of the council for an hour, during which time the
Indians were requested to consider the propositions he had made
with care and deliberation.

On re-assembling there was an evident disposition among the bands
living westwardly of the place of meeting to listen favorably to
the propositions of the Government, but the majority were still
unwilling to treat, and by intimidation and threats of violence
prevented any open expression of opinion except by the old war
Chief, Assicknack, who declared his full assent to the wishes of
the Government.

Ascertaining that the Chief's opposition came from Indians living
eastwardly of Heywood Sound, the undersigned determined to modify
the propositions of the Government, so as to meet in some degree
the objections from that quarter.

He accordingly adjourned the council until the following Monday,
the first day of meeting being Saturday, informing the Indians that
those who were disposed to continue the negotiations would remain
while those who had resolved to reject every proposition of the
Government might go home. He also informed them that no threats or
intimidation would be allowed, and that any one who should attempt
violence would be surely punished. Nearly all the Indians remained
or returned on Monday, and being apprised of the nature of the
proposition the undersigned intended to submit, namely, to exclude
that part of the island eastwardly of the Manitoulin Gulf and
Heywood Sound from the proposed agreement, they came to the
adjourned meeting in a more friendly mood and expressed their
willingness to surrender for sale and settlement all that part of
the island westwardly of the Gulf and Sound.

The undersigned submits herewith the deed or instrument which embodies
the agreement made and concluded between the respective parties. It
was executed by the undersigned and the Deputy-Superintendent of
Indian Affairs on behalf of the Government, and by nineteen of the
Chiefs and principal men on behalf of the Indians.

In consequence of the modification of the terms of agreement
authorized by the Order in Council as above-mentioned and the
addition of other terms deemed necessary to prevent future
difficulty, and which will be found in the instrument, the
undersigned caused a provision to be inserted that it was not to
take effect until approved by the Governor-General in Council.

The undersigned therefore now begs to submit the same for such
approval.

                      (Signed)      WM. McDOUGALL,
                        Superintendent-General of Indian Affairs.



CHAPTER IV

THE STONE FORT AND MANITOBA POST TREATIES NUMBERS ONE AND TWO


In the year 1871, the late Honorable Joseph Howe, then Secretary of
State of Canada, recommended the appointment by the Privy Council
of Canada, of Mr. Wemyss McKenzie Simpson, as Indian Commissioner,
in consequence of "the necessity of arranging with the bands of
Indians inhabiting the tract of country between Thunder Bay and the
Stone Fort, for the cession, subject to certain reserves such as
they should select, of the lands occupied by them." Mr. Simpson
accepted the appointment, and in company with Messrs. S. J. Dawson
and Robert Pether visited the Ojjibewas or Chippawa Indians,
between Thunder Bay and the north-west angle of the Lake of the
Woods, and took the initiatory steps for securing a treaty with
them thereafter. On his arrival at Fort Garry, he put himself, as
directed by his instructions, in communication with his Honor, the
Hon. A. G. Archibald, then Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba and the
North-West Territories. A conference took place between His Honor,
Messrs. Simpson, Dawson and Pether, and the Hon. James McKay, a
member, at that time, of the Executive Council of Manitoba, and
himself a half-breed intimately acquainted with the Indian tribes,
and possessed of much influence over them. The Indians in Manitoba,
in the fall of 1870, had applied to the Lieutenant-Governor to
enter into a treaty with them, and had been informed that in the
ensuing year negotiations would be opened with them. They were
full of uneasiness, owing to the influx of population, denied
the validity of the Selkirk Treaty, and had in some instances
obstructed settlers and surveyors. In view of the anxiety and
uneasiness prevailing, those gentlemen were of opinion "that it was
desirable to secure the extinction of the Indian title not only
to the lands within Manitoba, but also to so much of the timber
grounds east and north of the Province as were required for
immediate entry and use, and also of a large tract of cultivable
ground west of the Portage, where there were very few Indian
inhabitants." It was therefore resolved to open negotiations at the
Lower Fort Garry, or Stone Fort, with the Indians of the Province,
and certain adjacent timber districts, and with the Indians of the
other districts at Manitoba Post, a Hudson's Bay fort, at the north
end of Lake Manitoba, the territory being occupied principally by
one nation, the Chippawas, of whom the Saulteaux of the lakes are a
branch, although there are also a number of Swampy Crees resident
within it.

Mr. Simpson accordingly issued proclamations, inviting the Indians
to meet him on the 25th of July and 17th of August, 1871, at
these points respectively, to negotiate an Indian treaty. The
Lieutenant-Governor also issued a proclamation forbidding the sale
or gift of intoxicating liquors during the negotiation of the
treaty, and applied to Major Irvine to detail a few of the troops
under his command to preserve order, which request was acceded to.

The Lieutenant-Governor and Mr. Simpson arrived at the Stone Fort
on the 24th of July, 1871, but as the Indians had not all arrived
the meeting was postponed till the 27th, when a thousand Indians
were found to have assembled, and a considerable number of
half-breeds and other inhabitants of the country were present,
awaiting with anxiety to learn the policy of the Government.

Lieutenant-Governor Archibald, after the Indians were assembled
opened the proceedings by delivering the following address:

"On the 13th September last, on my first arrival in the country,
I met a number of you at the mission, I told you I could not then
negotiate a Treaty with the Indians, but that I was charged by your
Great Mother, the Queen, to tell you that she had been very glad
to see that you had acted during the troubles like good and true
children of your Great Mother. I told you also that as soon as
possible you would all be called together to consider the terms of
a treaty to be entered into between you and your Great Mother.

"I advised you to disperse to your homes, and gave you some
ammunition to enable you to gain a livelihood during the winter
by hunting.

"I promised that in the spring you would be sent for, and that
either I, or some person directly appointed to represent your Great
Mother, should be here to meet you, and notice would be given you
when to convene at this place to talk over what was right to be
done.

"Early in the spring, Mr. Simpson, who sits beside me, was made
Commissioner. He left his home at once for this Province, by Rainy
Lake and the Lake of the Woods.

"The Indians of the lake districts meet, as you know, on Rainy
River yearly, about the 20th June, to fish for sturgeon, I and they
could not be called together sooner.

"Mr. Simpson met them there at that time, and talked over their
affairs with them, and made certain arrangements with them. He then
hurried on to see you, and reached this Province a week ago last
Sunday. He then sent messengers at once to all the Indians within
certain bounds, asking them to meet him here on the 25th day of
July. Some of you were unable to come so soon, and he has
therefore, at the instance of those who were here, waited till
to-day to open the talk. I believe that now you are all arrived,
and ready to proceed to business.

"It will be the duty of the Commissioner to talk to you on the
particular details of the treaty, and I will give place to him
presently, but there are one or two things of a general kind which
I would like, before I close, to bring to your notice, for you to
think about among yourselves.

"First. Your Great Mother, the Queen, wishes to do justice to all
her children alike. She will deal fairly with those of the setting
sun, just as she would with those of the rising sun. She wishes
order and peace to reign through all her country, and while her arm
is strong to punish the wicked man, her hand is also open to reward
the good man everywhere in her Dominions.

"Your Great Mother wishes the good of all races under her sway. She
wishes her red children to be happy and contented. She wishes them
to live in comfort. She would like them to adopt the habits of the
whites, to till land and raise food, and store it up against a
time of want. She thinks this would be the best thing for her red
children to do, that it would make them safer from famine and
distress, and make their homes more comfortable.

"But the Queen, though she may think it good for you to adopt
civilized habits, has no idea of compelling you to do so. This she
leaves to your choice, and you need not live like the white man
unless you can be persuaded to do so of your own free will. Many
of you, however, are already doing this.

"I drove yesterday through the village below this Fort. There I saw
many well-built houses, and many well-tilled fields with wheat and
barley and potatoes growing, and giving promise of plenty for the
winter to come. The people who till these fields and live in these
houses are men of your own race, and they shew that you can live
and prosper and provide like the white man.

"What I say in my drive is enough to prove that even if there was
not a buffalo or a fur bearing animal in the country, you could
live and be surrounded with comfort by what you can raise from
the soil.

"Your Great Mother, therefore, will lay aside for you 'lots' of
land to be used by you and your children forever. She will not
allow the white man to intrude upon these lots. She will make rules
to keep them for you, so that as long as the sun shall shine, there
shall be no Indian who has not a place that he can call his home,
where he can go and pitch his camp or if he chooses build his house
and till his land.

"These reserves will be large enough, but you must not expect them
to be larger than will be enough to give a farm to each family,
where farms shall be required. They will enable you to earn a
living should the chase fail, and should you choose to get your
living by tilling, you must not expect to have included in your
reserve more of hay grounds than will be reasonably sufficient for
your purposes in case you adopt the habits of farmers. The old
settlers and the settlers that are coming in, must be dealt with on
the principles of fairness and justice as well as yourselves. Your
Great Mother knows no difference between any of her people. Another
thing I want you to think over is this: in laying aside these
reserves, and in everything else that the Queen shall do for you,
you must understand that she can do for you no more than she has
done for her red children in the East. If she were to do more for
you that would be unjust for them. She will not do less for you
because you are all her children alike, and she must treat you all
alike.

"When you have made your treaty you will still be free to hunt over
much of the land included in the treaty. Much of it is rocky and
unfit for cultivation, much of it that is wooded is beyond the
places where the white man will require to go, at all events for
some time to come. Till these lands are needed for use you will
be free to hunt over them, and make all the use of them which you
have made in the past. But when lands are needed to be tilled or
occupied, you must not go on them any more. There will still be
plenty of land that is neither tilled nor occupied where you can
go and roam and hunt as you have always done, and, if you wish to
farm, you will go to your own reserve where you will find a place
ready for you to live on and cultivate.

"There is another thing I have to say to you. Your Great Mother
cannot come here herself to talk with you, but she has sent a
messenger who has her confidence.

"Mr. Simpson will tell you truly all her wishes. As the Queen has
made her choice of a chief to represent her, you must, on your
part, point out to us the chiefs you wish to represent you, as the
persons you have faith in.

"Mr. Simpson cannot talk to all your braves and people, but when he
talks to chiefs who have your confidence he is talking to you all,
and when he hears the voice of one of your chiefs whom you name he
will hear the voice of you all. It is for you to say who shall talk
for you, and also who shall be your chief men. Let them be good
Indians, who know your wishes and whom you have faith in.

"You will look to the Commissioner to fulfil everything he agrees
to do, and the Queen will look to the chiefs you name to us, to see
that you keep your parts of the agreement.

"It is our wish to deal with you fairly and frankly.

"If you have any questions to ask, ask them, if you have anything
you wish the Queen to know, speak out plainly.

"Now chiefs and braves and people, I introduce to you Mr. Simpson,
who will say anything he thinks fit in addition to what I have
said.

"When you hear his voice you are listening to your Great Mother the
Queen, whom God bless and preserve long to reign over us."

Mr. Simpson also addressed them, and thereafter, in compliance with
a request of the Lieutenant-Governor, the Indians retired to select
their chiefs and principal spokesmen.

On the next day the conference was resumed, the chiefs and
spokesmen being presented. The Indians, on being asked to express
their views, "stated that there was a cloud before them which made
things dark, and they did not wish to commence the proceedings till
the cloud was dispersed." On inquiry it was ascertained that they
referred to the imprisonment of four Swampy Cree Indians, who
had been convicted under a local law, of breach of contract, as
boatmen, with the Hudson's Bay Company, and on default of payment
of a fine, had been sent to prison. The Lieutenant-Governor, as a
matter of favor, ordered the release of these prisoners, and the
sky became clear. Next day the Indians met again and declared that
they would never again raise their voice against the enforcement
of the law, but much difficulty was experienced in getting them
to understand the views of the Government--they wishing to have
two-thirds of the Province as a reserve. Eventually on the 3rd
of August, 1871, a treaty was concluded, its principal features
being the relinquishment to Her Majesty of the Indian title; the
reserving of tracts of land for the Indians, sufficient to furnish
160 acres of land to each family of five; providing for the
maintenance of schools, and prohibition of the sale of intoxicating
liquors on the reserves; a present of three dollars per head to the
Indians and the payment to them of an annuity of three dollars per
head. [Footnote: In consequence of misunderstandings having arisen,
owing to the Indians alleging that certain promises had been made
to them which were not specified in these treaties, a revision of
them became necessary, and was effected in 1875, as will be seen
reported hereafter.] (See copy of treaty which will be found in
the Appendix.) On the 21st of August Mr. Commissioner Simpson,
accompanied by the Lieutenant-Governor, the Hon. James McKay,
and Mr. Molyneux St. John (lately Sheriff of the North-West
Territories), met the Indians at Manitoba Post, and found them
disposed to accept the terms of the treaty made at the Stone Fort,
with which they had already become familiar, so that little time
was lost in effecting a treaty with them as they had no special
terms to prefer. By these two treaties, there was acquired by the
Crown, the extinguishment of the Indian title in Manitoba, and in
a tract of country fully equal in resources beyond it.

Having submitted these preliminary remarks, I conclude my notice
of these treaties by quoting, as matter alike of historical record
and practical interest, the despatches of Lieutenant-Governor
Archibald and the excellent and instructive report, addressed to
the Secretary of State by Mr. Simpson, embracing as it does a full
and graphic narrative of the proceedings which took place at the
negotiation of these treaties, and of the difficulties which were
encountered by the Commissioner, and the mode in which they were
overcome.

                     GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
                            SILVER HEIGHTS July 32nd, 1871.

Sir,--I have the honor to enclose you copy of a proclamation I have
caused to be issued with a view to prevent the danger arising from
intoxicating drinks being given to the Indians, on the occasion of
the meeting to negotiate a treaty.

I look upon the proceedings, we are now initiating as important
in their bearing upon our relations to the Indians of the whole
continent. In fact the terms we now agree upon will probably shape
the arrangements we shall have to make with all the Indians between
the Red River and the Rocky Mountains. It will therefore be well to
neglect nothing that is within our power to enable us to start
fairly with the negotiations.

With that view, I have, amongst other things, asked Major Irvine
to detail a few of his troops to be present at the opening of the
treaty. Military display has always a great effect on savages, and
the presence even of a few troops will have a good tendency.

I fear we shall have to incur a considerable expenditure for
presents of food, etc. during the negotiations; but any cost for
that purpose I shall deem a matter of minor consequence. The real
burden to be considered is that which has to be borne in each
recurring year.

I doubt if it will be found practicable to make arrangements upon
so favorable a basis as that prescribed by His Excellency the
Governor-General as the maximum to be allowed, in case of a treaty
with the Lake Indians.

Nor indeed would it be right, if we look to what we receive, to
measure the benefits we derive from coming into possession of the
magnificent territory we are appropriating here by what would be
fair to allow for the rocks and swamps and muskegs of the lake
country east of this Province.

But to this subject I shall probably take occasion to call your
attention at an early day.

                      I have etc.,
                                    ADAMS G. ARCHIBALD.
THE HONORABLE
    THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE PROVINCES,
                                        Ottawa.



LOWER FORT GARRY, July 20th, 1871.

Sir,--I have the honor to inform you that on Monday last I came to
this Fort with the Commissioner to meet the Indians called here,
with a view to negotiate a treaty, intending to open the business
on Tuesday morning.

It appeared, however, on inquiry, that some bands of Indians had
not arrived on Tuesday morning, and we were therefore obliged to
postpone the opening of the meeting till Thursday. On that day the
Indians from all the sections of the country to which the
invitation extended were found present to the number of about one
thousand. A considerable body of half-breeds and other inhabitants
of the country were also present, awaiting with some anxiety to
learn what should be announced as the policy of the Government.

I enclose you a memorandum of the observations with which I opened
the meeting. On reading them you will observe one or two points
which may require some explanation.

At the time of the treaty with the Earl of Selkirk, certain Indians
signed as Chiefs and representatives of their people. Some of the
Indians now deny that these men ever were Chiefs or had authority
to sign the treaty.

With a view therefore to avoid a recurrence of any such question we
asked the Indians, as a first step, to agree among themselves in
selecting their Chiefs and then to present them to us and have
their names and authority recorded.

Furthermore, the Indians seem to have false ideas of the meaning
of a reserve. They have been led to suppose that large tracts of
ground were to be set aside for them as hunting grounds, including
timber lands, of which they might sell the wood as if they were
proprietors of the soil.

I wished to correct this idea at the outset.

Mr. Simpson followed me with some observations in the same strain,
after which the Indians retired to select their Chiefs and
spokesmen.

On Friday morning the Chiefs and spokesmen were duly presented,
and after their names were recorded, the Indians were invited to
express their views.

After some delay they stated that there was a cloud before them
which made things dark, and they did not wish to commence the
proceedings till the cloud was dispersed.

On inquiring into their meaning, I found that they were referring
to some four of their number who were prisoners in gaol. It seems
that some Swampy Indians had entered into a contract with the
Hudson's Bay Company as boatmen, and had deserted, and had been
brought up before magistrates under a local law of last session,
and fined, and in default of payment sent to prison for forty days.

Of this term some considerable part had expired. A few of the
offenders had paid their fines, but there were still four Indians
remaining in prison.

On learning the facts I told the Indians that I could not listen
to them if they made a demand for the release of the Indians as a
matter of right; that every subject of the Queen, whether Indian,
half-breed or white, was equal in the eye of the law; that every
offender against the law must be punished, whatever race he
belonged to; but I said that on the opening of negotiations with
them the Queen would like to see all her Indians taking part in
them, and if the whole body present were to ask as a matter of
grace and favor, under the circumstances, that their brethren
should be released, Her Majesty would be willing to consent to
their discharge; she would grant as a favor what she must refuse if
asked for on any other ground. They replied by saying that they
begged it as a matter of favor only. Thereupon I acceded to their
request, and directed the discharge of the four Indians. This was
received with great satisfaction. I explained again, that there
might be no misunderstanding about it, that henceforth every
offender against the law must be punished. They all expressed their
acquiescence in what I said. The discharge of the prisoners had an
excellent effect.

Next morning the Indians, through one of their spokesmen, declared
in presence of the whole body assembled that from this time they
would never raise their voice against the law being enforced. After
the order of the release, the Chiefs and spokesmen addressed us
questions were asked and answered, and some progress made in the
negotiations. Eventually the meeting adjourned till this morning
at ten o'clock.

A general acquiescence in the views laid down by Mr. Simpson and
myself was expressed, but it was quite clear by the proceedings of
to-day, that our views were imperfectly apprehended. When we met
this morning, the Indians were invited to state their wishes as
to the reserves, they were to say how much they thought would be
sufficient, and whether they wished them all in one or in several
places.

In defining the limits of their reserves, so far as we could see,
they wished to have about two-thirds of the Province. We heard them
out, and then told them it was quite clear that they had entirely
misunderstood the meaning and intention of reserves. We explained
the object of these in something like the language of the
memorandum enclosed, and then told them it was of no use for
them to entertain any such ideas, which were entirely out of
the question. We told them that whether they wished it or not,
immigrants would come in and fill up the country; that every year
from this one twice as many in number as their whole people there
assembled would pour into the Province, and in a little while would
spread all over it, and that now was the time for them to come to
an arrangement that would secure homes and annuities for themselves
and their children.

We told them that what we proposed to allow them was an extent of
one hundred and sixty acres for each family of five, or in that
proportion; that they might have their land where they chose,
not interfering with existing occupants, that we should allow an
annuity of twelve dollars for every family of five, or in that
proportion per head. We requested them to think over these
propositions till Monday morning.

If they thought it better to have no treaty at all, they might do
without one, but they must make up their minds; if there was to be
a treaty, it must be on a basis like that offered.

That under some such arrangements, the Indians in the east were
living happy and contented enjoying themselves, drawing their
annuities, and satisfied with their position.

The observations seemed to command the acquiescence of the
majority, and on Monday morning we hope to meet them in a better
frame for the discussion and settlement of the treaty.

                 I have, etc.,
                                ADAMS G. ARCHIBALD.
The Honorable
    The Secretary of State for the Provinces.



LOWER FORT GARRY, MANITOBA, July 30th, 1871.

Sir,--I have the honor to inform you, for the information of His
Excellency the Governor-General, that I arrived in this Province on
the 16th instant, and, after consultation with the Lieutenant-Governor
of Manitoba, determined upon summoning the Indians of this part of the
country to a conference for the purpose of negotiating a treaty at
Lower Fort Garry, on Tuesday, the 25th instant, leaving for a future
date the negotiation with the Indians westward of and outside of the
Province of Manitoba.

Proclamations were issued, and every means taken to insure the
attendance of the Indians, and on Monday, the 24th instant, I
proceeded to Lower Fort Garry, where I met His Excellency the
Lieutenant-Governor.

On Tuesday, finding that only a small portion of the Indians had
arrived, we held a preliminary conference with Henry Prince--the
Chief of the Swampies and Chippewas residing on what is known as
the Indian Reserve, between Lower Fort Garry and Lake Winnipeg--at
which we arranged a meeting for the next day at twelve o'clock, for
the purpose of ascertaining the names of the Chiefs and head men of
the several tribes. At this preliminary conference, Henry Prince
said that he could not then enter upon any negotiations, as he was
not empowered to speak or act for those bands of Indians not then
present.

In the meantime it was found necessary to feed the Indians
assembled here, and accordingly provisions were purchased and
rations served out.

On Wednesday, the 26th, His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor and
myself met those Indians who had arrived, in council, and addressed
them with the view of explaining the purport of my commission, and
the matters which were to form the subject of a treaty.

It having been reported that the Indians who had not then arrived
were on their road here, we agreed that another meeting should take
place on the following day, at which the Chiefs and head men were
to be presented to us.

On Thursday, pursuant to appointment, we again met the Indians,
when the Chiefs and head men of the several bands present were
named and presented. I then explained to them the nature of
Indian reserves, and desired them to determine, in council among
themselves, the locality in which they desired their reserves to
be laid out.

On Friday, the 28th, we again met the Indians, but they were not
then prepared to state their demands, and another meeting was
appointed for Saturday.

On Saturday, the 29th, we again met them, all having by this time
arrived. When the subject of reserves came up, it was found that
the Indians had misunderstood the object of these reservations, for
their demands in this respect were utterly out of the question.
After a prolonged discussion with them, I consulted with the
Lieutenant-Governor, and determined to let them at once understand
the terms that I was prepared to offer and I pointed out that the
terms offered were those which would receive Her Majesty's consent.
On further explanation of the subject, the Indians appeared to be
satisfied, and willing to acquiesce in our arrangements as
hereinafter mentioned, and having given them diagrams showing the
size of the lots they would individually become possessed of, and
having informed them of the amount of their annuity, it was finally
settled that they should meet on Monday, the 31st and acquaint me
with their decision.

The reserves will comprise sufficient land to give each family of
five persons one hundred and sixty acres, or in like proportion
together with an annual payment in perpetuity of twelve dollars
for each family of five persons, or in like proportion.

As far as I can judge, I am inclined to think that the Indians will
accept these terms.

I am happy to be able to say that the precautions taken to prevent
the introduction of liquor amongst the Indians have been wholly
successful, and that perfect order and contentment have prevailed
up to the present time.

                        I have etc.
                                 WEMYSS M. SIMPSON,
                                      Indian Commissioner.
The Honorable
    The Secretary of State for the Provinces,
                                       Ottawa.



OTTAWA, November 3rd, 1871.

TO THE HONORABLE
     THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE PROVINCES,
                                   Ottawa

Sir,--I have the honor to submit to you, for the information of
His Excellency the Governor-General, a report of my negotiations
with the Indians of the Province of Manitoba, and with certain of
the Indians of the North-West Territory, entered upon by me, in
accordance with your instructions, dated 3rd May, 1871.

Having, in association with S. J. Dawson, Esq., and Robert Pether,
Esq., effected a preliminary arrangement with the Indians of Rainy
Lake, the particulars of which I have already had the honor of
reporting to you in my Report, dated July 11th, 1871, I proceeded
by the Lake of the Woods and Dawson Road to Fort Garry, at which
place I arrived on the 16th July.

Bearing in mind your desire that I should confer with the
Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba, I called upon Mr. Archibald, and
learned from him that the Indians were anxiously awaiting my
arrival, and were much excited on the subject of their lands being
occupied without attention being first given to their claims for
compensation. Amongst the settlers, also, an uneasy feeling
existed, arising partly from the often-repeated demands of the
Indians for a treaty with themselves, and partly from the fact that
certain settlers in the neighborhood of Portage la Prairie and
other parts of the Province, had been warned by the Indians not to
cut wood or otherwise take possession of the lands upon which they
were squatting. The Indians, it appeared, consented to their
remaining on their holdings until sufficient time had been allowed
for my arrival, and the conclusion of a treaty; but they were
unwilling to allow the settlers the free use of the country for
themselves or their cattle. Mr. Archibald and those residents in
the Province of Manitoba with whom I conversed on the subject,
appeared to think that no time should be lost in meeting the
Indians, as some assurances had already been given them that a
treaty would be made with them during the summer of 1871; and I
therefore, at once, issued notices calling certain of the Indians
together, naming two places at which I would meet them. The first
meeting, to which were asked the Indians of the Province and
certain others on the eastern side, was to be held on the 25th of
July, at the Stone Fort, a Hudson's Bay Company's Post, situated
on the Red River, about twenty miles northward of Fort Garry--a
locality chosen as being the most central for those invited. The
second meeting was appointed to be held on August 17th, at Manitoba
Post, a Hudson's Bay Company's Post, at the north-west extremity of
Lake Manitoba, as it was deemed that such of the bands of Indians
residing without the limits of the Province of Manitoba, as I
purposed to deal with at present, would meet there more readily
than elsewhere.

On Monday, the 24th of July, I met the Lieutenant-Governor of
Manitoba at the Stone Fort; but negotiations were unavoidably
delayed, owing to the fact that only one band of Indians had
arrived, and that until all were on the spot those present declined
to discuss the subject of a treaty, except in an informal manner.
Amongst these, as amongst other Indians with whom I have come in
contact, there exists great jealousy of one another, in all matters
relating to their communications with the officials of Her Majesty;
and in order to facilitate the object in view, it was most
desirable that suspicion and jealousy of all kinds should be
allayed. The fact of the Commissioner having arrived was sufficient
evidence of the good intentions of Her Majesty's Government, and it
seemed better to await the arrival of all whom I had summoned, than
to press matters to an issue while any were absent. This, however,
entailed the necessity of feeding those who were already there, and
others as they arrived.

It is customary in dealing with Indians to do so, and in this case
it was absolutely necessary, for, obviously, it would have been
impossible to invite those people from a distance, and then leave
them to starve at our doors, or, in search of food, to plunder the
neighborhood into which they had been introduced. At that season of
the year the Indians were not engaged in fishing or hunting, and
consequently large numbers of men, women and children attended at
the place of meeting, for all of whom food was provided. The price
of provisions, even at the lowest price for which they could be
obtained, was high, pork being fifty dollars a barrel, and flour
twenty shillings sterling per hundred, and such cattle as I was
able to purchase L16 per head, so that the expense of keeping
the Indians during the negotiation of treaty and payment of the
gratuity, which lasted eleven days, forms no small share of the
total expenditure. In addition to this expense, it was thought
necessary by the Lieutenant-Governor that Major Irvine commanding
the troops at Fort Garry should be requested to furnish a guard at
the Stone Fort during the negotiations, and that there should be at
hand, also, a force of constabulary, for the purpose of preventing
the introduction of liquor amongst the Indian encampments. Other
expenses of a somewhat similar nature were incurred, which would be
totally unnecessary upon any future occasion of payment being made
to the Indians of Manitoba. I may here refer to the apparently
prolonged duration of the first negotiation, and explain, in
reference thereto, the causes, or some of them, that entailed the
loss of time and attendant expense. For some time a doubt has
existed whether the Chief, nominally at the head of the Indians of
the Indian settlement, possessed the good will and confidence of
that band; and I thought it advisable to require that the several
bands of Indians should select such Chiefs as they thought proper,
and present these men as their authorized Chiefs, before anything
was said as to the terms of a treaty. The Indians having acquiesced
in this proposal, forthwith proceeded to such election; but the
proceeding apparently involved discussion and consideration amongst
themselves, and two days elapsed before the men chosen were
presented for recognition, and the business of the meeting
commenced.

When the peculiar circumstances surrounding the position of the
Indians of the Province were pointed out, the future of the country
predicted, and the views and intentions of the Government explained
by the Lieutenant-Governor and myself, the Indians professed a
desire for time to think over what had been said before making any
reply; and when their answer came it proved to contain demands of
such an exorbitant nature, that much time was spent in reducing
their terms to a basis upon which an arrangement could be made.

Every band had its spokesman in addition to its Chief, and each
seemed to vie with another in the dimensions of their requirements.
I may mention, as an illustration, that in the matter of reserves,
the quantity of land demanded for each band amounted to about three
townships per Indian, and included the greater part of the settled
portions of the Province. It was not until the 3rd of August, or
nine days after the first meeting, that the basis of arrangement
was arrived at, upon which is founded the treaty of that date.
Then, and by means of mutual concessions, the following terms were
agreed upon. For the cession of the country described in the treaty
referred to, and comprising the Province of Manitoba, and certain
country in the north-east thereof, every Indian was to receive a
sum of three dollars a year in perpetuity, and a reserve was to he
set apart for each band, of sufficient size to allow one hundred
and sixty acres to each family of five persons, or in like
proportion as the family might be greater or less than five. As
each Indian settled down upon his share of the reserve, and
commenced the cultivation of his land, he was to receive a plough
and harrow. Each Chief was to receive a cow and a male and female
of the smaller kinds of animals bred upon a farm. There was to be
a bull for the general use of each reserve. In addition to this,
each Chief was to receive a dress, a flag and a medal, as marks of
distinction; and each Chief, with the exception of Bozawequare, the
Chief of the Portage band, was to receive a buggy, or light spring
waggon. Two councillors and two braves of each band were to receive
a dress, somewhat inferior to that provided for the Chiefs, and
the braves and councillors of the Portage band excepted, were to
receive a buggy. Every Indian was to receive a gratuity of three
dollars, which, though given as a payment for good behaviour, was
to be understood to cover all dimensions for the past.

On this basis the treaty was signed by myself and the several Chiefs,
on behalf of themselves and their respective bands, on the 3rd of
August, 1871, and on the following day the payment commenced.

The three dollars gratuity, above referred to, will not occur in
the ordinary annual payments to the Indians of Manitoba, and,
though doubling the amount paid this year, may now properly be
regarded as belonging to a previous year, but only now liquidated.

A large number of Indians, entitled to share in the treaty, were
absent on the 3rd August, and in the belief that I should, almost
immediately, be able to obtain a more accurate knowledge than I
possessed of the numbers of the several bands, I paid to each
person present only three dollars--the gratuity--postponing for
a short time the first annual payment. Having completed this
disbursement, I prepared to start for Manitoba Post, to open
negotiations with the Indians on the immediate north and north-west
borders of the Province of Manitoba, promising however to visit the
several bands of the first treaty, in their own districts, and to
there pay them. By this means the necessity for their leaving their
own homes, and for the Government's feeding them while they were
being paid, and during their journey home, was avoided.

After completing the treaty at Manitoba Post, of which mention
is herein after made, I visited Portage la Prairie, the Indian
settlement at St. Peter's, Riviere Marais, and the Town of
Winnipeg, according to my promise, and at each place, with the
exception of Riviere Marais, found the Indians satisfied with the
treaty and awaiting their payment. At Riviere Marais, which was
the rendezvous appointed by the bands living in the neighborhood
of Pembina, I found that the Indians had either misunderstood the
advice given them by parties in the settlement, well disposed
towards the treaty, or, as I have some reason to believe had become
unsettled by the representations made by persons in the vicinity
of Pembina, whose interests lay elsewhere than in the Province of
Manitoba; for, on my announcing my readiness to pay them, they
demurred at receiving their money until some further concessions
had been made by me.

With a view to inducing the Indians to adopt the habits and labors
of civilization, it had been agreed, at the signing of the treaty
as before mentioned, to give certain animals as a nucleus for
stocking the several reserves, together with certain farming
implements; and it was now represented to me by the spokesman of
the bands, that as the Queen had, with that kindness of heart which
distinguished her dealings with her red children, expressed a
desire to see the Indians discard their former precarious mode of
living and adopt the agricultural pursuits of the white man, they
were desirous of acceding to the wish of their great Mother, and
were now prepared to receive the gifts she had been good enough to
speak of, through her Commissioner, in full. But, as it could make
no difference whatever to their great Mother whether these things
were given in kind or in money value, her red children of the
Pembina bands were resolved to receive them in the latter form.
I had put a valuation upon all the articles mentioned in the
supplement to the treaty, and could go no further in the matter
unless I was prepared to pay them for all these articles at the
rates they would now proceed to mention. I declined to comply
with the request, and they declined to receive their first annual
payment, whereupon I broke up my camp and returned to Winnipeg. As
I foresaw at the time this determination on their part was shortly
repented, and a number of their leading men were subsequently paid
at Winnipeg, while at the request of the Indians, the money for the
remainder, together with a pay sheet, was forwarded to the officer
in charge of the Hudson's Bay Company's Post at Pembina, with
instructions to pay the Indians as per list as each might present
himself. At Portage la Prairie, although the number paid at the
Stone Fort was largely increased, there still remained many who,
from absence or other causes, were not paid, and by the request of
the Chief the money was left for these with the officers in charge
of the Hudson's Bay Company's Post, in the same manner as was done
for the Pembina bands.

As I was unable to proceed to Fort Alexander, the payments for the
Indians or for such of them as were present at the signing of the
treaty, were sent in like manner to the officer in charge of the
Hudson's Bay Company's Post at Fort Alexander; but it may be as
well to mention that the number so paid will fall far short of the
total number belonging to that place. The latter remark will apply
to the Pembina band, for their payment was sent as per gratuity
list, and there must necessarily have been others who did not
receive payment. All these must receive their back payments during
the course of next year.

During the payment of the several bands, it was found that in some,
and most notably in the Indian settlement and Broken Head River
Band, a number of those residing among the Indians, and calling
themselves Indians, are in reality half-breeds, and entitled to
share in the land grant under the provisions of the Manitoba Act.
I was most particular, therefore, in causing it to be explained,
generally and to individuals, that any person now electing to be
classed with Indians, and receiving the Indian pay and gratuity,
would, I believed, thereby forfeit his or her right to another
grant as a half-breed; and in all cases where it was known that
a man was a half-breed, the matter, as it affected himself and
his children, was explained to him, and the choice given him to
characterize himself. A very few only decided upon taking their
grants as half-breeds. The explanation of this apparent sacrifice
is found in the fact that the mass of these persons have lived all
their lives on the Indian reserves (so called), and would rather
receive such benefits as may accrue to them under the Indian
treaty, than wait the realization of any value in their half-breed
grant.

The Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba having expressed a desire to
be present at the negotiation of the treaty at Manitoba Post. His
Honor, accompanied by the Hon. James McKay, proceeded thither
with me, in company with Mr. Molyneux St. John, the Clerk of the
Legislative Assembly of Manitoba, who had assisted me in the duties
connected with the former treaty and payments. I left Winnipeg on
the 13th August, but owing to adverse winds on Lake Manitoba did
not arrive until two days after the time appointed. I found that,
in the meanwhile, the officer in charge of the Hudson's Bay
Company's Post had been obliged to give some provisions to the
Indians pending my arrival, but on my speaking to the leading men
of the bands assembled, it was evident that the Indians of this
part had no special demands to make, but having a knowledge of the
former treaty, desired to be dealt with in the same manner and on
the same terms as those adopted by the Indians of the Province of
Manitoba.

The negotiation with these bands therefore occupied little time and
on the 21st August, 1871, a treaty was concluded by which a tract
of country three times as large as the Province of Manitoba was
surrendered by the Indians to the Crown. Payment in full, that is
to say, the gratuity and the first payment, was at once made; and
I have since written to the officers in charge of the Hudson's Bay
Company's Posts within the tract above referred to, requesting them
to procure for me a reliable census of the Indians, parties to this
treaty.

I have referred to the cost of effecting these treaties, and
remarked that it will prove to be exceptional. It may be regarded
as entirely so, as far as the Indians with whom the dealings were
held are concerned. In the future the annual payment will be only
one-half to each Indian of the amount paid this year, for the
gratuity was the same as the payment, and the heavy expense of
feeding the Indians while at the place of meeting and on their
journey home, will be avoided by the payment being made at or near
their own reserves.

All the collateral expenses, therefore, of this year, including
dresses, medals, presents to the Indians, etc., etc., will not
appear in the expenses attending during future payments.

But it is to be remembered that a large number of Indians, whose
lands were ceded by the second treaty, were not present. The
distance from the hunting grounds of some to Manitoba Post is
very great; but while their absence was to be regretted for some
reasons, it effected a very considerable saving in the item of
provisions.

During the ensuing season, these persons will probably be found at
the place where the payments will be made, and will then require
their payments as if they had been present at the signing of the
treaty.

Of the land ceded in the Province of Manitoba, it will be hardly
necessary for me to speak, as His Excellency the Governor-General
is already in possession of accurate information touching its
fertility and resources; but I may observe that, valuable as are
these lands, they are fully equalled if not exceeded by the country
of which the Government now comes into possession by virtue of
the treaty concluded at Manitoba Post. Already settlers from the
Provinces in Canada and elsewhere are pushing their way beyond the
limits of the Province of Manitoba; and there is nothing but the
arbitrary limits of that Province, and certain wood and water
advantages found in the territory beyond it, to distinguish one
part of the country from the other. The fertility that is possessed
by Manitoba is shared by the country and its confines. The water
courses of the Province are excelled by those of the territory; and
the want of wood which threatens serious difficulty in the one is
by no means so apparent in the other.

The Indians of both parts have a firm belief in the honor and
integrity of Her Majesty's representatives, and are fully impressed
with the idea that the amelioration of their present condition
is one of the objects of Her Majesty in making these treaties.
Although many years will elapse before they can be regarded as a
settled population--settled in the sense of following agricultural
pursuits--the Indians have already shown a disposition to provide
against the vicissitudes of the chase by cultivating small patches
of corn and potatoes. Moreover, in the Province of Manitoba, where
labor is scarce, Indians give great assistance in gathering in the
crops. At Portage la Prairie, both Chippawas and Sioux were largely
employed in the grain field; and in other parishes I found many
farmers whose employes were nearly all Indians.

Although serious trouble has from time to time occurred across the
boundary line, with Indians of the same tribes, and indeed of the
same bands as those in Manitoba, there is no reason to fear any
trouble with those who regard themselves as subjects of Her
Majesty. Their desire is to live at peace with the white man, to
trade with him, and, when they are disposed, to work for him; and I
believe that nothing but gross injustice or oppression will induce
them either to forget the allegiance which they now claim with
pride, or molest the white subjects of the sovereign whom they
regard as their Supreme Chief.

The system of an annual payment in money I regard as a good one,
because the recipient is enabled to purchase just what he requires
when he can get it most cheaply, and it also enables him to buy
articles at second hand, from settlers and others, that are quite
as useful to him as are the same things when new. The sum of three
dollars does not appear to be large enough to enable an Indian to
provide himself with many of his winter necessaries; but as he
receives the same amount for his wife or wives, and for each of his
children, the aggregate sum is usually sufficient to procure many
comforts for his family which he would otherwise be compelled to
deny himself.

*    *    *    *    *

I take this opportunity of acknowledging the assistance afforded
me in successfully completing the two treaties, to which I have
referred, by His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba, the
Hon. James McKay, and the officers of the Hudson's Bay Company. In
a country where transport and all other business facilities are
necessarily so scarce, the services rendered to the Government by
the officers in charge of the several Hudson's Bay Posts has been
most opportune and valuable.

                         I have, etc.,
                                   WEMYSS M. SIMPSON,
                                         Indian Commissioner.



CHAPTER V

TREATY NUMBER THREE, OR THE NORTH-WEST ANGLE TREATY


In the year 1871 the Privy Council of Canada issued a joint
commission to Messrs. W. M. Simpson, S. J. Dawson and W. J. Pether,
authorizing them to treat with the Ojibbeway Indians for the
surrender to the Crown of the lands they inhabited--covering the
area from the watershed of Lake Superior to the north-west angle of
the Lake of the Woods, and from the American border to the height
of land from which the streams flow towards the Hudson's Bay. This
step had become necessary in order to make the route known as "the
Dawson route," extending from Prince Arthur's Landing on Lake
Superior to the north-west angle of the Lake of the Woods, which
was then being opened up, "secure for the passage of emigrants
and of the people of the Dominion generally," and also to enable
the Government to throw open for settlement any portion of the
land which might be susceptible of improvement and profitable
occupation. The Commissioners accepted the appointment, and in
July, 1871, met the Indians at Fort Francis.

The tribes preferred claims for right of way through their country.
The Commissioners reported "that they had admitted these to a
limited extent and had made them presents in provisions and
clothing and were also to pay them a small amount in money, it
being fully and distinctly understood by the Indians that these
presents and clothing were accepted by them as an equivalent for
all past claims whatever." The Commissioners having explained to
them fully the intentions of the Government as to obtaining a
surrender of their territorial rights, and giving in return
therefor reserves of land and annual payments, asked them to
consider the proposals calmly* and meet the Commissioners the
succeeding summer to come to an arrangement. In 1872, the Indians
were found not to be ready for the making of a treaty and the
subject was postponed. In the year 1873 a commission was issued to
the Hon. Alexander Morris, then Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba and
the North-West Territories, Lieut.-Col. Provencher, who had in the
interval been appointed Commissioner of Indian Affairs in the place
of Mr. Simpson, who had resigned, and Lindsay Russell Esq., but
the latter being unable to act, Mr. Dawson, now M.P. for Algoma,
was appointed Commissioner in his stead. These Commissioners
having accepted the duty confided to them, met the Indians at the
north-west angle of the Lake of the Woods in the end of September,
1873, and, after protracted and difficult negotiations, succeeded
in effecting a treaty with them. A copy of the treaty will be
found in the Appendix, and a brief record of the utterances of
the Indians and of the Commissioners, which was taken down in
short hand by one of the soldiers of the militia force, is hereto
subjoined. This treaty was one of great importance, as it not
only tranquilized the large Indian population affected by it, but
eventually shaped the terms of all the treaties, four, five, six
and seven, which have since been made with the Indians of the
North-West Territories--who speedily became apprised of the
concessions which had been granted to the Ojibbeway nation. The
closing scenes were striking and impressive. The chief speaker,
Mawe-do-pe-nais, thus winding up the conference on the part of
the Indians, in his final address to the Lieutenant-Governor and
his fellow Commissioners:

"Now you see me stand before you all: what has been done here to
day has been done openly before the Great Spirit and before the
nation, and I hope I may never hear any one say that this treaty
has been done secretly: and now in closing this council, I take off
my glove, and in giving you my hand I deliver over my birthright
and lands: and in taking your hand I hold fast all the promises you
have made, and I hope they will last as long as the sun rises and
the water flows, as you have said."

The conference then adjourned, and on re-assembling, after the
treaty had been read and explained, the Commissioners signed it
and the Lieutenant-Governor called on an aged hereditary Chief,
Kee-ta-kay-pi-nais, to sign next. The Chief came forward, but declined
to touch the pen, saying, "I must first have the money in my hand."
The Lieutenant-Governor immediately held out his hand and directed the
interpreter to say to the chief, "Take my hand and feel the money in
it. If you cannot trust me for half an hour do not trust me forever."
When this was repeated by the interpreter, the Chief smiled, took
the out-stretched hand, and at once touched the pen, while his mark
was being made, his last lingering distrust having been effectively
dispelled by this prompt action and reply. The other Chiefs followed,
and then the interpreter was directed to tell Kee-ta-kay-pi-nais,
the Chief, that he would be paid forthwith, but the Chief at once
replied, "Oh no, it is evening now, and I will wait till to-morrow."
The payments were duly made next day, and so was closed, a treaty,
whereby a territory was enabled to be opened up, of great importance
to Canada, embracing as it does the Pacific Railway route to the
North-West Territories--a wide extent of fertile lands, and, as is
believed, great mineral resources. I now quote the official despatch
of the Lieutenant-Governor, dated the 14th October, 1873, in which
will be found, a full narrative of the proceedings, connected with the
treaty, and a statement of the results thereby effected. I also submit
a short-hand report of the negotiations connected with the treaty.

                  GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
                        FORT GARRY, October 14th, 1873.

Sir,--I have the honor to enclose copy of a treaty made by myself,
Lieut.-Col. Provencher, Indian agent and S. J. Dawson, Esq.,
Commissioner, acting on behalf of Her Majesty, of the one part,
and the Saulteaux tribe of Ojibbeway Indians on the other, at the
North-West Angle of the Lake of the Woods, on the 3rd of October,
for the relinquishment of the Indian title to the tract of land
therein described and embracing 55,000 square miles. In the first
place, the holding of the negotiation of the treaty had been
appointed by you to take place at the North-West Angle before you
requested me to take part therein, and Mr. Dawson had obtained the
consent of the Indians to meet there on the 10th of September, but
they afterwards changed their minds, and refused to meet me unless
I came to Fort Francis. I refused to do this, as I felt that the
yielding to the demand of the Indians in this respect, would
operate injuriously to the success of the treaty, and the results
proved the correctness of the opinion I had formed. I therefore
sent a special agent (Mr. Pierre Levaillier) to warn them that I
would meet them as arranged at the North-West Angle on the 25th,
or not at all this year, to which they eventually agreed.

I left here for the Angle on the 23rd September and arrived there
on the 25th, when I was joined by Messrs. Provencher and Dawson the
last named of whom I was glad to find had been associated with the
Commissioners in consequence of the resignation of Mr. Lindsey
Russell, thereby giving us the benefit as well of his knowledge of
the country to be dealt with, as of the several bands of Indians
therein. Mr. Pether, of Fort Francis, was also in attendance, and
Mr. Provencher was accompanied by Mr. St. John, of his department.

On arriving, the Indians, who were already there, came up to the
house I occupied, in procession, headed by braves bearing a banner
and a Union Jack, and accompanied by others beating drums. They
asked leave to perform a dance in my honor, after which they
presented to me the pipe of peace. They were then supplied with
provisions and returned to their camp. As the Indians had not all
arrived, and for other reasons, the 26th, 27th and 28th were passed
without any progress but on the 29th I sent them word that they
must meet the Commissioners next morning. Accordingly, on the 30th,
they met us in a tent, the use of which I had obtained from the
military authorities. I explained to them the object of the
meeting, but as they informed me that they were not ready to confer
with us, I adjourned the meeting until next day. On the 1st October
they again assembled. The principal cause of the delay was
divisions and jealousies among themselves. The nation had not met
for many years, and some of them had never before been assembled
together. They were very jealous of each other, and dreaded any of
the Chiefs having individual communications with me, to prevent
which they had guards on the approaches to my house and Mr.
Dawson's tent. On the 2nd October they again assembled, when I
again explained the object of the meeting, through Mr. McPherson,
an intelligent half-breed trader, whose services I secured. M.
Chatelan, the Government interpreter, was also present. They had
selected three spokesmen, and had also an Indian reporter, whose
duty was to commit to memory all that was said. They had also
secured the services of M. Joseph Nolin, of Point du Chene, to
take notes in French of the negotiations, a copy of which notes I
obtained from him and herewith enclose. The spokesmen informed me
they would not treat as to the land until we settled with them as
to the Dawson route, with regard to which they alleged Mr. Dawson
had made promises which had not been kept, and that they had not
been paid for the wood used in building the steamers, nor for the
use of the route itself. Mr. Dawson explained that he had paid them
for cutting wood, but had always asserted a common right to the use
of wood and the water way. He asked them what promise had not been
kept, and pointed out that the Government had twice before
endeavored to treat with them for a settlement of all matters. He
referred them to me as to the general question of the use of the
route. They were unable to name any promises which had not been
kept. Thereupon I told them I came on behalf of the Queen and the
Government of the Dominion of Canada to treat with them with regard
to the lands and all other matters, but that they refused to hear
what I had to say; they had closed my mouth; and as we would not
treat except for the settlement of all matters past and future I
could not speak unless they asked me to do so. They conferred among
themselves, and seeing that we were quite firm, the spokesman came
forward and said that they would not close my mouth, after which
they would make their demands. The Commissioners had had a
conference and agreed, as they found there was no hope of a treaty
for a less sum, to offer five dollars per head, a present of ten
dollars, and reserves of farming and other lands not exceeding one
square mile per family of five, or in that proportion, sums within
the limits of our instructions, though I had private advices if
possible not to give the maximum sum named, as the Government had
been under a misapprehension as to amounts given to the bands in
the United States. The Chiefs heard my proposal, and the meeting
adjourned until next day. On the 3rd October the Chiefs again
assembled and made a counter proposition, of which I enclose a
copy, being the demand they have urged since 1869. I also enclose
an estimate I had made of the money value of the demand, amounting
to $125,000 per annum. On behalf of the Commissioners I at once
peremptorily refused the demand. The spokesmen returned to the
Chiefs, who were arranged on benches, the people sitting on the
ground behind them, and on their return they informed me that the
Chiefs, warriors and braves were of one mind, that they would make
a treaty only if we acceded to their demand. I told them if so the
conference was over, that I would return and report that they had
refused to make a reasonable treaty, that hereafter I would treat
with those bands who were willing to treat, but that I would advise
them to return to the council and reconsider their determination
before next morning, when, if not, I should certainly leave. This
brought matters to a crisis. The Chief of the Lac Seul band came
forward to speak. The others tried to prevent him, but he was
secured a hearing. He stated that he represented four hundred
people in the north, that they wished a treaty, that they wished a
school-master to be sent them to teach their children the knowledge
of the white man; that they had begun to cultivate the soil and
were growing potatoes and Indian corn, but wished other grain for
seed and some agricultural implements and cattle. This Chief spoke
under evident apprehension as to the course he was taking in
resisting the other Indians, and displayed much good sense and
moral courage. He was followed by the Chief "Blackstone," who
urged the other Chiefs to return to the council and consider my
proposals, stating that he was ready to treat, though he did not
agree to my proposals nor to those made to me. I then told them
that I had known all along they were not united as they had said;
that they ought not to allow a few Chiefs to prevent a treaty, and
that I wished to treat with them as a nation and not with separate
bands, as they would otherwise compel me to do, and therefore urged
them to return to their council, promising to remain another day to
give them time for consideration. They spent the night in council,
and next morning having received a message from M. Charles Nolin, a
French half-breed, that they were becoming more amenable to reason,
I requested the Hon. James McKay (who went to the Angle three times
to promote this treaty), Charles Nolin and Pierre Levaillier to go
down to the Indian Council, and as men of their own blood, give
them friendly advice. They accordingly did so, and were received
by the Indians, and in about half an hour afterwards were followed
by Messrs. Provencher and St. John, who also took part in the
interview with the Council of Chiefs. The Chiefs were summoned to
the conference by the sound of a bugle and again met us, when they
told me that the determination to adhere to their demands had been
so strong a bond that they did not think it could be broken, but
they had now determined to see if I would give them anything more.

The Commissioners had had a conference, and agreed previously to
offer a small sum for ammunition and twine for nets, yearly--a few
agricultural implements and seeds, for any band actually farming
or commencing to farm, and to increase the money payment by two
dollars per head if it should be found necessary in order to secure
a treaty, maintaining a permanent annuities at the sum fixed. The
Indians on the other hand had determined on asking fifteen dollars,
with some other demands. In fixing the ten dollars the Commissioners
had done so as a sum likely to be accepted in view of three dollars
per head having been paid the Indians the first year the Dawson route
was used, and that they had received nothing since. In reply to the
Indians, I told them I was glad that they had reconsidered their
decision, and that as they had done so, being desirous of inducing
them to practice agriculture and to have the means of getting food
if their fishing and hunting failed, we would give them certain
implements, cattle and grain, once for all, and the extra two dollars
per head of a money payment. This proposal was received favorably, but
the spokesmen again came forward and said they had some questions to
ask before accepting my proposal. They wanted suits of clothing every
year for all the bands, and fifty dollars for every Chief annually.
This I declined, but told them that there were some presents of
clothing and food which would be given them this year at the close of
treaty. They then asked free passes forever over the Canada Pacific
Railway, which I refused. They then asked that no "fire-water" should
be sold on their reserves, and I promised that a regulation to this
effect should be introduced into the treaty. They then asked that they
should not be sent to war, and I told them the Queen was not in the
habit of employing the Indians in warfare. They asked that they should
have power to put turbulent men off their reserves, and I told them
the law would be enforced against such men. They asked what reserves
would be given them, and were informed by Mr. Provencher that reserves
of farming and other lands would be given them as previously stated,
and that any land actually in cultivation by them would be respected.
They asked if the mines would be theirs; I said if they were found on
their reserves it would be to their benefit, but not otherwise. They
asked if an Indian found a mine would he be paid for it, I told them
he could sell his information if he could find a purchaser like any
other person. They explained that some of their children had married
in the States, and they wished them to return and live among them, and
wanted them included in the treaty. I told them the treaty was not for
American Indians, but any bona fide British Indians of the class they
mentioned who should within two years be found resident on British
soil would be recognized.

They said there were some ten to twenty families of half-breeds who
were recognized as Indians and lived with them, and they wished
them included. I said the treaty was not for whites, but I would
recommend that those families should be permitted the option of
taking either status as Indians or whites, but that they could not
take both. They asked that Mr. Charles Nolin should be employed as
an Indian Agent, and I stated that I would submit his name to the
Government with favorable mention of his services on that occasion.
They asked that the Chiefs and head men, as in other treaties,
should get an official suit of clothing, a nag, and a medal, which
I promised. Mawedopenais produced one of the medals given to the
Red River Chiefs, said it was not silver, and they were ashamed
to wear it, as it turned black, and then, with an air of great
contempt, struck it with his knife. I stated that I would mention
what he had said, and the manner in which he had spoken. They
also stated the Hudson Bay Company had staked out ground at Fort
Francis, on part of the land they claimed to have used, and to be
entitled to, and I promised that enquiry would be made into the
matter. They apologized for the number of questions put me, which
occupied a space of some hours, and then the principal spokesman,
Mawedopenais, came forward and drew off his gloves, and spoke as
follows: "Now you see me stand before you all. What has been done
here to-day, has been done openly before the Great Spirit, and
before the nation, and I hope that I may never hear any one say
that this treaty has been done secretly. And now in closing this
council, I take off my glove, and in taking your hand, I deliver
over my birthright, and lands, and in taking your hand I hold fast
all the promises you have made, and I hope they will last as long
as the sun goes round, and the water flows, as you have said." To
which I replied as follows: "I accept your hand, and with it the
lands and will keep all my promises, in the firm belief that the
treaty now to be signed will bind the red man and the white man
together as friends forever." The conference then adjourned for an
hour to enable the text of the treaty to be completed in accordance
with the understanding arrived at. At the expiration of that period
the conference was resumed, and after the reading of the treaty,
and an explanation of it in Indian by the Hon. James McKay it was
signed by the Commissioners and by the several Chiefs, the first
signature being that of a very aged hereditary Chief. The next
day the Indians were paid by Messrs. Pether and Graham, of the
Department of Public Works; the latter of whom kindly offered
his services as Mr. Provencher had to leave to keep another
appointment. The negotiation was a very difficult and trying one,
and required on the part of the Commissioners great patience and
firmness. On the whole I am of opinion that the issue is a happy
one. With the exception of two bands in the Shebandowan District,
whose adhesion was secured in advance and the signatures of whose
Chiefs Mr. Dawson left to secure, the Indian title has been
extinguished over the vast tract of country comprising 55,000
square miles lying between the upper boundary of the Lake Superior
treaty, and that of the treaty made by Mr. Commissioner Simpson at
Manitoba Post, and embracing within its bounds the Dawson route,
the route of the Canada Pacific Railway and an extensive lumber and
mineral region. [Footnote: Mr. Dawson succeeded in obtaining the
adhesion to the treaty of the Chiefs in question.] It is fortunate,
too that the arrangement has been effected, as the Indians
along the lakes and rivers were dissatisfied at the use of the
waters, which they considered theirs, having been taken without
compensation, so much so indeed that I believe if the treaty had
not been made, the Government would have been compelled to place a
force on the line next year.

Before closing this despatch, I have much pleasure in bearing
testimony to the hearty co-operation and efficient aid the
Commissioners received from the Metis who were present at the
Angle, and who, with one accord, whether of French or English
origin, used the influence which their relationships to the Indians
gave them to impress them with the necessity of their entering into
the treaty. I must also express my obligations to the detachment of
troops under the command of Captain Macdonald, assigned me as an
escort, for their soldierly bearing and excellent conduct while at
the Angle. Their presence was of great value, and had the effect of
deterring traders from bringing articles of illicit trade for sale
to the Indians; and moreover exercised a moral influence which
contributed most materially to the success of the negotiations. I
have further to add, that it was found impossible, owing to the
extent of the country treated for, and the want of knowledge of the
circumstances of each band, to define the reserves to be granted to
the Indians. It was therefore agreed that the reserves should be
hereafter selected by officers of the Government, who should confer
with the several bands, and pay due respect to lands actually
cultivated by them. A provision was also introduced to the effect
that any of the reserves, or any interest in them, might hereafter
be sold for the benefit of the Indians by the Government with their
consent. I would suggest that instructions should be given to Mr.
Dawson to select the reserves with all convenient speed; and, to
prevent complication I would further suggest that no patents should
be issued, or licenses granted, for mineral or timber lands, or
other lands, until the question of the reserves has been first
adjusted.

                 I have the honor to be, Sir,
                            Your obedient servant,
                                      ALEXANDER MORRIS.
                                               Lieut.-Governor.


Attention is called to the ensuing report of the proceedings
connected with the treaty, extracted from the Manitoban newspaper
of the 18th October, 1873, published at Winnipeg. The reports of
the speeches therein contained were prepared by a short-hand
reporter and present an accurate view of the course of the
discussions, and a vivid representation of the habits of Indian
thought.

                                     NORTH-WEST ANGLE,
                                             September 30, 1873.

The Lieutenant-Governor and party, and the other Commissioners
appointed to negotiate a treaty with the Indians, arrived here on
Thursday, 24th inst., having enjoyed delightful weather during the
entire trip from Fort Garry. The Governor occupies the house of the
officer in charge of the H. B. Post. The grounds around it have
been nicely graded and cleared of brush, and surrounded by rows of
evergreens planted closely, so as to completely screen the house
from wind, and at the same time contribute much to relieve the
monotony of the scenery. Immediately west of this, and likewise
enclosed by walls of evergreens, is the large marquee used as
a Council House, by the contracting parties; and immediately
surrounding it to the north and west are the tents of the other
officers of the Commission and the officers and men of the
Volunteers on detachment duty.

Situated to the eastward, and extending all along the river bank,
are the tents of the Indians to the number of a hundred, with here
and there the tent of the trader, attracted thither by the prospect
of turning an honest penny by exchanging the necessaries of Indian
life for such amounts of the price of their heritage as they can be
induced to spend.

The natives now assembled here number about 800 all told, and hail
from the places given below. Among them are many fine physically
developed men, who would be considered good looking were it not for
the extravagance with which they be-smear their faces with pigments
of all colors.

It was at first thought probable that the serious business of the
meeting would be begun on Friday, but owing to the non-arrival of
a large body of Rainy River and Lac Seul representatives, it was
decided to defer it until next day. Saturday came, and owing to the
arrival of a messenger from the Lac Seul band asking the Governor
to wait for their arrival, proceedings have further stayed until
Monday. But "hope deferred maketh the heart sick;" so the advent of
Monday brought nothing but disappointment, and this, coupled with
the disagreeable wet and cold weather that prevailed, made every
one ill at ease if not miserable. The Chiefs were not ready to
treat--they had business of their own to transact, which must be
disposed of before they could see the Governor; and so another
delay was granted. But Monday did not find them ready, and they
refused to begin negotiations. An intimation from the Governor that
unless they were ready on the following day he would leave for
home on Wednesday, hurried them up a little--they did wait on him
to-day, Tuesday, but only to say they had not yet finished their
own business, but that they would try and be ready to treat on
Wednesday. And so the matter stands at present--if the Indians
agree amongst themselves, the treaty will be opened to-morrow,
otherwise the Governor will strike camp and return to Fort Garry.

Divisions and local jealousies have taken possession of the Indian
mind. The difficulties are the inability of the Indians to select
a high or principal chief from amongst themselves, and as to the
matter and extent of the demands to be made.

It is many years since these people had a general council, and in
the interval many head men have died, while others have grown to
man's estate, and feel ambitious to take part in the proceedings.
But the fiat has gone forth, that unless a conclusion is arrived at
to-morrow negotiations will be broken off for this year.

BOUNDARIES OF THE LANDS TO BE CEDED

Beginning at the North-West Angle eastward, taking in all the Lake
of the Woods, including White Fish Bay, Rat Portage and north to
White Dog in English River; up English River to Lake Seul, and then
south east to Lake Nepigon; westward to Rainy River and down it
to Lake of the Woods, and up nearly to Lac des Mille Lacs; then
beginning at the 49th parallel to White Mouth River, thence down it
to the north, along the eastern boundary of the land ceded in 1871,
embracing 55,000 square miles.

In the neighborhood of Lac des mille Lacs and Shebandowan are
several bands, who have sent word that they cannot come as far as
this point, but will accept the terms made at this treaty and
ratify it with any one commissioner who will go there to meet them.

The whole number of Indians in the territory is estimated at
14,000, and are represented here by Chiefs of the following bands:

   1. North-West Angle.
   2. Rat Portage.
   3. Lake Seul.
   4. White Fish Bay on Lake of the Woods.
   5. Sha-bas-kang, or Grassy Narrows.
   6. Rainy River.
   7. Rainy Lake.
   8. Beyond Kettle Falls, southward.
   9. Eagle Lake.
  10. Nepigon.
  11. Shoal Lake (three miles to the north of this point).


                           NORTH-WEST ANGLE,
                                   October 1, 1873.

The assembled Chiefs met the Governor this morning, as per
agreement, and opened the proceedings of the day by expressing the
pleasure they experienced at meeting the Commissioners on the
present occasion. Promises had many times been made to them, and,
said the speaker, unless they were now fulfilled they would not
consider the broader question of the treaty.

Mr. S. J. Dawson, one of the Commissioners, reciprocated the
expression of pleasure used by the Chiefs through their spokesman.
He had long looked forward to this meeting, when all matters
relating to the past, the present, and the future, could be
disposed of so as to fix permanently the friendly relations between
the Indians and the white men. It was now, he continued, some years
since the white men first came to this country--they came in the
first place at the head of a great military expedition; and when
that expedition was passing through the country all the chiefs
showed themselves to be true and loyal subjects--they showed
themselves able and willing to support their Great Mother the
Queen. Subsequently, when we began to open up the road, we had to
call upon the Indians to assist us in doing so, and they always
proved themselves very happy to help in carrying out our great
schemes. He was, he continued, one of the Commission employed by
the Government to treat with them and devise a scheme whereby both
white men and Indians would be benefitted. We made to the Indians
the proposals we were authorized to make, and we have carried out
these proposals in good faith. This was three years ago. What we
were directed to offer we did offer, but the Indians thought it
was too little, and negotiations were broken off. Since this I
have done what was in my power to bring about this meeting with
new terms, and consider it a very happy day that you should be
assembled to meet the Governor of the Territory as representative
of Her Majesty. He would explain to them the proposals he had to
make. He had lived long amongst them and would advise them as a
friend to take the opportunity of making arrangements with the
Governor. When we arrange the general matters in question, should
you choose to ask anything, I shall be most happy to explain it,
as I am here all the time.

The Chief in reply said his head men and young men were of one
mind, and determined not to enter upon the treaty until the
promises made in the past were fulfilled, they were tired of
waiting. What the Commissioners called "small matters" were great
to them, and were what they wished to have settled.

The route that had been built through the country proved this,
and the Commissioners promised something which they now wanted.

This was taking the Commissioners on a new tack, but Mr. Dawson
promptly undertook to answer the objections. He said all these
questions had been discussed before; but if he had made any
promises that remained unfulfilled, he would be happy to learn
their nature. The Chief replied that all the houses on the line,
and all the big boats on the waters, were theirs, and they wanted
to be recompensed for them.

Mr. Dawson continued, saying he was glad they had now come to a
point on which they could deal. The Indians questioned the right
of the Government to take wood for the steamers. This was a right
which the speaker had all along told them was common to all Her
Majesty's subjects. He then referred them to the Governor if they
had anything more to say on that subject. Wood on which Indians had
bestowed labor was always paid for; but wood on which we had spent
our own labor was ours.

His Excellency then addressed them at some length. He understood
that they wanted to have the questions in which they were
interested treated separately. This was not what he came there for.
Wood and water were the gift of the Great Spirit, and were made
alike for the good of both the white man and red man. Many of his
listeners had come a long way, and he, too, had come a long way,
and he wanted all the questions settled at once, by one treaty. He
had a message from the Queen, but if his mouth was kept shut, the
responsibility would rest on the Indians, and not with him if he
were prevented from delivering it. He had authority to tell them
what sum of money he could give them in hand now, and what he could
give them every year; but it was for them to open his mouth. He
concluded his remarks, which were forcibly delivered, with an
emphatic "I have said."

The Chief reiterated that he and his young men were determined not
to go on with the treaty until the first question was disposed of.
What was said about the trees and rivers was quite true, but it
was the Indian's country, not the white man's. Following this the
Governor told the Council that unless they would settle all the
matters, the big and little, at once, he would not talk. He was
bound by his Government, and was of the same mind to treat with
them on all questions, and not on any one separately.

On seeing His Excellency so firm, and feeling that it would not do
to allow any more time to pass without coming to business the Chief
asked the Governor to open his mouth and tell what propositions he
was prepared to make.

His Excellency then said--"I told you I was to make the treaty on
the part of our Great Mother the Queen, and I feel it will be for
your good and your children's. I should have been very sorry if
you had shut my mouth, if I had had to go home without opening my
mouth. I should not have been a true friend of yours if I had not
asked you to open my mouth. We are all children of the same Great
Spirit, and are subject to the same Queen. I want to settle all
matters both of the past and the present, so that the white and red
man will always be friends. I will give you lands for farms, and
also reserves for your own use. I have authority to make reserves
such as I have described, not exceeding in all a square mile for
every family of five or thereabouts. It may be a long time before
the other lands are wanted, and in the meantime you will be
permitted to fish and hunt over them. I will also establish schools
whenever any band asks for them, so that your children may have the
learning of the white man. I will also give you a sum of money for
yourselves and every one of your wives and children for this year.
I will give you ten dollars per head of the population and for
every other year five dollars a head. But to the chief men, not
exceeding two to each band, we will give twenty dollars a-year for
ever. I will give to each of you this year a present of goods and
provisions to take you home, and I am sure you will be satisfied."

After consultation amongst themselves, the Councillors went to
have a talk about the matter and will meet the Governor to-morrow
morning, when it is expected the bargain will be concluded. Of
course the Indians will make some other demands.

Immediately after the adjournment as above, the Governor presented
an ox to the people in camp; and the way it disappeared would have
astonished the natives of any other land. Half-an-hour after it was
led into encampment, it was cut up and boiling in fifty pots.

THIRD DAY

Proceedings were opened at eleven o'clock by the Governor
announcing that he was ready to hear what the Chiefs had to say.
The Fort Francis Chief acted as spokesman, assisted by another
Chief, Powhassan.

MA-WE-DO-PE-NAIS--"I now lay down before you the opinions of those
you have seen before. We think it a great thing to meet you here.
What we have heard yesterday, and as you represented yourself,
you said the Queen sent you here, the way we understood you as a
representative of the Queen. All this is our property where you
have come. We have understood you yesterday that Her Majesty has
given you the same power and authority as she has, to act in
this business; you said the Queen gave you her goodness, her
charitableness in your hands. This is what we think, that the Great
Spirit has planted us on this ground where we are, as you were
where you came from. We think where we are is our property. I will
tell you what he said to us when he planted us here; the rules that
we should follow--us Indians--He has given us rules that we should
follow to govern us rightly. We have understood you that you have
opened your charitable heart to us like a person taking off his
garments and throwing them to all of us here. Now, first of all, I
have a few words to address to this gentleman (Mr. Dawson). When he
understood rightly what was my meaning yesterday, he threw himself
on your help. I think I have a right to follow him to where he flew
when I spoke to him on the subject yesterday. We will follow up
the subject from the point we took it up. I want to answer what
we heard from you yesterday, in regard to the money that you have
promised us yesterday to each individual. I want to talk about the
rules that we had laid down before. It is four years back since we
have made these rules. The rules laid down are the rules that they
wish to follow--a council that has been agreed upon by all the
Indians. I do not wish that I should be required to say twice what
I am now going to lay down. We ask fifteen dollars for all that you
see, and for the children that are to be born in future. This year
only we ask for fifteen dollars; years after ten dollars; our
Chiefs fifty dollars per year for every year, and other demands of
large amounts in writing, say $125,000 yearly."

ANOTHER CHIEF--"I take my standing point from here. Our councillors
have in council come to this conclusion, that they should have
twenty dollars each; our warriors, fifteen dollars; our population,
fifteen dollars. We have now laid down the conclusion of our
councils by our decisions. We tell you our wishes are not divided.
We are all of one mind." (Paper put in before the Governor for
these demands.)

CHIEF--"I now let you know the opinions of us here. We would not
wish that anyone should smile at our affairs, as we think our
country is a large matter to us. If you grant us what is written on
that paper, then we will talk about the reserves; we have decided
in council for the benefit of those that will be born hereafter.
If you do so the treaty will be finished, I believe."

GOVERNOR--"I quite agree that this is no matter to smile at. I
think that the decision of to-day is one that affects yourselves
and your children after, but you must recollect that this is the
third time of negotiating. If we do not shake hands and make our
Treaty to-day, I do not know when it will be done, as the Queen's
Government will think you do not wish to treat with her. You told
me that you understood that I represented the Queen's Government to
you and that I opened my heart to you, but you must recollect that
if you are a council there is another great council that governs a
great Dominion, and they hold their councils the same as you hold
yours. I wish to tell you that I am a servant of the Queen. I
cannot do my own will; I must do hers. I can only give you what she
tells me to give you. I am sorry to see that your hands were very
wide open when you gave me this paper. I thought what I promised
you was just, kind and fair between the Queen and you. It is now
three years we have been trying to settle this matter. If we do not
succeed to-day I shall go away feeling sorry for you and for your
children that you could not see what was good for you and for them.
I am ready to do what I promised you yesterday. My hand is open and
you ought to take me by the hand and say, "yes, we accept of your
offer." I have not the power to do what you ask of me. I ask you
once more to think what you are doing, and of those you have left
at home, and also of those that may be born yet, and I ask you not
to turn your backs on what is offered to you, and you ought to see
by what the Queen is offering you that she loves her red subjects
as much as her white. I think you are forgetting one thing, that
what I offer you is to be while the water flows and the sun rises.
You know that in the United States they only pay the Indian for
twenty years, and you come here to-day and ask for ever more than
they get for twenty years. Is that just? I think you ought to
accept my offer, and make a treaty with me as I ask you to do. I
only ask you to think for yourselves, and for your families, and
for your children and children's children, and I know that if you
do that you will shake hands with me to-day."

CHIEF--"I lay before you our opinions. Our hands are poor but our
heads are rich, and it is riches that we ask so that we may be able
to support our families as long as the sun rises and the water
runs."

GOVERNOR--"I am very sorry; you know it takes two to make a
bargain; you are agreed on the one side, and I for the Queen's
Government on the other. I have to go away and report that I have
to go without making terms with you. I doubt if the Commissioners
will be sent again to assemble this nation. I have only one word
more to say; I speak to the Chief and to the head men to recollect
those behind them, and those they have left at home, and not to go
away without accepting such liberal terms and without some clothing."

CHIEF--"My terms I am going to lay down before you; the decision of
our Chiefs; ever since we came to a decision you push it back. The
sound of the rustling of the gold is under my feet where I stand;
we have a rich country; it is the Great Spirit who gave us this;
where we stand upon is the Indians' property, and belongs to them.
If you grant us our requests you will not go back without making
the treaty."

ANOTHER CHIEF--"We understood yesterday that the Queen had given
you the power to act upon, that you could do what you pleased, and
that the riches of the Queen she had filled your head and body
with, and you had only to throw them round about; but it seems it
is not so, but that you have only half the power that she has, and
that she has only half filled your head."

GOVERNOR--"I do not like to be misunderstood. I did not say
yesterday that the Queen had given me all the power; what I told
you was that I was sent here to represent the Queen's Government,
and to tell you what the Queen was willing to do for you. You can
understand very well; for instance, one of your great chiefs asks
a brave to deliver a message, he represents you, and that is how I
stand with the Queen's Government."

CHIEF--"It is your charitableness that you spoke of yesterday--Her
Majesty's charitableness that was given you. It is our chiefs, our
young men, our children and great grand-children, and those that
are to be born, that I represent here, and it is for them I ask for
terms. The white man has robbed us of our riches, and we don't wish
to give them up again without getting something in their place."

GOVERNOR--"For your children, grand-children, and children unborn,
I am sorry that you will not accept of my terms. I shall go home
sorry, but it is your own doing; I must simply go back and report
the fact that you refuse to make a treaty with me."

CHIEF--"You see all our chiefs before you here as one mind; we have
one mind and one mouth. It is the decision of all of us; if you
grant us our demands you will not go back sorrowful; we would not
refuse to make a treaty if you would grant us our demands."

GOVERNOR--"I have told you already that I cannot grant your
demands, I have not the power to do so. I have made you a liberal
offer, and it is for you to accept or refuse it as you please."

CHIEF--"Our chiefs have the same opinion; they will not change
their decision."

GOVERNOR--"Then the Council is at an end."

CHIEF (of Lac Seule)--"I understand the matter that he asks; if he
puts a question to me as well as to others, I say so as well as the
rest. We are the first that were planted here; we would ask you to
assist us with every kind of implement to use for our benefit, to
enable us to perform our work; a little of everything and money. We
would borrow your cattle; we ask you this for our support; I will
find whereon to feed them. The waters out of which you sometimes
take food for yourselves, we will lend you in return. If I should
try to stop you--it is not in my power to do so; even the Hudson's
Bay Company--that is a small power--I cannot gain my point with it.
If you give what I ask, the time may come when I will ask you to
lend me one of your daughters and one of your sons to live with us;
and in return I will lend you one of my daughters and one of my
sons for you to teach what is good, and after they have learned, to
teach us. If you grant us what I ask, although I do not know you, I
will shake hands with you. This is all I have to say."

GOVERNOR--"I have heard and I have learned something. I have
learned that you are not all of one mind. I know that your
interests are not the same--that some of you live in the north far
away from the river, and some live on the river, and that you have
got large sums of money for wood that you have cut and sold to the
steamboats; but the men in the north have not this advantage. What
the Chief has said is reasonable; and should you want goods I mean
to ask you what amount you would have in goods, so that you would
not have to pay the traders' prices for them. I wish you were all
of the same mind as the Chief who has just spoken. He wants his
children to be taught. He is right. He wants to get cattle to help
him to raise grain for his children. It would be a good thing for
you all to be of his mind, and then you would not go away without
making this treaty with me."

BLACKSTONE (Shebandowan)--"I am going to lay down before you the
minds of those who are here. I do not wish to interfere with the
decisions of those who are before you, or yet with your decisions.
The people at the height of land where the waters came down from
Shebandowan to Fort Frances, are those who have appointed me to lay
before you our decision. We are going back to hold a Council."

MR. DAWSON--"I would ask the Chief who has just spoken, did the
band at Shebandowan--did Rat McKay, authorize him to speak for
them? Ke-ha-ke-ge-nen is Blackstone's own Chief; and I am perfectly
willing to think that he authorized him. What I have to say is that
the Indians may not be deceived by representations made to them,
and that the two bands met me at Shebandowan and said they were
perfectly willing to enter into a treaty."

GOVERNOR--"I think the nation will do well to do what the Chief has
said. I think he has spoken sincerely, and it is right for them to
withdraw and hold a Council among themselves."

Blackstone here handed in a paper which he alleged gave him authority
as Chief, but which proved to be an official acknowledgement of the
receipt of a letter by the Indian Department at Ottawa.

The Governor here agreed with the Council that it would be well for
the Chiefs to have another meeting amongst themselves. It was a
most important day for them and for their children, and His
Excellency would be glad to meet them again.

The Council broke up at this point, and it was extremely doubtful
whether an agreement could be come to or not. The Rainy River
Indians were careless about the treaty, because they could get
plenty of money for cutting wood for the boats, but the northern
and eastern bands were anxious for one. The Governor decided that
he would make a treaty with those bands that were willing to accept
his terms, leaving out the few disaffected ones. A Council was held
by the Indians in the evening, at which Hon. James McKay, Pierre
Leveillee, Charles Nolin, and Mr. Genton were present by invitation
of the Chiefs. After a very lengthy and exhaustive discussion, it
was decided to accept the Governor's terms, and the final meeting
was announced for Friday morning. Punctually at the appointed time
proceedings were opened by the Fort Francis Chiefs announcing to
His Excellency that they were all of one mind, and would accept his
terms, with a few modifications. The discussion of these terms
occupied five hours, and met every possible contingency so fully
that it would be impossible to do justice to the negotiators
otherwise than by giving a full report of the speeches on both
sides; but want of space compels us to lay it over until next week.

The treaty was finally closed on Friday afternoon, and signed on
Saturday, after which a large quantity of provisions, ammunition
and other goods were distributed.

When the council broke up last (Thursday) night, 3rd October, it
looked very improbable that an understanding could be arrived at,
but the firmness of the Governor, and the prospect that he would
make a treaty with such of the bands as were willing to accept
his terms, to the exclusion of the others, led them to reconsider
their demands. The Hon. James McKay, and Messrs. Nolin, Genton,
and Leveillee were invited in to their council, and after a most
exhaustive discussion of the circumstance in which they were
placed, it was resolved to accept the Governor's terms, with some
modifications. Word was sent to this effect, and at eleven o'clock
on Friday, conference was again held with His Excellency.

The Fort Francis Chief opened negotiations by saying:--"We present
our compliments to you, and now we would tell you something. You
have mentioned our councillors, warriors and messengers--every
Chief you see has his councillors, warriors and messengers."

GOVERNOR--"I was not aware what names they gave me--they gave
their chief men. I spoke of the subordinates of the head Chiefs;
I believe the head Chiefs have three subordinates--I mean the
head Chief and three of his head men."

CHIEF--"I am going to tell you the decision of all before you. I
want to see your power and learn the most liberal terms that you
can give us."

GOVERNOR--"I am glad to meet the Chiefs, and I hope it will be the
last time of our meeting. I hope we are going to understand one
another to-day. And that I can go back and report that I left my
Indian friends contented, and that I have put into their hands the
means of providing for themselves and their families at home; and
now I will give you my last words. When I held out my hands to you
at first, I intended to do what was just and right, and what I had
the power to do at once,--not to go backwards and forwards, but at
once to do what I believe is just and right to you. I was very much
pleased yesterday with the words of the Chief of Lac Seul. I was
glad to hear that he had commenced to farm and to raise things for
himself and family, and I was glad to hear him ask me to hold out
my hand. I think we should do everything to help you by giving
you the means to grow some food, so that if it is a bad year for
fishing and hunting you may have something for your children at
home. If you had not asked it the Government would have done it all
the same, although I had not said so before. I can say this, that
when a band settles down and actually commences to farm on their
lands, the Government will agree to give two hoes, one spade, one
scythe, and one axe for every family actually settled; one plough
for every ten families, five harrows for every twenty families, and
a yoke of oxen, a bull and four cows for every band; and enough
barley, wheat and oats to plant the land they have actually broken
up. This is to enable them to cultivate their land, and it is to be
given them on their commencing to do so, once for all. There is one
thing that I have thought over, and I think it is a wise thing to
do. That is to give you ammunition, and twine for making nets, to
the extent of $1,500 per year, for the whole nation, so that you
can have the means of procuring food.--Now, I will mention the last
thing that I can do. I think that the sum I have offered you to be
paid after this year for every man, woman and child now, and for
years to come, is right and is the proper sum I will not make an
change in that, but we are anxious to show you that we have a great
desire to understand you--that we wish to do the utmost in our
power to make you contented, so that the white and the red man will
always be friends. This year, instead of ten dollars we will give
you twelve dollars, to be paid you at once as soon as we sign the
treaty. This is the best I can do for you I wish you to understand
we do not come here as traders but as representing the Crown, and
to do what we believe is just and right. We have asked in that
spirit, and I hope you will meet me in that spirit and shake hands
with me day and make a treaty for ever. I have no more to say."

CHIEF--"I wish to ask some points that I have not properly
understood. We understand that our children are to have two dollars
extra. Will the two dollars be paid to our principal men as well?
And these things that are promised will they commence at once and
will we see it year after year?"

GOVERNOR--"I thought I had spoken fully as to everything, but I
will speak again. The ammunition and twine will be got at once for
you, this year, and that will be for every year. The Commissioner
will see that you get this at once; with regard to the things to
help you to farm, you must recollect, in a very few days the river
will be frozen up here and we have not got these things here now.
But arrangements will be made next year to get these things for those
who are farming, it cannot be done before as you can see yourselves
very well. Some are farming, and I hope you will all do so."

CHIEF--"One thing I did not say that is most necessary--we want a
cross-cut saw, a whip saw, grindstone and files."

GOVERNOR--"We will do that, and I think we ought to give a box of
common tools to each Chief of a Band."

CHIEF--"Depending upon the words you have told us, and stretched
out your hands in a friendly way, I depend upon that. One thing
more we demand--a suit of clothes to all of us."

GOVERNOR--"With regard to clothing, suits will be given to the
Chiefs and head men, and as to the other Indians there is a
quantity of goods and provisions here that will be given them at
the close of the treaty. The coats of the Chiefs will be given
every three years."

CHIEF--"Once more; powder and shot will not go off without guns. We
ask for guns."

GOVERNOR--"I have shewn every disposition to meet your view, but
what I have promised is as far as I can go."

CHIEF--"My friends, listen to what I am going to say, and you,
my brothers. We present you now with our best and our strongest
compliments. We ask you not to reject some of our children who have
gone out of our place; they are scattered all over, a good tasted
meat hath drawn them away, and we wish to draw them all here and be
contented with us."

GOVERNOR--"If your children come and live here, of course they will
become part of the population, and be as yourselves."

CHIEF--"I hope you will grant the request that I am going to lay
before you. I do not mean those that get paid on the other side of
the line, but some poor Indians who may happen to fall in our road.
If you will accept of these little matters, the treaty will be at
an end. I would not like that one of my children should not eat
with me, and receive the food that you are going to give me."

GOVERNOR--"I am dealing with British Indians and not American
Indians, after the treaty is closed we will have a list of the
names of any children of British Indians that may come in during
two years and be ranked with them; but we must have a limit
somewhere."

CHIEF--"I should not feel happy if I was not to mess with some of
my children that are around me--those children that we call the
Half-breed--those that have been born of our women of Indian blood.
We wish that they should be counted with us, and have their share
of what you have promised. We wish you to accept our demands. It is
the Half-breeds that are actually living amongst us--those that are
married to our women."

GOVERNOR--"I am sent here to treat with the Indians. In Red River,
where I came from, and where there is a great body of Half-breeds,
they must be either white or Indian. If Indians, they get treaty
money; if the Half-breeds call themselves white, they get land. All
I can do is to refer the matter to the Government at Ottawa, and to
recommend what you wish to be granted."

CHIEF--"I hope you will not drop the question; we have understood
you to say that you came here as a friend, and represented your
charitableness, and we depend upon your kindness. You must remember
that our hearts and our brains are like paper; we never forget.
There is one thing that we want to know. If you should get into
trouble with the nations, I do not wish to walk out and expose my
young men to aid you in any of your wars."

GOVERNOR--"The English never call the Indians out of their country
to fight their battles. You are living here and the Queen expects
you to live at peace with the white men and your red brothers, and
with other nations."

ANOTHER CHIEF--"I ask you a question--I see your roads here passing
through the country, and some of your boats--useful articles that
you use for yourself. Bye and bye we shall see things that run
swiftly, that go by fare--carriages--and we ask you that us Indians
may not have to pay their passage on these things, but can go
free."

GOVERNOR--"I think the best thing I can do is to become an Indian.
I cannot promise you to pass on the railroad free, for it may be a
long time before we get one; and I cannot promise you any more than
other people."

CHIEF--"I must address myself to my friend here, as he is the one
that has the Public Works."

MR. DAWSON--"I am always happy to do anything I can for you. I have
always given you a passage on the boats when I could. I will act as
I have done though I can give no positive promise for the future."

CHIEF--"We must have the privilege of travelling about the country
where it is vacant."

MR. McKAY--"Of course, I told them so."

CHIEF--"Should we discover any metal that was of use, could we have
the privilege of putting our own price on it?"

GOVERNOR--"If any important minerals are discovered on any of their
reserves the minerals will be sold for their benefit with their
consent, but not on any other land that discoveries may take place
upon; as regards other discoveries, of course, the Indian is like
any other man. He can sell his information if he can find a
purchaser."

CHIEF--"It will be as well while we are here that everything should
be understood properly between us. All of us--those behind us--wish
to have their reserves marked out, which they will point out, when
the time comes. There is not one tribe here who has not laid it
out."

COMMISSIONER PROVENCHER (the Governor being temporarily absent)--"As
soon as it is convenient to the Government to send surveyors to lay
out the reserves they will do so, and they will try to suit every
particular band in this respect."

CHIEF--"We do not want anybody to mark out our reserves, we have
already marked them out."

COMMISSIONER--"There will be another undertaking between the
officers of the Government and the Indians among themselves for the
selection of the land; they will have enough of good farming land,
they may be sure of that."

CHIEF--"Of course, if there is any particular part wanted by the
public works they can shift us. I understand that; but if we have
any gardens through the country, do you wish that the poor man
should throw it right away?"

COMMISSIONER--"Of course not."

CHIEF--"These are matters that are the wind-up. I begin now to see
how I value the proceedings. I have come to this point, and all
that are taking part in this treaty and yourself I would wish to
have all your names in writing handed over to us. I would not find
it to my convenience to have a stranger here to transact our
business between me and you. It is a white man who does not
understand our language that is taking it down. I would like a man
that understands our language and our ways. We would ask your
Excellency as a favor to appoint him for us."

GOVERNOR--"I have a very good feeling to Mr. C. Nolin, he has been
a good man here; but the appointment of an Agent rests with the
authorities at Ottawa and I will bring your representation to them,
and I am quite sure it will meet with the respect due to it."

CHIEF--"As regards the fire water, I do not like it and I do not
wish any house to be built to have it sold. Perhaps at times if I
should be unwell I might take drop just for medicine; and shall any
one insist on bringing it where we are, I should break the treaty."

GOVERNOR--"I meant to have spoken of that myself, I meant to put it
in the treaty. He speaks good about it. The Queen and her
Parliament in Ottawa have passed a law prohibiting the use of it in
this territory, and if any shall be brought in for the use of you
as medicine it can only come in by my permission."

CHIEF--"Why we keep you so long is that it is our wish that
everything should be properly understood between us,"

GOVERNOR--"That is why I am here. It is my pleasure, and I want
when we once shake hands that it should be forever."

CHIEF--"That is the principal article. If it was in my midst the
fire water would have spoiled my happiness, and I wish it to be
left far away from where I am. All the promises that you have made
me, the little promises and the money you have promised, when it
comes to me year after year--should I see that there is anything
wanting, through the negligence of the people that have to see
after these things, I trust it will be in my power to put them in
prison."

GOVERNOR--"The ear of the Queen's Government will always be open to
hear the complaints of her Indian people, and she will deal with
her servants that do not do their duty in a proper manner."

CHIEF--"Now you have promised to give us all your names. I want a
copy of the treaty that will not be rubbed off, on parchment."

GOVERNOR--"In the mean time I will give you a copy on paper, and as
soon as I get back I will get you a copy on parchment."

CHIEF--"I do not wish to be treated as they were at Red River--that
provisions should be stopped as it is there. Whenever we meet and
have a council I wish that provisions should be given to us. We
cannot speak without eating."

GOVERNOR--"You are mistaken. When they are brought together at Red
River for their payments they get provisions."

CHIEF--"We wish the provisions to come from Red River."

GOVERNOR--"If the Great Spirit sends the grasshopper and there is
no wheat grown in Red River, we cannot give it to you."

CHIEF--"You have come before us with a smiling face, you have shown
us great charity--you have promised the good things; you have given
us your best compliments and wishes, not only for once but for
ever; let there now for ever be peace and friendship between us. It
is the wish of all that where our reserves are peace should reign,
that nothing shall be there that will disturb peace. Now, I will
want nothing to be there that will disturb peace, and will put
every one that carries arms,--such as murderers and thieves--outside,
so that nothing will be there to disturb our peace."

GOVERNOR--"The Queen will have policemen to preserve order, and
murderers and men guilty of crime will be punished in this country
just the same as she punishes them herself."

CHIEF--"To speak about the Hudson's Bay Company. If it happens that
they have surveyed where I have taken my reserve, if I see any of
their signs I will put them on one side."

GOVERNOR--"When the reserves are given you, you will have your
rights. The Hudson's Bay Company have their rights, and the Queen
will do justice between you."

CHIEF OF FORT FRANCIS--"Why I say this is, where I have chosen for
my reserve I see signs that the H. B. Co. has surveyed. I do not
hate them. I only wish they should take their reserves on one side.
Where their shop stands now is my property; I think it is three
years now since they have had it on it."

GOVERNOR--"I do not know about that matter; it will be enquired
into. I am taking notes of all these things and am putting them on
paper."

CHIEF--"I will tell you one thing. You understand me now, that I
have taken your hand firmly and in friendship. I repeat twice that
you have done so, that these promises that you have made, and the
treaty to be concluded, let it be as you promise, as long as the
sun rises over our head and as long as the water runs. One thing I
find, that deranges a little my kettle. In this river, where food
used to be plentiful for our subsistence, I perceive it is getting
scarce. We wish that the river should be left as it was formed from
the beginning--that nothing be broken."

GOVERNOR--"This is a subject that I cannot promise."

MR. DAWSON--"Anything that we are likely to do at present will not
interfere with the fishing, but no one can tell what the future may
require, and we cannot enter into any engagement."

CHIEF--"We wish the Government would assist us in getting a few
boards for some of us who are intending to put up houses this fall,
from the mill at Fort Francis."

GOVERNOR--"The mill is a private enterprise, and we have no power
to give you boards from that."

CHIEF--"I will now show you a medal that was given to those who
made a treaty at Red River by the Commissioner. He said it was
silver, but I do not think it is. I should be ashamed to carry it
on my breast over my heart. I think it would disgrace the Queen, my
mother, to wear her image on so base a metal as this. [Here the
Chief held up the medal and struck it with the back of his knife.
The result was anything but the 'true ring,' and made every man
ashamed of the petty meanness that had been practised.] Let the
medals you give us be of silver--medals that shall be worthy of
the high position our Mother the Queen occupies."

GOVERNOR--"I will tell them at Ottawa what you have said, and how
you have said it."

CHIEF--"I wish you to understand you owe the treaty much to the
Half-breeds."

GOVERNOR--"I know it. I sent some of them to talk with you, and I
am proud that all the Half-breeds from Manitoba, who are here, gave
their Governor their cordial support."

The business of the treaty having now been completed, the Chief,
Mawedopenais, who, with Powhassan, had with such wonderful tact
carried on the negotiations, stepped up to the Governor and said:--

"Now you see me stand before you all; what has been done here
to-day has been done openly before the Great Spirit, and before
the nation, and I hope that I may never hear any one say that this
treaty has been done secretly; and now, in closing this Council, I
take off my glove, and in giving you my hand, I deliver over my
birth-right and lands; and in taking your hand, I hold fast all the
promises you have made, and I hope they will last as long as the
sun goes round and the water flows, as you have said."

The Governor then took his hand and said:

"I accept your hand and with it the lands, and will keep all my
promises, in the firm belief that the treaty now to be signed will
bind the red man and the white together as friends for ever."

A copy of the treaty was then prepared and duly signed, after which
a large amount of presents consisting of pork, flour, clothing,
blankets, twine, powder and shot, etc., were distributed to the
several bands represented on the ground.

On Saturday, Mr. Pether, Local Superintendent of Indian Affairs at
Fort Francis, and Mr. Graham of the Government Works, began to pay
the treaty money--an employment that kept them busy far into the
night. Some of the Chiefs received as much as one hundred and
seventy dollars for themselves and families.

As soon as the money was distributed the shops of the H. B. Co.,
and other resident traders were visited, as well as the tents of
numerous private traders, who had been attracted thither by the
prospect of doing a good business. And while these shops all did a
great trade--the H. B. Co. alone taking in $4,000 in thirty
hours--it was a noticeable fact that many took home with them
nearly all their money. When urged to buy goods there, a frequent
reply was: "If we spend all our money here and go home and want
debt, we will be told to get our debt where we spent our money."
"Debt" is used by them instead of the word "credit." Many others
deposited money with white men and Half-breeds on whose honor they
could depend, to be called for and spent at Fort Garry when "the
ground froze."

One very wonderful thing that forced itself on the attention of
every one was the perfect order that prevailed throughout the camp,
and which more particularly marked proceedings in the council.
Whether the demands put forward were granted by the Governor
or not, there was no petulance, no ill-feeling, evinced; but
everything was done with a calm dignity that was pleasing
to behold, and which might be copied with advantage by more
pretentious deliberative assemblies.

On Sunday afternoon, the Governor presented an ox to the nation,
and after it had been eaten a grand dance was indulged in. Monday
morning the river Indians took passage on the steamer for Fort
Francis, and others left in their canoes for their winter quarters.

The Governor and party left on Monday morning, the troops, under
command of Captain McDonald, who had conducted themselves with the
greatest propriety, and had contributed, by the moral effect of
their presence, much to the success of the negotiation, having
marched to Fort Garry on Saturday morning.



CHAPTER VI

THE QU'APPELLE TREATY, OR NUMBER FOUR


This treaty, is, so generally called, from having been made at
the Qu'Appelle Lakes, in the North-West Territories. The Indians
treated with, were a portion of the Cree and Saulteaux Tribes, and
under its operations, about 75,000 square miles of territory were
surrendered. This treaty, was the first step towards bringing
the Indians of the Fertile Belt into closer relations with the
Government of Canada, and was a much needed one. In the year 1871,
Major Butler was sent into the North-West Territories by the
Government of Canada, to examine into and report, with regard to
the state of affairs there. He reported, to Lieutenant-Governor
Archibald, that "law and order are wholly unknown in the region
of the Saskatchewan, in so much, as the country is without any
executive organization, and destitute of any means of enforcing
the law." Towards remedying this serious state of affairs, the
Dominion placed the North-West Territories under the rule of
the Lieutenant-Governor and Council of the Territories, the
Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba, being, ex officio, Governor of the
Territories. This body, composed of representative men, possessed
executive functions, and legislative powers. They entered upon
their duties with zeal, and discharged them with efficiency.
Amongst other measures, they passed a prohibitory liquor law, which
subsequently was practically adopted by a Statute of the Dominion.
They proposed the establishment of a Mounted Police Force, a
suggestion which was given force to by the Dominion Cabinet, and
they recommended, that, treaties should be made, with the Indians
at Forts Qu'Appelle, Carlton and Pitt, recommendations, which, were
all, eventually, carried out. In the report of the Minister of
the Interior, for the year 1875, he states "that it is due to the
Council to record the fact, that the legislation and valuable
suggestions, submitted to your Excellency, from time to time,
through their official head, Governor Morris, aided the Government
not a little in the good work of laying the foundations of law
and order, in the North-West, in securing the good will of the
Indian tribes, and in establishing the prestige of the Dominion
Government, throughout that vast country." In accordance with these
suggestions, the Government of the Dominion, decided, on effecting
a treaty, with the plain Indians, Crees and Chippawas, who inhabit
the country, of which, Fort Qu'Appelle, was a convenient centre,
and entrusted the duty, to the Hon. Alexander Morris then
Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba and the North-West Territories,
the Hon. David Laird, then Minister of the Interior, and now
Lieutenant-Governor of the North-West Territories, and the Hon. W.
J. Christie, a retired factor of the Hudson's Bay Company, and a
gentleman of large experience, among the Indian tribes.

In pursuance of this mission, these gentlemen left Fort Garry in
August, 1874, and journeyed to Lake Qu'Appelle (the calling or
echoing lake), where they met the assembled Indians, in September.
The Commissioners, had an escort of militia, under the command of
Lieut.-Col. Osborne Smith, C.M.G. This force marched to and from
Qu'Appelle, acquitted themselves with signal propriety, and proved
of essential service. Their return march was made in excellent
time. The distance, three hundred and fifty miles having been
accomplished in sixteen and a half days.

The Commissioners encountered great difficulties, arising, from the
excessive demands of the Indians, and from the jealousies, existing
between the two Nations, Crees and Chippawas, but by perseverance,
firmness and tact, they succeeded in overcoming the obstacles, they
had to encounter, and eventually effected a treaty, whereby the
Indian title was extinguished in a tract of country, embracing
75,000 square miles of territory. After long and animated
discussions the Indians, asked to be granted the same terms as were
accorded to the Indians of Treaty Number Three, at the North-West
Angle, hereinbefore mentioned. The Commissioners assented to their
request and the treaty was signed accordingly.

On the return, of the Commissioners to Fort Ellice, they met there,
the Chippawas of that vicinage, and made a supplementary treaty
with them. These Indians were included in the boundaries of Treaty
Number Two, but had not been treated with, owing to their distance
from Manitoba House, where that treaty was made. In 1875, the Hon.
W. J. Christie, and Mr. M. G. Dickieson, then of the Department of
the Interior, and subsequently, Assistant Superintendent of Indian
affairs, in the North-West Territories, were appointed to make the
payments of annuities, to the Indians, embraced in the Treaty
Number Four, and obtain the adhesion of other bands, which had
not been present at Qu'Appelle, the previous year. They met, the
Indians, at Qu'Appelle (where six Chiefs who had been absent,
accepted the terms of the treaty) and at Fort Pelly and at Shoal
River, where two other Chiefs, with their bands, came into the
treaty stipulations. A gratifying feature connected with the making
of this, and the other, North-Western Treaties, has been the
readiness, with which the Indians, who were absent, afterwards
accepted the terms which had been settled for them, by those, who
were able to attend. I close these observations, by annexing,
the reports of Lieutenant-Governor Morris, to the Honorable the
Secretary of State of Canada, of date 17th October, 1874, giving,
an account, of the making of the treaties at Qu'Appelle and
Fort Ellice, and an extract, from that of Messrs. Christie and
Dickieson, dated 7th October, 1875, describing its further
completion, and I also insert, accurate short-hand reports of the
proceedings at Qu'Appelle and Fort Ellice, which, were made, at
the time, by Mr. Dickieson, who, was present, at the treaty, as
secretary to the Commissioners. These will be found to be both
interesting and instructive.



GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
FORT GARRY, MANITOBA, October 17, 1874.

Sir,--I have the honor to inform you that in compliance with the
request of the Government, I proceeded to Lake Qu'Appelle in
company with the Hon. David Laird, in order to act with him and W.
J. Christie, Esq., as Commissioners to negotiate a treaty with the
tribes of Indians in that region.

Mr. Laird and I left Fort Garry on the 26th of August, and arrived
at Lake Qu'Appelle on the 8th of September, Mr. Christie having
gone in advance of us to Fort Pelly.

We were accompanied on arriving by the escort of militia under the
command of Lieut.-Col. W. Osborne Smith, who had preceded us, but
whom we had overtaken.

The escort took up their encampment at a very desirable situation
on the edge of the lake, the Indians being encamped at some
distance.

The Commissioners were kindly provided with apartments by W. J.
McLean, Esq., the officer in charge of the Hudson Bay Company's
Post.

After our arrival, the Commissioners caused the Indians to be
summoned, to meet them, in a marquee tent adjoining the encampment
of the militia.

The Crees came headed by their principal Chief "Loud Voice," and
a number of Saulteaux followed, without their Chief, Cote. The
Commissioners, having decided that it was desirable that there
should be only one speaker on behalf of the Commissioners,
requested me owing to my previous experience with the Indian tribes
and my official position as Lieutenant-Governor of the North-West
Territories, to undertake the duty, which I agreed to do.
Accordingly, I told the Indians the object of our coming and
invited them to present to us their Chiefs and headmen. "Loud
Voice" stated that they were not yet ready and asked for a delay
till next day, to which we assented.

On the 9th, four Indian soldiers were sent to the Commissioners to
ask for two days delay, but we replied that when they met us in
conference they could prefer any reasonable request, but that we
expected them to meet us as agreed on the previous day, and further
that the Saulteaux had not conducted themselves with proper respect
to the Commissioners, as representatives of the Crown, as their
principal Chief Cote had not met us. Eventually, both the Crees and
the Saulteaux met us, with their Chiefs, when I addressed them.
They asked time to deliberate and we appointed the 11th at ten
o'clock for the next conference.

The Crees then left the tent suddenly, under constraint of the
Indian soldiers, who compelled the Chiefs to go.

On the 11th we sent a bugler round to summon the Indians to the
appointed conference, but they did not come.

Instead the Saulteaux sent word that they could not meet us except
in their own soldiers tent, distant about a mile from the militia
encampment, but we refused to do so.

The Crees were ready to proceed to the marquee, but were prevented
by the Saulteaux, a section of whom displayed a turbulent
disposition and were numerically the strongest party. We sent our
interpreter Charles Pratt, a Cree Indian, who was educated at
St. John's College here, and who is a catechist of the Church of
England, to tell the Indians that they must meet us as agreed upon.

In consequence, about four o'clock in the afternoon the Crees led
by "Loud Voice," came to the conference but the Saulteaux kept
away, though a number were sent to hear and report. On behalf of
the Commissioners, I then explained to the Crees the object of our
mission and made our proposals for a treaty, but as they were not
ready to reply, we asked them to return to their tents and meet us
next day.

On the 12th the Crees and Saulteaux sent four men from the soldiers
tent or council, which they had organized, to ask that the
encampment of the militia and the conference tents should be
removed half way, towards their encampment.

In consequence, we requested Lieut.-Col. Smith to proceed to the
Indian encampment and ascertain the meaning of this demand
authorizing him, if necessary, to arrange for the pitching of the
conference tent nearer the Indians, if that would give them any
satisfaction.

He reported, on his return, that the Indians wished the militia to
encamp with them, and that they objected to meet us anywhere on
the reserve of the Hudson Bay Company, as they said they could not
speak freely there.

He refused to remove the militia camp, as it was a very desirable
place where it had been placed, but with the assent of the Indians
selected a spot adjoining the reserve and at a suitable distance
from the Indian tents, on which the conference tent was to be daily
erected, but to be removed after the conferences closed.

We then summoned the Indians to meet us at one o'clock which they
did at the appointed place.

After the formal hand shaking, which ceremony they repeat at the
beginning and close of every interview the Commissioners submitted
their terms for a treaty, which were in effect similar to those
granted at the North-West Angle, except that the money present
offered was eight dollars per head, instead of twelve dollars as
there.

The Indians declined, however, to talk about these proposals, as
they said there was something in the way. They objected to the
reserve having been surveyed for the Hudson Bay Company, without
their first having been consulted, and claimed that the L300,000
paid to the Company should be paid to them. They also objected to
the Company's trading in the Territory, except only at their posts.
The Commissioners refused to comply with their demands, and
explained to them how the Company had become entitled to the
reserve in question, and the nature of the arrangement, that had
resulted in the payment by the Government of Canada of the
L300,000.

The conference adjourned to Monday the 14th, on which day the
Commissioners again met them, but the Cree Chief "Loud Voice" asked
for another day to consider the matter, and "Cote" or "Meemay" the
Saulteaux Chief, from Fort Pelly, asked to be treated with, at his
own place. They demanded, that the Company should only be allowed
to trade at their own posts, and not to send out traders into the
Territory--which was of course refused, it being explained to them
that all Her Majesty's subjects had equal right of trading. The
Commissioners then agreed to grant a final delay of another day,
for further consideration. Up to this period the position was very
unsatisfactory.

The Crees were from the first ready to treat, as were the Saulteaux
from Fort Pelly, but the Saulteaux of the Qu'Appelle District were
not disposed to do so and attempted to coerce the other Indians.

They kept the Chiefs "Loud Voice" and "Cote" under close
surveillance, they being either confined to their tents or else
watched by "soldiers," and threatened if they should make any
overtures to us.

The Saulteaux cut down the tent over the head of one of the Cree
Chiefs and conducted themselves in such a manner, that "Loud Voice"
applied to the Commissioners for protection, and the Crees
purchased knives and armed themselves.

The Saulteaux, one day went the length of placing six "soldiers,"
armed with rifles and revolvers, in the conference tent to
intimidate the other Indians, a step which was promptly counteracted
by Lieut.-Col. Smith, calling in six of the militiamen who were
stationed in the tent. In this connection, I must take the
opportunity of stating that the results proved the wisdom of the
course taken by the Commissioners in obtaining the escort of the
militia, as their presence exerted great moral influence, and I am
persuaded, prevented the jealousies and ancient feud between the
Crees and Saulteaux culminating in acts of violence.

The conduct of the whole force was excellent and, whether on the
march or in the encampment ground, they conducted themselves in a
most creditable manner.

Resuming, however, my narrative, on the 15th of September, the
Commissioners again met the Indians at eleven o'clock in the
forenoon.

The Crees had, in the interval, decided to treat with us
independently, and the Saulteaux, finding this, came to a similar
conclusion. After a protracted interview, the Indians asked to be
granted the same terms as were given at the North-West Angle. The
Commissioners took time to consider and adjourned the conference
until three o'clock.

In the interval, the Commissioners, being persuaded that a treaty
could not otherwise be made, determined on acceding to the request
of the Indians.

The Indians, having again met the Commissioners in the afternoon,
presented their Chiefs to them, when they asked to be informed what
the terms granted at the North-West Angle were. These were fully
and carefully explained to them, but after a request that all the
Indians owed to the Hudson Bay Company should be wiped out and a
refusal of the Commissioners to entertain their demands, they then
asked that they should be paid fifteen dollars per annum per head,
which was refused, and they were informed that the proposals of the
Commissioners were final, and could not be changed.

The Chiefs then agreed to accept the terms offered and to sign
the treaty, having first asked that the Half-breeds should be
allowed to hunt, and having been assured that the population in
the North-West would be treated fairly and justly, the treaty was
signed by the Commissioners and the Chiefs, having been first fully
explained to them by the interpreter.

Arrangements were then made to commence the payment and distribution
of the presents the next day, a duty which was discharged by Mr.
Christie and Mr. Dickieson, Private Secretary of the Hon. Mr. Laird.

I forward you to form an appendix to this despatch, a report
marked "A" and "B" extended from notes taken in short hand, by Mr.
Dickieson, of the various conferences and of the utterances of the
Commissioners and the Indians.

It is obvious that such a record will prove valuable, as it enables
any misunderstanding on the part of the Indians, as to what was
said at the conference, to be corrected, and it, moreover, will
enable the council better to appreciate the character of the
difficulties that have to be encountered in negotiating with the
Indians.

On the 17th I left for Fort Ellice, in company with Mr. Laird, Mr.
Christie and Mr. Dickieson remaining to complete the payments,
which were satisfactorily disposed of.

Before leaving, the Chiefs "Loud Voice" and Cote called on us to
tender their good wishes, and to assure us that they would teach
their people to respect the treaty.

The Commissioners received every assistance in their power from
Mr. McDonald of Fort Ellice, in charge of the Hudson Bay Company
District of Swan River, and from Mr. McLean, in charge of the
Qu'Appelle Post,--I also add, that the Half-breed population were I
believe generally desirous of seeing the treaty concluded and used
the influence of their connection with the Indians in its favor.

I forward in another despatch a copy of an address I received from
the Metis, or Half-breeds, together with my reply thereto.

The treaty was taken charge of by the Hon. Mr. Laird, and will be
by him placed on record in his Department and submitted to council
for approval.

I enclose herewith, however, a printed copy of it, marked "C," to
accompany this despatch.

The supplementary treaty made at Fort Ellice will form the subject
of another despatch.

Trusting that the efforts of the Commissioners to secure a
satisfactory understanding with the Western Indians will result in
benefit to the race, advantage to the Dominion, and meet the
approval of the Privy Council,

                 I have the honor to be, Sir,
                           Your obedient servant,
                                    ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                                         Lieut.-Gov. N. W. T.



                           GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
                  FORT GARRY, MANITOBA, October 17th, 1874.

Sir,--Referring to my despatch of the 17th inst., (No. 211) I have
the honor to report that Mr. Laird and I arrived at Fort Ellice
from Qu'Appelle Lakes, on Saturday the 19th of September.

On Monday, we met the band of Saulteaux Indians, who make their
headquarters at Fort Ellice, and who had remained there, instead of
going to Qu'Appelle at our request.

This band have been in the habit of migrating between the region
covered by the Second Treaty and that comprehended in the Fourth,
but had not been treated with.

We proposed to them to give their adhesion to the Qu'Appelle Treaty
and surrender their claim to lands, wherever situated, in the
North-West Territories, on being given a reserve and being granted
the terms on which the treaty in question was made. We explained
fully these terms and asked the Indians to present to us their
Chief and headmen. As some of the band were absent, whom the
Indians desired to be recognized as headmen, only the Chief and one
headman were presented. These, on behalf of the Indians accepted
the terms and thanked the Queen and the Commissioners for their
care of the Indian people. A supplement to the treaty was then
submitted and fully explained to them, by our acting interpreter,
Joseph Robillard, after which it was signed by Mr. Laird and
myself, and by the Chief and head man.

The original of the supplementary treaty will be submitted for
approval by Mr. Laird, but I annex a printed copy of it, as an
appendix to this despatch.

I also annex, notes of the conference with these Indians, extended
from the short hand report taken of the proceedings by Mr.
Dickieson, Private Secretary to the Hon. Mr. Laird.

In the afternoon, Mr. Christie and Mr. Dickieson arrived from Lake
Qu'Appelle, and shortly afterwards proceeded to make the payments
to the Indians, under the treaty.

It was satisfactory to have this band dealt with, as they asserted
claims in the region covered by the Manitoba Post Treaty, but had
not been represented at the time it was made.

On the 22nd of September the Commissioners left Fort Ellice and
arrived at Fort Garry on the afternoon of the 26th of that month,
having been absent a little over a month.

            I have the honor to be, Sir,
                      Your obedient Servant,
                             ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                                 Lieut.-Gov. N. W. T.
THE HONORABLE
   THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE PROVINCES,
                                      Ottawa.



WINNIPEG, MANITOBA, 7th October, 1875.

Sir,--We have now the honor to submit, for your information, our
final report in connection with our missions to the Indians
included in Treaty No 4.

As former reports have made you fully acquainted with the
arrangements that had been entered into previous to our departure
from this place, any further reference to them is unnecessary.

Having left Winnipeg on the 19th August, we arrived at Fort Ellice
on the 24th, the day appointed for the meeting the Indians of
that place. The same evening we had an interview with, and fully
explained the terms and conditions of the treaty to some of the
Indians who were not present when the treaty was concluded last
year. Next morning, by appointment, we met all the Indians
and explained to them the object of our mission, and, after
considerable discussion, made arrangements to commence paying the
annuities next day. This, however, was prevented by heavy rains,
which continued more or less to retard our operations on the
two following days, the 27th and 28th, but everything was
satisfactorily concluded with this band on the evening of the
latter day, and on the following morning we started for the
Qu'Appelle Lakes, accompanied by an escort of fifteen men of the
Mounted Police Force, under the command of Sub-Inspector McIllree,
which had arrived at Fort Ellice on the evening of the 26th, and
reached our destination on the forenoon of the 2nd September.

As you are aware, we had heard before leaving Winnipeg, that the
number of Indians assembled at the Qu'Appelle Lakes would be very
large, but we did not anticipate that so many as we found (nearly
five hundred lodges) would be congregated.

We at once saw that the funds at our disposal to pay the annuities
and gratuities would be inadequate, and availed ourselves of the
opportunity presented by the return of Major Irvine to Winnipeg,
to forward a telegram on the 5th September, requesting a further
amount of six thousand dollars to be placed to our credit; and we
may state here, though out of the order of time, as we found after
the first two days payments that we had still underestimated the
number of Indians present, we transmitted a telegram to Winnipeg by
special messenger, on the 9th September, for a further credit of
fifteen thousand dollars.

On the 3rd September we met the Indians and explained the object
of our mission, and, for the benefit of those who were absent last
year, the terms and conditions of the treaty, and stated that
we were now ready to fulfil so many of the obligations therein
contained as the Government were bound to execute this year. The
Indians declined saying anything on this occasion, but wished to
meet and confer with in the following day, as they had something
they wished to speak about. They accordingly met us on the 4th,
and made several demands, one of which was that the annuities be
increased to twelve dollars per head. We replied that the treaty
concluded last year was a covenant between them and the Government,
and it was impossible to comply with their demands; that all we had
to do was to carry out the terms of the treaty in so far as the
obligations of the same required. An idea seemed prevalent among
the Indians who were absent last year that no treaty had been
concluded then; that all which had been done at that time was
merely preliminary to the making of the treaty in reality, which
they thought was to be performed this year. The prevalence of this
opinion amongst them operated very prejudicially to the furthering
of our business, and we saw that until this was done away with it
would be impossible to do anything towards accomplishing the real
object of our mission. After a great deal of talking on their
part, and explanation on ours, the meeting adjourned until Monday
morning, as it was necessary that provisions should be issued to
the different bands that evening for the following day.

On Monday (the 6th) we again met the Indians, and as they evidently
wished to have another day's talking to urge the same demands they
had made on Saturday, we assured them all further discussion on the
subject was useless; that if they declined to accept the terms of
the treaty we must return and report to the Government that they
had broken the promise made last year. They then asked that we
should report to the Government what they had demanded. This we
agreed to do. After some further explanation to those Chiefs who
had not signed the treaty, the payment of the annuities and
gratuities was commenced and continued by Messrs. Dickieson and
Forsyth on this and the three following days until completed,
during which time Mr. Christie conferred with the Chiefs as to
the locality of their reserves.

Six Chiefs who had not been present last year when the treaty was
concluded, agreed to accept the terms of the same, and signed their
adhesion previous to being paid. The instruments thus signed by
them are transmitted herewith.

The suits of clothes, flags, medals and copies of the treaty were
given to the Chiefs and headmen as they were paid, and on the 10th
the ammunition and twine were distributed, also provisions to each
band for the return journey to their hunting grounds. * * * * * *

       We have the honor to be, Sir,
                  Your obedient servants,
                             W. J. CHRISTIE,
                                Indian Commissioner.
                             M. G. DICKIESON.



Report of the proceedings at the Conference between the Hon.
Alexander Morris, Lieut.-Governor of the North-West Territories,
the Hon. David Laird, Minister of the Interior, and W. J. Christie,
Esq., the Commissioners appointed by Order in Council to treat with
the Indians inhabiting the country described in the said Order in
Council, the first conference having been held at Qu'Appelle,
September 8th, 1874:

FIRST DAY'S CONFERENCE

At four o'clock the Commissioners entered the marquee erected for
the accommodation of themselves, and the Indians, who in in a short
time arrived, shook hands with the Commissioners, the officers of
the guard, and other gentlemen who were in the tent, and took their
seats.

It having been noticed that Cote, "the Pigeon," a leading Chief of
the Saulteaux tribe, had not arrived but that several of his band
were present and claimed that they had been sent to represent him,
His Honor the Lieut.-Governor instructed the (acting) interpreter,
William Daniel, to enquire why their Chief had not come to meet the
Commissioners, the white chiefs?

To this question they answered, that he had given no reason.

His Honor, through the interpreter, told them that the Queen had
sent him and the other Commissioners to see their Chief and their
nation, and that the least a loyal subject could do would be to
meet the messengers of the Queen.

His Honor then addressed the Crees as follows: "The Commissioners
having agreed that as Lieut.-Governor he should speak to them, as
we are sent here by the Queen, by the Great Mother--the Queen has
chosen me to be one of her Councillors, and has sent me here to
represent her and has made me Governor of all her Territories
in the North-West. She has sent another of her Councillors who
has come all the way from Ottawa. She has also sent with us Mr.
Christie, whom you all know, who has lived for a long time in this
country, but who had gone away from it to live in another part of
the Dominion of Canada. The Queen loves her Red children; she has
always been friends with them; she knows that it is hard for them
to live, and she has always tried to help them in the other parts
of the Dominion. Last year she sent me to see her children at the
Lake of the Woods. I took her children there by the hand, and the
white man and the red man made friends for ever. We have come here
with a message from the Queen and want to tell you all her mind. We
want to speak to you about the land and what the Queen is willing
to do for you, but before we tell you, we want you to tell us, who
your Chiefs and headmen are who will speak for you, while we speak
for the Queen, and we want to know what bands of Crees are here and
who will speak for them. We wish to know if the Crees are ready to
speak with us now?"

RA-KU-SHI-WAY, THE LOUD VOICE,--Said in reply: "I do not wish to
tell a lie. I cannot say who will speak for us; it will only be
known after consultation."

HIS HONOR THE LIEUT.-GOV.--"By to-morrow you will probably have
chosen whom you will have to speak for you and the Commissioners
will be glad to meet you after you have chosen your spokesmen, and
will meet you at ten o'clock. We want you to tell us openly what
you want and we will speak to you for the Queen in the same way.
The Colonel will send a man round to sound a bugle at ten o'clock
to let you know."

To the Saulteaux His Honor said: "We are here with a message from
the Great Mother and want you to open my mouth so that I can tell
you what I have to say. If you and your Chiefs will meet together
in council and talk it over we will be glad to meet you, if you
bring your Chief to-morrow. You must also choose your speakers who
will come with your Chief and speak for you."

LOUD VOICE--"I will tell the message that is given me to tell. I
have one thing to say, the first word that came to them was for the
Saulteaux tribe to choose a place to pitch their tents."

HIS HONOR--"This place was chosen because it is a good place for
my men--for the soldiers--there is plenty of water and grass, and
I will meet you here to-morrow. That is all at present."

After the departure of the main body of Cree Indians, Saulteaux,
from the Cypress Hills, entered the tent saying that they had no
Chief, and did not want to go with the main body of the nation,
that they had plenty of friends on the plains.

His Honor said they would hear the Queen's message with the rest of
the Indians.



SECOND DAY'S CONFERENCE

September 9, 1874.

The Indians, both Crees, Saulteaux and their Chiefs having arrived,
His Honor Lieut.-Governor Morris said: "I am glad to see so many
of the Queen's red children here this morning. I told those I
saw yesterday that I was one of the Queen's councillors, and had
another councillor with me from Ottawa and that the Queen had sent
Mr. Christie who used to live amongst you to help us. Yesterday the
Cree nation with their Chief were here, the Saulteaux did not come
to meet the Queen's servants, their Chief was not here. I thought
that the Saulteaux could not have understood that the Queen had
sent her servants to see them, or they would have come to meet
them. If Loud Voice or any other Chief came down to Fort Garry to
see me, and I sent one of my servants to meet them instead of
shaking hands with them, would they be pleased? I wanted you to
meet me here to-day because I wanted to speak to you before the
Great Spirit and before the world. I want both Crees and Saulteaux
to know what I say. I told those who were here yesterday that we
had a message from the Queen to them. Last year I made a treaty
with the Indians, 4,000 in number, at the Lake of the Woods. To-day
the Queen sends us here. I told you yesterday that she loves her
red children, and they have always respected her and obeyed her
laws. I asked you yesterday, and ask you now, to tell me who would
speak for you, and how many bands of each nation are represented
here. I have heard that you are not ready to speak to me yet but do
not know it, and I want you to say anything you have to say before
all, and I will speak in the same way. What I have to talk about
concerns you, your children and their children, who are yet unborn,
and you must think well over it, as the Queen has thought well over
it. What I want, is for you to take the Queen's hand, through mine,
and shake hands with her for ever, and now I want, before I say any
more, to hear from the Chiefs if they are ready with their men to
speak for them, and if they are not ready if they will be ready
to-morrow."

CAN-A-HAH-CHA-PEW, THE MAN OF THE BOW,--"We are not ready yet, we
have not gathered together yet. That is all I have to say."

PEI-CHE-TO'S SON--O-TA-HA-O-MAN, THE GAMBLER--"My dear friends,
do you want me to speak for you to these great men?" (the Indians
signified their consent). "I heard you were to come here, that was
the reason that all the camps were collected together, I heard
before-hand too where the camp was to be placed, but I tell you
that I am not ready yet. Every day there are other Indians coming
and we are not all together. Where I was told to pitch my tent that
is where I expected to see the great men in the camp. That is all."

HIS HONOR--"With regard to the camp, the Queen sent one of her
chief men of our soldiers with us, and he selected the best place
for the men, the place where we are now, and I think it is a good
place. At first he thought to have encamped across the river, but
he thought this was better ground and chose it. I think it just as
well that our tents should be at a little distance from your braves
and your camp. I want to say to the Indian children of the Queen
that if their people are coming in, that our men have walked a long
way here, and must go back again to Fort Garry, and I have other
things to do. Mr. Laird has to go back again to look after other
things for the Queen at Ottawa. I want to ask the Chiefs when they
will be ready to meet us to-morrow."

PEI-CHE-TO'S SON--"I have said before, we are not ready."

HIS HONOR--"Let them send me word through their Chiefs when they
are ready."



THIRD DAY'S CONFERENCE

September 11, 1874.

The Crees and their Chiefs met the Commissioners. The Saulteaux
Chief was not present, though most of the tribe were present.

An Indian, "the Crow," advised the assembled Crees, the Saulteaux
not having arrived, to listen attentively to what words he said.

His Honor the Lieut.-Governor then arose and said: "I am glad to
meet you here to-day. We have waited long and began to wonder
whether the Queen's red children were not coming to meet her
messengers. All the ground here is the Queen's and you are free to
speak your mind fully. We want you to speak to me face to face. I
am ready now with my friends here to give you the Queen's message.
Are your ears open to hear? Have you chosen your speakers?"

THE LOUD VOICE--"There is no one to answer."

HIS HONOR--"You have had time enough to select your men to answer
and I will give you the Queen's message. The Queen knows that you
are poor; the Queen knows that it is hard to find food for
yourselves and children; she knows that the winters are cold, and
your children are often hungry; she has always cared for her red
children as much as for her white. Out of her generous heart and
liberal hand she wants to do something for you, so that when the
buffalo get scarcer, and they are scarce enough now, you may be
able to do something for yourselves."

THE LOUD VOICE (to the Indians)--"I wonder very much at your
conduct. You understand what is said and you understand what is
right and good. You ought to listen to that and answer it, every
one of you. What is bad you cannot answer."

HIS HONOR--"What the Queen and her Councillors would like is this,
she would like you to learn something of the cunning of the white
man. When fish are scarce and the buffalo are not plentiful she
would like to help you to put something in the land, she would like
that you should have some money every year to buy things that you
need. If any of you would settle down on the land, she would give
you cattle to help you; she would like you to have some seed to
plant. She would like to give you every year, for twenty years,
some powder, shot, and twine to make nets of. I see you here before
me to-day. I will pass away and you will pass away. I will go where
my fathers have gone and you also, but after me and after you will
come our children. The Queen cares for you and for your children,
and she cares for the children that are yet to be born. She would
like to take you by the hand and do as I did for her at the Lake of
the Woods last year. We promised them and we are ready to promise
now to give five dollars to every man, woman and child, as long as
the sun shines and water flows. We are ready to promise to give
$1,000 every year, for twenty years, to buy powder and shot and
twine, by the end of which time I hope you will have your little
farms. If you will settle down we would lay off land for you, a
square mile for every family of five. Whenever you go to a Reserve,
the Queen will be ready to give you a school and schoolmaster, and
the Government will try to prevent fire-water from being sent among
you. If you shake hands with us and make a treaty, we are ready to
make a present at the end of the treaty, of eight dollars for every
man, woman and child in your nations. We are ready also to give
calico, clothing and other presents. We are ready to give every
recognized Chief, a present of twenty-five dollars, a medal, and a
suit of clothing. We are also ready to give the Chief's soldiers,
not exceeding four in each band, a present of ten dollars, and next
year and every year after, each chief will be paid twenty-five
dollars, and his chief soldiers not exceeding four in each band,
will receive ten dollars. Now I think that you see that that the
Queen loves her red children, that she wants to do you good, and
you ought to show that you think so. I cannot believe that you will
be the first Indians, the Queen's subjects, who will not take her
by the hand. The Queen sent one of her councillors from Ottawa, and
me, her Governor, to tell you her mind. I have opened my hands and
heart to you. It is for you to think of the future of those who are
with you now, of those who are coming after you, and may the Great
Spirit guide you to do what is right. I have only one word more to
say. The last time I saw you I was not allowed to say all I wanted
to say until you went away. What I wanted to say is this, I have
put before you our message, I want you to go back to your tents and
think over what I have said and come and meet me to-morrow.
Recollect that we cannot stay very long here. I have said all."

FOURTH DAY'S CONFERENCE

September 12, 1874.

In the morning four Indians, two Crees and two Saulteaux, waited on
the Commissioners and asked that they should meet the Indians half
way, and off the Company's reserve, and that the soldiers should
remove their camps beside the Indian encampment, that they would
meet the Commissioners then and confer with them; that there was
something in the way of their speaking openly where the marquee had
been pitched. Their request was complied with as regarded the place
of meeting only, and the spot for the conference selected by Col.
Smith and the Indians.

The meeting was opened by the Lieut.-Governor, who said, "Crees and
Saulteaux,--I have asked you to meet us here to-day. We have been
asking you for many days to meet us and this is the first time you
have all met us. If it was not my duty and if the Queen did not
wish it, I would not have taken so much trouble to speak to you. We
are sent a long way to give you her message. Yesterday I told the
Crees her message, and I know that the Saulteaux know what it was,
but that there may be no mistake, I will tell it to you again and I
will tell you more. When I have given my message understand that
you will have to answer it, as I and my friends will have to leave
you. You are the subjects of the Queen, you are her children, and
you are only a little band to all her other children. She has
children all over the world, and she does right with them all. She
cares as much for you as she cares for her white children, and the
proof of it is that wherever her name is spoken her people whether
they be red or white, love her name and are ready to die for it,
because she is always just and true. What she promises never
changes. She knows the condition of her people here; you are not
her only red children; where I come from, in Ontario and in Quebec,
she has many red children, and away beyond the mountains she has
other red children, and she wants to care for them all. Last year I
was among the Saulteaux; we have the Saulteaux where I came from.
They were my friends. I was the son of a white Chief who had a high
place among them, they told him they would do his work, they called
him Shekeisheik. I learned from him to love the red man, and it was
a pleasant duty and good to my heart when the Queen told me to come
among her Saulteaux children and I expect the Crees and the
Saulteaux to take my hand as they did last year. In our hands they
feel the Queen's, and if they take them the hands of the white and
red man will never unclasp. In other lands the white and red man
are not such friends as we have always been, and why? Because the
Queen always keeps her word, always protects her red men. She
learned last winter that bad men from the United States had come
into her country and had killed some of her red children, What did
she say? This must not be, I will send my men and will not suffer
these bad men to hurt my red children, their lives are very dear to
me. And now I will tell you our message. The Queen knows that her
red children often find it hard to live. She knows that her red
children, their wives and children, are often hungry, and that the
buffalo will not last for ever and she desires to do something for
them. More than a hundred years ago, the Queen's father said to the
red men living in Quebec and Ontario, I will give you land and
cattle and set apart Reserves for you, and will teach you. What has
been the result? There the red men are happy; instead of getting
fewer in number by sickness they are growing in number; their
children have plenty. The Queen wishes you to enjoy the same
blessings, and so I am here to tell you all the Queen's mind, but
recollect this, the Queen's High Councillor here from Ottawa, and
I, her Governor, are not traders; we do not come here in the spirit
of traders; we come here to tell you openly, without hiding
anything, just what the Queen will do for you, just what she thinks
is good for you, and I want you to look me in the face, eye to eye,
and open your hearts to me as children would to a father, as
children ought to do to a father, and as you ought to the servants
of the great mother of us all. I told my friends yesterday that
things changed here, that we are here to-day and that in a few
years it may be we will not be here, but after us will come our
children. The Queen thinks of the children yet unborn. I know that
there are some red men as well as white men who think only of
to-day and never think of to-morrow. The Queen has to think of what
will come long after to-day. Therefore, the promises we have to
make to you are not for to-day only but for to-morrow, not only for
you but for your children born and unborn, and the promises we make
will be carried out as long as the sun shines above and the water
flows in the ocean. When you are ready to plant seed the Queen's
men will lay off Reserves so as to give a square mile to every
family of five persons, and on commencing to farm the Queen will
give to every family cultivating the soil two hoes, one spade, one
scythe for cutting the grain, one axe and plough, enough of seed
wheat, barley, oats and potatoes to plant the land they get ready.
The Queen wishes her red children to learn the cunning of the white
man and when they are ready for it she will send schoolmasters on
every Reserve and pay them. We have come through the country for
many days and we have seen hills and but little wood and in many
places little water, and it may be a long time before there are
many white men settled upon this land, and you will have the right
of hunting and fishing just as you have now until the land is
actually taken up. (His Honor repeated the offers which had been
given to the Saulteaux on the previous day.) I think I have told
you all that the Queen is willing to do for you. It ought to show
you that she has thought more about you than you have about her. I
will be glad now to have those whom you have selected speak for you
and I again ask you to keep nothing back. This is the first time
you have had white chiefs, officers of the Queen, so high in her
Councils, so trusted by her among you. We have no object but your
good at heart, and therefore we ask you to speak out to us, to open
your minds to us, and believe that we are your true and best
friends, who will never advise you badly, who will never whisper
bad words in your ears, who only care for your good and that of
your children. I have told you the truth, the whole truth, and now
we expect to hear from the two nations and any other tribe who may
be represented here. My friend Mr. Laird reminds me that he has
come from an Island in the far off sea, that he has go back to
Ottawa and then go to his own home, that he was asked specially to
help me in speaking to you and advising me. He is obliged to go
away as I am, and therefore we want you to answer us."

COTE, or MEE-MAY (Saulteaux Chief)--"I cannot say anything to you.
It is that man (pointing to Loud Voice) will speak."

LOUD VOICE (Cree Chief)--"If I could speak, if I could manage to
utter my feelings there is reason why I should answer you back; but
there is something in my way, and that is all I can tell you. This
man (the Gambler) will tell you."

O-TA-KA-O-NAN, OR THE GAMBLER.--"This morning I saw the chief of
the soldiers, who asked me what is in your way that you cannot come
and meet the Queen's messengers; then I told him what was in the
way. And now that I am come in, what do I see? You were rather slow
in giving your hand. You said that the Queen spoke through you and
spoke very plainly, but I cannot speak about what you said at
present; the thing that is in the way that is what I am working
at."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"We have come here for the purpose of knowing
what is in your mind. I held out my hand but you did not do as your
nation did at the Angle. When I arrived there the Chief and his men
came and gave me the pipe of peace and paid me every honor. Why?
Because I was the servant of the queen. I was not slow in offering
my hand, I gave it freely and from my heart, and whenever we found
I could please you by coming here, we sent the chief of the
soldiers to select a suitable place to meet you. You tell me there
is something in your mind. If there is anything standing between
us, how can we take it away or answer you unless we know what it
is?"

THE GAMBLER--"I told the soldier master you did not set your camp
in order, you came and staid beyond over there, that is the reason
I did not run in over there. Now when you have come here, you see
sitting out there a mixture of Half-breeds, Crees, Saulteaux and
Stonies, all are one, and you were slow in taking the hand of a
Half-breed. All these things are many things that are in my way. I
cannot speak about them."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"Why are you here to-day? because we asked you
to come, because it was a good place to speak with them the reason
we wished to see them. I am now quite willing to tell you all about
Fort Pelly. The Queen heard that Americans had come into the
country and were treating her Indian children badly. I myself sent
her word that twenty-five of her Indian children, men, women and
children, had been shot down by the American traders, then she
resolved to protect her red children, for that reason she has
determined to have a body of men on horses as policemen to keep all
bad people, white or red, in order. She will not allow her red
children to be made drunk and shot down again as some of them were
a few months ago. Now you ought to be glad that you have a Queen
who takes such an interest in you. What are they doing now up at
Fort Pelly? The men must have some place to live in this winter,
they cannot live out of doors, and some men have gone to Fort Pelly
to build houses for them, and the Queen expects that you will do
all you can to help them because they are your friends. There was a
treaty before and Indians are paid under it, but we were told as we
passed Fort Ellice that there were a few Indians there who were not
included in that treaty, and had never been paid, and they agreed
to meet us when we go back, I do not quite understand another
point. We have here Crees, Saulteaux, Assiniboines and other
Indians, they are all one, and we have another people, the
Half-breeds, they are of your blood and my blood. The Queen cares
for them, one of them is here an officer with a Queen's coat on his
back. At the Lake of the Woods last winter every Half-Breed who was
there with me was helping me, and I was proud of it, and glad to
take the word back to the Queen, and her servants, and you may rest
easy, you may leave the Half-breeds in the hands of the Queen who
will deal generously and justly with them. There was a Half-breed
came forward to the table. He was only one of many here. I simply
wanted to know whether he was authorized by you to take any part in
the Council, as it is the Indians alone we are here to meet. He
told me you wanted him here as a witness. We have plenty of
witnesses here, but when I heard that, I welcomed him as I had done
you, and shook hands with him, and he ought to have told you that.
I have given our answer and I have always found this that it is
good for men to try to understand each other, and to speak openly,
if they do that and both are earnest, if their hearts are pure,
they will and can understand each other."

THE GAMBLER--"I have understood plainly before what he (the Hudson
Bay Company) told me about the Queen. This country that he (H. B.
Co.) bought from the Indians let him complete that. It is that
which is in the way. I cannot manage to speak upon anything else,
when the land was staked off it was all the Company's work. That is
the reason I cannot speak of other things."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"We don't understand what you mean. Will you
explain?"

THE GAMBLER--"I know what I have to tell you. Who surveyed this
land? Was it done by the Company? This is the reason I speak of the
Company, why are you staying in the Company's house?"

LIEUT.-GOVERNOR MORRIS--"The Company have a right to have certain
lands granted them by the Queen, who will do what is fair and just
for the Company, for the Indians, for the Half-breeds, and for the
whites. She will make no distinction. Whatever she promises she
will carry out. The Company are are nothing to her except that they
are carrying on trade in this country, and that they are subjects
to her just as you are. You ask then why I went to the Company's
house? I came here not at my own pleasure. I am not so strong as
you are. I never slept in a tent in my life before and was only too
glad to find a home to go to."

The Gambler--"I understand now. And now this Company man. This is
the Company man (pointing to Mr. McDonald). This is the thing I
cannot speak of. The Cree does not know, the Saulteaux does not
know. It was never known when this was surveyed, neither by the
Cree nor the Saulteaux."

Lieut.-Gov. Morris--"The Company are trading in this country and
they require to have places to carry out their trade. If the Queen
gives them land to hold under her she has a perfect right to do it,
just as she will have a perfect right to lay off lands for you if
you agree to settle on them. I am sorry for you; I am afraid you
have been listening to bad voices who have not the interests of the
Indians at heart. If because of these things you will not speak to
us we will go away with hearts sorry for you and for your children,
who thus throw back in our faces the hand of the Queen that she has
held out to you."

The Gambler--"It is very plain who speaks; the Crees are not
speaking, and the Saulteaux is speaking, if the Queen's men came
here to survey the land. I am telling you plainly. I cannot speak
any other thing till this is cleared up. Look at these children
that are sitting around here and also at the tents, who are just
the image of my kindness. There are different kinds of grass
growing here that is just like those sitting around here. There is
no difference. Even from the American land they are here, but we
love them all the same, and when the white skin comes here from far
away I love him all the same. I am telling you what our love and
kindness is. This is what I did when the white man came, but when
he came back he paid no regard to me how he carried on."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"I did not know till I came here that any
survey had been made because I had nothing to do with it; but my
friend, one of the Queen's Councillors, tells me it was done by the
authority of the Queen."

THE GAMBLER--"I want to tell you the right story. I waited very
much for the Queen's messenger when I saw what the Company did.
Perhaps he may know why he did so. Perhaps if I were to ask him now
he would say. That is what I would think. This is the reason. I am
so pleased at what I see here I cannot manage to speak because of
the Company."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"We cannot see why you cannot speak to the
Queen's messengers because of the Company. The Company is no
greater in her sight than one of those little children is in yours,
and whatever she promises, either to the Company or the little
child, she will do. The Company ought not to be a wall between you
and us; you will make a mistake if you send us away with a wall
between us, when there should be none."

THE GAMBLER--"I do not send you away; for all this I am glad. I
know this is not the Queen's work. He (H. B. Co.) is the head; he
does whatever he thinks all around here, that is the reason I
cannot say anything."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"I am very sorry that you cannot answer."

THE GAMBLER--"The Company have stolen our land. I heard that at
first. I hear it is true. The Queen's messengers never came here,
and now I see the soldiers and the settlers and the policemen. I
know it is not the Queen's work, only the Company has come and they
are the head, they are foremost; I do not hold it back. Let this be
put to rights; when this is righted I will answer the other."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"The Company have not brought their soldiers
here. This man is not an officer of the Company. I am not an
officer of the Company. We did not come at the request of the
Company, but at that of the Queen. I told you that the Queen had
sent her policemen here. You see the flag there, then know that we
are the Queen's servants, and not the Company's, and it is for you
to decide on the message I have delivered to you."

THE GAMBLER--"When one Indian takes anything from another we call
it stealing, and when we see the present we say pay us. It is the
Company I mean."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"What did the Company steal from you?"

THE GAMBLER--"The earth, trees, grass, stones, all that which I see
with my eyes."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"Who made the earth, the grass, the stone, and
the wood? The Great Spirit. He made them for all his children to
use, and it is not stealing to use the gift of the Great Spirit.
The lands are the Queen's under the Great Spirit. The Chippewas
were not always here. They come from the East. There were other
Indians here and the Chippewas came here, and they used the wood
and the land, the gifts of the Great Spirit to all, and we want to
try and induce you to believe that we are asking for the good of
all. We do not know how the division between us is to be taken
away. We do not know of any lands that were stolen from you, and if
you do not open your mouths we cannot get the wall taken away. You
can open your mouths if you will; we are patient but we cannot
remain here always."

THE GAMBLER--"I cannot manage to speak of anything else. It is this
I am speaking. All the Indians know how the Company set their land
in order long ago. The Company is making it more and that is the
reason I am speaking."

LIEUT.-GOVERNOR MORRIS--"Many, many years ago, before we were born,
one of the Kings gave the Company certain rights to trade in this
country. The Queen thought that this was not just neither to the
white nor the red man. She considered that all should be equal; but
when the Queen's father's father's hand had been given she could
not take it back without the Company's consent; therefore she told
the Company that the time had come when they should no longer be
the great power in this country, that she would plant her own flag,
that she would send her own Governor and soldiers, and that they
must cease to have the only right to trade here (and I am glad to
know that some of you are good traders), the Queen then told the
Company that she would govern the country herself, and she told
them she would give them some land. They had their forts, their
places of trade where they raised cattle and grain, and she told
them they could keep them, and she will no more break with them
than she will with you. There is no reason why you should not talk
to us. The Company have no more power, no more authority to govern
this country than you have, it rests with the Queen."

THE GAMBLER--"This is the reason I waited for the Queen's
messengers to come here because I knew the Company was strong and
powerful, and I knew they would set every thing in order. Truly
since the Company came here they have brought me many things which
are good, but the Company's work is in my way and I cannot utter my
words."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"What do you complain of? I can not tell."

THE GAMBLER--"The survey. This one (pointing to an Indian) did not
say so, and this Saulteaux and he was never told about it. He
should have been told beforehand that this was to have been done
and it would not have been so, and I want to know why the Company
have done so. This is the reason I am talking so much about it."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"I have told you before that the Queen had
promised to give the Company certain lands around the forts and
she gave them land around this fort. I have told you that what she
promised she will do. She has taken all the lands in this country
to manage; they were hers; they were her fathers; if she gives you
reserves they will be yours and she will let no one take them from
you unless you want to sell them yourselves. It will be a sorry
thing if this nation and that nation scattered all over the country
are to suffer because of this little piece of land I see around me.
What good is it going to do to raise up a question of this kind
and block the way to our understanding each other when the Queen's
hand, full of love and generosity is held out to you? The blame
rests with you; it is time for you to talk, to open your mouth,
because I cannot take away what shuts it, you must do it yourselves."

THE GAMBLER--"This is my chief, the Queen never told this man. If
this had been told him, I would not have said what I said just now.
The Company's store was only there at first. I do not push back the
Queen's hand. Let this be cleared up."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"Once for all we tell you, whatever number of
acres the Queen has promised to the Company at this post, they will
receive no more and no less. We will ascertain what was promised,
and will take care to see that what was promised and that only will
be performed with regard to the land around this Fort. We can give
you no other answer."

THE GAMBLER--"I am telling you and reporting what I had to tell.
The Company have no right to this earth, but when they are spoken
to they do not desist, but do it in spite of you. He is the head
and foremost. These Indians you see sitting around report that they
only allowed the store to be put up. That is the reason I was very
glad when I heard you were coming. The Indians were not told of the
reserves at all. I hear now, it was the Queen gave the land. The
Indians thought it was they who gave it to the Company, who are now
all over the country. The Indians did not know when the land was
given."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"I am weary hearing about the country. You
might understand me now. You are stronger than that little boy over
there, and the Company is stronger than a single trader, but the
Company has its master, the Queen, and will have to obey the laws
as well as all others. We have nothing to do with the Company. We
are here to talk with you about the land, I tell you what we wish
to do for your good, but if you will talk about the Company I
cannot hinder you, I think it is time now you should talk about
what concerns you all."

THE GAMBLER--"That is the reason I waited so long. I cannot speak
of anything else, my mind is resting on nothing else I know that
you will have power and good rules and this is why I am glad to
tell you what is troubling me."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"I have told you before and tell you again that
the Queen cannot and will not undo what she has done. I have told
you that we will see that the Company shall obey what she has
ordered, and get no more and no less than she has promised. We
might talk here all the year and I could not give you any other
answer, and I put it to you now face to face--speak to me about
your message, don't put it aside, if you do the responsibility will
rest upon your nation, and during the winter that is coming, many
a poor woman and child will be saying, how was it that our
councillors and our braves shut their ears to the mouth of the
Queen's messengers and refused to tell them their words. This
Company, I have told you is nothing to us, it is nothing to the
Queen, but their rights have to be respected just as much as those
of the meanest child in the country. The Queen will do right
between you and them I can say no more than what I have said and
if the Indians will not speak to us we cannot help it, and if the
Indians won't answer our message, we must go back and tell the
Queen that we came here and did everything we could to show the
Indians we were in earnest in proving her love for them and that
when there was a little difficulty, I came at once to meet them
half way. What prevents you from coming out and speaking openly. I
cannot take away the difficulty you speak of, and if you will not
answer us, there is no use in talking."

THE GAMBLER--"I told the chief of the soldiers what was in our way,
what was troubling us and now we are telling you. It is that I am
working at."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"What is troubling you?"

PIS-QUA (the plain) pointing to Mr. McDonald, of the Hudson's Bay
Company--"You told me you had sold your land for so much money,
L300,000. We want that money."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"I wish our Indian brother had spoken before
what was in his mind. He has been going here and there, and we
never knew what he meant. I told you that many years ago the
Queen's father's father gave the Company the right to trade in the
country from the frozen ocean to the United States boundary line,
and from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific. The Company grew strong
and wanted no one to trade in the country but themselves. The
Queen's people said, "no, the land is not yours, the Queen's
father's father gave you rights to trade, it is time those rights
should stop." You may go on and trade like any other merchant, but
as it was worth money to you to say to this trader you shall not
buy furs at any post, the Queen would not act unjustly to the
Company. She would not take rights away from them any more than
from you; and to settle the question, she took all the lands into
her own hands and gave the Company a sum of money in place of the
rights which she had taken from them. She is ready to deal with you
justly. We are here to-day to make to you her good offers. We have
nothing to hide, nothing to conceal. The Queen acts in daylight. I
think it is time you are going to talk with us about the offers we
have made."

THE GAMBLER--"I have made up about no other article. I suppose,
indeed, I would make the thing very little and very small. When I
get back I will think over it."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"I have a word to say to you. In our land we
worship the Great Spirit, and do not work on Sunday. I am glad to
see that you are going back into council, and I will only ask you
to think of these things with single hearts desiring only to do
what is right and trusting my words. On Monday morning we will be
glad to meet you here and hope we will find then that your heart
has come to ours, that you will see that it is for your children's
good, to take our hands and the promises we have given. As I told
you before we would be glad to stay longer with you, but we are
obliged to go away. We ask you then to meet us on Monday morning
and Mr. Pratt will tell you so that there may be no mistake as to
what we have promised. He has it written down so that it may not be
rubbed out."

The conference then ended.



FIFTH DAY'S CONFERENCE

September 14.

Both nations, Crees and Saulteaux, having assembled, His Honor
Lieut.-Governor Morris again addressed them:--

"Children of our Great Mother, I am glad to see you again after
another day. How have you come to meet us? I hope you have come to
us with good thoughts, and hearts ready to meet ours. I have one or
two words to say to you. It is twenty days to-day since we left the
Red River. We want to turn our faces homewards. You told me on
Saturday that some of you could eat a great deal. I have something
to say to you about that. There are Indians who live here, they
have their wives and children around them. It is good for them to
be here, and have plenty to eat, but they ought to think of their
brothers; they ought to think that there are men here who have come
from a distance, from Fort Pelly and beyond, whose wives and
children are not here to eat, and they want to be at home with
them. It is time now that we began to understand each other, and
when there is something troubles us, I believe in telling it. When
you told us you were troubled about the situation of this tent, we
had it moved. Now we want you to take away our trouble, or tell us
what you mean. We are troubled about this. We are servants of the
Queen; we have been here many days giving you our message, and we
have not yet heard the voice of the nations. We have two nations
here. We have the Crees, who were here first, and we have the
Ojibbeways, who came from our country not many suns ago. We find
them here; we won't say they stole the land and the stones and the
trees; no, but we will say this, that we believe their brothers,
the Crees, said to them when they came in here: "The land is wide,
it is wide, it is big enough for us both; let us live here like
brothers;" and that is what you say, as you told us on Saturday, as
to the Half-breeds that I see around. You say that you are one with
them; now we want all to be one. We know no difference between
Crees and Ojibbeways. Now we want to ask you are you wiser, do you
know more, than the Ojibbeway people that I met last year? You are
a handful compared with them; they came to me from the Lake of the
Woods, from Rainy Lake, from the Kaministiquia, and from the Great
Lake. I told them my message, as I have told you; they heard my
words and they said they were good, and they took my hand and I
gave them mine and the presents; but that is not all. There was a
band of Ojibbeways who lived at Lake Seul, to the north of the Lake
of the Woods, 400 in number, and just before we came away we sent
our messenger to them. He told them I had shaken hands for the
Queen with all the Ojibbeways down to the Great Lake. He told them
what we had done for these, and asked them if they found it good to
take the Queen's hand through our messenger; they were pleased;
they signed the treaty; they put their names to it, saying, We take
what you promised to the other Saulteaux; and our messenger gave
them the money, just as our messengers will give your brothers who
are not here the money if we understand each other. Now, we ask you
again, are you wiser than your brothers that I have seen before? I
do not think that you will say you are, but we want you to take
away our last trouble. What I find strange is this: we are Chiefs;
we have delivered the message of our great Queen, whose words never
change, whose tongue and the tongues of whose messengers are never
forked; and how is it that we have not heard any voice back from
the Crees or Saulteaux, or from their Chiefs? I see before me two
Chiefs; we know them to be Chiefs, because we see you put them
before you to shake hands with us. They must have been made Chiefs,
not for anything we are talking about to-day, not for any presents
we are offering to you, not because of the land; then why are they
chiefs? Because I see they are old men; the winds of many winters
have whistled through their branches. I think they must have
learned wisdom; the words of the old are wise; why then, we ask
ourselves--and this is our trouble--Why are your Chiefs dumb? They
can speak. One of them is called "Loud Voice." He must have been
heard in the councils of the nation. Then I ask myself, why do they
not answer? It cannot be that you are afraid; you are not women. In
this country, now, no man need be afraid. If a white man does wrong
to an Indian, the Queen will punish them. The other day at Fort
Ellice, a white man, it is said, stole some furs from an Indian.
The Queen's policemen took him at once; sent him down to Red River,
and he is lying in jail now; and if the Indians prove that he did
wrong, he will be punished. You see then that if the white man does
wrong to the Indian he will punished; and it will be the same if
the Indian does wrong to the white man. The red and white man must
live together, and be good friends, and the Indians must live
together like brothers with each other and the white man. I am
afraid you are weary of my talking. Why do I talk so much? Because
I have only your good at heart. I do not want to go away with my
head down, to send word to the Queen, "Your red children could not
see that your heart was good towards them; could not see as you see
that it was for the good of themselves and their children's
children to accept the good things you mean for them." I have done.
Let us hear the voice of the people. Let us hear the voice of your
old wise men."

COTE--"The same man that has spoken will speak yet."

KA-KIE-SHE-WAY (Loud Voice)--"This is the one who will speak; after
he speaks I will show what I have to say."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"Understand me, what I want to know is, does he
speak for the nations. If you prefer to speak by the voice of an
orator I am glad. All we want is to hear the voice of the people,
and I asked you at first to choose among yourselves those who would
speak for you; therefore I am glad to hear the man you have chosen,
and I am glad to hear that after he has done the Chief will speak
to us."

THE GAMBLER--"Saturday we met, we spoke to each other, we met at
such a time as this time, and again we said we would tell each
other something; now, then, we will report to each other a little
again. This Company man that we were speaking about, I do not hate
him; as I loved him before I love him still, and I also want that
the way he loved me at first he should love me the same; still, I
wish that the Company would keep at his work the same as he did;
that I want to be signed on the paper. I want you to put it with
your own hands. After he puts that there it is given to the
Indians, then there will be another article to speak about. The
Indians want the Company to keep at their post and nothing beyond.
After that is signed they will talk about something else."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"I told you on Saturday that I had nothing to
do with the Company. The Company have a right to trade. I cannot
make them buy goods and bring them here, or stop them from bringing
them. I dare say some of you are traders; you do not ask me whether
you shall buy goods and sell them again, and I do not stop you. It
is the same way with the Company. If they make money in bringing
goods here they will bring them just as they used to do; and I want
you to understand it fully, the Company may have a little more
money than the white traders, or the Half-breeds, or the Indians,
but they have no more right, they have no more privileges, to trade
than the Indians, or the Half-breeds, or the whites; and that is
written with a higher hand than ours, and we have no power to write
anything, or to add anything, to what is written and remains in the
Queen's house beyond the sea."

THE GAMBLER--"I do not want to drive the Company anywhere. What I
said is, that they are to remain here at their house. Supposing you
wanted to take them away, I would not let them go. I want them to
remain here to have nothing but the trade. I do not hate them; we
always exchange with them, and would die if they went away."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"I do not know whether we rightly understand or
not. I think you have spoken wise words; the Company helps you to
live, and they have a right to sell goods as other traders. I do
not know that I understand you rightly, that you do not want them
to sell goods anywhere except at the posts; to keep at their posts
there. If that is what you mean, I cannot say yes to that; they
have the same right to sell goods anywhere that you have. They are
no longer as they were once. The Government of the country, I think
I told you that before--understand me distinctly--the Government
have nothing to do with the Company, but the Company and all their
servants are subjects of the Queen and love and obey her laws. The
day has gone past when they made the laws. They have to hear the
laws the Queen makes, and like good subjects submit to them."

THE GAMBLER--"The Company is not to carry anything out into the
country, but are to trade in the Fort. That is what we want signed
on the paper; then we will talk on other subjects." LIEUT.-GOV.
MORRIS--"I have told you before, and I tell you again, that the
Company as traders have the right to sell goods anywhere they
please, just as you have, just as the whites have, just as the
Half-breeds have, and we have no power to take it away from them.
If the Company were to ask me to say to you that you were not to
trade anywhere except in their Fort by the lake, you would think it
very hard, and I would say to the Company, No, you shall not
interfere with the Indians throughout our land. I would like to
give you pleasure but I cannot do wrong; we won't deceive you with
smooth words. We will tell you the simple truth what we can do and
what we cannot do, but we cannot interfere as you ask us."

THE GAMBLER--"Cannot you sign such a paper?"

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"No; the Queen has signed the great paper, and
the Company have no more rights than any one else, but they have
the same."

KA-KIE-SHE-WAY (Loud Voice)--"I would not be at a loss, but I am,
because we are not united--the Crees and the Saulteaux--this is
troubling me. I am trying to bring all together in one mind, and
this is delaying us. If we could put that in order, if we were all
joined together and everything was right I would like it, I would
like to part well satisfied and pleased. I hear that His Excellency
is unwell, and I wish that everything would be easy in his mind. It
is this that annoys me, that things do not come together. I wish
for one day more, and after that there would not be much in my
way."

COTE--"You wanted me to come here and I came here. I find nothing,
and I do not think anything will go right. I know what you want; I
cannot speak of anything here concerning my own land until I go to
my own land. Whenever you desire to see me I will tell you what you
are asking me here. Now I want to return."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"We asked the Chief to come here. He has as much
right to be here as another Indian. We cannot go there and ask the
people of the two great tribes to meet in one place as they have
done when they were asked to meet us. You have had many days to talk
together. If the Saulteaux are determined that they want an agreement
to prevent the Company from trading, it cannot be given. I think the
Chief here spoke wisely. He says he is in trouble because you do not
understand each other. Why are you not of one mind? Have you tried to
be of one mind? Must we go back and say we have had you here so many
days, and that you had not the minds of men--that you were not able
to understand each other? Must we go back and tell the Queen that we
held out our hands for her, and her red children put them back again?
If that be the message that your conduct to-day is going to make us
carry back, I am sorry for you, and fear it will be a long day before
you again see the Queen's Councillors here to try to do you good.
The Queen and her Councillors may think that you do not want to be
friends, that you do not want your little ones to be taught, that you
do not want when the food is getting scarce to have a hand in yours
stronger than yours to help you. Surely you will think again before
you turn your backs on the offers; you will not let so little a
question as this about the Company, without whom you tell me you
could not live, stop the good we mean to do. I hope that I am
perfectly understood; when we asked the chief here we wanted to speak
with him about his lands at his place; when we asked "Loud Voice"
here we wanted to speak with him about the land at his place; so when
we asked the other chiefs here we wanted to speak with them about the
lands at their places. Why? because we did not want to do anything
that you would not all know about, that there might be no bad
feelings amongst you. We wanted you to be of one mind and heart in
this matter, and that is the reason you are here to-day. Now it rests
with you; we have done all we could. Have you anything more to say to
us, or are we to turn our backs upon you, and go away with sorry
hearts for you and your children? It remains for you to say."

THE GAMBLER--"We do not understand you and what you are talking
about. I do not keep it from you; we have not chosen our Chiefs; we
have not appointed our soldiers and councillors; we have not looked
around us yet, and chosen our land, which I understand you to
tell us to choose. We do not want to play with you, but we cannot
appoint our Chiefs and head men quickly; that is in the way. Now it
is near mid-day, and we cannot appoint our Chiefs. This Chief who
got up last--the Queen's name was used when he was appointed to be
Chief--he wants to know where his land is to be and see it, what
like it is to be, and to find the number of his children; that is
what is in his mind. He says he came from afar, he had a good mind
for coming, and he takes the same good mind away with him. I have
not heard him say to the Saulteaux to keep back their land."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"I think I understand you. We do not want to
separate in bad feeling, or to avoid any trouble in coming to an
understanding with you; because I do not believe that if we do not
agree it will ever be my good fortune to endeavor to do so again.
"Loud Voice," the Chief, has told us he wants a day to think it
over. The Chief "Cote," from the north, would like to go home, but
I am sure he will stop a day and try to understand his brothers,
and agree as the others did at the Lake of the Woods. I put my
name, and the Chiefs and the head men put theirs, and I gave the
Chief a copy, and I told him when I went home to Red River I would
have it all written out, a true copy made on skin, that could not
be rubbed out, that I would send a copy to his people so that
when we were dead and gone the letter would be there to speak for
itself, to show everything that was promised; and that was the
right way to do. I did so, and sent a copy of the treaty written
in letters of blue, gold, and black to the Chief "Maw-do-pe-nais,"
whom the people had told to keep it for them. He who speaks for the
Saulteaux tells us they have not made up their minds yet about the
land--he tells us they have not decided to refuse our hands. I am
glad to hear him say that, and if it will please my Indian brethren
here we will be glad to wait another day and meet them here
to-morrow morning, if they will promise me with the words of men
that they will look this matter straight in the face; that they
will lay aside every feeling except the good of their people, and
try to see what is right, and that they will come back and say, 'We
have done our best, we have tried to be of one mind, and considered
what was best for now, and to-morrow, and the years that are to
come when we have all passed away. This is our answer. We are very
much in earnest about this matter.' The Chief said I was not very
well, yet I am here. Why? Because the duty was laid upon me I was
afraid of the journey, but when a Chief has a duty to do he tries
to do it, and I felt that if I could do you any good, as I believed
I could, I ought to be here. I tell you this, trust my words, they
come from the heart of one who loves the Indian people, and who is
charged by his Queen to tell them the words of truth."



SIXTH DAY'S CONFERENCE

The Crees having come and shaken hands, His Honor Lieut.-Gov.
Morris rose and said:

"My friends, I have talked much; I would like to hear your voices,
I would like to hear what you say."

KA-KU-ISH-MAY, (Loud Voice--a principal chief of the Crees)--"I am
very much pleased with that, to listen to my friends, for certainly
it is good to report to each other what is for the benefit of each
other. We see the good you wish to show us. If you like what we lay
before you we will like it too. Let us join together and make the
Treaty; when both join together it is very good."

The Saulteaux arrived at this juncture, when the Lieut.-Governor
said:

"I will say to the two tribes what I said to the Crees before the
Saulteaux came. You have heard my voice for many days, you know its
sound. You have looked in my face, you have seen my mind through my
face, and you know my words are true and that they do not change.
But I am not here to talk to-day, I am here to listen. You have had
our message, you have had the Queen's words. It is time now that
you spoke. I am here to listen, my ears are open. It is for you to
speak."

KAMOOSES--"Brothers, I have one word and a small one, that is the
reason I cannot finish anything that is large. You do not see the
whole number of my tribe which is away at my back, that is the
reason I am so slow in making ready."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"I want to hear the voice of those who are
here, they can speak for themselves and for those who are away."

CHE-E-KUK (the Worthy One)--"My ears are open to what you say. Just
now the Great Spirit is watching over us; it is good. He who has
strength and power is overlooking our doings. I want very much to
be good in what we are going to talk about, and our Chiefs will
take you by the hand just now."

The Chiefs now rose and shook hands with the Commissioners.

KA-HA-OO-KUS-KA-TOO (he who walks on four claws)--"It is very good
to meet together on a fine day, father. When my father used to
bring me anything I used to go and meet him, and when my father had
given it to me I gave it to my mother to cook it. When we come to
join together one half at least will come."

CHE-E-KUK (the Worthy)--"Now I am going to tell you, and you say
your ears are open. You see the Qu'Appelle Lake Indians that you
wished to see, you hear me speak but there are many far away, and
that is the reason I cannot speak for these my children who are
away trying to get something to eat; the Crees my child is not
here, the Saulteaux my child is not here, the Young Dogs are not
here, the Stonies my children are not here, this is not the number
that you see; I am only telling you this, I think I have opened my
mind."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"I know you are not all here. We never could
get you all together, but you know what is good for you and for
your children. When I met the Saulteaux last year we had not 4,000
there, but there were men like you who knew what was good for
themselves, for their wives, for their children, and those not
born. I give to those who were there, and they took my hand and
took what was in it, and I sent to those who were away, and I did
for them just as I did for those who were present. It is the same
to-day. What we are ready to give you will be given to those who
are not here. What is good for you, what you think will be good for
you will be good for them. It is for you to say, not for us; we
have done all that men who love their red brothers can do, it is
for you now to act, on you rests the duty of saying whether you
believe our message or not, whether you want the Queen to help you
or not, whether or not you will go away and let the days and the
years go on, and let the food grow scarcer, and let your children
grow up and do nothing to keep off the hunger and the cold that is
before them. It is for you to say that, not for us; if we had not
your good at heart we would not have been here, and we would not
have labored these many days, if our hearts were not warm towards
you, and if we did not believe what we are doing, would be for your
good as children of our Queen. I have said all."

KAN-OO-SES--"Is it true you are bringing the Queen's kindness? Is
it true you are bringing the Queen's messenger's kindness? Is it
true you are going to give my child what he may use? Is it true you
are going to give the different bands the Queen's kindness? Is it
true that you bring the Queen's hand? Is it true you are bringing
the Queen's power?"

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"Yes, to those who are here and those who are
absent, such as she has given us."

KAMOOSES--"Is it true that my child will not be troubled for what
you are bringing him?"

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"The Queen's power will be around him."

KAMOOSES--"Now, I am going to ask you that the debt that has been
lying in the Company's store, I want that to be wiped out. I ask it
from the great men of the Queen."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"I told you before we have nothing to do with
the Company, we have nothing to do with its debts. I have told you
what we will do for you, what the Queen will do for you forever.
But the money that the Indian owes the Company is just like the
money that the Indians owe to each other or to any trader and is
not due to the Queen. We have no power to put money in your hands
and your children's to pay your debts, and it would not be right
for the Queen to come in and take away either what is between you
and the Company, or what is between you and the traders, or what
is between you and each other. If one of you owes the Chief is it
right that the Queen should wipe it out? I would be very glad if we
had it in our power to wipe out your debts, but it is not in our
power. All we can do is to put money in your hands and promise to
put money in the hands of those who are away, and give you money
every year afterwards, and help you to make a living when the food
is scarce. I have told you from the first that whether my words
please you or not I will tell you only the truth, and I will only
speak as far as the Queen has given us power."

(He who walks on four claws)--"Whenever you give to these my
children what they desire, then you will get what you want."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"We will give them what we have power to give.
We are ready to hear."

KAMOOSES--"Yes, I understand and my heart also, but it is not
large, it is small, and my understanding is small; that is the word
I tell you."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"I have told you what we are ready to do for
you. Your understanding is large enough to know what is good for
you. We have talked these many days, and I ask you now to talk
straight, to tell me your mind, to tell me whether you wish to take
our offers or not, it is for you to say."

KEE-E-KUK--"Twenty dollars we want to be put in our hand every
year, this we have heard from the others. Twenty-five dollars to
each chief."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"If I understand you aright you are mistaken.
The Saulteaux did not get twenty-five dollars per head. They get
five dollars every year. We promised them five dollars every year,
and a messenger was sent this year to pay them that sum. I may tell
you that my children at the Lake of the Woods had big hearts to
ask. You say you have small. I told them that if the Queen gave
them all they asked I would have to ask her to allow me to become
an Indian, but I told them I could not give them what they asked,
and when they understood that, and understood the full breadth and
width of the Queen's goodness, they took what I offered, and I
think if you are wise you will do the same."

(A proposition was made here by an Indian that they should receive
five dollars per head every second year for fifty years, but he
must have done so without authority as it was not acceded to by the
other Indians who expressed their dissent strongly as soon as the
offer was made.)

KAMOOSES--"I am going to speak for Loud Voice and for the other
chiefs. Some chiefs are not here, they are absent, hereafter you
will see them. I myself will tell them, and my child that is at my
back will tell them also. Will you receive that which I am asking?
I want to clear up what the Indians and I want to try and put it
right, what my child will say. Well, can you give me that. We want
the same Treaty you have given to the North-West Angle. This I am
asking for."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"Who are you speaking for? Is it for the whole
of the Indians? (They expressed their assent.) Are you ready to
carry it out? (They again assented.) Are your chiefs ready to sign
this afternoon if we grant you these terms? (The Indians assented
unanimously.) It is now after twelve, we will speak to you this
afternoon."

The Conference here ended to allow the Commissioners time to
consult.



AFTERNOON CONFERENCE

The Indians having assembled, presented the Chiefs, whose names
appear on the Treaty to the Commissioners as their Chiefs.

KAMOOSES--"To-day we are met together here and our minds are open.
We want to know the terms of the North-West Angle Treaty."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"Do we understand that you want the same terms
which were given at the Lake of the Woods (The Indians assented.) I
have the Treaty here in a book. You must know that the steamboats
had been running through their waters, and our soldiers had been
marching through their country, and for that reason we offered the
Ojibbeways a larger sum than we offered you. Last year it was a
present, covering five years; with you it was a present for this
year only. I paid the Indians there a present in money down of
twelve dollars per head. I have told you why we offered you less,
and you will see there were reasons for it. That is the greatest
difference between what we offered you and what was paid them, but
on the other hand there were some things promised you that were not
given at the Lake of the Woods. (His Honor then explained the terms
granted in that Treaty.) We promised there that the Queen would
spend $1,500 per year to buy shot and powder, ball and twine. There
were 4,000 of them. I offered you $1,000 although you are only
one-half the number, as I do not think you number more than 2,000.
Your proportionate share would be $750 which you shall receive.
Then at the Lake of the Woods each Chief had their head men; we
have said you would have four who shall have fifteen dollars each
per year, and as at the Lake of the Woods each Chief and head man
will receive a suit of clothing once in three years, and each Chief
on signing the treaty will receive a medal and the promise of a
flag. We cannot give you the flag now, as there were none to be
bought at Red River, but we have the medals here. Now I have told
you the terms we gave at the North-West Angle of the Lake of the
Woods, and you will see that the only difference of any consequence
between there and what we offered you is in the money payment that
we give as a present, and I have told you why we made the
difference, and you will see that it was just. We had to speak with
them for four years that had gone away. We speak to you only for
four days. It was not that we came in the spirit of traders, but
because we were trying to do what was just between you and the
Queen, and the other Indians who would say that we had treated you
better than we had treated them because we put the children of this
year on the same footing as these children through whose land we
had been passing and running our steamboats for four years. You see
when you ask us to tell you everything, we show you all that has
been done, and I have to tell you again that the Ojibbeways at Lake
Seul who number 400, when I sent a messenger this spring with a
copy of those terms made at the North-West Angle with their nation,
took the Queen's hand by my messenger and made the same treaty. I
think I have told you all you want to know, and our ears are open
again."

KAMOOSES--"I want to put it a little light for all my children
around me, something more on the top. For my chief thirty dollars,
for my four chief head men twenty dollars, and each of my young
children fifteen dollars a year."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"I am afraid you are not talking to us
straight; when we went away you asked us to give you the terms
given at the Lake of the Woods; you asked to know what they were,
and the moment I told you, you ask three times as much for your
children as I gave them. That would not be right; and it is well
that you should know that we have not power to do so; we can give
you no more than we gave them. We hope you are satisfied. I have
one word more to say, we are in the last hours of the day you asked
us for and we must leave you. The utmost we can do, the furthest we
can go or that we ought to go is, to do what you asked, to give you
the terms granted last year at the Lake of the Woods. We can do no
more, and you have our last words. It is for you to say whether you
are satisfied or not."

KAMOOSES--"We ask that we may have cattle."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"We offered you cattle on the first day, we
offered your Chief cattle for the use of his band--not for himself,
but for the use of his band; we gave the same at the Lake of the
Woods. We can give no more here."

KAMOOSES--"We want some food to take us home."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"When you sign the treaty, provisions will be
given to take you home. Now I ask you, are you ready to accept the
offer, the last offer we can make, you will see we have put you on
the same footing as the Indians at the Lake of the Woods, and we
think it is more than we ought to give, but rather than not close
the matter we have given it, we have talked long enough about this.
It is time we did something. Now I would ask, are the Crees and the
Saulteaux and the other Indians ready to make the treaty with us.
Since we went away we have had the treaty written out, and we are
ready to have it signed, and we will leave a copy with any Chief
you may select and after we leave we will have a copy written out
on skin that cannot be rubbed out and put up in a tin box, so that
it cannot be wet, so that you can keep it among yourselves so that
when we are dead our children will know what was written."

KAMOOSES--"Yes, we want each Chief to have a copy of the treaty, we
ask that the Half-breeds may have the right of hunting."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"We will send a copy to each Chief. As to the
Half-breeds, you need not be afraid; the Queen will deal justly,
fairly and generously with all her children."

The Chiefs then signed the treaty, after having been assured that
they would never be made ashamed of what they then did.

One of the Chiefs on being asked to do so signed; the second called
on said he was promised the money when he signed, and returned to
his seat without doing so. The Lieutenant-Governor called him
forward--held out his hand to him and said, take my hand; it holds
the money. If you can trust us forever you can do so for half an
hour; sign the treaty. The Chief took the Governor's hands and
touched the pen, and the others followed. As soon as the treaty was
signed the Governor expressed the satisfaction of the Commissioners
with the Indians, and said that Mr. Christie and Mr. Dickieson, the
Private Secretary of the Minister of the Interior, were ready to
advance the money presents, but the Indians requested that the
payment should be postponed till next morning, which was acceded
to. The Chiefs then formally approached the Commissioners and shook
hands with them, after which the conference adjourned, the
Commissioners leaving the place of meeting under escort of the
command of Lieut.-Col. Smith, who had been in daily attendance.

Report of the interview at Fort Ellice between the Indian
Commissioners and certain Saulteaux Indians not present at
Qu'Appelle, and not included in Treaty Number Two, the Chief being
Way-wa-se-ca-pow, or "the Man proud of standing upright:"

Lieut.-Governor Morris said he had been here before, and since that
time he had met the Crees and Saulteaux nations, and had made a
treaty with them. The Indians there were from Fort Pelly and as far
distant as the Cypress Hills. He wished to know the number of the
Saulteaux to be found in this locality.

The Chief said there were about thirty tents who were not at
Qu'Appelle, and ten who were there.

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"The Commissioners here are representing the
Queen. I made a treaty with the Saulteaux last year at the Lake of
the Woods. They were not a little handful; but there were 4,000 of
them--and now we have made a treaty with the Crees and Saulteaux at
Qu'Appelle. There is not much need to say much--it is good for the
Indians to make treaties with the Queen--good for them and their
wives and children. Game is getting scarce and the Queen is willing
to help her children. Now we are ready to give you what we gave the
Saulteaux at the Lake of the Woods and the Saulteaux and Crees at
Qu'Appelle. It will be for you to say whether you will accept it or
not." His Honor then explained the treaty to them.

"What we offer will be for your good, as it will help you, and not
prevent you from hunting.

"We are not traders. I have told you all we can do and all we will
do. It is for you to say whether you will accept my hand or not. I
cannot wait long. I think you are not wiser than your brothers. Our
ears are open, you can speak to us."

LONG CLAWS--"My father--I shake hands with you, I shake hands with
the Queen."

SHAPONETUNG'S FIRST SON--"I find what was done at Qu'Appelle was
good, does it take in all my children?"

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"Yes."

SHAPONETUNG'S FIRST SON--"I thank you for coming and bringing what
is good for our children."

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"I forgot to say that we will be able to give
you a small present, some powder and shot, blankets and calicoes.
Each band must have a Chief and four headmen, but you are not all
here to-day. I want to-day to know the Chief and two headmen.

"Now I want to know will you take my hand and what is in it."

The Indians came up and shook hands in token of acceptance.

LIEUT.-GOV. MORRIS--"I am glad to shake hands with you; the white
man and the red man have shaken hands and are friends. You must be
good subjects to the Queen and obey her laws."

The Indians introduced as their Chief, Way-wa-se-ca-pow; and as
their headmen, Ota-ma-koo-euin and Shaponetung's first son.

His Honor then explained the memorandum to them, when it was
signed.



CHAPTER VII

THE REVISION OF TREATIES NUMBERS ONE AND TWO


When Treaties, Numbers One and Two, were made, certain verbal
promises were unfortunately made to the Indians, which were not
included in the written text of the treaties, nor recognized
or referred to, when these Treaties were ratified by the Privy
Council. This, naturally, led to misunderstanding with the Indians,
and to widespread dissatisfaction among them. This state of matters
was reported to the Council by the successive Lieut.-Governors
of Manitoba, and by the Superintendent of Indian Affairs. On
examination of the original Treaty Number One, the Minister of the
Interior reported that a memorandum was found attached to it signed
by Mr. Commissioner Simpson, His Hon. Governor Archibald, Mr.
St. John and the Hon. Mr. McKay, purporting to contain their
understanding of the terms upon which the Indians concluded the
treaty. This memorandum was as follows:

Memorandum of things outside of the Treaty which were promised at
the Treaty at the Lower Fort, signed the 3rd day of August, A.D.
1871.

For each Chief that signed the treaty, a dress distinguishing him
as Chief.

For braves and for councillors of each Chief, a dress: it being
supposed that the braves and councillors will be two for each
Chief.

For each Chief, except Yellow Quill, a buggy.

For the braves and councillors of each Chief, except Yellow Quill,
a buggy.

In lieu of a yoke of oxen for each reserve, a bull for each, and a
cow for each Chief; a boar for each reserve, and a sow for each
Chief, and a male and female of each kind of animal raised by
farmers; these when the Indians are prepared to receive them.

A plow and a harrow for each settler cultivating the ground.

These animals and their issue to be Government property, but to be
allowed for the use of the Indians, under the superintendence and
control of the Indian Commissioner.

The buggies to be the property of the Indians to whom they are
given.

The above contains an inventory of the terms concluded with the
Indians.

               WEMYSS M. SIMPSON,
               MOLYNEUX ST. JOHN,
               A. G. ARCHIBALD,
               JAS. McKAY.

The Privy Council, by Order in Council, agreed to consider this
memorandum as part of the original treaties, and instructed the
Indian Commissioner to carry out the promises therein contained,
which had not been implemented. They also agreed to offer to raise
the annuities from three to five dollars per head, to pay a further
annual sum of twenty dollars to each chief, and to give a suit of
clothing every three years to each chief and head man, allowing
four head men to each band, upon the distinct understanding
however, that any Indian accepting the increased payment, thereby
formally abandoned all claims against the Government, in connection
with the verbal promises of the Commissioners, other than those
recognized by the treaty and the memorandum above referred to.

The Government then invited Lieut.-Gov. Morris, in conjunction with
the Indian Commissioner, Lieut.-Col. Provencher, to visit the
several bands interested in the treaties, with a view to submit to
them the new terms, and obtain their acceptance of the proposed
revision of the treaties. His Honor accordingly placed his
services at the disposal of the Government, and was at his request
accompanied by the Hon. Mr. McKay, who had been present at the
making of the original treaties, and was well versed in the Indian
tongues. In October 1875, these gentlemen entered upon the task
confided to them, and first proceeded to meet the large and
important band of St. Peters, in the Province of Manitoba. The
matter was fully discussed with the Indians, the Order in Council,
and memorandum read and explained to them, and their written assent
to the new terms obtained. After their return from St. Peters,
owing to the advanced season of the year, it was decided to
divide the work, the Lieutenant-Governor requesting the Indian
Commissioner to proceed to Fort Alexander on Lake Winnipeg, and to
the Broken Head and Roseau Rivers, while Messrs. Morris and McKay,
would undertake to meet the Indians included in Treaty Number Two
at Manitoba House on Lake Manitoba. Colonel Provencher met the
Indians at the places above mentioned, and obtained the assent of
the Indians of the three bands to the revised treaty. Messrs.
Morris and McKay proceeded by carriage to Lake Manitoba, and thence
in a sail boat, where they met the Indians of the six bands of
Treaty Number Two, and after full discussion, the Indians cordially
accepted the new terms, and thus was pleasantly and agreeably
closed, with all the bands of Treaties One and Two, except that of
the Portage band, who were not summoned to any of the conferences,
a fruitful source of dissension and difficulty. The experience
derived from this misunderstanding, proved however, of benefit with
regard to all the treaties, subsequent to Treaties One and Two, as
the greatest care was thereafter taken to have all promises fully
set out in the treaties, and to have the treaties thoroughly and
fully explained to the Indians, and understood by them to contain
the whole agreement between them and the Crown. The arrangement,
however, of the matter with the Portage band was one of more
difficulty. This band had always been troublesome. In 1870, they
had warned off settlers and Governor MacTavish of the Hudson's Bay
Company had been obliged to send the Hon. James McKay to make
terms for three years with them for the admission of settlers. In
1874, they twice sent messengers with tobacco (the usual Indian
credentials for such messengers) to Qu'Appelle to prevent the
making of the treaty there. Besides the claims to the outside
promises, preferred by the other Indians, they had an additional
grievance, which they pressed with much pertinacity. To obtain
their adhesion to Treaty Number One, the Commissioners had given
them preferential terms in respect to their reserve, and the
wording in the treaty of these terms enhanced the difficulty. The
language used was as follows: "And for the use of the Indians of
whom Oo-za-we-kwun is Chief, so much land on the south and east
side of the Assiniboine, as will furnish one hundred and sixty
acres for each family of five, or in that proportion for larger or
smaller families, reserving also a further tract enclosing said
reserve, to contain an equivalent to twenty-five square miles of
equal breadth, to be laid out around the reserve." The enclosure
around the homestead reserve led to extravagant demands by them.
They did not understand its extent, and claimed nearly half of the
Province of Manitoba under it.

The Indians constantly interviewed the Lieutenant-Governor on
the subject, and when the Hon. Mr. Laird, then Minister of the
Interior, visited Manitoba, they twice pressed their demands upon
him. The Government requested the Hon. Messrs. Morris and McKay to
endeavor to settle the long pending dispute, and they proceeded to
the Round Plain on the river Assiniboine with that view. They met
the Indians, some five hundred in number, but without result. The
Indians were divided among themselves. A portion of the band had
forsaken Chief Yellow Quill and wished the recognition of the Great
Bear, grandson of Pee-qual-kee-quash, a former chief of the band.
The Yellow Quill band wanted the reserve assigned in one locality;
the adherents of the Bear said that place was unsuited for farming,
and they wished it to be placed at the Round Plain, where they had
already commenced a settlement. The land to which they were
entitled under the treaty was 34,000 acres, but their demands were
excessive.

The Chief Yellow Quill was apprehensive of his own followers,
and besides the danger of collision between the two sections was
imminent. The Commissioners finally intimated to the band that they
would do nothing with them that year, but would make the customary
payment of the annuities under the original treaty and leave them
till next year to make up their minds as to accepting the new
terms, to which the Indians agreed.

In 1876, the Government again requested Mr. Morris to meet these
Indians and endeavor to arrange the long pending dispute with them,
and in July he travelled to the Long Plain on the Assiniboine with
that object in view. He had previously summoned the band to meet
there, and had also summoned a portion of the band known as the
White Mud River Indians, dwelling on the shores of Lake Manitoba,
who were nominally under the chieftainship of Yellow Quill, and
were, as such, entitled to a portion of the original reserve, but
did not recognize the Chief. Mr. Morris was accompanied by Mr.
Graham, of the Indian Department, Secretary and Paymaster. On
arrival at his destination, the Lieutenant-Governor found the
Indians assembled, but in three camps. Those adhering to Yellow
Quill, the Bear, and the White Mud River Indians, being located
on different parts of the plains, Mr. Reid, Surveyor, was also
present, to explain the extent and exact dimensions of the proposed
reserve.

The next day the Indians were assembled, and the conference lasted
for two days. The Yellow Quill band were still obstructive, but the
other two sections were disposed to accept the terms. The question
of the reserve was the main difficulty. The Yellow Quill band still
desired a reserve for the whole. The others wished to remain, the
Bear's party at the Round Plain, and the White Mud River Indians at
Lake Manitoba, where they resided and had houses and farms. In the
interval from the previous year, the Bear's band had built several
houses, and made enclosures for farming. Eventually, the Indians
were made to comprehend the extent of land they were really
entitled to, but the Governor intimated that the land was for all,
and that he would divide the band into three, each with a Chief
and councillors, and that he would give each band a portion of the
whole number of acres, proportionate to their numbers--the Bear at
the Round Plain, the White Mud Indians at their place of residence,
and the Yellow Quill band wherever they might select, in unoccupied
territory. After long consultations among themselves the Indians
accepted the proposal. The Bear was recognized as a Chief, and a
Chief selected by the White Mud River band was accepted as such.

The Indians also agreed to accept the revised terms of Treaty
Number One, and an agreement in accordance with the understanding
was prepared and signed by the Lieutenant-Governor, and the Chief
and head men. The Indians preferred a request to receive the two
dollars, increased amount, which, as they said, "had slipped
through their fingers last year," which was granted, and also that
the councillors should be paid yearly, as in the other treaties,
subsequently made. This the Governor promised to recommend, and it
was eventually granted, being made applicable to all the bands in
Treaties Numbers One and Two.

Thus was so far closed, a controversy which had lasted for
some years, and had been fruitful of unpleasant feelings, the
negotiations terminating in that result having been from a variety
of causes more difficult to bring to a satisfactory solution than
the actual making of treaties, for the acquisition of large extents
of territory. On the leaving of the Lieutenant-Governor, the
morning after the conclusion of the arrangement, the Indians
assembled and gave three cheers for the Queen and Governor, and
fired a feu de joie. Mr. Reid at once proceeded to set aside the
reserves for the Bear and White Mud bands, but the selection of a
reserve by the Yellow Quill band was attended with still further
further difficulty, although it was eventually pointed out by them,
and surveyed by Mr. Reid, it being in a very desirable locality.
The despatches of the Lieutenant-Governor to the Minister of the
Interior, giving an account in full of the negotiations for the
revision of the Treaties Numbers One and Two, will complete this
record, and will be found to give a clear narrative of them. These
are as follows:

                   GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
             FORT GARRY, MANITOBA, 5th October, 1875.

Sir,--I have the honor to inform you that in pursuance of your
request that I should meet the Indians of Treaties Numbers One
and Two, with a view to a revision of the terms thereof, and
an adjustment of the disputed questions connected therewith,
I proceeded to the St. Peter Reserve on the 5th of August and
encamped near the Indian tents.

On the 6th I met Chief Prince and his band, being accompanied by
the Hon. James McKay, who at my request gave me the benefit of
his valuable services, and by Mr. Provencher. I explained to the
Indians the terms offered to them by the Government, and obtained
their written assent thereto, endorsed on a parchment copy of the
Order in Council of date the 30th April, 1875. As however there
are in the bands of Treaties Numbers One and Two, four councillors,
i.e., head men, and two braves, we were under the necessity of
agreeing that they should continue at that number, instead of two,
as specified in the report of the Privy Council. We then brought
before them your request that the portion of the reserve embraced
in the proposed new town near the Pacific Railway crossing should
be sold for their benefit, to which they agreed, and the formal
instrument of surrender will be enclosed to you by the Indian
Commissioner.

The Indians living at Nettley Creek asked to have a reserve
assigned them there, and I promised to bring their request under
your notice.

I did not bring up the question of the division of the band into
two, as my experience with the Portage band, arising from a similar
difficulty, led me to fear that complications might arise from the
proposal which might prevent the settlement of the more important
matter of the disposal of the open questions relating to the
treaty. I was therefore of opinion that the division of the band
should be postponed to next year, and acted upon that opinion. A
party of Norway House Indians were present and asked for a reserve
at the Grassy Narrows. I informed them that one could not be
granted at that place, and learning from them that the Chief at
Norway House was about leaving there with a party of Indians to
confer with me, I engaged three of the Indians present to proceed
at once to Norway House and inform the Indians that I would meet
them there about the middle of September.

I have since learned that they met the Chief after he had left
Norway House or Fort Garry, and caused him to return.

                 I have the honor to be, etc.,
                                 ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                                         Lieut.-Governor.



                  GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
             FORT GARRY, MANITOBA, 4th October, 1875.

Sir,--I have the honor to inform you that after my return from St.
Peters, finding that in view of my contemplated mission to Lake
Winnipeg it would be impossible for me to visit all the bands of
Indians included in Treaties Numbers One and Two, I requested
the Indian Commissioner, Mr. Provencher, to proceed to meet them
at Fort Alexander and the Broken Head and Roseau rivers, while
I should proceed to Lake Manitoba and meet at Manitoba House
the various bands of Indians included in Treaty Number Two. In
pursuance of this arrangement, I left here on the 17th of August
for Oak Point, on Lake Manitoba, where I was to take a boat for
Manitoba Post.

I was accompanied by the Hon. James McKay, whose presence enabled
me to dispense with an interpreter, and was of importance
otherwise, as he had assisted my predecessor in the making of the
treaty originally at Manitoba Post. Mr. Graham, of the Indian
Department, also accompanied me to make the payments and distribute
the pensions. I reached Oak Point on the afternoon of the 18th, and
left there on the afternoon of the 20th, arriving at Manitoba House
on the evening of the 21st. The next day being Sunday, nothing of
course was done relating to my mission, but on Monday morning I
met the Indians at ten o'clock on the lake shore. The six bands
included in the treaty were all represented by their Chiefs and
head men and a large number of their people.

I explained to them the object of our mission, my remarks being
fully interpreted by Mr. McKay, and obtained their assent in
writing to the Order in Council of the 30th April last, the terms
of which were accepted with cordiality and good feeling by the
Indians.

The new medals and uniforms were distributed to the Chiefs and head
men, and the payments under the revised treaty were then commenced
by Mr. McKay and Mr. Graham, and continued until 12.30 p.m.

On the 24th, the payments were resumed and concluded, but owing to
heavy rain and high winds, we were unable to leave Manitoba Post
until the 25th. The Indians on our departure again firing their
guns in token of their respect and good will. Owing to stormy
weather, which obliged us to encamp on Bird Island, we did not
return to Oak Point until the afternoon of the 27th.

On the 28th, the Indians residing in that vicinity, and belonging
to Sousanye's band, were paid by Messrs. McKay and Graham. I
returned to Fort Garry on the 1st September, in the afternoon, my
journey having been protracted by unfavorable weather, and by the
fact that owing to the prevalence of shoals, the navigation of Lake
Manitoba is difficult in stormy weather.

As only a small portion of the Riding House Indians were present, I
informed them that Mr. Graham would proceed to the mountains after
our return, to make the payments, and that I would send by him a
reply to their requests, as to the retention by them of the reserve
originally designated in the treaty, and this I have since done
affirmatively with your sanction. Mr. Provencher succeeded in
obtaining the adhesion of the bands at Fort Alexander, Broken Head
and Roseau rivers to the new terms, and has handed me the copies of
the Order in Council with their assents endorsed thereon.

You will therefore perceive that with the exception of the Portage
band with regard to whom I wrote you fully on the 2nd of August
last, the assent of all the Indians interested therein to the
proposed mode of settlement of the unrecorded promises made at the
conclusion of Treaties Numbers One and Two, has been obtained, and
I feel that I have reason to congratulate the Privy Council on the
removal of a fruitful source of difficulty and discontent. But I
would add, that it becomes all the more important that a better
system of Indian administration should be devised so as to secure
the prompt and rigid carrying out of the new terms in their
entirety.

You are already in possession of my views on this subject, and
I trust that local agents will be appointed to be supervised by
the Indian Commissioner and that an Indian Council of advice
and control, sitting at Fort Garry, will be entrusted with the
direction of the Treaties One, Two, and the upper portion of Three,
and the new Treaty Number Five, so as to secure prompt and
effective administration of Indian Affairs.

Under the system of local agents, the necessity of large gatherings
of the Indians will be avoided, and much expense to the Government,
and inconvenience to the Indians, avoided. I have further to record
my sense of the services rendered to me by Messrs. McKay and
Graham. The latter discharged his duties with promptitude and
efficiency, and Mr. McKay and he introduced a mode of distribution
of the provisions to which I would call your attention.

                I have the honor to be, etc.,
                             ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                                     Lieut.-Governor.



                       GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
              FORT GARRY, MANITOBA, 2nd August, 1875.

Sir,--In accordance with your request I have commenced my visits to
the Indian bands included in Treaties Numbers One and Two, with a
view to settling the matters in dispute. I left here on the 22nd
inst., and was accompanied by the Hon. James McKay, whom I had
invited to accompany me in consequence of his having been present
at the making of the treaties, and by the Indian Commissioner.

I reached the Round Plain on the Assiniboine river, where Yellow
Quill's band of Saulteaux had assembled on the 26th, and met the
Indians next day, explaining to them our mission, and telling them
what I was empowered to promise them. This band, as you are aware,
has always been dissatisfied, and have been difficult to deal with
I found them in an intractable frame of mind, and the difficulty of
the position was enhanced by a division amongst themselves.

The original Chief of the Portage band was Pee-quah-kee-quah, who
was a party to the treaty with Lord Selkirk. On his death he was
succeeded by his son, who died some years ago leaving a boy, who
has now grown up. Yellow Quill was appointed chief by the Hudson's
Bay Company when Pee-quah-kee-quah's son died. The grandson is now
grown up and has returned from the plains, where he has been, and
claims to be recognized as an hereditary chief, and about half
the band have followed his lead. After we had been in conference
some time, an Indian rose and told me that when the chief of the
Portage died, he charged him to keep the land for his son, and that
they wished a reserve at the Portage. Another rose and produced
Pee-quah-kee-quah's King George medal, and said the chief had
placed it in his keeping and charged him to deliver it to his son,
when he was old enough to be a chief, and then placed it round the
neck of Kes-kee-maquah, or the Short Bear. They then asked that I
should receive him as a chief, in place of Yellow Quill. I told
them that could not be done. That Yellow Quill must remain a chief,
but that I would report their request on behalf of the young chief
to the Government at Ottawa and let them know their decision,
but that they could get no reserve at the Portage as only that
mentioned in the treaty would be given, and with this they were
satisfied. The conference then went on, the two parties sitting
apart and holding no intercourse with each other. I spent two days
with them making no progress, as they claimed that a reserve thirty
miles by twenty was promised them as shewn in the rough sketch
enclosed, made at their dictation and marked "A." I produced the
plan of the reserve, as proposed to be allotted to them, containing
34,000 acres, but Yellow Quill said it was not in the right place,
and was not what was promised, and morever it was not surrounded
by the belt of five miles, mentioned in the treaty, but was only
partially so and did not cross the river. I told them they could
get no more land than was promised in the treaty. They appealed to
Mr. McKay whether the Reserve was not promised to be on both sides
of the river, and he admitted that it was. I told them it was not
so written in the treaty, and that if the Government should allow
it to cross the river, the rights of navigation must be conserved,
but I would consult the Queen's Councillors. They replied that they
would go to the "Grand Father" and get him to intercede for them,
meaning the "President of the United States," as I afterwards
discovered, an American Indian having persuaded them to take this
course.

They refused to discuss or accept anything until the Reserve
Question was settled, and while I was speaking on the afternoon of
the second day, Yellow Quill's Councillors went away, and left him
alone, when he followed. I then left the Council tent, leaving word
that I would depart in the morning. Yellow Quill came back and said
that he would accept the five dollars, but Mr. McKay told him he
had not taken my hand, and that it would not be paid, as my offer
was conditioned on a settlement of all questions between them and
the Government. About six o'clock, Yellow Quill and his Councillors
sent me the following message which had been written for them by
Mr. Deputy Sheriff Setter from their dictation.

"They didn't come to see you. You came to see them, and if you
choose to come and speak to them again, you can come if you like."

I felt that I must now deal firmly with them, and therefore
prepared the following reply:

"It is not right, for they came to see me at my request, as their
Governor, and I came to meet them. After spending two days with
them, their Chief insulted me by rising and going out while I was
speaking, and breaking up the Conference. I represent the Queen,
and his action was disrespectful to her. I will not go to meet you
again. If you are sorry for the way I have been treated you can
come and see me."

I charged Mr. McKay to deliver it to them in their Council, which
he did, when they denied having meant to send the message in the
terms in which it was, and disclaimed all intended offence. The
message had its desired effect, but their disclaimer was not
correct, as Mr. Setter informs me that he had originally written
a welcome to me, which they caused him to strike out, and to say
that "I could come if I chose." Next morning I struck my tents and
loaded my waggons and prepared to leave. Seeing this, Yellow Quill
and his Councillors came to Mr. McKay, and asked if I would not see
them again, to which I consented. On proceeding to Mr. Provencher's
pay tent, I met the Chief, Yellow Quill. His spokesman rose, saying
"that they were glad to have met me, that they had found my words
good; that they had not desired to offend the Queen or me, and
were sorry; that God had watched us during two days, and He was
again looking on." I accepted their apology, and then proceeded
to practical business, the whole tone and demeanor of the Indians
being changed, having become cordial and friendly. I may mention
here, that Yellow Quill reproached his Councillors for their
conduct. He also informed Mr. McKay privately, that he could not
act otherwise as he was in danger of his life from some of his own
"braves." He was guarded all the time by a man armed with a bow and
steel-pointed arrows. I promised to state their claims as to the
reserve, but told them it would not be granted, but that I would
change the location of the reserve, as it had been selected without
their approval, and would represent their view as to its locality,
and as to crossing the river, the navigation of which, however,
could not be interfered with. They asked to be paid three dollars
per head or one dollar per year for the following transaction:
In 1868 a number of Ontario farmers had settled on Rat Creek.
Yellow Quill's band drove them off and trouble was impending.
Governor McTavish sent Mr. McKay up to arrange the difficulty, in
anticipation of the advent of Canadian power. He made a lease for
three years of their rights, assuring them that before that time
the Canadian Government would make a treaty with them and recognize
the temporary arrangement, and in consequence the settlers were
unmolested. The question was not raised at the "Stone Fort" Treaty,
and I told them I had not known of it before, but supposed the
Government would hold that the treaty had covered it, and that
the extra two dollars would compensate for it, but that I would
represent their news and give them an answer. They complained
of the mode of payment, as my predecessor assured them that their
children who were absent should be paid when they presented
themselves, and that they only got two years payment instead of the
full amount. As these were Mr. Provencher's instructions I promised
to report it. They expressed themselves quite satisfied with the
arrangements as to the outside promises, and would gladly accept of
it, if the reserve question was settled, but that they could not
receive that as surveyed. I took the opportunity of explaining to
them that the "President of the United States" had no power here,
and that the Queen and Her Councillors were the only authorities
they had to deal with, and that I would state their wishes as fully
as they could do themselves. They asked if I would come back,
but I said not this year, but next year either I or some other
Commissioner would meet them. Eventually they cheerfully agreed to
accept the three dollars annuity as usual, and to defer a final
adjustment of the question between us until next year, and promised
to accompany any one I sent to select the reserve and agree on
its locality. They again thanked me for my kindness and patience
with them, and I took leave of them. I regard the result as very
satisfactory, as I left the band contented, and you are aware
of their intimate relation with the "Plain Indians," and the
difficulty their message to Qu'Appelle, "that the white man had
not kept his promises," caused us then, and it is very important
that they should be satisfied. I returned to the Portage, and Mr.
Provencher proceeded to Totogan, and paid the White Mud section
of the band, numbering one hundred and thirty, who are nominally
included in it, but do not recognize Yellow Quill's authority, the
usual annuities, which they accepted without demur.

I would now make the following recommendations:

1st. That you should write to Yellow Quill declining to entertain
his demands for the large reserve but offering to them a reserve
including the "Eagle's Nest" on the north side of the river, and
laid off in the terms of the treaty, with the land comprised in the
one hundred and sixty acres for each family, surrounded by the belt
mentioned in the treaty, in the manner suggested in the enclosed
rough sketch "B," reserving the rights of navigation and access to
the river. The land is of inferior quality to that already offered
them.

2nd. I would propose that the young chief should be recognized as
head of the section of the band adhering to him. He and his section
are ready to accept the terms and the reserve as described in
the treaty. They behaved very well and told Mr. McKay that they
were glad I had not recognized him then, as it would have led to
bloodshed, and they would be content if the recognition came when
the reserve was settled. The young chief is an intelligent, well
disposed man, aged about twenty-six.

3rd. I would propose that the White Mud Indians, who live there
constantly, should be recognized as a distinct band and should
elect a Chief.

4th. I would recommend that the arrears due to Indians who have not
yet received their annuities, should be paid in full at once, but
that a period of two years should be fixed for those bona fide
members of the band to come in and be paid, and that after that
they should only receive one year's payment. If these steps are
taken, I think we shall have no more trouble with these Indians.

In conclusion I have to express my obligations to the Hon. Mr.
McKay for the valuable services he rendered me. The Indians told me
they would not have come into the Stone Fort Treaty but for him,
and I know it was the case.

                        I have the honor to be, etc.,
                                        ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                                                 Lieut.-Governor.



                               GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
                        FORT GARRY, MANITOBA, 8th July 1876.

TO THE HONORABLE THE MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR.

Sir,--I have the honor to inform you that, in compliance with your
request, I left this on the 14th ult. with the view of proceeding
to the Long Plain on the Assiniboine, in order to meet the Indians
of the Portage Band, to arrange the dispute with regard to the
reserve, and to settle the outside promises. Mr. Graham, of the
Indian Department, and Mr. Reid, P.L.S., also went there at my
request, the one to act as paymaster, and the other, as you wished,
to survey the reserve. Owing to the prevalence of heavy rain the
roads were in so bad a condition that I was four days in reaching
the Long Plain, while we were also subjected to inconvenience and
expense by the detention of the provisions, owing to the same
cause. Added to my other discomforts was the presence of mosquitoes
in incredible numbers, so that the journey and the sojourn at the
Plain were anything but pleasurable. I had taken the precaution
to request Mr. Cummings, the interpreter, to summon the White Mud
Indians as well as Yellow Quill's band, and those who adhered to
the Short Bear.

On my arrival at the Long Plains, which I accomplished on the 17th,
I found about five hundred Indians assembled, but camped in three
separate encampments. On arriving, I was saluted by a feu de joie.
At the Portage, Mr. Graham had obtained some provisions, which he
had sent forward in carts.

On our way we met some carts sent by the Indians to relieve my
waggons of the tents and baggage, the Indian trail being almost
impracticable; but instead of so using them I sent them on toward
the Portage to meet the loaded carts, and was thus enabled to
get the temporary supply of provisions to the Plain, which was
fortunate, as the Indians were without food. The evening of my
arrival the Councillors of Yellow Quill came to talk with me, but
I declined to do so, telling them that the Chief had not come, and
I would only speak with him. I acted thus, in consequence of the
conduct of their head men, last year, when they controlled the
Chief and coerced the whole band. In a short time Yellow Quill
came with them to see me, and finding that they had come about
provisions, I referred them to Mr. Graham, who, I informed them,
had charge of the provisions and payments. The incident had a
marked effect in giving tone to the following negotiations.

On Monday I met the Indians, who ranged themselves in three
parties. I explained to them the proposed arrangement of the
outside promises very fully, and told them that as they were
willing to accept of the settlement last year, I did so for their
information only. I then took up the question of the reserve, read
the terms in which it was referred to in the Stone Fort Treaty,
explained to them that they were getting double the land any other
Indians in Treaties Numbers One and Two were doing, but told them
the reserve belonged to all of them, and not to Yellow Quill's band
alone. I then called on them to speak to me, asking Yellow Quill
first. He said he did not understand the extent of the reserve. I
then asked Mr. Reid to shew them a diagram of it, and to explain to
them its length in ordinary miles, and otherwise, which he did very
satisfactorily, and at length they comprehended it. I then called
on Short Bear's band to express their views. They said they wanted
a reserve at the Long Plain, if it was only a little piece of land;
that they liked the place, that they had built houses and planted
gardens, had cut oak to build more houses, and wished to farm
there. I then called on the White Mud Indians. They said that they
were Christians and had always lived at the White Mud River; that
they did not wish to join either Yellow Quill's or Short Bear's
reserve, but desired a reserve at the Big Point. I told them they
could not have it there, as there were settlers, and the Government
wished them to join one of the other bands, and explained to them
that their holdings would be respected, except where inadvertently
sold. I took this course, as I had ascertained that the plan of
Yellow Quill's head men was to make no settlement this year, and
that they had induced the other Indians to agree to act in that
way. I accordingly so shaped my opening speech and my dealings with
the Indians as to defeat this project, by securing the support of
Short Bear's and the White Mud Indians, which I succeeded in doing,
though Yellow Quill's spokesman taunted the others with having
broken their agreement. As the conference proceeded, Yellow Quill's
councillors said they did not want the band broken up, as they
wished all to live together. I told Yellow Quill he would have his
reserve on both sides of the river, reserving the navigation, and
that if they could agree to go to one reserve, I would be pleased;
but if not, that I would settle the matter. Yellow Quill said his
councillors were willing that the other Indians should have a
separate reserve provided they retained the belt of twenty-five
miles, in addition to their proportion of the reserve. I informed
them this could not be done; the reserve belonged to all. They then
asked for an adjournment, in order that they might meet together
and have a smoke over it, to assemble again when I hoisted my flag.
After a couple of hours interval I again convened them. The Short
Bears and White Mud Indians adhered to what they stated to me, but
Yellow Quill's band insisted on one reserve for all, but admitted
that the objections of Short Bear's band to the place asked by them
were well founded, and that it was sandy and unfit for farming,
and that they would like to select a reserve higher up the River
Assiniboine. I then adjourned the conference until morning, and
asked them to meet together and be prepared for settlement.

On Tuesday, the 20th June, the Indians again responded to the
hoisting of my flag, and met at 9 o'clock. Yellow Quill told me
that his band were now willing to separate from the others, and
wished to select a reserve higher up the river. I informed them
that I would accede to their request, but that they must do it at
once, and on the approval thereof by the Privy Council it would be
laid off. Short Bear's band still desired a reserve at the Long
Plain, to which I assented. The White Mud River Indians asked for
a separate reserve where they could farm, and I informed them that
under the discretionary powers I possessed I would have a reserve
selected for them, giving them their proportion of the original
reserve. The Indians then asked that the two dollars per head,
which had, as they said, slipped through their fingers last year,
should be paid to them, and I told them that I had been authorized
to do so, which gave them much satisfaction. In anticipation of a
settlement I had prepared a draft agreement, which was being copied
for me by Mr. Graham. I informed them of this, and stated that
I would sign it, and that the Chiefs and Councillors must do so
likewise, so that there could be no misunderstanding. When the
agreement was completed, I asked Mr. Cummings, the Interpreter,
to read it to them, which he did. Three Indians, who understood
English, and who had at an early period been selected by the
Indians to check the interpretation of what was said, standing by,
and Mr. Cummings being assisted by Mr. Cook, of St. James, who, at
Mr. Cummings' request, I had associated with him, on the Indians
choosing their interpreters. I then signed the agreement, and
called upon Yellow Quill to do so. He came forward cheerfully and
said he would sign it, because he now understood what he never
did before, viz., what was agreed to at the Stone Fort. I then
called on his Councillors to sign, but they refused, saying
they had agreed by the mouth. I then told the Indians that
unless the Councillors signed nothing could be done, and that the
Councillors who refused would be responsible for the failure of the
negotiations. One of them then signed, but the other persistently
refused. I repeated my warning, and at length he reluctantly came
forward and said he wished to ask me a question, "Would the head
men be paid?" I told him I had no authority to do so, but would
report his request. He said he did not expect it this year, but
hoped for it next. Eventually he signed the agreement. I then said
I would recognize Short Bear as a Chief, and asked him to select
his Councillors and braves. He did so at once, making a judicious
choice, and came forward to touch the pen, saying "I thank you for
my people." His Councillors promptly followed, one of them asking
for a part of the reserve on the other side of the river, which I
refused. I then called on the White Mud River Indians to select a
Chief and one Councillor, being under the impression at the time
that they were the least numerous band, which, however, has turned
out not to be the case, which they did at once, and on their being
presented to me they signed the agreement. I then gave a medal to
Yellow Quill, and promised to send the other two Chiefs medals
when procured from Ottawa, the supply here being exhausted. To the
Chiefs and Councillors suits of clothing were then distributed,
Yellow Quill and his head men having hitherto refused to accept
either medals or coats, but now taking them. Yellow Quill then
presented me with a skin coat, and said that he parted with the
other Indians as friends, and that there would be no hard feelings.
The conference then broke up, and thus terminated a difficulty
which has existed for several years, and the influence of which
was felt as an obstacle, as you are aware, at Qu'Appelle when the
treaty was made there. Mr. Graham at once commenced the payments,
and during the evening the three Chiefs and their Councillors
called on me, evidently being on the most friendly terms with each
other, a state of things which had not existed for a considerable
period. In the morning, as I was leaving for the Portage, the
Indians assembled near my waggon and gave three cheers for the
Queen and three for the Governor, and I then drove off amid a
salute of firearms from all sections of the encampment. I left
Mr. Graham to complete the payments, and here record my sense of
the efficient services he rendered me. He understands the Indian
character, and gets on well with them. I requested Mr. Reid to
visit the White Mud region and ascertain what persons are entitled
to holdings under the terms of your instructions, and also to
survey Short Bear's reserve.

Yellow Quill is to go without delay to look up a reserve, and as
there are no settlers in the region in question, I propose that if
Mr. Reid sees no objection to the locality he should at once lay
it off, so as to effectually terminate the chronic difficulty with
this band. I shall be glad to receive by telegram your approval
of his doing so. The interpreters, Mr. Cummings, Mr. Cook, of St.
James, a trader, and Kissoway, an Indian trader belonging to the
band, rendered me much service; the latter trades in the west,
and was passing the Portage on his way to Fort Garry, and as he
belonged to Yellow Quill's band, and is a relative of his, being
a son of the deceased Pecheto, (another of whose sons was the
spokesman at Qu'Appelle, as you will recollect) he came to the
Long Plains to advise the band to come to terms. He remained at
my request until the negotiations were concluded, and exerted a
most beneficial influence over Yellow Quill's band. I call your
attention to the request of Yellow Quill's Councillors, that they
should be paid. As in Treaties Three, Four and Five, they are paid,
and as the expense would not be large, I am of opinion that before
the Superintendent of Indian Affairs for the Superintendency of
Manitoba proceeds to make the payments in Treaties One and Two, he
should be authorized to pay the head men. It will be difficult to
explain why the difference is made, and it will secure in every
band, men who will feel that they are officers of the Crown and
remunerated as such. I returned to Fort Garry on the 23rd inst.,
encountering on the way a very severe thunder storm, which
compelled me to take advantage of the very acceptable shelter of
the kindly proffered residence of the Hon. Mr. Breland, at White
Horse Plains, instead of a tent on the thoroughly-drenched
prairie. I congratulate you that with the successful issue of
this negotiation is closed, in Treaties One and Two, the vexed
question of the open promises. I forward by this mail a copy of
the agreement I have above alluded to, retaining the original for
the present, and will be pleased to hear of its speedy approval
by the Privy Council.

                        I have the honor to be, etc.,
                                      ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                                              Lieut.-Governor.



CHAPTER VIII

THE WINNIPEG TREATY, NUMBER FIVE


This treaty, covers an area of approximately about 100,000 square
miles. The region is inhabited by Chippewas and Swampy Crees.
The necessity for it had become urgent. The lake is a large and
valuable sheet of water, being some three hundred miles long. The
Red River flows into it and the Nelson River flows from it into
Hudson's Bay. Steam navigation had been successfully established by
the Hudson's Bay Company on Lake Winnipeg. A tramway of five miles
in length was being built by them to avoid the Grand Rapids and
connect that navigation with steamers on the River Saskatchewan. On
the west side of the lake, a settlement of Icelandic immigrants had
been founded, and some other localities were admirably adapted for
settlement. Moreover, until the construction of the Pacific Railway
west of the city of Winnipeg, the lake and Saskatchewan River are
destined to become the principal thoroughfare of communication
between Manitoba and the fertile prairies in the west. A band of
Indians residing at Norway House, who had supported themselves by
serving the Hudson's Bay Company as boatmen on the route from Lake
Winnipeg to the Hudson Bay, by way of the Nelson River, but whose
occupation was gone, owing to supplies being brought in by way of
the Red River, desired to migrate to the western shore of Lake
Winnipeg, and support themselves there by farming.

For these and other reasons, the Minister of the Interior reported
"that it was essential that the Indian title to all the territory
in the vicinity of the lake should be extinguished so that
settlers and traders might have undisturbed access to its waters,
shores, islands, inlets and tributary streams." The mouth of
the Saskatchewan River especially seemed to be of importance,
as presenting an eligible site for a future town. For these
reasons the Privy Council of Canada, in the year 1875, appointed
Lieut.-Gov. Morris, and the Hon. James McKay, to treat with these
Indians. It may be here stated that this remarkable man, the
son of an Orkneyman by an Indian mother, has recently died at a
comparatively early age. Originally in the service of the Hudson's
Bay Company, he became a trader on his own account. Thoroughly
understanding the Indian character, he possessed large influence
over the Indian tribes, which he always used for the benefit and
the advantage of the Government.

The Hudson's Bay Company, to resume this narrative, kindly placed
their propeller steamer, the Colville, at the service of the
Commissioners, and the Board in London, in view of the public
service rendered by its use by the Commissioners, eventually
declined to make any charge for its employment. A full report
of the voyage of the Commissioners, and of the results of their
mission, will be found in the despatch of the Lieutenant-Governor,
which will be found at the end of this chapter. Suffice it to say,
that the Commissioners proceeded first to Berens River, on the east
side of the lake, and made a treaty with the Indians of that side
of the lake, thence they sailed to the head of Lake Winnipeg,
descended the Nelson River to Norway House, where no steamer had
ever before been, and concluded a treaty with the Indians there.

They also promised the Indians to give those of them who chose to
remove, a reserve on the west side of Lake Winnipeg, at Fisher's
River, about forty miles from the Icelandic settlement.

A considerable number of families have since removed there, and
have formed a very promising settlement.

From Nelson River the Commissioners proceeded to the mouth of the
Great Saskatchewan River, and met the Indians who live there. Their
houses were built at the foot of the Grand Rapids, and in the
immediate vicinity of the Hudson's Bay, Tramway, some seven miles
from the mouth of the river. The river is here deep to the very
shore, so that the steamer ran long aside the bank, and was moored
by ropes attached to the Chief's house. The Commissioners met
the Indians and informed them of the desire of the Government
to control the land where they had settled, and to give them a
reserve, instead, on the opposite side of the river. They said,
they would surrender the locality in question, and go to the south
side of the river, if a small sum was given them, to aid them in
removing their houses or building others. To this the Commissioners
willingly acceded, and promised that the next year a sum of five
hundred dollars would be paid them for that purpose. The treaty was
then signed, the Commissioners having extended the boundaries of
the treaty limits, so as to include the Swampy Cree Indians at the
Pas or Wahpahpuha, a settlement on the Saskatchewan River, and
recommended that Commissioners should be sent in the ensuing summer
to complete the work. The Commissioners then returned to Winnipeg,
after a voyage, on and around the lake, of about one thousand
miles. The terms of the treaty were identical with those of
Treaties Numbers Three and Four, except that a smaller quantity of
land was granted to each family, being one hundred and sixty, or in
some cases one hundred acres to each family of five, while under
Treaties Numbers Three and Four the quantity of land allowed was
six hundred and forty acres to each such family. The gratuity paid
each Indian in recognition of the treaty was also five dollars per
head, instead of twelve dollars the circumstances under which the
treaty was made being different. The area covered by these treaties
was approximately about 100,000 square miles and has been described
as lying north of the territory covered by Treaties Numbers Two and
Three, extending west to Cumberland House (on the Saskatchewan
River) and including the country east and west of Lake Winnipeg,
and of Nelson River as far north as Split Lake.

In 1876, Lieut.-Gov. Morris, in accordance with his suggestions to
that effect, was requested by the Minister of the Interior, to take
steps for completing the treaty, and entrusted the duty to the Hon.
Thomas Howard, and J. Lestock Reid, Esq., Dominion Land Surveyor.
He gave them formal instructions, and directed them to meet the
Indians together at Dog Head Point, on the lake, to treat with the
Island Indians there and thence to proceed to Berens River to meet
the Indians of the rapids of that river who had not been able to be
present the previous year, and thereafter directed Mr. Howard to
proceed to the mouth of the Saskatchewan and pay the Indians the
five hundred dollars for removal of the houses, and thence to go up
the Saskatchewan to the Pas and deal with the Indians there, while
Mr. Reid was to proceed from Berens River to Norway House, and
arrange with the Indians for the removal of such of them as desired
it, to Fisher's River, on Lake Winnipeg.

These gentlemen accordingly in July, 1876, proceeded in York boats
(large sail boats) to their respective destinations, and were very
successful in accomplishing the work confided to them.

I now append the official despatch of Lieut.-Gov. Morris, dated
11th October, 1875, giving an account of the making of the treaty
and of the journey, and his despatch of the 17th November, 1876,
relating to the completion of the treaty, together with extracts
from the reports of Messrs. Howard and Reid.

FORT GARRY, October 11th, 1875.

TO THE HONORABLE THE MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR.

Sir,--I have the honor to inform you, that under authority of the
Commission of the Privy Council to that effect, I proceeded to
Lake Winnipeg for the purpose of making a treaty with the Saulteaux
and Swampy Cree Indians, in company with my associate, the Hon.
James McKay, leaving Fort Garry for Chief Prince's Landing on
the Red River, on the 17th September last, in order to embark on
the Hudson's Bay Company's new propeller, the Colville, which
Chief Commissioner Graham had kindly placed at our disposal on
advantageous terms. We selected this mode of conveyance, as
travelling and conveyance of provisions in York boats would, at the
advanced period of the season, have occupied at least eight weeks,
if at all practicable.

The steamer left the landing at five o'clock on the 18th September,
but owing to the prevalence of a gale of northerly wind was
compelled to be anchored at the three channels of the Red River,
inside of the bar which obstructs the entrance of the lake. The
wind continued during the 18th and 19th, but on the afternoon of
the latter day, Captain Hackland, a sailor of much practical
experience on the Northern Seas decided to risk going out, as the
water on the bar was running down so fast that he feared that the
steamer would be unable to cross over the bar. I may remark that
the wind causes the waters of the lake to ebb and flow into the
river with great rapidity, and that the bar is so serious an
obstruction to an important navigation, that it ought to be
examined with a view to ascertain the cost and practicability of
its removal. Leaving our anchorage, we crossed the bar at three in
the afternoon with difficulty, and proceeded on our voyage;
anchored opposite the mouth of the Berens River on Monday, the
20th, at nine a.m., to await the arrival of a pilot, as no steamer
had ever before entered the river. Under the pilotage of a Chief
and a Councillor, we reached Berens River Post, the Indians
greeting us with volleys of firearms, and at once summoned the
Indians to meet us in the Wesleyan Mission School House, which the
Rev. Mr. Young kindly placed at our disposal. We met the Indians at
four o'clock, and explained the object of our visit. The question
of reserves was one of some difficulty, but eventually this was
arranged, and the Indians agreed to accept our offer, and the
indenture of treaty was signed by the Chiefs and head men about
eleven p.m. The payment of the present of five dollars per head,
provided by the treaty, was immediately commenced by Mr. McKay and
the Hon. Thomas Howard, who accompanied me as Secretary and Pay
Master, and was continued until one a.m., when the payment was
concluded.

The steamer left next day, the 21st, for Norway House, but the
captain was obliged to anchor at George's Island in the evening,
owing to the stormy weather. The Colville remained at anchor all
the next day, the 22nd, but left at midnight for Nelson River. We
sighted the Mossy and Montreal points, at the mouth of that river,
about nine a.m. on the 23rd, and arrived at the old or abandoned
Norway House at eleven o'clock, under the guidance of Roderick
Rose, Esquire, of the Hudson's Bay Company's Service, at Norway
House, who had been engaged for some days in examining the channel,
in anticipation of our visit.

The Nelson River expands into Play Green Lake, a large stream of
water studded with islands, presenting a remarkable resemblance to
the Thousand Islands of the St. Lawrence River. The distance from
the mouth of the river to Norway House is twenty miles. We arrived
at Norway House at three o'clock and were welcomed there by the
Indians, who fired a salute.

On the 24th we met the Indians in a large store-house of the
Hudson's Bay Company, and asked them to present their Chiefs and
head men. We found that there were two distinct bands of Indians,
the Christian Indians of Norway House, and the Wood or Pagan
Indians of Cross Lake. Each elected their Chiefs by popular vote in
a most business-like manner, and the Chiefs, after consulting the
bands, selected the head men. We then accepted the Chiefs, and I
made an explanation of the object of our visit in English, and the
Hon. James McKay in the Indian dialect. We severed the questions of
terms and reserves, postponing the latter till we had disposed of
the former. The Indians gratefully accepted of the offered terms,
and we adjourned the conference to enable them to consult as to
reserves. On re-assembling, the Christian Chief stated that as they
could no longer count on employment in boating for the Hudson's Bay
Company, owing to the introduction of steam navigation, he and a
portion of his band wished to migrate to Lake Winnipeg, where they
could obtain a livelihood by farming and fishing. We explained why
we could not grant them a reserve for that purpose at the Grassy
Narrows as they wished, owing to the proposed Icelandic settlement
there, but offered to allot them a reserve at Fisher River, about
forty miles north of the Narrows, and this they accepted. It is
supposed that some eighty or ninety families will remove there
in spring, and it was arranged that those who remain, instead
of receiving a reserve, should retain their present houses and
gardens. The Chief of the Pagan band, who has, however, recently
been baptized, stated that the Wood Indians wished to remain at
Cross Lake, and we agreed that a reserve should be allotted them
there. The treaty was then signed and the medals and uniforms
presented. The Chiefs, on behalf of their people, thanked Her
Majesty and her officers for their kindness to the Indian people,
which I suitably acknowledged, and the payment of the presents was
commenced by Messrs. McKay and Howard, and completed on the 15th.

We left that day at half-past three amidst cheering by the Indians
and a salute of fire-arms, and came to anchor in Play Green Lake,
at Kettle Island, at half-past five.

The steamer left Kettle Island next morning at six o'clock for the
Grand Rapids of the Saskatchewan, which we reached at four o'clock.

The original post of the Hudson's Bay Company, at the mouth of
the river, has been abandoned, and a new one established on their
reserve, some six miles higher up the river, at the head of the
portage, which the river steamer descends to. The Colville, at our
request ran up to the Chiefs house, situated on the shore of a deep
bay, and was moored and gangways laid out to the shore. We found an
Indian village on the north side, and also the Chief's house, which
was built on the only spot where good and inexpensive wharfage can
be had, and ascertained afterwards that the Indians claimed the
whole north shore for a reserve.

On the 27th we met the Indians near the Chief's house in the open
air, at a spot where a large fire had been lighted by them, as the
weather was cold. We took a similar course as at Norway House in
severing the question of terms of the treaty and reserves, and with
like satisfactory results. After a lengthy discussion the Indians
agreed to accept the terms, and we then entered upon the difficult
question of the reserves. They complained of the Hudson's Bay
Company's reserve, and wished to have the land covered by it,
but we explained whatever had been promised the Company would be
given just as promises made to them would be kept. They said the
Company's reserve should be at the abandoned post at the mouth of
the river, and not at the end of the portage. We informed them that
we would inquire as to this. They then claimed a reserve on both
sides of the river of large extent, and extending up to the head of
the Grand Rapids, but this we declined to accede to. Eventually, as
the locality they had hitherto occupied is so important a point,
controlling as it does the means of communication between the mouth
of the river, and the head of the rapids, and where a "tram-way"
will no doubt ere long require to be constructed, presenting also
deep-water navigation and excellent wharfage, and evidently being
moreover the site where a town will spring up, we offered them
reserve on the south side of the river. They objected, that they
had their houses and gardens on the north side of the river, but
said that as the Queen's Government were treating them so kindly,
that they would go to south side of the river, if a small sum was
given them to assist in removing their houses, or building others,
and this as will be seen by the terms of the treaty, we agreed to
do, believing it to be alike in the interests of the Government
to have the control of so important a point as the mouth of the
great internal river of the Saskatchewan, and yet only just to the
Indians, who were making what was to them so large a concession to
the wishes of the Commissioners. On our agreeing to the proposal,
the treaty was cheerfully signed by the Chief and head men, and
the payment of the present was made to them, together with a
distribution of some provisions. I enclose a tracing of the mouth
of the river, copied from a sketch thereof kindly made for me by
Mr. Ross, which will enable you to understand the actual position
of the locality in question, and the better appreciate our reasons
for our action in the matter.

The steamer left the Grand Rapids in the afternoon of the 27th, and
the captain took his course for the mouth of the Red River, but
anchored, as the night became very dark, between George's Island
and Swampy Island.

On the 28th, resuming our course at half past five a.m., we sighted
Berens River Mission House at eight o'clock, and passed into the
channel between Black Bear Island and Dog Head or Wapang Point,
at 12.30; then observing a number of Indians on the shore making
signals to us by firing guns, we requested the captain to approach
the shore. The water being very deep the steamer went close inshore
and anchored--the Indians coming off to us in their canoes. We
found them to be headed by Thickfoot, a principal Indian of the
band inhabiting the islands, and some of those and the Jack Head
band of the West Shore, and explained to them the object of our
visit. They told us they had heard of it, and had been waiting to
see us. Thickfoot said the Island Indians at Big Island, Black
Island, Wapang and the other islands in the vicinity had no chief;
that they numbered one hundred and twenty-eight, and those at
Jack-Fish Head sixty. Thickfoot said he had cattle and would like
to have a place assigned to his people on the main shore, where
they could live by farming and fishing. We suggested Fisher River
to them, which they approved of. Eventually we decided on paying
these Indians--took Thickfoot's adhesion to the treaty, of which I
enclose a copy, and authorized him to notify the Indians to meet at
the Dog Head Point next summer, at a time to be intimated to them,
and to request them in the mean time to select a Chief and
Councillors. Thickfoot expressed gratitude for the kindness of the
Government, and his belief that Indians of the various Islands and
of Jack Head Point would cheerfully accept the Queen's benevolence
and settle on a reserve. After paying this party, and distributing
a small quantity of provisions among them, we resumed our voyage,
and, owing to the character of the navigation, again came to anchor
in George's Channel at seven o'clock, p.m. On the 29th, we left our
anchorage at five o'clock a.m., and entered the mouth of the Red
River at twelve o'clock, crossing the bar without difficulty, as
the weather was calm. We arrived at the Stone Fort at three o'clock
in the afternoon, but had to remain there till next day, awaiting
the arrival of conveyances from Winnipeg. Mr. McKay and I left the
Stone Fort on the 30th at seven a.m. leaving our baggage and a
portion of the provisions which had not been used to be forwarded
by the steamer Swallow, and reached Fort Garry at ten o'clock,
thus terminating a journey of over one thousand miles, and having
satisfactorily closed a treaty with the Saulteaux and Swampy Crees,
which will prove of much importance in view of the probable rapid
settlement of the west coast of Lake Winnipeg. The journey,
moreover, is of interest, as having been the first occasion on
which a steam vessel entered the waters of Berens River and of the
Nelson River, the waters of which river fall into the Hudson's Bay,
and as having demonstrated the practicability of direct steam
navigation through a distance of three hundred and sixty miles from
the city of Winnipeg to Norway House. I may mention here that the
prevalence of timber suitable for fuel and building purposes, of
lime and sandstone, of much good soil, and natural hay lands on the
west shore of the lake, together with the great abundance of white
fish, sturgeon and other fish in the lake, will ensure, ere long,
a large settlement.

The east coast is much inferior to the west coast, as far as
I could learn, but appeared to be thickly wooded, and it is
understood that indications of minerals have been found in several
places.

I now beg to call your attention to the boundaries of the treaty,
which, you will observe, vary somewhat from those suggested in your
memorandum to the Privy Council. The Commissioners adopted as the
southern boundary of the treaty limits, the northern boundary of
Treaties Numbers Two and Three. They included in the limits all the
territory to which the Indians ceding, claimed hunting and other
rights, but they fixed the western boundary as defined in the
treaty, for the following reasons:

1st. The extension of the boundary carries the treaty to the
western limit of the lands claimed by the Saulteaux and Swampy Cree
Tribes of Indians, and creates an eastern base for the treaties to
be made with the Plain Crees next year.

2nd. The Swampy Crees at the Pas, on the Saskatchewan, would
otherwise have had to be included in the western treaties.

3rd. That the extension of the boundaries will add some six hundred
to the number of Indians in the suggested limits, of whom three
hundred at Wahpahhuha or the Pas on the Saskatchewan would have had
to be treated with owing to the navigation of the Saskatchewan, in
any event.

4th. The inclusion of the Norway House Indians in the treaty, and
the surrender of their rights, involved a larger area of territory.

5th. That a number of the Norway House Indians came from Moose Lake
and the Cumberland region, and possessed rights there which have
been included in the boundaries.

6th. Unless the boundaries had been properly defined, in conformity
with known geographical points, a portion of the country lying
between the territories formerly ceded and those comprised in
Treaty Number Five, would have been left with the Indian title
unextinguished.

For these reasons, the Commissioners defined the boundaries as they
are laid down in the treaty, and it will remain with the Government
to send a Commissioner to the Pas to obtain the adhesion of the
Indians there to the treaty next summer, or not as they shall
decide, though the Commissioners strongly urge that step to be
taken as a necessity.

I forward the original of the treaty to you by the Hon. Mr.
Christie, and in order to the better understanding of the treaty
area, I enclose a very valuable map copied from one made for me at
my request on board of the Colville, by Roderick Ross, Esq., who
accompanied me from Norway House to the Stone Fort, and to whom
I was indebted for much valuable assistance and co-operation, as
we were in fact to the Company's officers generally. This map is
prepared from actual observation, and locates many places not
indicated on any existing map, and covering as it does an area of
over 100,000 square miles, which, exclusive of the great waters,
has been included in the treaty, possesses much value.

I enclose herewith duplicates of the pay sheets, a statement of the
cash expenditure, shewing the balance on hand of the credit which
was given me for the purposes of the treaty, and statements of the
distribution of the provisions and of the clothing, and medals,
as given to the chiefs and head men. These statements will shew
that every arrangement was made to secure the utmost economy in
effecting the treaty, and yet to give satisfaction to the Indians
concerned.

I mention here that the Indians were uniformly informed that no
back payments of the present would be made to those who did not
attend the meetings with the Commissioners, but that next year
those not present would receive payment with the others, if they
presented themselves.

I have to express my sense of the services rendered to the
Government by my associate the Hon. James McKay, and the Hon.
Thomas Howard, who acted as Secretary and Pay Master to the
Commissioners as well as of the many kind services we received from
Captain Hackland, and the other officers of the Colville, from the
Wesleyan Missionaries, and from the officers of the Hudson's Bay
Company.

I take this opportunity of suggesting that the supervision of
Treaty Number Five, and the carrying out of the treaty obligations
with the Indians of the St. Peter's Band, and of those of Fort
Alexander and the River Roseau and Broken Head, which fall into
Lake Winnipeg, should be entrusted to a local agent, stationed at
the Stone Fort or in the vicinity of St. Peter's, and who would
thence supervise the whole District.

In conclusion, I have only to express the hope that the action of
the Commissioners, which in every respect was governed by a desire
to promote the public interest, will receive the approval of the
Privy Council, and be regarded by them as the satisfactory
discharge of an onerous and responsible duty.

                  I have the honor to be, Sir,
                          Your obedient servant,
                                 ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                                     Lieut.-Gov. N. W. T.



                                GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
                          FORT GARRY 17th November, 1876.

TO THE HONORABLE THE MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR.

Sir,--I recommended in my despatch of the 7th June, that measures
should be adopted to secure the adhesion of the Indians, who had
not been met with when Treaty Number Five was concluded, and was
requested by you to entrust the duty to Mr. Graham, of the Indian
Department here, or to the Hon. Thomas Howard, Mr. Graham was
unable to leave the office. I therefore entrusted the matter to Mr.
Howard and J. Lestock Reid, D.L.S. I gave these gentleman written
instructions, a copy of which will be found appended to the report
of Mr. Howard, in which I directed them to meet the Island Indians
and those of Berens River together, and then to separate, Mr. Reid
proceeding to Norway House and Mr. Howard to the Grand Rapids of
the Saskatchewan and the Pas, this course being necessary to enable
the work to be accomplished during the season. I have pleasure in
informing you that these gentlemen discharged their mission most
successfully and satisfactorily, as will be seen from the following
reports, which I enclose, viz:--

A. Joint report of Messrs. Howard and Reid as to the Island Indians
of Lake Winnipeg and those of Berens River.

B. Report of Mr. Howard as to the band at the Grand Rapids, and as
to his negotiations with the Indians at the Pas.

C. Report of Mr. Reid with regard to the Norway House Indians.

D. Report of Mr. Howard, submitting the accounts of the expenditure
incurred in carrying out my instructions.

1. It will appear from these reports that the Commissioners
obtained the assent of the scattered bands among the islands and
shores of Lake Winnipeg, and had them united in a band with one
Chief and his Councillors.

2. That the Indians of the Grand Rapids of the Berens River
accepted the treaty, being received as part of the band of Jacob
Berens, and that the latter band wish their reserves to be allotted
them and some hay lands assigned.

3. That the Norway House Indians contemplate removal to Fisher's
River, on Lake Winnipeg.

4. That the Indians of Grand Rapids have removed, as they agreed
to do last year from the point where they had settled on the
Saskatchewan, and which had been set apart as the site of a town.

5. That the Indians of the Pas, Cumberland, and Moose Lake gave
their adhesion to the treaty and, subject to the approval of the
Privy Council, have agreed upon the localities for their reserves.

6. That the bands at the Grand Rapids, the Pas, and Cumberland are
in a sufficiently advanced position to be allowed the grant for
their schools.

I forward herewith the balance sheet of Mr. Howard for the receipts
and disbursements connected with the completion of the treaty and
the payments, as also the various vouchers in support thereof. I
placed the charge of the financial arrangements in the hands of Mr.
Howard, on whom also fell the longest period of service in the work
entrusted to the Commissioners.

I also forward by parcel post, registered, the original of the
assents to the treaty of the various bands.

To prevent complications and misunderstandings, it would be
desirable that many of the reserves should be surveyed without
delay, and, from Mr. Reid's connection with the treaty, and his
fitness for the work, I think that he would be a suitable person
to be employed in the duty.

I would remark in conclusion, that I requested Mr. Provencher to
obtain the assent to the treaty of the band at the mouth of the
Black River, and that be informs me that he obtained their adhesion
and has so reported to you. The having obtained the assent of the
whole of the Indians within the region treated for so far, is a
most satisfactory feature of the year's operations.

                                  I have, &c.,
                                              ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                                                      Lieut.-Governor.



A.

WINNIPEG, October 10th, 1876.

TO THE HON. ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                 Lieutenant-Governor, Fort Garry.

Sir,--Under instructions received from you, dated 14th July last,
we were directed to proceed to the Dog Head Point and Berens River,
on Lake Winnipeg, and there obtain the adhesion of certain Indians
to the treaty that was made and concluded at Norway House last
year, and we have now the honor to report....

With a fair wind and fine weather we reached the Narrows on Monday
afternoon, the 24th, at half-past four. Mr. Howard called at the
Hudson's Bay Company's post to see about the provisions stored
there, where he found Thickfoot and the Jack-Fish Head Indians
encamped, about twenty-five families in all, and learned from them
that they were desirous to meet and speak to us where they were,
and not across the Narrows at the Dog Head; but as the place of
meeting was distinctly fixed, Mr. Howard informed them that they
would have to move their camps.

Mr. Reid having, in the meantime, gone to the Dog Head Point, was
received with a salute from the Indians there encamped, viz.: the
Blood Vein River, Big Island and Sandy Bar bands, and, almost
simultaneously with Mr. Howard's arrival there, the Indians
belonging to Thickfoot and the Jack-Fish Head arrived also.

We hardly had time to make our camp before being waited upon by
a representative from all the bands except Thickfoot's, and they
desired to know when we would be prepared to have a conference;
and, having told them that the following day, the 25th, was the day
appointed, and that we would meet them at eleven o'clock in the
morning, we gave them some provisions and they withdrew. Thickfoot
subsequently called upon us and stated that he was prepared at
any time to meet us and sign the treaty, that he had learned that
it was our intention to make only one Chief for all the Indians
gathered there; that he had felt when the paper was placed in his
hands last year by the Governor, that he was making him the Chief;
that he had notified all the Indians that were there as he had
agreed, and that they had threatened him with violence for saying
he was to be Chief, and that he was afraid now to join them in any
way, and that he and his band wished to be spoken to by themselves.
Upon hearing this, we informed him that he need not be afraid of
violence, that the paper the Governor gave him merely stated that
he was a principal Indian, and we would certainly recognize him as
such, and if the Indians desired him to be their Chief it would be
a great pleasure to us.

The following morning the Indians sent word by a representative
from each band, except Thickfoot's, that they desired another day
to meet in council before having a conference; but, feeling they
had sufficient time already, yet not wishing to hurry them too
much, we extended the hour of meeting to four o'clock on the same
day, which satisfied them, and when they promised to be ready.

About three o'clock, we were informed that the Indians had
gathered, so we at once proceeded to meet them. The place we had
chosen for the conference was on a granite plateau, and at one end
our crews had erected a covering with boughs; a more suitable spot
for the meeting could not be found.

After inquiring if they had all gathered, and, being assured that
they had, we began to explain the object of our mission, but
immediately saw that the bands were determined to be considered
distinct and wished to be treated with separately, when we informed
them that only one Chief would be allowed, and that before we could
proceed any further we would require them all to meet together
in council and there select one Chief and three Councillors, and
be prepared to present them to us on the following day. This
evidently gave great satisfaction to the Island Band, of which
Ka-tuk-e-pin-ais was head man, but they all withdrew; before doing
so, agreeing to be ready the next day at noon to meet us.

Before the hour appointed for the meeting the next day, another
delegation came over and informed us that the Indians were not yet
prepared, that they could not come to any decision as to who should
be Chief, and again asked to have the hour of meeting extended to
three o'clock, which we did upon the understanding that if they
were not then prepared we would return and report the facts to you.

Shortly after, we noticed Thickfoot and his Indians sitting near
our tents, and evidently taking no part in the selection of a
Chief, so we called him over and found him still disinclined to
join the other Indians. He stated that they would not have him as
Chief, and that he would therefore remain away. We then explained
that he could be head man of his band by being elected a Councillor
to whoever would be appointed Chief, and at last prevailing upon
him to go with his Indians to the Council tent, we requested the
Rev. Mr. Cochrane to proceed to the Indian encampment and state to
them that from each band other than the one from which the chief
was chosen, a Councillor would have to be taken. By this means
we saw our way to satisfy all the bands, and Mr. Cochrane having
notified the Indians accordingly, we felt confident the choice of
a chief would soon be made; but in this we were disappointed, as a
messenger shortly after arrived and said no choice could be made,
as Ka-tuk-e-pin-ais would do nothing unless he was chosen Chief. On
hearing this Mr. Cochrane decided to visit the Indians in Council,
and, having done so, proposed to them that they should elect
a Chief by ballot, and having got them all to agree to this
proposition, they proceeded to the election. Several ballots had
to be taken, and at last resulted in favor of the chief Indian of
the Blood Vein River band, Sa-ha-cha-way-ass, and the Councillors
elected were the head men from the Big Island, Doghead and
Jack-Fish Head bands.

At three o'clock p.m., we were notified that the Indians had again
gathered, when we proceeded to the place of meeting, and were
presented to the Chief and two of his Councillors. Ka-tuk-e-pin-ais,
the third Councillor, coming forward, said his band did not want him
to act as Councillor; that he had seen the Governor the other day, and
had been told by him that he would be the Chief of the Island Indians.
Whereupon we informed him that no such promise had been made by you,
and that we could only recognize the choice of the majority. He then
desired to withdraw from the negotiations, and wait until he saw you,
before signing the treaty; but as we had learned that out of the
twenty-two families that were in his band, all, with one or two
exceptions, had received the annuity since 1870, with the St. Peter's
Band, we made them sit by themselves, and then explained that by
receiving the annuity as a large number of them had done, they had
really agreed to the treaty and that we were there only to deal with
those of the band that had at no time received money from the Queen.
Ka-tuk-e-pin-ais then said that there were very few of his Indians
that had not received money from the Queen, but that he never had;
that he was quite prepared to sign the treaty now, only some of his
people did not want him to do so, unless we agreed to give them the
Big Island for a reserve. This we at once refused, and at the same
time told them that unless he and all his band agreed to the terms
we offered them without further delay, they might return to their
homes. Hearing this, they all withdrew, but soon returned, when
Ka-tuk-e-pin-ais said one or two of his people did not want him to
sign any treaty, but most of them did, and that he was going to do so.
He then took his seat along with the Chiefs and other Councillors,
and we proceeded to explain the terms of the treaty. When we came to
the clause referring to the reserves, each band was anxious that the
places where they are in the habit of living should be granted them
as reserves, and the locations of the same mentioned in the treaty;
but as our instructions were positive on this point, we refused but
assured them that the names of the places they asked for, we would
certainly forward with our report to you, and we stated that with the
exception of the location asked for by the Sandy Bar Indians, we felt
sure the Government would grant their request, and give them their
reserves where they desired. The following were the localities
mentioned:--

    DOG HEAD BAND.--The point opposite the Dog Head.
    BLOOD VEIN RIVER BAND.--At mouth of Blood Vein River.
    BIG ISLAND BAND.--At mouth of Badthroat River.
    JACK-FISH HEAD BAND.--The north side of Jack Head Point, at the
  Lobstick, and the
    SANDY BAR BAND.--White Mud River, west side of Lake Winnipeg.

It must be remembered that four bands out of the above named,
viz.:--Big Island, Jack-Fish Head, Dog Head and Blood Vein River,
are distinct bands, those at Sandy Bar really belonging to the St.
Peter's Band of Indians and that they have always lived at the
different points upon the lake from which they take their names,
and they therefore look upon these points as their homes. We would,
therefore, beg to recommend that the request of of all, with the
exception of the Sandy Bar Indians, be granted, although in doing
so we are aware of the desire of the Government that Indians should
not be encouraged to break up into small bands, yet we feel sure in
this instance it would be impossible to get them all upon any one
reserve.

The adhesion we had signed on Wednesday evening, July 26th, and
we then arranged to begin the payments of annuities the following
morning at nine o'clock, which was done, and the payments
completed by four o'clock on the same day. We then distributed
the implements, ammunition, twine, and balance of provisions.

As already stated, the Indians at Sandy Bar, were formerly paid
with the St. Peter's band. They are now included in the limits of
Treaty Five, and desire to receive their annuity with the Island
band.

Having distributed the presents, we immediately moved our camp
to an island about a quarter of a mile from the Point, and
there remained until Saturday morning, the 29th, when, having a
favourable wind, we set sail and arrived off the mouth of Berens
River, and camped on Lobstick Island the following morning, Sunday,
at half-past nine o'clock.

We remained there until Tuesday, and then moved our camp to the
Methodist Mission. The next day we went over in one of our boats
to the Hudson's Bay Company's post, where we met Mr. Flett, the
officer in charge and received from him the provisions that had
been previously forwarded and which he had in store, and then
returned to our camp.

Mr. Flett informed us that the Indians from the Narrows of Berens
River, he expected would arrive that evening, and on Thursday,
visited us to say that they had arrived and were then holding a
council. The same afternoon the Chief and Councillors called upon
us and desired to know when we would be prepared to meet them, and
though the 5th was the day appointed, we thought it advisable, as
all the Indians were then gathered there, and were anxious to
return to their homes, to appoint the following day, the 4th
August.

The next morning the Indians came over from where they were
encamped near the Hudson's Bay post, in York boats; and when we
learned that they were all in the school-house we proceeded there,
and met, in addition to the Berens River band, about thirty Indians
from the Grand Rapids of Berens River. We explained the object of
our mission, and found the Indians from the Rapids most anxious to
accept the Queen's bounty and benevolence, some of them had already
accepted the annuity with the Lac Seule Indians we found, so we
immediately told them that it was only to those that had not
previously received money or presents from the Queen, that the
first part of our mission extended, and with whom it was necessary
we should first speak. The head man, Num-ak-ow-ah-nuk-wape, then
said that he was fully prepared, on behalf of all his Indians, to
accept the same terms as given to the Berens River band, only be
wanted his reserve where he then lived, at the Grand Rapids; upon
which we told him that before we could speak further, we must be
assured by the band that he was their head man, and this the band
at once did. We then thought it advisable to recommend that they
should make the Chief of the Berens River band their Chief,
and make their head man a Councillor to him, and although our
proposition was not at once received satisfactorily, we ultimately
prevailed upon them to accept it, and the Chief was at once
elected. By this means we saved the expenses necessarily incurred
in maintaining one Chief and two Councillors. We then stated that
we were prepared to grant them their reserve where they asked for
it; and having explained the treaty to them, clause by clause, and
mentioned in the adhesion where the reserve should be, the adhesion
was duly signed by the Chief and Councillors. The payment of the
annuity was then gone on with and finished that afternoon at four
o'clock.

We then distributed the implements, ammunition, twine and
provisions. When we had finished, the Chief and Councillors came
forward, and thanked us for all that had been done for them; they
said they were well pleased with what they had received and desired
us to inform you of the fact, which we accordingly promised. They
then returned in the same boats they had come over in: before
leaving the bank, giving three cheers for the Queen and three for
the Governor.

We are very much pleased to inform you that the best possible
feeling appears to exist between the Indians in this region. They
all appeared anxious to farm and settle down, and we heard that a
number of houses had been built at Poplar River, and considerable
clearing done there since the treaty was made with them last year;
the implements and tools we brought them were therefore most
acceptable. As these bands live at a considerable distance from
each other, we would recommend that an extra supply of tools be
allowed them. We also feel satisfied that the animals promised by
the treaty might be furnished, as we certainly consider them in a
position to take care of the same.

As you directed, we informed them that their application for hay
lands had been forwarded to the Government, and this gave them
great satisfaction. The following morning, Saturday, August 5th,
Mr. Reid left for Norway House, and during the afternoon of the
same day, Mr. Howard sailed for the Stone Fort on the Red River.

Having obtained the adhesion of the Indians at the Dog Head, and at
Berens River, our duties as Joint Commissioners under your
instructions ceased....

We were fortunate enough to secure the services of the Rev. Henry
Cochrane, who kindly acted as interpreter. Being in the Province on
a visit from his mission at the Pas, and desirous of returning, Mr.
Howard gave him a passage in his boat, and he rendered us the most
valuable assistance throughout.

Having thus referred to the different matters connected with our
mission while acting together, and assuring you that our aim and
desire was to fulfill it to your entire satisfaction, which we
trust we have done,

                We have the honor to be, Sir,
                       Your obedient servants,
                                    THOS. HOWARD,
                                    J. LESTOCK REID,
                                             Commissioners.



B.

WINNIPEG, October 10th, 1876.

TO THE HONORABLE ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                 Lieutenant-Governor, Fort Garry.

Sir,--I have the honor to inform you that in compliance with your
instructions, a copy of which I hereunto annex, I proceeded,
accompanied by Mr. Reid, to the Dog Head and Berens River on Lake
Winnipeg, and there successfully secured the adhesion of the Island
and Grand Rapids of Berens River Bands of Indians to Treaty Number
Five, and, having paid the annuities to the Berens River Indians,
returned to the Stone Fort. As mentioned in the joint report
submitted to you by Mr. Reid and myself, I had the greatest
difficulty in procuring a boat to take me on my mission, and only
through the kindness of Mr. Flett, of the Hudson's Bay Company, at
the Stone Fort, was I able to obtain even the loan of one as far as
Berens River, from where I had to return it....

I left the Stone Fort for the Grand Rapids, on the morning of the
17th of August, and after a very fast, though rough and dangerous
passage, reached the mouth of the Saskatchewan river, early on the
morning of the 26th. I found, on entering the river, that the
Indians were encamped near its mouth, on the south bank, where
I landed, and arranged to meet them at noon that day. As the
provisions were stored at the Hudson's Bay Company's post, about a
mile and a half up the river, I decided to camp at the foot of the
road leading across the four-mile Portage, and having done so, and
in the meantime sent the provisions to the Indian camp, I returned
there at the time agreed upon.

The band having assembled, I stated to them the object of my
mission--that I had been directed to pay them the annuity and
deliver some of the tools and implements granted them by the
treaty, and also to distribute amongst those that formerly had
houses and gardens on the north bank of the river, and had moved to
where they were then living, as stipulated in the treaty, the sum
of five hundred dollars.

To my surprise, the Chief at once expressed his astonishment at my
saying that the treaty had been made last year, and said he had
only a talk then with the Governor preliminary to making the treaty
this year, and that they were only then prepared to be treated
with. I explained to the band how I had been present myself when
it was made, and that I would have it read to them. I accordingly
requested Mr. Cochrane to do so, explaining it thoroughly; yet, it
was only after a great deal of talking on their part, during which
they made most unreasonable demands, and many explanations on my
part, that the Indians were satisfied that a treaty had been made,
when they requested me to go on with the payments; at the same time
a number of them stated that they had been misled by one of the
counsellors, Joseph Atkinson by name. I then paid the annuity,
distributed the provisions, tools, implements, etc., and gave the
Chief a copy of the treaty, and, arranging to meet them again on
Monday the 28th, I returned to my camp at midnight.

On Monday, I met them as agreed, and at once began and made
inquiries as to who had houses and gardens on the north bank and
had moved their houses to the south bank, and I found that all
those that had formerly lived on the north bank had removed from
there. I noticed that great feeling existed amongst them all as to
the division of the five hundred dollars granted. All the band
congregated round me and the large majority desired that the amount
should be divided equally between them all, and claimed that every
one belonging to the band was entitled to participate in the
division; so I thought it best to leave it to themselves to decide
how the amount should be distributed, and they only succeeded in
doing so after a great deal of talking, and, I regret to say,
quarrelling; but they at last arranged it, and I was requested by
the Chief and Councillors to divide it amongst the whole band in
such proportions as I thought right, so I proceeded at once to what
turned out to be a long and troublesome undertaking; but having as
I considered made a fair and equitable distribution of the amount,
I paid the same, had the document witnessed by the Chief and
Councillors, and only got back to my camp again at midnight. As I
before said, all the Indians had removed to the south bank of the
river, but had made no preparations to build, and were merely
living in tents. Close to the encampment, at the mouth of the
river, the Church Missionary Society have put up a large building
to answer the purposes of a church and school-house. Care must be
taken and strict watch kept over this band. Living as they do on
the bank of a navigable river, where people are constantly passing,
they can give great trouble and annoyance, and, I am sorry to say,
are inclined to do so. Several complaints were made to me while
there, and I spoke to the Indians regarding them. They promised me
to abide faithfully by the terms of the treaty henceforth and not
give any further annoyance.

While occupied paying the Indians there, my crew were engaged in
taking my boat and supplies across the Portage. They left the camp
early on Monday morning, and with the assistance kindly rendered
them by Mr. Matheson, of the Hudson's Bay Company, succeeded in
reaching the north end of the Portage on Tuesday evening. That same
afternoon I walked over the four-mile Portage and found there a
number of buildings belonging to the Hudson's Bay Company. To this
point the Saskatchewan River steamer Northcote descends and
receives the supplies for the different posts belonging to the
Company to the West and North-West.

On Wednesday morning, the 30th, I left for the Pas. From the Grand
Rapids to the Narrows, before entering Cedar Lake, a distance of
eighteen or twenty miles, a continuous rapid extends, and it is
only by tracking and poling simultaneously that you are at all able
to ascend the river. The first day I made only nine miles on my way
and camped at the Demi Charge, and it was late in the evening on
the second day when I reached Cedar Lake. This lake is about
thirty-five miles in length and is very shallow and dangerous in
stormy weather. I was fortunate enough to have very calm weather,
and, therefore, crossed it without any delay and entered the
Saskatchewan again at the Che-ma-wa-win or "Seining place," early
on Saturday morning, September 2nd. Noticing a large encampment of
Indians there, I landed and found they were part of the Moose Lake
band. They desired that I should treat with them where they were,
and not bring them to the Pas, but upon my telling them that I
could only treat with them at the appointed place of meeting, they
readily assented to follow me up, and having given them some
provisions to take them there, and secured the services of one of
them to act as guide, I again started on my journey.

I was then three days and two nights ascending the river, and on
Tuesday morning, the 5th September, the day appointed for me to
meet the Indians, I arrived at the Pas or Devon Mission, on my way
up having been passed by the Indians from the Che-ma-wa-win.

On entering the river after leaving Cedar Lake the whole aspect of
the country changes, and from there to the Pas, and, I understand,
for fully one hundred miles above it, nothing but marsh can be
seen; so much so that it was difficult along the bank of the river
to find a spot dry enough to camp upon, and I was, consequently,
obliged to eat and sleep in my boat. The dreariness of this voyage
can hardly be realized, and it was with feelings of delight that I
landed at the Mission at the Pas where the Rev. Mr. Cochrane
received me.

Mr. Cochrane had accompanied me from the Stone Fort and had been in
my boat up to the night before I arrived, when, meeting some
Indians that were on the look-out for us, he returned with them in
their canoe and reached his home shortly before I arrived.

The Pas or Devon Mission is situated on the south bank of the
Saskatchewan, distant, I should say, one hundred and forty miles
from Grand Rapids. The Church Missionary Society have a very nice
church, school-house and parsonage there; and the Hudson's Bay
Company one of their posts. There are also a large number of houses
belonging to the Indians of the place; and on the other bank the
firm of Kew, Stobart & Co., have erected a store for trading
purposes. There are also several dwelling-houses on the north bank.
Altogether, the appearance of the place, on my arrival, was most
prepossessing. The banks were covered with Indians with their
canoes, and immediately the boat rounded the point below the
Mission and came in view a salute was fired, the like of which, I
was subsequently told, had never been heard in the "Ratty Country".

Having landed at the Mission, Mr. Cochrane informed me that he had,
as I requested, summoned the Indians to meet in the school-house at
three o'clock that afternoon, and when the hour arrived I proceeded
there and found upwards of five hundred Indians gathered. I stated
the object of my mission to them, and was at once assured of their
desire to accept of, and their gratitude for, the Queen's bounty
and benevolence.

I found that the Pas and Cumberland bands of Indians had acknowledged
Chiefs, but that the Moose Lake band had none, owing to a division
amongst them. It appeared that the Indians from the Che-ma-wa-win
desired to be a distinct band and have their reserves where I had
seen them at the entrance of the river from Cedar Lake; but noticing,
on my way up, the unfitness of the locality for a reserve, and having
learned that at Moose Lake, where part of the band desired to live,
a most suitable locality could be had, I had decided before meeting
them upon the course I should take, which was, not to encourage the
division in the band, and allow only one Chief; and this I did, and
succeeded, without much trouble, in getting the band to unite. I then
requested all the Indians to meet in council and select their Chief
and head men, and be prepared the following morning to present them
to me, when I would be ready to speak to them.

The next morning at eleven o'clock I met them and found they had
done as I requested, and having been presented to the Chiefs and
Councillors I proceeded to explain the terms of the treaty that I
desired to receive their adhesion to. The Chiefs immediately stated
that they wanted to make a treaty of their own, and it was only
after great difficulty that I could make them understand that in
reality it was not a new treaty they were about to make.

They had heard of the terms granted the Indians at Carlton, and
this acted most prejudicially at one time against the successful
carrying out of my mission; but I at last made them understand the
difference between their position and the Plain Indians, by
pointing out that the land they would surrender would be useless to
the Queen, while what the Plain Indians gave up would be of value
to her for homes for her white children. They then agreed to accept
the terms offered if I would agree to give them reserves where they
desired; and to their demands I patiently listened, and having at
last come to a satisfactory understanding I adjourned the meeting
to the following day.

Before proceeding further, I would draw your attention to the
localities I granted for reserves, subject to the approval of the
Government, and beg to inform you that I made every inquiry as to
the extent of farming land in each locality mentioned.

At the Narrows, at Moose Lake, there is considerable good land, and
a suitable place for a reserve can be had for the Moose Lake band.

For the Pas and Cumberland Indians I had to mention several
localities. At the Pas all the land obtainable is now cultivated,
and consists of a vegetable garden and one field attached to the
Mission, and a few patches of potatoes here and there. A short
distance from the river the marsh begins, and extends to the south
for miles; and the same thing occurs to the north. In fact, on both
banks of the river at this point, and from the Che-ma-wa-win up to
it, one hundred and fifty acres of land fit for cultivation cannot
be found; and about Cumberland the country in every respect is
similar.

The following day, Thursday the 7th, I met the Indians at three
p.m., and had the adhesion read to them and signed. I then
presented the medals and clothing to the Chiefs and Councillors,
with which they were greatly pleased, and having congratulated them
upon wearing the Queen's uniform, and having in return been
heartily thanked by them for what had been done, I proceeded to pay
them, and continued to do so up to seven o'clock, when the funds at
my disposal being exhausted, I directed them to meet me again the
following morning at nine o'clock, which they did, and I completed
the payments the same evening at five o'clock. I then distributed
the balance of provisions and the ammunition and twine. The
implements and tools I had been unable to bring from Grand Rapids,
my boat being very heavily laden; but Mr. Belanger, of the Hudson's
Bay Company, kindly promised to have them brought up free of charge
in a boat that was going to the Grand Rapids in a few days; I
therefore gave the Chief of the Pas band an order for the chest of
tools and the implements.

The following day, Saturday, having again seen all the Chiefs and
Councillors and received their thanks, and after many expressions
of gratitude from the Indians gathered, I left the Pas at half-past
two o'clock p.m., and with rowing and floating alternately during
the afternoon and night, reached the Che-ma-wa-win on Sunday
evening; crossed Cedar Lake on Monday, and landed at the head of
Grand Rapids on Tuesday morning. I then ran the rapids and hoisted
the sail at the mouth of the river at two p.m., having called upon
Mr. Matheson and seen the Chief of the Indians there on my way
down. I then made all haste to return here, but, owing to contrary
winds, only succeeded in reaching the Stone Fort on the 20th
September, yet, having made a very quick trip, unprecedented in
fact, and in carrying out the mission entrusted to me, travelled in
an open boat, thirteen hundred miles.

I would now inform you that three out of the four bands of Indians
I met on the Saskatchewan, viz., the Grand Rapids, Pas and
Cumberland, are in a position to receive at once from the
Government the grant allowed for the maintenance of schools of
instruction; at the Grand Rapids a huge school-house is by this
time entirely completed; and at the Pas and Cumberland, schools,
under the charge of the Church Missionary Society, have been in
existence some years. The Indians belonging to the bands I have
named desired that the assistance promised should be given as soon
as possible.

I would now mention the very valuable services rendered the
Government by the Rev. Mr. Cochrane, who acted as interpreter at
the Dog Head, Berens River, Grand Rapids and the Pas, and who was
at all times ready to give his advice and assistance; as well as by
Mr. A. M. Muckle, who accompanied me and assisted in making the
payments; and by Mr. Nursey, who took charge of the boat with
supplies for the Pas. To Mr. Matheson, of the Hudson's Bay Company,
Grand Rapids, and Mr. Belanger, of Cumberland House, I am deeply
indebted, and take this opportunity of tendering these gentlemen my
sincere thanks for the assistance rendered me and the many
kindnesses I received from them. I enclose herewith the pay-sheet
of the different bands I paid, a statement of the cash expenditure,
and statements shewing quantities of provisions, implements, etc.,
received and how distributed, with a statement of clothing, medals,
etc., given to the Chiefs and Councillors, and a report I received
from Mr. Bedson.

And, trusting that the manner in which I have carried out the
mission entrusted to my care, may meet with your approval,

                  I have the honor to be, Sir,
                            Your obedient servant,
                                   THOMAS HOWARD,
                                         Commissioner.



FORT GARRY, July 14th, 1876.

TO THE HON. THOS. HOWARD AND J. LESTOCK REID, ESQ.

Dear sirs,--Under authority from the Minister of the Interior, I
have to request you to proceed to Lake Winnipeg for the purpose
of--on behalf of the Privy Council of Canada--securing the adhesion
to Treaty Number Five of the Indians who have not yet been dealt
with, and to make the necessary payments to the others.

1st. You will, if possible, together proceed to or meet at the
following places, being there on the days named, viz.: Dog Head
Point, 25th July, and Berens River on the 5th August.

2nd. Mr. Howard will then proceed to the mouth of the Saskatchewan,
so as to reach there on the 25th of August, and then arrive at the
Pas on the 5th of September.

3rd. Mr. Reid will proceed from Berens River to Norway House, to
arrive there on or before the 25th of August.

4th. You or either of you will secure the adhesion of the Island
Indians to the treaty after the form annexed, and will request them
to select a Chief and three Councillors, and will be authorized to
promise them a reserve of one hundred and sixty acres to each
family of five, or that proportion for larger or smaller families,
to be selected for them by the person chosen for that end by the
Privy Council with their approval.

5th. You or either of you will obtain the adhesion of the Indians
of the Grand Rapids of Berens River to the treaty according to the
form annexed. You will ask them to select a Chief and three
Councillors. A similar provision will be made as to a reserve, but
if necessary you can fix the locality at the Sandy Narrows above
the rapids on the Berens River, reserving free navigation and
access to the shores to all Her Majesty's subjects.

6th. Mr. Reid will pay the Norway House and Cross Lake Indians, and
will ascertain the intentions of the Norway House Indians as to the
time of their removal to Fisher River, of which I am unadvised.

7th. Mr. Howard will pay the Indians at the mouth of the
Saskatchewan, and if the Indians have removed their houses, as
agreed by the treaty, will pay them five hundred dollars, but if
not and some have removed, will pay such their proportionate share
of the five hundred dollars.

8th. You will distribute the implements, tools, etc. sent among the
Indians, as also the ammunition and twine. Cattle cannot be given
till the Indians are sufficiently settled on the reserves to make
it seem that they will be cared for. You will report any cases
where you find this to be the case, for future action.

9th. You will inform the Berens River Indians that their application
for a hay reserve has been forwarded to the Privy Council by me, and
that they will receive a reply hereafter.

10th. Mr. Howard will secure the adhesion of the Indians at the
Pas to the treaty providing that reserves of one hundred and sixty
acres to each family of five will be granted at places selected for
them by an officer of the Privy Council, with their approval; but
it will probably be necessary to give them a reserve at the Pas
where they reside, reserving carefully free navigation and access
to the shores. As the extent of land there is very narrow, it may
be desirable to indicate localities where farming reserves will be
granted subject to the approval of the Privy Council.

11th. The Moose Lake Indians are a distinct band, and will probably
desire the recognition of two separate Chiefs and the allotment of
separate reserves to them.

12th. The Cumberland House Indians are another band, but very much
scattered; the question of a reserve will have to be considered,
and, in connection with it, as in other cases, respect for actual,
bona fide, substantial improvements, and for the rights of
settlers.

13th. In all cases the places indicated for reserves to be subject
to Her Majesty's approval in Council, and free navigation and
access to the shores to be reserved.

14th. In the case of new adhesions to the treaty, which are in fact
new treaties, only five dollars is to be paid, but persons
belonging to bands treated with last year are to receive last
year's payment, if then absent, if necessary.

15th. You will each take with you a suitable person, to be approved
of by me, to assist you in the payment.

             I have the honor to be,
                      Your obedient servant,
                             ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                                  Lieut.-Governor.



C.

WINNIPEG, October 14th 1876.

TO THE HON. ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                      Lieut.-Governor.

Sir,--Referring to your letter of instructions under date of the
14th of July, relative to the payment of the Norway House and Cross
Lake bands of Indians, I have the honor to submit the following
report:--

Having, in co-operation with the Hon. Thomas Howard, paid the
Indians of Berens River and successfully secured the adhesion of
the Island and Upper Berens River bands of Indians to Treaty Number
Five, on the morning of Saturday, the 5th of August, I left for
Norway House, which place, owing to stormy weather and strong head
winds, I did not succeed in reaching until the morning of the 12th.
On the way I was met by Indians proceeding to inspect their reserve
at Fisher's River, who brought a letter from the Chiefs of Norway
House and Cross Lake, stating that the Indians were all assembled,
and requesting to be paid at the earliest possible date.

On reaching this place, Norway House, after having camp pitched at
a short distance from the fort, I dispatched messengers to the
several camps and villages, notifying the Indians of my arrival and
desiring the Chiefs to meet me on the Monday morning following. On
Sunday evening divine service was held within the fort by the Rev.
Mr. Ruttan, Wesleyan missionary, at which a large number of Indians
were present.

On Monday morning, the Chiefs and most of the Indians of both bands
having assembled at my camp, the Cross Lake band requested to be
paid there, and the Norway House Chief asked that his people might
he paid in the school-house in their village about two miles from
the fort. On hearing that all the Indians that could come were
assembled, I consented to pay them where they desired, and told the
Cross Lake Chief to bring his people at noon to receive their
gratuities, the payment which was satisfactorily completed the same
day.

The next day I crossed over to the Indian village and paid the
Norway House bands their annuities....

The following morning, Wednesday, August 16th, the Chiefs and
Indians of the two bands having assembled at my camp, I distributed
the provisions implements, &c., which were received with the
greatest degree of gratification and satisfaction.

On my inquiring of the Chief of Norway House when his band would be
prepared to remove to their reserve at the Fisher River, he
informed me that he had sent two of his people to that locality to
report on the same, and that he could not say anything definite on
the matter until their return. I might here state that, on my way
back to Winnipeg I met these men returning from Fisher's River, who
expressed themselves as highly pleased with the proposed location,
and that the band in all probability would remove there in the
spring.

Whilst at Norway House I was waited upon by a Chief and four
Councillors from the vicinity of Oxford House, who were anxious to
know if the same bounties would be extended to them as were being
extended to their brethren of Norway House and Cross Lake, and
also whether they could obtain a reserve on Lake Winnipeg, as
the country in which they were living was totally unfit for
cultivation, and that they had the greatest difficulty in procuring
a livelihood. I told them that I had no idea what were the
intentions of the Government with regard to those Indians living
north of the present Treaty, but that I would make known their
requests to Your Excellency, and that they would be duly notified
of any action the Government might take in the matter.

I left Norway House on my return trip, on the morning of the 18th,
arriving at Winnipeg on the afternoon of Saturday the 26th, having
that morning paid my boat's crew off at Selkirk.

I would here mention that previous to my departure from Norway
House there was a very hearty and apparently sincere expression of
gratitude, on the part of all the Indians present, for the
liberality extended to them, and a general and spoken wish that
their thanks be conveyed to the Queen's Representative in this
Province for his kind interest in their welfare.

I cannot conclude without bearing testimony to the kindness of Mr.
Ross, Hudson's Bay Company's Factor, and the Rev. Mr. Ruttan,
Wesleyan missionary, for services rendered during the few days
occupied in my making the payments at Norway House.

I enclose herewith statement of expenditure, &c., &c., with
vouchers attached.

           I have the honor to be, Sir,
                       Your obedient servant,
                                  J. LESTOCK REID,
                                         Commissioner.



CHAPTER IX

THE TREATIES AT FORTS CARLTON AND PITT


The treaties made at Forts Carlton and Pitt in the year 1876, were
of a very important character.

The great region covered by them, abutting on the areas included in
Treaties Numbers Three and Four, embracing an area of approximately
120,000 square miles, contains a vast extent of fertile territory
and is the home of the Cree nation. The Crees had, very early after
the annexation of the North-West Territories to Canada, desired a
treaty of alliance with the Government. So far back as the year
1871, Mr. Simpson, the Indian Commissioner, addressing the
Secretary of State in a despatch of date, the 3rd November, 1871,
used the following language:

"I desire also to call the attention of His Excellency to the state
of affairs in the Indian country on the Saskatchewan. The
intelligence that Her Majesty is treating with the Chippewa Indians
has already reached the ears of the Cree and Blackfeet tribes. In
the neighborhood of Fort Edmonton, on the Saskatchewan, there is a
rapidly increasing population of miners and other white people, and
it is the opinion of Mr. W. J. Christie, the officer in charge of
the Saskatchewan District, that a treaty with the Indians of that
country, or at least an assurance during the coming year that a
treaty will shortly be made, is essential to the peace, if not the
actual retention, of the country. I would refer His Excellency, on
this subject, to the report of Lieut. Butler, and to the enclosed
memoranda of Mr. W. J. Christie, the officer above alluded to."

He also enclosed an extract of a letter from Mr. Christie, then
Chief Factor of the Hudson's Bay Company, and subsequently one of
the Treaty Commissioners, in which, he forwarded the messages of
the Cree Chiefs to Lieut.-Gov. Archibald, "our Great Mother's
representative at Fort Garry, Red River Settlement." This extract
and messages are as follows.

EDMONTON HOUSE, 13th April, 1871.

On the 13th instant (April) I had a visit from the Cree Chiefs,
representing the Plain Crees from this to Carlton, accompanied by
a few followers.

The object of their visit was to ascertain whether their lands
had been sold or not, and what was the intention of the Canadian
Government in relation to them. They referred to the epidemic
that had raged throughout the past summer, and the subsequent
starvation, the poverty of their country, the visible diminution
of the buffalo, their sole support, ending by requesting certain
presents at once, and that I should lay their case before Her
Majesty's representative at Fort Garry. Many stories have reached
these Indians through various channels, ever since the transfer of
the North-West Territories to the Dominion of Canada, and they were
most anxious to hear from myself what had taken place.

I told them that the Canadian Government had as yet made no
application for their lands or hunting grounds, and when anything
was required of them, most likely Commissioners would be sent
beforehand to treat with them, and that until then they should
remain quiet and live at peace with all men. I further stated that
Canada, in her treaties with Indians, heretofore, had dealt most
liberally with them, and that they were now in settled houses and
well off, and that I had no doubt in settling with them the same
liberal policy would be followed.

As I was aware that they had heard many exaggerated stories about
the troops in Red River, I took the opportunity of telling them why
troops had been sent, and if Her Majesty sent troops to the
Saskatchewan, it was as much for the protection of the red as the
white man, and that they would be for the maintenance of law and
order.

They were highly satisfied with the explanations offered, and said
they would welcome civilization. As their demands were complied
with, and presents given to them, their immediate followers, and
for the young men left in camp, they departed well pleased for the
present tune, with fair promises for the future. At a subsequent
interview with the Chiefs alone, they requested that I should write
down their words, or messages to their Great Master in Red River. I
accordingly did so, and have transmitted the messages as delivered.
Copies of the proclamation issued, prohibiting the traffic in
spirituous liquors to Indians or others, and the use of strychnine
in the destruction of animal life, have been received, and due
publicity given to them. But without any power to enforce these
laws, it is almost useless to publish them here; and I take this
opportunity of most earnestly soliciting, on behalf of the
Company's servants, and settlers in this district, that protection
be afforded to life and property here as soon as possible, and that
Commissioners be sent to speak with the Indians on behalf of the
Canadian Government.

MEMORANDA:

Had I not complied with the demands of the Indians--giving them
some little presents--and otherwise satisfied them, I have no doubt
that they would have proceeded to acts of violence, and once that
had commenced, there would have been the beginning of an Indian
war, which it is difficult to say when it would have ended.

The buffalo will soon be exterminated, and when starvation comes,
these Plain Indian tribes will fall back on the Hudson's Bay Forts
and settlements for relief and assistance. If not complied with, or
no steps taken to make some provision for them, they will most
assuredly help themselves; and there being no force or any law up
there to protect the settlers, they must either quietly submit to
be pillaged, or lose their lives in the defence of their families
and property, against such fearful odds that will leave no hope for
their side.

Gold may be discovered in paying quantities, any day, on the
eastern slope of the Rocky Mountains. We have, in Montana, and in
the mining settlements close to our boundary line, a large mixed
frontier population, who are now only waiting and watching to hear
of gold discoveries to rush into the Saskatchewan, and, without any
form of Government or established laws up there, or force to
protect whites or Indians, it is very plain what will be the
result.

I think that the establishment of law and order in the Saskatchewan
District, as early as possible, is of most vital importance to the
future of the country and the interest of Canada, and also the
making of some treaty or settlement with the Indians who inhabit
the Saskatchewan District.

                W. J. CHRISTIE, Chief Factor,
                        In charge of Saskatchewan District,
                                        Hudson's Bay Company.



Messages from the Cree Chiefs of the Plains, Saskatchewan, to His
Excellency Governor Archibald, our Great Mother's representative at
Fort Garry, Red River Settlement.

1. The Chief Sweet Grass, The Chief of the country.

GREAT FATHER,--I shake hands with you, and bid you welcome. We
heard our lands were sold and we did not like it; we don't want to
sell our lands; it is our property, and no one has a right to sell
them.

Our country is getting ruined of fur-bearing animals, hitherto our
sole support, and now we are poor and want help--we want you to
pity us. We want cattle, tools, agricultural implements, and
assistance in everything when we come to settle--our country is no
longer able to support us.

Make provision for us against years of starvation. We have had
great starvation the past winter, and the small-pox took away many
of our people, the old, young, and children.

We want you to stop the Americans from coming to trade on our
lands, and giving firewater, ammunition and arms to our enemies the
Blackfeet.

We made a peace this winter with the Blackfeet. Our young men are
foolish, it may not last long.

We invite you to come and see us and to speak with us. If you can't
come yourself, send some one in your place.

We send these words by our Master, Mr. Christie, in whom we have
every confidence.--That is all.

2. Ki-he-win, The Eagle.

GREAT FATHER,--Let us be friendly. We never shed any white man's
blood, and have always been friendly with the whites, and want
workmen, carpenters and farmers to assist us when we settle. I want
all my brother, Sweet Grass, asks. That is all.

3. The Little Hunter.

You, my brother, the Great Chief in Red River, treat me as a
brother, that is, as a Great Chief.

4. Kis-ki-on, or Short Tail.

My brother, that is coming close, I look upon you, as if I saw you;
I want you to pity me, and I want help to cultivate the ground for
myself and descendants. Come and see us.



The North-West Council, as already elsewhere stated, had urged
the making of treaties with these Indians, and the necessity
of doing so, was also impressed upon the Privy Council, by the
Lieutenant-Governor of the North-West Territories, and Col. French,
then in command of the Mounted Police therein. The Minister of the
Interior, the Hon. David Mills, in his Report for the year 1876,
thus alluded to this subject:

"Official reports received last year from His Honor Governor Morris
and Colonel French, the officer then in command of the Mounted
Police Force, and from other parties, showed that a feeling of
discontent and uneasiness prevailed very generally amongst the
Assiniboines and Crees lying in the unceded territory between the
Saskatchewan and the Rocky Mountains. This state of feeling, which
had prevailed amongst these Indians for some years past, had been
increased by the presence, last summer, in their territory of the
parties engaged in the construction of the telegraph line, and
in the survey of the Pacific Railway line, and also of a party
belonging to the Geological Survey. To allay this state of feeling,
and to prevent the threatened hostility of the Indian tribes to the
parties then employed by the Government, His Honor Governor Morris
requested and obtained authority to despatch a messenger to convey
to these Indians the assurance that Commissioners would be sent
this summer, to negotiate a treaty with them, as had already been
done with their brethren further east.

"The Rev. George McDougall, who had been resident as a missionary
amongst these Indians for upwards of fourteen years, and who
possessed great influence over them, was selected by His Honor to
convey this intelligence to the Indians, a task which he performed
with great fidelity and success: being able to report on his return
that although he found the feeling of discontent had been very
general among the Indian tribes, he had been enabled entirely to
remove it by his assurance of the proposed negotiations during the
coming year.

"For the purpose of negotiating this treaty with the Indians, Your
Excellency availed yourself of the services of His Honor Governor
Morris, who had been formerly employed in negotiating Treaties
Numbers Three, Four and Five. With him were associated the Hon.
James McKay and W. J. Christie, Esq., both of whom had had
considerable experience in such work, and possessed moreover an
intimate acquaintance with the Indians of the Saskatchewan, their
wants, habits and dialects."

With reference to the Rev. George McDougall, [Footnote: This
faithful missionary came to an untimely death on the plains during
the succeeding winter. Having missed his way to his camp, he was
found lying dead on the snow, and there in the lonely wilds was
closed a most useful career.] I may here state, that when the
application was made to him, to visit the Indians of the Plains, in
the Sask atchewan Valley, he was on his way, with his family, to his
distant mission, among the Assiniboines, near the Rocky Mountains,
after a brief sojourn in the Province of Ontario, but on the
request being made to him, to explain to the Indians the intentions
of the Government, he at once undertook the duty, and leaving
his family to follow him, went upon the long journey, which his
mission involved, carrying with him a letter missive from the
Lieutenant-Governor of the North-West Territories, promising the
Indians, that Commissioners would visit them during the ensuing
summer, to confer with them as to a treaty. The result of his
tour, and of the tidings which he bore was very gratifying, as the
Indians were at once tranquilized, and awaited in full confidence,
the coming of the Commissioners. The way in which he discharged his
important duties and the success which followed his exertions, will
be best set forth by giving place to his Report, addressed to the
Lieutenant-Governor, of the results of his arduous mission:

                 MORLEYVILLE, BOW RIVER, ROCKY MOUNTAINS,
                                     October 23rd, 1875.

TO HIS HONOR LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR MORRIS.

Sir,--In accordance with my instructions, I proceeded with as
little delay as possible to Carlton, in the neighborhood of which
place I met with forty tents of Crees. From these I ascertained
that the work I had undertaken would be much more arduous than I
had expected, and that the principal camps would be found on the
south branch of the Saskatchewan and Red Deer Rivers. I was also
informed by these Indians that the Crees and Plain Assiniboines
were united on two points: 1st. That they would not receive any
presents from Government until a definite time for treaty was
stated. 2nd. Though they deplored the necessity of resorting to
extreme measures, yet they were unanimous in their determination
to oppose the running of lines, or the making of roads through
their country, until a settlement between the Government and them
had been effected. I was further informed that the danger of a
collision with the whites was likely to arise from the officious
conduct of minor Chiefs who were anxious to make themselves
conspicuous, the principal men of the large camps being much more
moderate in their demands. Believing this to be the fact, I
revolved to visit every camp and read them your message, and in
order that your Honor may form a correct judgment of their
disposition towards the Government, I will give you a synopsis of
their speeches after the message was read. Mistahwahsis, head Chief
of the Carlton Indians, addressing the principal Chief of the
Assiniboines and addressing me, said: "That is just it, that is all
we wanted." The Assiniboines addressing me, said: "My heart is full
of gratitude, foolish men have told us that the Great Chief would
send his young men to our country until they outnumbered us, and
that then he would laugh at us, but this letter assures us that the
Great Chief will act justly toward us."

Beardy, or the Hairy Man, Chief of the Willow Indians, said: "If I
had heard these words spoken by the Great Queen I could not have
believed them with more implicit faith than I do now." The Sweet
Grass was absent from camp when I reached the Plain Crees, but
his son and the principal men of the tribe requested me to convey
to the Great Chief, at Red River, their thanks for the presents
received, and they expressed the greatest loyalty to the government.
In a word, I found the Crees reasonable in their demands, and
anxious to live in peace with the white men. I found the Big Bear,
a Saulteaux, trying to take the lead in their council. He formerly
lived at Jack Fish Lake, and for years has been regarded as a
troublesome fellow. In his speech he said: "We want none of the
Queen's presents; when we set a fox-trap we scatter pieces of meat
all round, but when the fox gets into the trap we knock him on the
head; we want no bait, let your Chiefs come like men and talk to
us." These Saulteaux are the mischief-makers through all this
western country, and some of them are shrewd men.

A few weeks since, a land speculator wished to take a claim at the
crossing on Battle River and asked the consent of the Indians, one
of my Saulteaux friends sprang to his feet, and pointing to the
east, said: "Do you see that great white man (the Government)
coming?" "No," said the speculator. "I do," said the Indian, "and I
hear the tramp of the multitude behind him, and when he comes you
can drop in behind him and take up all the land claims you want;
but until then I caution you to put up no stakes in our country."
It was very fortunate for me that Big Bear and his party were a
very small minority in camp. The Crees said they would have driven
them out of camp long ago, but were afraid of their medicines, as
they are noted conjurers.

The topics generally discussed at their council and which will be
brought before the Commissioner are as follows in their own
language. "Tell the Great Chief that we are glad the traders are
prohibited bringing spirits into our country; when we see it we
want to drink it, and it destroys us; when we do not see it we do
not think about it. Ask for us a strong law, prohibiting the free
use of poison (strychnine). It has almost exterminated the animals
of our country, and often makes us bad friends with our white
neighbors. We further request, that a law be made, equally
applicable to the Half-breed and Indian, punishing all parties who
set fire to our forest or plain. Not many years ago we attributed a
prairie fire to the malevolence of an enemy, now every one is
reckless in the use of fire, and every year large numbers of
valuable animals and birds perish in consequence. We would farther
ask that our chiefships be established by the Government. Of late
years almost every trader sets up his own Chief and the result is
we are broken up into little parties, and our best men are no
longer respected." I will state in connection with this, some of
the false reports I had to combat in passing through this country,
all calculated to agitate the native mind. In the neighborhood of
Carlton an interested party went to considerable trouble to inform
the Willow Indians that I had $3,000 for each band, as a present
from the Government, and nothing in my long journey gave me greater
satisfaction than the manner in which these Indians received my
explanation of the contents of my letter of instructions. At the
Buffalo Lake I found both Indians and Half-breeds greatly agitated.
A gentlemen passing through their country had told them that the
Mounted Police had received orders to prevent all parties killing
buffalo or other animals, except during three months in the year,
and these are only samples of the false statements made by parties
who would rejoice to witness a conflict of races.

That your Honor's message was most timely, these are ample proofs.

A report will have reached you before this time that parties have
been turned back by the Indians, and that a train containing
supplies for the telegraph contractors, when west of Fort Pitt,
were met by three Indians and ordered to return. Now after
carefully investigating the matter and listening to the statements
of all parties concerned, my opinion is, that an old traveller
amongst Indians would have regarded the whole affair as too trivial
to be noticed. I have not met with a Chief who would bear with the
responsibility of the act....

Personally I am indebted both to the missionaries, and the Hudson's
Bay Company's officials for their assistance at the Indian
councils.

Believing it would be satisfactory to your Honor and of service to
the Commissioners, I have kept the number of all the tents visited
and the names of the places where I met the Indians. [Footnote: The
number of Indians, as estimated by Mr. McDougall, as being visited
by him, was 3,976.]

By reckoning eight persons to each tent, we will have a very close
approximate to the number of Indians to be treated with at Carlton,
and Fort Pitt. There may have been a few tents in the forest, and I
have heard there are a few Crees at Lesser Slave Lake and Lac la
Biche, but the number cannot exceed twenty tents.

All of which is respectfully submitted.

G. McDOUGALL.

The Commissioners, in the discharge of their task, had to travel
through the prairie district in going to their destination and
returning to Winnipeg, a distance of over 1,800 miles. They
first met the Indians in the vicinity of Fort Carlton, on the
Saskatchewan, in the month of August, 1876, and eventually
succeeded on the 23rd day of that month, in effecting a treaty with
the Plain and Wood Crees, and on the 28th of the same month with
the tribe of Willow Crees. The negotiations were difficult and
protracted. The Hon. David Mills, then Minister of the Interior,
in his Annual Report thus characterizes them:--"In view of the
temper of the Indians of the Saskatchewan, during the past year,
and of the extravagant demands which they were induced to prefer
on certain points, it needed all the temper, tact, judgment and
discretion, of which the Commissioners were possessed, to bring
the negotiations to a satisfactory issue." The difficulties were
encountered chiefly at Carlton: The main body of the Crees were
honestly disposed to treat, and their head Chiefs, Mistowasis and
Ah-tuk-uh-koop, shewed sound judgment, and an earnest desire to
come to an understanding.

They were embarrassed, however, by the action of the Willow Crees,
who, under the guidance of one of their Chiefs, Beardy, interposed
every obstacle to the progress of the treaty, and refused to attend
the Council, unless it was held at the top of a hill some miles
off, where the Chief pretended it had been revealed to him in a
vision that the treaty was to be made. The Willow Crees were,
moreover, under the influence of a wandering band of Saulteaux,
the chief portion of whom resided within the limits of the other
treaties, and who were disposed to be troublesome. Before the
arrival of the Commissioners, the Saulteaux conceived the idea of
forming a combination of the French Half-breeds, the Crees, and
themselves, to prevent the crossing of the Saskatchewan by the
Lieutenant-Governor, and his entrance into the Indian territories.
They made the proposal first to the French Half-breeds, who
declined to undertake it, and then to the Crees, who listened to it
in silence. One of them at length arose, and pointing to the River
Saskatchewan, said, "Can you stop the flow of that river?" The
answer was, "No," and the rejoinder was "No more can you stop the
progress of the Queen's Chief." When the Commissioners arrived at
the Saskatchewan, a messenger from the Crees met them, proffering a
safe convoy, but it was not needed. About a hundred traders' carts
were assembled at the crossing, and Kissowayis, a native Indian
trader, had the right of passage, which he at once waived, in
favor of Messrs. Christie and Morris, the Commissioners. The other
Commissioner, Mr. McKay, met them at Duck Lake next day, having
proceeded by another route, and there they encountered Chief
Beardy, who at once asked the Lieutenant-Governor to make the
treaty at the hill, near the lake. On his guard, however, he
replied, that he would meet the Cree nation wherever they desired,
but must first go on and see them at Carlton, as he had appointed.
An escort of Mounted Police also met the Commissioners at Duck
Lake, having been sent from Carlton, in consequence of the
information given by the Crees of the threatened interference
with their progress. After several days' delay the Commissioners
were obliged to meet the Crees without the Willow Crees. But after
the conference had opened, the Beardy sent a message asking to
be informed of the terms the Commissioners intended to offer in
advance. The reply was that the messenger could sit with the other
Indians, and report to his Chief what he heard, as it was his own
fault that the Chief was not there to take part in the proceedings.
The negotiations then went on quietly and deliberately, the
Commissioners giving the Indians all the time they desired. The
Indians were apprehensive of their future. They saw the food
supply, the buffalo, passing away, and they were anxious and
distressed. They knew the large terms granted to their Indians by
the United States, but they had confidence in their Great Mother,
the Queen, and her benevolence.

They desired to be fed. Small-pox had destroyed them by hundreds
a few years before, and they dreaded pestilence and famine.

Eventually the Commissioners made them an offer. They asked this
to be reduced to writing, which was done, and they asked time to
consider it, which was of course granted. When the conference
resumed, they presented a written counter-proposal. This the
Commissioners considered, and gave full and definite answers of
acceptance or refusal to each demand, which replies were carefully
interpreted, two of the Commissioners, Messrs. Christie and McKay,
being familiar with the Cree tongue, watching how the answers were
rendered, and correcting when necessary. The food question, was
disposed of by a promise, that in the event of a National famine or
pestilence such aid as the Crown saw fit would be extended to them,
and that for three years after they settled on their reserves,
provisions to the extent of $1,000 per annum would be granted them
during seed-time.

The other terms were analogous to those of the previous treaties.
The Crees accepted the revised proposals. The treaty was
interpreted to them carefully, and was then signed, and the payment
made in accordance therewith. After the conclusion of the treaty,
the Commissioners were unwilling that the Willow Crees should
remain out of the treaty, and sent a letter to them by a messenger,
Pierre Levailler, that they would meet them half way, at the
camp of the Hon. James McKay, and give them the opportunity of
accepting the terms of the treaty already concluded. The letter
was translated to the Indians by the Rev. Pere Andre, a Catholic
missionary, who, as well as M. Levailler, urged the Indians to
accede to the proposal made to them, which they agreed to do. The
Commissioners met the Indians accordingly, at the place proposed,
and received, after a full discussion, the adhesion of the three
Chiefs and head men of the Willow Crees to the treaty, and the
payments were then made to them.

The Commissioners then prepared to leave for Fort Pitt, but having
been apprised by the Rev. Mr. Scollan, a Catholic missionary, who
had been sent by Bishop Grandin, to be present at the making of the
treaty, that Sweet Grass, the principal Chief of the Plain Crees,
at Fort Pitt, was unaware of the place and time of meeting, they
despatched a messenger to apprise him of them, and request him to
be present.

The Commissioners crossed the Saskatchewan and journeyed to Fort
Pitt. Near it they were met by an escort of Mounted Police, who
convoyed them to the fort.

There they found a number of Indians assembled, and, during the
day, Sweet Grass arrived. In the evening the Chief and head men
waited upon the Commissioners. Delay was asked and granted before
meeting. Eventually the conference was opened. The ceremonies which
attended it were imposing. The national stem or pipe dance was
performed, of which a full narrative will be found hereafter. The
conference proceeded, and the Indians accepted the terms made at
Carlton with the utmost good feeling, and thus the Indian title
was extinguished in the whole of the Plain country, except a
comparatively small area, inhabited by the Black Feet, comprising
about 35,000 square miles, I regret to record, that the Chief Sweet
Grass, who took the lead in the proceedings, met with an accidental
death a few months afterwards, by the discharge of a pistol. The
Indians, in these two treaties, displayed a strong desire for
instruction in farming, and appealed for the aid of missionaries
and teachers.

The latter the Commissioners promised, and for the former they were
told they must rely on the churches, representatives of whom were
present from the Church of England, the Methodist, the Presbyterian
and the Roman Catholic Church. The Bishop (Grandin) of the latter
Church travelled from Edmonton to Fort Pitt and Battleford to see
the Commissioners and assure them of his good will. After the
conclusion of the treaty, the Commissioners commenced their long
return journey by way of Battleford, and arrived at Winnipeg on the
6th day of October, with the satisfaction of knowing that they had
accomplished a work which, with the efficient carrying out of the
treaties, had secured the good will of the Cree Nation, and laid
the foundations of law and order in the Saskatchewan Valley.

The officers of the Hudson's Bay Company, the missionaries of the
various churches, Colonel McLeod of the Mounted Police Force, his
officers and men, and the Half-breed population, all lent willing
assistance to the commissioners, and were of substantial service.

I now submit the despatch of the Lieutenant-Governor, giving an
account of the journey and of the negotiations attending the
treaty, and I include a narrative of the proceedings taken down,
day by day, by A. G. Jackes, Esq., M.D., Secretary to the
Commission, which has never before been published, and embraces an
accurate account of the speeches of the Commissioners and Indians.
It is satisfactory to be able to state, that Lieut.-Gov. Laird,
officers of the police force and Mr. Dickieson have since obtained
the adhesion to the treaty, of, I believe, all but one of the
Chiefs included in the treaty area, viz.: The Big Bear, while the
head men even of his band have ranged themselves under the
provisions of the treaty.

                        GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
                FORT GARRY, MANITOBA, 4th. December, 1876.

Sir,--I beg to inform you that in compliance with the request of
the Privy Council that I should proceed to the west to negotiate
the treaties which I had last year, through the agency of the late
Rev. George McDougall, promised the Plain Crees, would be
undertaken, I left Fort Garry on the afternoon of the 27th of July
last, with the view of prosecuting my mission. I was accompanied by
one of my associates, the Hon. J. W. Christie, and by A. G. Jackes,
Esq., M.D., who was to act as secretary. I selected as my guide Mr.
Pierre Levailler. The Hon. James McKay, who had also been
associated in the commission, it was arranged, would follow me and
meet me at Fort Carlton.

On the morning of the 4th of August, I forded the Assiniboine about
five miles from Fort Ellice, having accomplished what is usually
regarded as the first stage of the journey to Fort Carlton, about
two hundred and twenty miles. After crossing the river, I was
overtaken by a party of the Sioux who have settled on the reserve
assigned to them at Bird Tail Creek, and was detained the greater
part of the day.

I am sanguine that this settlement will prove a success, as these
Sioux are displaying a laudable industry in cutting hay for their
own use and for sale, and in breaking up ground for cultivation. I
resumed my journey in the afternoon, but a storm coming on, I was
obliged to encamp at the Springs, having only travelled eight miles
in all during the day.

On the 5th I left the Springs, and after traversing much fine
country, with excellent prairie, good soil, clumps of wood,
lakelets, and hay swamps, in the Little and Great Touchwood Hills
and File Mountain region, I arrived at the South Saskatchewan, at
Dumont's crossing, twenty miles from Fort Carlton, on the afternoon
of the 14th of August.

Here I found over one hundred carts of traders and freighters,
waiting to be ferried across the river. The scow was occupied in
crossing the carts and effects of Kis-so-wais, an enterprising
Chippewa trader, belonging to the Portage la Prairie band, who at
once came forward and gave up to me his right of crossing.

I met, also, a young Cree who had been sent by the Crees to hand me
a letter of welcome in the name of their nation.

The reason of this step being taken was, that a few wandering
Saulteaux or Chippewa, from Quill Lake, in Treaty Number Four, had
come to the Crees and proposed to them to unite with them and
prevent me from crossing the river and entering the Indian country.
The Crees promptly refused to entertain the proposal, and sent a
messenger, as above stated, to welcome me.

I also received from their messenger a letter from Lawrence Clarke,
Esq., Chief Factor of the Hudson's Bay Company at Carlton, offering
the Commissioners the hospitalities of the fort.

I sent replies in advance, thanking the Crees for their action, and
accepting the kind offer of Mr. Clarke, to the extent of the use of
rooms in the fort.

It was late in the evening before our party crossed the river, so
that we encamped on the heights near it.

On the morning of the 15th we left for Fort Carlton, Mr. Christie
preceding me to announce my approaching arrival at Duck Lake. About
twelve miles from Carlton I found the Hon. James McKay awaiting me,
having travelled by way of Fort Pelly.

Here also a Chief, Beardy of the Willow Crees, came to see me.

He said that his people were encamped near the lake, and that as
there were fine meadows for their horses they wished the treaty to
be made there.

I was at once on my guard, and replied to him, that after I reached
Carlton, which was the place appointed, I would meet the Indians
wherever the great body of them desired it.

He then asked me to stop as I passed his encampment, and see his
people. This I agreed to do, as I was leaving Duck Lake I met
Captain Walker with his troop of mounted police, coming to escort
me to Carlton which they did.

When I arrived at Beardy's encampment, the men came to my carriage
and holding up their right hands to the skies, all joined in an
invocation to the deity for a blessing on the bright day which had
brought the Queen's messenger to see them, and on the messenger and
themselves; one of them shook hands with me for the others.

The scene was a very impressive and striking one, but as will be
seen hereafter, this band gave me great trouble and were very
difficult to deal with.

Leaving the Indian encampment I arrived at Fort Carlton, where Mr.
Christie, Dr. Jackes and myself were assigned most comfortable
rooms, Mr. McKay preferring to encamp about four miles from the
fort.

In the evening, Mist-ow-as-is and Ah-tuk-uk-koop, the two head
Chiefs of the Carlton Crees, called to pay their respects to me,
and welcomed me most cordially.

On the 16th the Crees sent me word that they wished the day to
confer amongst themselves.

I acceded to their request, learning that they desired to bring the
Duck Lake Indians into the negotiations.

I sent a messenger, Mr. Peter Ballenden, to Duck Lake to inform the
Indians that I would meet them at the encampment of the Carlton
Crees, about two miles from the fort.

On the 17th, on his return, he informed me that the Chief said "He
had not given me leave to meet the Indians anywhere except at Duck
Lake, and that they would only meet me there." The Carlton Indians,
however, sent me word, that they would be ready next morning at ten
o'clock.

On the 18th, as I was leaving for the Indian encampment, a
messenger came to me from the Duck Lake Indians, asking for
provisions. I replied, that Mr. Christie was in charge of the
distribution of provisions, but that I would not give any to the
Duck Lake Indians, in consequence of the unreasonableness of their
conduct, and that provisions would only be given to the large
encampment.

I then proceeded to the Indian camp, together with my fellow
Commissioners, and was escorted by Captain Walker and his troop.

On my arrival I found that the ground had been most judiciously
chosen, being elevated, with abundance of trees, hay marshes and
small lakes. The spot which the Indians had left for my council
tent overlooked the whole.

The view was very beautiful: the hills and the trees in the
distance, and in the foreground, the meadow land being dotted with
clumps of wood, with the Indian tents clustered here and there to
the number of two hundred.

On my arrival, the Union Jack was hoisted, and the Indians at once
began to assemble, beating drums, discharging fire-arms, singing
and dancing. In about half an hour they were ready to advance and
meet me. This they did in a semicircle, having men on horseback
galloping in circles, shouting, singing and discharging fire-arms.

They then performed the dance of the "pipe stem," the stem was
elevated to the north, south, west and east, a ceremonial dance was
then performed by the Chiefs and head men, the Indian men and women
shouting the while.

They then slowly advanced, the horsemen again preceding them on
their approach to my tent. I advanced to meet them, accompanied by
Messrs. Christie and McKay, when the pipe was presented to us and
stroked by our hands.

After the stroking had been completed, the Indians sat down in
front of the council tent, satisfied that in accordance with their
custom we had accepted the friendship of the Cree nation.

I then addressed the Indians in suitable terms, explaining that I
had been sent by the Queen, in compliance with their own wishes and
the written promise I had given them last year, that a messenger
would be sent to them.

I had ascertained that the Indian mind was oppressed with vague
fears; they dreaded the treaty; they had been made to believe that
they would be compelled to live on the reserves wholly, and abandon
their hunting and that in time of war, they would be placed in the
front and made to fight.

I accordingly shaped my address, so as to give them confidence in
the intentions of the Government, and to quiet their apprehensions.
I impressed strongly on them the necessity of changing their
present mode of life, and commencing to make homes and gardens for
themselves, so as to be prepared for the diminution of the buffalo
and other large animals, which is going on so rapidly.

The Indians listened with great attention to my address, and at
its close asked an adjournment that they might meet in council to
consider my words, which was of course granted.

The Rev. C. Scollen, a Roman Catholic Missionary amongst the
Blackfeet, arrived soon after from Bow River, and informed me that
on the way he had learned that Sweet Grass, the principal Chief of
the Plain Crees, was out hunting and would not be at Fort Pitt,
and that he was of opinion that his absence would be a great
obstruction to a treaty.

After consulting with my colleagues, I decided on sending a
messenger to him, requesting his presence, and succeeded in
obtaining, for the occasion, the services of Mr. John McKay, of
Prince Albert, who had accompanied the Rev. George McDougall on his
mission last year.

In the evening, Lieut.-Col. Jarvis arrived with a reinforcement of
the Mounted Police, and an excellent band, which has been
established at the private cost of one of the troops.

On the 19th, the Commissioners, escorted by the Mounted Police,
headed by the band, proceeded to the Indian encampment.

The Indians again assembled, following Mist-ow-as-is and
Ah-tuk-uk-koop, the recognised leading Chiefs.

I asked them to present their Chiefs; they then presented the two
head Chiefs, and the minor ones.

At this juncture, a messenger arrived from the Duck Lake Indians,
asking that I should tell them the terms of the Treaty. I replied
that if the Chiefs and people had joined the others they would have
heard what I had to say, and that I would not tell the terms in
advance, but that the messenger could remain and hear what I had to
say. He expressed himself satisfied and took his seat with the
others. I then fully explained to them the proposals I had to make,
that we did not wish to interfere with their present mode of
living, but would assign them reserves and assist them as was being
done elsewhere, in commencing to farm, and that what was done would
hold good for those that were away.

The Indians listened most attentively, and on the close of my
remarks Mist-ow-as-is arose, took me by the hand, and said that
"when a thing was thought of quietly, it was the best way," and
asked "this much, that we go and think of his words."

I acquiesced at once, and expressed my hope that the Chiefs would
act wisely, and thus closed the second day.

The 20th being Sunday, the Rev. Mr. John McKay, of the Church of
England, conducted divine service at the fort, which was largely
attended; the Rev. Mr. Scollen also conducted service.

At noon a messenger came from the Indian camp, asking that there
should be a service held at their camp, which Mr. McKay agreed to
do; this service was attended by about two hundred adult Crees.

On Monday, 21st, the head Chiefs sent word that, as the previous
day was Sunday, they had not met in council, and wished to have the
day for consultation, and if ready would meet me on Tuesday
morning. I cheerfully granted the delay from the reasonableness of
the request; but I was also aware that the head Chiefs were in a
position of great difficulty.

The attitude of the Duck Lake Indians and of the few discontented
Saulteaux embarrassed them, while a section of their own people
were either averse to make a treaty or desirous of making
extravagant demands. The head Chiefs were men of intelligence, and
anxious that the people should act unitedly and reasonably.

We, therefore, decided to give them all the time they might ask, a
policy which they fully appreciated.

On the 22nd the Commissioners met the Indians, when I told them
that we had not hurried them, but wished now to hear their Chiefs.

A spokesman, The Pond Maker, then addressed me, and asked
assistance when they settled on the land, and further help as they
advanced in civilization.

I replied that they had their own means of living, and that we
could not feed the Indians, but only assist them to settle down.
The Badger, Soh-ah-moos, and several other Indians all asked help
when they settled, and also in case of troubles unforeseen in the
future. I explained that we could not assume the charge of their
every-day life, but in a time of a great national calamity they
could trust to the generosity of the Queen.

The Honourable James McKay also addressed them, saying that their
demands would be understood by a white man as asking for daily
food, and could not be granted, and explained our objects, speaking
with effect in the Cree tongue.

At length the Indians informed me that they did not wish to be fed
every day, but to be helped when they commenced to settle, because
of their ignorance how to commence, and also in case of general
famine; Ah-tuk-uk-koop winding up the debate by stating that
they wanted food in the spring when they commenced to farm, and
proportionate help as they advanced in civilization, and then
asking for a further adjournment to consider our offers.

The Commissioners granted this, but I warned them not to be
unreasonable, and to be ready next day with their decision, while
we on our part would consider what they had said.

The whole day was occupied with this discussion on the food
question, and it was the turning point with regard to the treaty.

The Indians were, as they had been for some time past, full of
uneasiness.

They saw the buffalo, the only means of their support, passing
away. They were anxious to learn to support themselves by
agriculture, but felt too ignorant to do so, and they dreaded that
during the transition period they would be swept off by disease or
famine--already they have suffered terribly from the ravages of
measles, scarlet fever and small-pox.

It was impossible to listen to them without interest, they were not
exacting, but they were very apprehensive of their future, and
thankful, as one of them put it, "a new life was dawning upon
them."

On the 23rd the conference was resumed, an Indian addressed the
people, telling them to listen and the interpreter, Peter Erasmus,
would read what changes they desired in the terms of our offer.
They asked for an ox and a cow each family; an increase in the
agricultural implements; provisions for the poor, unfortunate,
blind and lame; to be provided with missionaries and school
teachers; the exclusion of fire water in the whole Saskatchewan; a
further increase in agricultural implements as the band advanced in
civilization; freedom to cut timber on Crown lands; liberty to
change the site of the reserves before the survey; free passages
over Government bridges or scows; other animals, a horse, harness
and waggon, and cooking stove for each chief; a free supply of
medicines; a hand mill to each band; and lastly, that in case of
war they should not be liable to serve.

Two spokesmen then addressed us in support of these modifications
of the terms of the Treaty.

I replied to them that they had asked many things some of which had
been promised, and that the Commissioners would consult together
about what they had asked that day and the day before, and would
reply, but before doing so wished to know if that was the voice of
the whole people, to which the Indians all assented.

After an interval we again met them, and I replied, going over
their demands and reiterating my statements as to our inability to
grant food, and again explaining that only in a national famine did
the Crown ever intervene, and agreeing to make some additions to
the number of cattle and implements, as we felt it would be
desirable to encourage their desire to settle.

I closed by stating that, after they settled on the reserves, we
would give them provisions to aid them while cultivating, to the
extent of one thousand dollars per annum, but for three years only,
as after that time they should be able to support themselves.

I told them that we could not give them missionaries, though I was
pleased with their request, but that they must look to the
churches, and that they saw Catholic and Protestant missionaries
present at the conference. We told them that they must help their
own poor, and that if they prospered they could do so. With regard
to war, they would not be asked to fight unless they desired to do
so, but if the Queen did call on them to protect their wives and
children I believed they would not be backward.

I then asked if they were willing to accept our modified proposals.

Ah-tuk-uk-koop then addressed me, and concluded by calling on the
people, if they were in favour of our offers, to say so. This they
all did by shouting assent and holding up their hands.

The Pond Maker then rose and said he did not differ from his
people, but he did not see how they could feed and clothe their
children with what was promised. He expected to have received that;
he did not know how to build a house nor to cultivate the ground.

Joseph Toma, a Saulteaux, said he spoke for the Red Pheasant, Chief
of the Battle River Crees, and made demands as follows: Men to
build houses for them, increased salaries to the Chiefs and head
men, etc. He said what was offered was too little; he wanted enough
to cover the skin of the people, guns, and also ten miles of land
round the reserves in a belt.

I asked the Red Pheasant how it was that he was party to the
requests of his people and how, when I asked if that was their
unanimous voice he had assented, and yet had now put forward new
and large demands.

I said it was not good faith, and that I would not accede to the
requests now made; that what was offered was a gift as they had
still their old mode of living.

The principal Chiefs then rose and said that they accepted our
offers, and the Red Pheasant repudiated the demands and remarks of
Toma, and stated that he had not authorized him to speak for him.

Mist-ow-as-is then asked to speak for the Half-breeds, who wish to
live on the reserves.

I explained the distinction between the Half-breed people and the
Indian Half-breeds who lived amongst the Indians as Indians, and
said the Commissioners would consider the case of each of these
last on its merits.

The treaty was then signed by myself, Messrs. Christie and McKay,
Mist-ow-as-is and Ah-tuk-uk-koop, the head Chiefs, and by the other
Chiefs and Councillors, those signing, though many Indians were
absent, yet representing all the bands of any importance in the
Carlton regions, except the Willow Indians.

On the 24th the Commissioners again met the Indians, when I
presented the Head Chiefs with their medals, uniforms and flags,
and informed them that Mr. Christie would give the other Chiefs and
Councillors the same in the evening.

Some half a dozen of Saulteaux then came forward, of whom I found
one was from Qu'Appelle, and had been paid there, and the others
did not belong to the Carlton region. I told them that I had heard
that they had endeavoured to prevent me crossing the river and to
prevent a treaty being made, but that they were not wiser than the
whole of their nation, who had already been treated with.

They did not deny the charge, and their spokesman becoming
insolent, I declined to hear them further, and they retired, some
stating that they would go to Fort Pitt, which I warned them not to
do.

Besides these Saulteaux, there were others present who disapproved
of their proceedings, amongst them being Kis-so-way-is, already
mentioned, and Pecheeto, who was the chief spokesman at Qu'Appelle,
but is now a Councillor of the Fort Ellice Band.

I may mention here that the larger part of the Band to whom these
other Saulteaux belonged, with the Chief Yellow Quill, gave in
their adhesion to Treaty Number Four, at Fort Pelly about the time
that their comrades were troubling me at Fort Carlton.

Mr. Christie then commenced the payments, assisted by Mr. McKay, of
Prince Albert, and was engaged in so doing during the 24th and
25th. Amongst those paid were the few resident Saulteaux, who were
accepted by the Cree Chiefs as part of their bands.

The next morning, the 26th, the whole band, headed by their Chiefs
and Councillors, dressed in their uniforms, came to Carlton House
to pay their farewell visit to me.

The Chiefs came forward in order, each addressing me a few remarks,
and I replied briefly.

They then gave three cheers for the Queen, the Governor, one for
the Mounted Police, and for Mr. Lawrence Clarke, of Carlton House,
and then departed, firing guns as they went.

Considering it undesirable that so many Indians should be excluded
from the treaty, as would be the case if I left the Duck Lake
Indians to their own devices, I determined on sending a letter to
them. I, therefore, prepared a message, inviting them to meet me at
the Hon. Mr. McKay's encampment about three miles from the large
Indian encampment about half way to Duck Lake, on Monday, the 28th,
if they were prepared then to accept the terms of the treaty I had
made with the Carlton Indians. My letter was entrusted to Mr.
Levailler, who proceeded to Duck Lake.

On entering the Indian Council room, he found they had a letter
written to me by the Rev. Mr. Andre, offering to accept the terms
of the treaty, if I came to Duck Lake.

The Indians sent for Mr. Andre to read my letter to them, which was
received with satisfaction; both he and Mr. Levailler urged them to
accept my proposal, which they agreed to do, and requested Mr.
Levailler to inform me that they would go to the appointed place.

Accordingly, on the 28th, the Commissioners met the Willow Indians.

After the usual handshaking, and short speeches from two of the
Chiefs, I addressed them, telling them I was sorry for the course
they had pursued, and that I did not go away without giving them
this opportunity to be included in the treaty.

Kah-mee-yes-too-waegs, the Beardy, spoke for the people. He said
some things were too little. He was anxious about the buffalo.

Say-sway-kees wished to tell our mother, the Queen, that they were
alarmed about the buffalo. It appeared as if there was only one
left.

The Beardy again addressed me and said,--"You have told me what you
have done with the others you will do with us. I accept the terms;
no doubt it will run further, according to our numbers; when I am
utterly unable to help myself I want to receive assistance."

I replied to them, explaining, with regard to assistance that we
could not support or feed the Indians, and all that we would do
would be to help them to cultivate the soil.

If a general famine came upon the Indians the charity of the
Government would come into exercise. I admitted the importance of
steps being taken to preserve the buffalo, and assured them that it
would be considered by the Governor-General and Council of the
North-West Territories, to see if a wise law could be framed such
as could be carried out and obeyed.

The three Chiefs and their head men then signed the treaty, and the
medals and flags were distributed, when Mr. Christie intimated that
he was ready to make the payments.

They then asked that this should be done at Duck Lake, but Mr.
Christie informed them that, as we had to leave for Fort Pitt, this
was impossible; and that, moreover their share of the unexpended
provisions and the clothing and presents were at the fort, where
they would require to go for them.

They then agreed to accept the payment, which was at once proceeded
with.

The persistency with which these Indians clung to their endeavor to
compel the Commissioners to proceed to Duck Lake was in part owing
to superstition, the Chief Beardy having announced that he had a
vision, in which it was made known to him that the treaty would be
made there.

It was partly, also, owing to hostility to the treaty, as they
endeavored to induce the Carlton Indians to make no treaty, and
urge them not to sell the land, but to lend it for four years.

The good sense and intelligence of the head Chiefs led them to
reject their proposals, and the Willow Indians eventually, as I
have reported, accepted the treaty.

The 29th was occupied by Mr. Christie in settling accounts, taking
stock of the clothing, and preparing for our departure.

An application was made to me by Toma, the Saulteaux, who took part
in the proceedings on the 23rd, to sign the treaty as Chief of the
Saulteaux band.

As I could not ascertain that there were sufficient families of
these Indians resident in the region to be recognized as a distinct
band, and as I had no evidence that they desired him to be their
Chief, I declined to allow him to sign the treaty, but informed him
that next year, if the Saulteaux were numerous enough, and
expressed the wish that he should be Chief, he would be recognized.

He was satisfied with this, and said that next year they would come
to the payments.

His daughter, a widow, with her family, was paid, but he preferred
to remain until next year, as he did not wish to be paid except as
a Chief.

On the morning of the 31st, the previous day having been wet, Mr.
Christie and I left for Fort Pitt, Mr. McKay having preceded us by
the other road--that by way of Battle River.

We arrived on the 5th September, the day appointed, having rested,
as was our custom throughout the whole journey, on Sunday, the 3rd.

About six miles from the fort we were met by Col. Jarvis and the
police, with their band, as an escort, and also by Mr. McKay, the
Factor of the Hudson's Bay Company, who informed us that he had
rooms ready for our occupation.

We found over one hundred lodges of Indians already there, and
received a message from them, that as their friends were constantly
arriving, they wished delay until the 7th.

On the morning of the 6th, Sweet Grass, who had come in, in
consequence of my message, accompanied by about thirty of the
principal men, called to see me and express their gratification at
my arrival.

Their greeting was cordial, but novel in my experience, as they
embraced me in their arms, and kissed me on both cheeks, a
reception which they extended also to Mr. Christie and Dr. Jackes.

The Hon. James McKay arrived from Battle River in the evening, and
reported that he had met there a number of Indians, principally
Saulteaux, who had been camped there for some time. There had been
about seventy lodges in all, but as the buffalo had come near, the
poorer Indians had gone after them.

They expressed good feeling, and said they would like to have
waited until the 15th, the day named for my arrival there, to see
me and accept the treaty, but that the buffalo hunt was of so much
consequence to them that they could not wait so long.

This band is a mixed one, composed of Crees and Saulteaux from Jack
Fish Lake, their Chief being the Yellow Sky.

On the 7th the Commissioners proceeded to the council tent, which
was pitched on the high plateau above the fort, commanding a very
fine view, and facing the Indian encampment.

They were accompanied by the escort of the police, with their band.

The Indians approached with much pomp and ceremony, following the
lead of Sweet Grass.

The stem dance was performed as at Fort Carlton, but with much more
ceremony, there being four pipes instead of one, and the number of
riders, singers and dancers being more numerous. After the pipes
were stroked by the Commissioners, they were presented to each of
them to be smoked, and then laid upon the table to be covered with
calico and cloth, and returned to their bearers.

After the conclusion of these proceedings I addressed them, telling
them we had come at their own request, and that there was now a
trail leading from Lake Superior to Red River, that I saw it
stretching on thence to Fort Ellice, and there branching off, the
one track going to Qu'Appelle and Cypress Hills, and the other by
Fort Pelly to Carlton, and thence I expected to see it extended, by
way of Fort Pitt to the Rocky Mountains; on that road I saw all the
Chippewas and Crees walking, and I saw along it gardens being
planted and houses built.

I invited them to join their brother Indians and walk with the
white men on this road. I told them what we had done at Carlton,
and offered them the same terms, which I would explain fully if
they wished it.

On closing Sweet Grass rose, and taking me by the hand, asked me to
explain the terms of the treaty, after which they would all shake
hands with me and then go to meet in council.

I complied with this request, and stated the terms fully to them,
both addresses having occupied me for three hours. On concluding
they expressed satisfaction, and retired to their council.

On the 8th the Indians asked for more time to deliberate, which was
granted, as we learned that some of them desired to make exorbitant
demands, and we wished to let them understand through the avenues
by which we had access to them that these would be fruitless.

On the 9th, the Commissioners proceeded to the council tent, but
the Indians were slow of gathering, being still in council,
endeavoring to agree amongst themselves.

At length they approached and seated themselves in front of the
tent, I then asked them to speak to me. The Eagle addressed the
Indians, telling them not to be afraid, and that I was to them as a
brother, and what the Queen wished to establish was for their good.

After some time had passed, I again called on them to tell me their
minds and not to be afraid. Sweet Grass then rose and addressed me
in a very sensible manner. He thanked the Queen for sending me; he
was glad to have a brother and a friend who would help to lift them
up above their present condition. He thanked me for the offer and
saw nothing to be afraid of. He therefore accepted gladly, and took
my hand to his heart. He said God was looking down on us that day,
and had opened a new world to them. Sweet Grass further said, he
pitied those who had to live by the buffalo, but that if spared
until this time next year, he wanted, this my brother (i.e. the
Governor), to commence to act for him in protecting the buffalo;
for himself he would commence at once to prepare a small piece of
land, and his kinsmen would do the same.

Placing one hand over my heart, and the other over his own, he
said: "May the white man's blood never be spilt on this earth. I am
thankful that the white man and red man can stand together. When I
hold your hand and touch your heart, let us be as one; use your
utmost to help me and help my children so that they may prosper."

The Chief's speech, of which the foregoing gives a brief outline in
his own words, was assented to by the people with a peculiar
guttural sound which takes with them the place of the British
cheer.

I replied, expressing my satisfaction that they had so unanimously
approved of the arrangement I had made with the nation at Carlton,
and promised that I would send them next year, as I had said to the
Crees of Carlton, copies of the treaty printed on parchment.

I said that I knew that some of the Chiefs were absent, but next
year they would receive the present of money as they had done.

The Commissioners then signed the treaty, as did Sweet Grass, eight
other Chiefs and those of their Councillors who were present, the
Chiefs addressing me before signing. James Senum, Chief of the
Crees at White Fish Lake, said that he commenced to cultivate the
soil some years ago.

Mr. Christie, then chief factor of the Hudson's Bay Company, gave
him a plough, but it was now broken. He had no cattle when he
commenced, but he and his people drew the plough themselves, and
made hoes of roots of trees. Mr. Christie also gave him a pit-saw
and a grind-stone, and he was still using them. His heart was sore
in spring when his children wanted to plough and had no implements.
He asked for these as soon as possible, and referring to the
Wesleyan mission at that place, he said by following what I have
been taught it helps me a great deal.

The Little Hunter, a leading Chief of the Plain Crees, said he was
glad from his very heart; he felt in taking the Governor's hand as
if it was the Queen's. When I hear her words that she is going to
put this country to rights, it is the help of God that put it into
her heart. He wished an everlasting grasp of her hand; he was
thankful for the children who would prosper. All the children who
were settling there, hoped that the Great Spirit would look down
upon us as one. Other Chiefs expressed themselves similarly.

Ken-oo-say-oo, or The Fish, was a Chippewayan or mountaineer, a
small band of whom are in this region.

They had no Chief, but at my request they had selected a Chief and
presented the Fish to me. He said, speaking in Cree, that he
thanked the Queen, and shook hands with me, he was glad for what
had been done, and if he could have used his own tongue he would
have said more.

I then presented Sweet Grass his medal, uniform, and flag, the band
playing "God Save the Queen" and all the Indians rising to their
feet.

The rest of the medals, flags, and uniforms, were distributed, as
soon as possible, and Mr. Christie commenced to make the payments.

On Sunday, the 10th, the Rev. Mr. McKay conducted the service for
the police and others, who might attend, and in the afternoon the
Rev. Mr. McDougall had a service in Cree; Bishop Grandin and the
Rev. Mr. Scollen also had services for the Crees and Chippewayans.

On Monday, the 11th, Mr. Christie completed the payments and
distribution of provisions. The police commenced crossing the
Saskatchewan, with a view to leaving on Tuesday, the 12th, for
Battle River. We therefore sent our horses and carts across the
river, and had our tents pitched with the view of commencing our
return journey, early in the morning. Just as we were about to
leave Port Pitt, however, the Great Bear, one of the three Cree
Chiefs who were absent, arrived at the fort and asked to see me.
The Commissioners met him, when he told me that he had been out on
the plains hunting the buffalo, and had not heard the time of the
meeting; that on hearing of it he had been sent in by the Crees and
by the Stonies or Assiniboines to speak for them. I explained to
him what had been done at Carlton and Pitt, he expressed regret
that I was going away as he wished to talk to me. I then said we
would not remove until the next day, which gratified him much.

On the 13th, Sweet Grass and all the other Chiefs and Councillors
came down to the fort with the Great Bear to bid me farewell.

Sweet Grass told me the object of their visit. The Bear said the
Indians on the plains had sent him to speak for them, and those who
were away were as a barrier before what he would have to say.

Sweet Grass said, addressing him, "You see the representative of
the Queen here. I think the Great Spirit put it into their hearts
to come to our help. Let there be no barrier, as it is with great
difficulty that this was brought about. Say yes and take his hand."
The White Fish spoke similarly.

The Bear said, "Stop, my friends. I never saw the Governor before;
when I heard he was to come, I said I will request him to save me
from what I most dread--hanging; it was not given to us to have the
rope about our necks." I replied, that God had given it to us to
punish murder by death, and explained the protection the police
force afforded the Indians.

Big Bear still demanded that there should be no hanging, and I
informed him that his request would not be granted. He then wished
that the buffalo might be protected, and asked why the other Chiefs
did not speak.

The Fish, the Chippewayan replied, "We do not because Sweet Grass
has spoken, and what he says we all say."

I then asked the Bear to tell the other two absent Chiefs Short
Tail and Sagamat, what had been done; that I had written him and
them a letter, and sent it by Sweet Grass, and that next year they
could join the treaty; with regard to the buffalo, the North-West
Council were considering the question, and I again explained that
we would not interfere with the Indian's daily life except to
assist them in farming.

I then said I never expected to see them again. The land was so
large that another Governor was to be sent, whom I hoped they would
receive as they had done me, and give him the same confidence they
had extended to me. The Chiefs and Councillors, commencing with
Sweet Grass, then shook hands with Mr. Christie and myself, each
addressing me words of parting.

The Bear remained sitting until all had shaken hands, he then took
mine and holding it, said, "If he had known he would have met me
with all his people. I am not an undutiful child, I do not throw
back your hand, but as my people are not here I do not sign. I will
tell them what I have heard, and next year I will come." The
Indians then left, but shortly afterwards the Bear came to see me
again, fearing I had not fully understood him, and assured me that
he accepted the treaty as if he had signed it, and would come next
year with all his people and accept it.

We crossed the river, and left for Battle River in the afternoon,
where we arrived on the afternoon of the 15th. We found no Indians
there except Red Pheasant and his band, whom we had already met at
Carlton.

On the 16th, the Red Pheasant saw the Commissioners. He said he was
a Battle River Indian; his fathers had lived there before him, but
he was glad to see the Government coming there, as it would improve
his means of living. He wished the claims of the Half-breeds who
had settled there before the Government came to be respected, as
for himself he would go away and seek another home, and though it
was hard to leave the home of his people, yet he would make way for
the white man, and surely, he said, "if the poor Indian acts thus,
the Queen, when she hears of this, will help him." He asked, that a
little land should be given him to plant potatoes in next spring,
and they would remove after digging them, to their reserve, which
he thought he would wish to have at the Eagle Hills.

I expressed my satisfaction with their conduct and excellent
spirit, and obtained the cheerful consent of Mr. Fuller, of the
Pacific telegraph line, who is in occupation of a large cultivated
field, that the band should use three acres within the fenced
enclosure, and which, moreover, Mr. Fuller kindly promised to
plough for them gratuitously.

The 17th being Sunday we remained at our camp, and on Monday
morning, the 18th, we commenced our long return journey, with the
incidents of which I will not trouble you further than to state
that, on arriving on the 4th of October at an encampment about
thirty miles from Portage la Prairie, we found it necessary to
leave our tents and carts to follow us leisurely (many of the
horses having become completely exhausted with the long journey of
sixteen hundred miles) and push on to the Portage; on the 5th we
reached the Portage, where Mr. Christie and Dr. Jackes remained,
their horses being unable to go farther, and I went on to Poplar
Point, forty-five miles from Fort Garry, where I found accommodation
for the night from Mr. Chisholm, of the Hudson's Bay Company's Post
there.

I arrived at Fort Garry on the afternoon of the 6th of October
having been absent for over two months and a half. Mr. McKay,
having taken another road, had arrived before me; Mr. Christie
and Dr. Jackes reached here subsequently. Having thus closed the
narrative of our proceedings, I proceed to deal with the results of
our mission, and to submit for your consideration some reflections
and to make some practical suggestions.

1st. The Indians inhabiting the ceded territory are chiefly Crees,
but there are a few Assiniboines on the plains and also at the
slope of the mountains. There are also a small number of Saulteaux
and one band of Chippewayans.

2nd. I was agreeably surprised to find so great a willingness on
the part of the Crees to commence to cultivate the soil, and so
great a desire to have their children instructed. I requested Mr.
Christie to confer with the Chief while the payments were going on,
as to the localities where they would desire to have reserves
assigned to them, and with few exceptions they indicated the
places, in fact most of them have already commenced to settle.

It is, therefore important that the cattle and agricultural
implements should be given them without delay.

I would, therefore, recommend that provision should be made for
forwarding these as soon as the spring opens. I think it probable
that cattle and some implements could be purchased at Prince Albert
and thus avoid transportation.

3rd. I would further represent that, though I did not grant the
request, I thought the desire of the Indians, to be instructed in
farming and building, most reasonable, and I would therefore
recommend that measures be adopted to provide such instruction for
them. Their present mode of living is passing away; the Indians are
tractable, docile and willing to learn. I think that advantage
should be taken of this disposition to teach them to become
self-supporting, which can best be accomplished with the aid of a
few practical farmers and carpenters to instruct them in farming
and house building.

The universal demand for teachers, and by some of the Indians for
missionaries, is also encouraging. The former, the Government can
supply; for the latter they must rely on the churches, and I trust
that these will continue and extend their operations amongst them.
The field is wide enough for all, and the cry of the Indian for
help is a clamant one.

4th. In connection with the aiding of the Indians to settle, I have
to call attention to the necessity of regulations being made for
the preservation of the buffalo. These animals are fast decreasing
in numbers, but I am satisfied that a few simple regulations would
preserve the herds for many years. The subject was constantly
pressed on my attention by the Indians, and I promised that the
matter would be considered by the North-West Council. The council
that has governed the territories for the last four years was
engaged in maturing a law for this purpose, and had our regime
continued we would have passed a statute for their preservation. I
commend the matter to the attention of our successors as one of
urgent importance.

5th. There is another class of the population in the North-West
whose position I desire to bring under the notice of the Privy
Council. I refer to the wandering Half-breeds of the plains, who
are chiefly of French descent and live the life of the Indians.
There are a few who are identified with the Indians, but there is a
large class of Metis who live by the hunt of the buffalo, and have
no settled homes. I think that a census of the numbers of these
should be procured, and while I would not be disposed to recommend
their being brought under the treaties, I would suggest that land
should be assigned to them, and that on their settling down, if
after an examination into their circumstances, it should be found
necessary and expedient, some assistance should be given them to
enable them to enter upon agricultural operations.

If the measures suggested by me are adopted, viz., effective
regulations with regard to the buffalo, the Indians taught to
cultivate the soil, and the erratic Half-breeds encouraged to
settle down, I believe that the solution of all social questions of
any present importance in the North-West Territories will have been
arrived at.

In conclusion, I have to call your attention to the report made to
me by the Hon. Mr. Christie, which I forward herewith; that
gentleman took the entire charge of the payments and administration
of matters connected with the treaty, and I have to speak in the
highest terms of the value of his services.

Accompanying his report will be found the pay sheets, statements of
distribution of provisions and clothing, memoranda as to the
localities of the reserves, suggestions as to the times and places
of payment next year, and a general balance sheet.

A credit of $60,000 was given to me, and I have placed as a refund
to the credit of the Receiver-General, $12,730.55. This arises from
the fact that owing to the proximity of the buffalo, many of the
Indians did not come into the treaty.

I have to acknowledge the benefit I derived from the services of
the Hon. James McKay, camping as he did near the Indian encampment.
He had the opportunity of meeting them constantly, and learning
their views which his familarity with the Indian dialects enabled
him to do. Dr. Jackes took a warm interest in the progress of our
work, and kept a record of the negotiations, a copy of which I
enclose and which I think ought to be published, as it will be of
great value to those who will be called on to administer the
treaty, showing as it does what was said by the negotiators and by
the Indians, and preventing misrepresentations in the future. The
Commissioners are under obligations to Lieut.-Colonel McLeod, and
the other officers and men of the police force for their escort.

The conduct of the men was excellent, and the presence of the force
as an emblem and evidence of the establishment of authority in the
North-West was of great value.

I have to record my appreciation of the kindness of Messrs. Clarke,
of Fort Carlton, and McKay of Fort Pitt, and of the other officials
of the Hudson's Bay Company, and of the hearty assistance they
extended towards the accomplishment of our mission. I have also to
mention the interest taken in the negotiations by His Lordship
Bishop Grandin, and by the various missionaries, Protestant and
Catholic.

On this occasion, as on others, I found the Half-breed population
whether French or English generally using the influence of their
relationship to the Indians in support of our efforts to come to a
satisfactory arrangement with them.

We also had the advantage of good interpreters, having secured the
services of Messrs. Peter Ballendine and John McKay, while the
Indians had engaged Mr. Peter Erasmus to discharge the same duty.
The latter acted as chief interpreter, being assisted by the
others, and is a most efficient interpreter.

I transmit herewith a copy of the treaty, and have only in
conclusion to express my hope that this further step in the
progress of the work of the Dominion amongst the Indian tribes will
prove beneficial to them, and of advantage to the realm.

                   I have the honor to be, Sir,
                             Your obedient servant,
                                     ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                                              Lieut.-Governor.



Narrative of the proceedings connected with the effecting of the
treaties at Forts Carlton and Pitt, in the year 1876, together with
a report of the speeches of the Indians and Commissioners, by A. G.
Jackes, Esq., M.D., Secretary to the Commission.

The expedition for the proposed Treaty Number Six, reached the
South Saskatchewan on the afternoon of August 14th, where they were
met by a messenger from the Cree Indians expressing welcome, also a
messenger from Mr. L. Clarke, of Carlton House, offering to the
Governor and party the hospitality of the Fort.

The next morning, when about ten miles from Carlton, the
Commissioners were met by a detachment of Mounted Police under
Major Walker, who escorted them to the Fort; on the way the
Commissioners passed an encampment of Crees whose Chief had
previously seen the Governor at Duck Lake and asked him to make the
treaty there; he replied that he could not promise, that he would
meet the Indians where the greater number wished. These Crees
joined in an invocation to the deity for a blessing on the
Governor, and deputed one of their number to welcome him by shaking
hands.

Near the Fort were encamped about two hundred and fifty lodges of
Crees, to whom the Commissioners at once served out two days'
allowance of provisions.

On the 16th the Crees reported that they wanted another day to
confer amongst themselves, this was granted and the Governor
requested them to meet him and the Commissioners on the 18th at 10
a.m., to commence the business of the treaty.



FIRST DAY

August 18th.

At half-past ten His Honor Lieut.-Gov. Morris, the Hon. W. J.
Christie and Hon. Jas. McKay, accompanied by an escort of
North-West Mounted Police, left the Fort for the camp of the Cree
Indians, who had selected a site about a mile and a half from the
Hudson's Bay Fort. There were about two hundred and fifty lodges,
containing over two thousand souls. The Governor's tent was pitched
on a piece of rising ground about four hundred yards from the
Indian camp, and immediately facing it.

As soon as the Governor and party arrived, the Indians who were to
take part in the treaty, commenced to assemble near the Chief's
tents, to the sound of beating drums and the discharge of small
arms, singing, dancing and loud speaking, going on at the same
time.

In about half an hour they were ready to advance and meet the
Governor; this they did in a large semi-circle; in their front
were about twenty braves on horseback, galloping about in
circles, shouting, singing and going through various picturesque
performances. The semi-circle steadily advanced until within fifty
yards of the Governor's tent, when a halt was made and further
peculiar ceremonies commenced, the most remarkable of which was the
"dance of the stem." This was commenced by the Chiefs, medicine
men, councillors, singers and drum-beaters, coming a little to the
front and seating themselves on blankets and robes spread for them.
The bearer of the stem, Wah-wee-kah-nich-kah-oh-tah-mah-hote (the
man you strike on the back), carrying in his hand a large and
gorgeously adorned pipe stem, walked slowly along the semi-circle,
and advancing to the front, raised the stem to the heavens, then
slowly turned to the north, south, east and west, presenting the
stem at each point; returning to the seated group he handed the
stem to one of the young men, who commenced a low chant, at the
same time performing a ceremonial dance accompanied by the drums
and singing of the men and women in the background.

This was all repeated by another of the young men, after which the
horsemen again commenced galloping in circles, the whole body
slowly advancing. As they approached his tent, the Governor,
accompanied by the Hon. W. J. Christie and Hon. Jas. McKay,
Commissioners, went forward to meet them and to receive the stem
carried by its bearer. It was presented first to the Governor, who
in accordance with their customs, stroked it several times, then
passed it to the Commissioners who repeated the ceremony.

The significance of this ceremony is that the Governor and
Commissioners accepted the friendship of the tribe.

The interpreter then introduced the Chiefs and principal men; the
Indians slowly seating themselves in regular order in front of the
tent. In a few minutes there was perfect quiet and order, when His
Honor the Lieutenant-Governor addressed them as follows:

"My Indian brothers, Indians of the plains, I have shaken hands
with a few of you, I shake hands with all of you in my heart. God
has given us a good day, I trust his eye is upon us, and that what
we do will be for the benefit of his children.

"What I say and what you say, and what we do, is done openly before
the whole people. You are, like me and my friends who are with me,
children of the Queen. We are of the same blood, the same God made
us and the same Queen rules over us.

"I am a Queen's Councillor, I am her Governor of all these
territories, and I am here to speak from her to you. I am here now
because for many days the Cree nation have been sending word that
they wished to see a Queen's messenger face to face. I told the
Queen's Councillors your wishes. I sent you word last year by a
man who has gone where we will all go by and by, that a Queen's
messenger would meet you this year. I named Forts Carlton and Pitt
as the places of meeting, I sent a letter to you saying so, and my
heart grew warm when I heard how well you received it.

"As the Queen's chief servant here, I always keep my promises; the
winter came and went but I did not forget my word, and I sent a
messenger to tell you that I would meet you at Carlton on the 15th
of August, and at Fort Pitt on the 5th of September.

"During the winter I went to Ottawa to consult with the other
Queen's Councillors about you amongst other matters, and they said
to me, 'you promised a Queen's messenger to the Crees, you have
been so much with the Indians, that we wish you to go yourself;'
I said 'the journey is long and I am not a strong man, but when a
duty is laid upon me I will do it, but,' I said, 'you must give
with me two friends and councillors whom I can trust, to help me in
the duty;' and now I have with me two friends whom you and I have
known long; one of them is of your own blood, the other has been
many years amongst you.

"I will, in a short time, give you a message from the Queen, and my
Councillors will tell you that the words are true. Before I do so,
there are so many things I want to say to you that I scarcely know
where to begin. I have been nearly four years Governor of Manitoba
and these territories, and from the day I was sworn, I took the
Indian by the hand, and those who took it have never let it go.

"Three years ago I went to the north-west angle of Lake of the
Woods, and there I met the Chippewa nation, I gave them a message
and they talked with me and when they understood they took my hand.
Some were away, next year I sent messengers to them and I made a
treaty between the Queen and them; there are numbered of those
altogether four thousand. I then went to Lake Qu'Appelle the year
after, and met the Crees and Chippewas there, gave them my message,
and they took my hand. Last summer I went to Lake Winnipeg and gave
the Queen's message to the Swampy Crees and they and I, acting for
the Queen, came together heart to heart; and now that the Indians
of the east understand the Queen and her Councillors, I come to
you. And why is all this done? I will tell you; it is because you
are the subjects of the Queen as I am. She cares as much for one of
you as she does for one of her white subjects. The other day a
party of Iroquois Indians were taken to England across the ocean;
the Queen heard of it and sent to them, saying, 'I want to see my
red children,' took their hands and gave each of them her picture,
and sent them away happy with her goodness.

"Before I came here I was one of the Queen's Councillors at Ottawa.
We have many Indians there as here, but for many years there has
been friendship between the British, and the Indians. We respect
the Indians as brothers and as men. Let me give you a proof it.
Years ago there was war between the British and the Americans;
there was a great battle; there were two brave Chief warriors on
the British side, one wore the red coat, the other dressed as you
do, but they fought side by side as brothers; the one was Brock and
the other was Tecumseth whose memory will never die; the blood of
both watered the ground; the bones of Tecumseth were hid by his
friends; the remains of Brock by his, and now a great pile of stone
stands up toward heaven in his memory. And now the white man is
searching for the remains of Tecumseth, and when found they will
build another monument in honour of the Indian.

"I hope the days of fighting are over, but notwithstanding the
whites are as much your friends in these days of peace, as in war.

"The many Indians in the place that I have left are happy,
prosperous, contented and growing in numbers. A meeting of the
Grand Council of the Six Nation Indians was held a month ago; they
now number six thousand souls. They met to thank the Queen and to
say that they were content, and why are they content? Because many
years ago the Queen's Councillors saw that the Indians that would
come after, must be cared for, they saw that the means of living
were passing away from the Indians, they knew that women and
children were sometimes without food; they sent men to speak to the
Indians, they said your children must be educated, they must be
taught to raise food for themselves. The Indians heard them, the
Councillors gave them seed, land, food, taught their children and
let them feel that they were of one blood with the whites. Now,
what we have found to work so well where I came from we want to
have here in our territories, and I am happy to say that my heart
is gladdened by the way the Indians have met me.

"We are not here as traders, I do not come as to buy or sell horses
or goods, I come to you, children of the Queen, to try to help you;
when I say yes, I mean it, and when I say no, I mean it too.

"I want you to think of my words, I want to tell you that what we
talk about is very important. What I trust and hope we will do is
not for to-day or to-morrow only; what I will promise, and what I
believe and hope you will take, is to last as long as that sun
shines and yonder river flows.

"You have to think of those who will come after you, and it will be
a remembrance for me as long as I live, if I can go away feeling
that I have done well for you. I believe we can understand each
other, if not it will be the first occasion on which the Indians
have not done so. If you are as anxious for your own welfare as I
am, I am certain of what will happen.

"The day is passing. I thank you for the respectful reception you
have given me. I will do here as I have done on former occasions. I
hope you will speak your minds as fully and as plainly as if I was
one of yourselves.

"I wish you to think of what I have said. I wish you to present
your Chiefs to me to-day if you are ready, if not then we will wait
until to-morrow."

Here the Indians requested an adjournment until next day in order
that they might meet in council; this was granted, and the first
day's proceedings terminated.

Late in the evening the escort of Mounted Police was reinforced by
a detachment, accompanied by their band, under command of Col.
Jarvis, making a force of nearly one hundred men and officers.



SECOND DAY

August 19th.

The Lieutenant-Governor and Commissioners, with the Mounted Police
escort, headed by their band, proceeded to the camp to meet the
Indians at 10:30 a.m. The Indians having assembled in regular order
with their two leading Chiefs, Mis-tah-wah-sis and Ah-tuck-ah-coop
seated in front, the Governor said:

"My friends, we have another bright day before us, and I trust that
when it closes our faces will continue as bright as the day before
us. I spoke yesterday as a friend to friends, as a brother to
brothers, as a father to his children. I did not want to hurry you,
I wanted you to think of my words, and now I will be glad if you
will do as I asked you then, present your Chiefs to me, and I shall
be glad to hear the words of the Indians through the voice of their
Chiefs, or whoever they may appoint."

The head men then brought forward Mis-tah-wah-sis, of the Carlton
Indians, representing seventy-six lodges. Ah-tuck-ah-coop, of the Wood
Indians, representing about seventy lodges. These were acknowledged as
the leading Chiefs, after them came James Smith, of the Fort-a-la-Corne
Indians, fifty lodges. John Smith, of the Prince Albert and South
Branch Indians, fifty lodges. The Chip-ee-wayan, of the Plain Indians,
sixty lodges. Yah-yah-tah-kus-kin-un, of the Fishing or Sturgeon lake
Indians, twenty lodges. Pee-yahan-kah-mihk-oo-sit, thirty lodges.
Wah-wee-kah-nich-kah-oh-tah-mah-hote, of the River Indians, fifty
lodges.

Here a messenger came from the Indians under Chief Beardy, camped
at Duck Lake, eight miles from the main camp. He shook hands with
the Governor and said, "I am at a loss at this time what to say,
for the Indians' mind cannot be all the same, that is why I came
to tell the Governor the right of it; with a good heart I plead at
this time, it is not my own work, I would like to know his mind
just now and hear the terms of the treaty."

The Governor said in reply: "If your Chief and his people had been
in their places here, they would have heard with the rest what I
had to say. You refused to meet me here, yet you sent and asked me
to give you provisions, but I refused to do so unless you joined
the others; and now I will not tell my message to this messenger
until I tell all the rest; he can hear with the rest and take back
my words to his chief." The messenger expressed himself satisfied,
and took his seat with the others.

On the Indians expressing themselves ready to hear the message, the
Governor said:

"First I wish to talk to you about what I regard as something
affecting the lives of yourselves and the lives of your children.
Often when I thought of the future of the Indian my heart was sad
within me. I saw that the large game was getting scarcer and
scarcer, and I feared that the Indians would melt away like snow in
spring before the sun. It was my duty as Governor to think of them,
and I wondered if the Indians of the plains and lakes could not do
as their brothers where I came from did. And now, when I think of
it, I see a bright sky before me. I have been nearly four years
working among my Indian brothers, and I am glad indeed to find that
many of them are seeking to have homes of their own, having gardens
and sending their children to school.

"Last spring I went to see some of the Chippewas, this year I went
again and I was glad to see houses built, gardens planted and wood
cut for more houses. Understand me, I do not want to interfere with
your hunting and fishing. I want you to pursue it through the
country, as you have heretofore done; but I would like your
children to be able to find food for themselves and their children
that come after them. Sometimes when you go to hunt you can leave
your wives and children at home to take care of your gardens.

"I am glad to know that some of you have already begun to build and
to plant; and I would like on behalf of the Queen to give each band
that desires it a home of their own; I want to act in this matter
while it is time. The country is wide and you are scattered, other
people will come in. Now unless the places where you would like to
live are secured soon there might be difficulty. The white man
might come and settle on the very place where you would like to be.
Now what I and my brother Commissioners would like to do is this:
we wish to give each band who will accept of it a place where they
may live; we wish to give you as much or more land than you need;
we wish to send a man that surveys the land to mark it off, so you
will know it is your own, and no one will interfere with you. What
I would propose to do is what we have done in other places. For
every family of five a reserve to themselves of one square mile.
Then, as you may not all have made up your minds where you would
like to live, I will tell you how that will be arranged: we would
do as has been done with happiest results at the North-West Angle.
We would send next year a surveyor to agree with you as to the
place you would like.

"There is one thing I would say about the reserves. The land I name
is much more than you will ever be able to farm, and it may be that
you would like to do as your brothers where I came from did.

"They, when they found they had too much land, asked the Queen to
it sell for them; they kept as much as they could want, and the
price for which the remainder was sold was put away to increase for
them, and many bands now have a yearly income from the land.

"But understand me, once the reserve is set aside, it could not be
sold unless with the consent of the Queen and the Indians; as long
as the Indians wish, it will stand there for their good; no one can
take their homes.

"Of course, if when a reserve is chosen, a white man had already
settled there, his rights must be respected. The rights and
interests of the whites and half-breeds are as dear to the Queen as
those of the Indians. She deals justly by all, and I am sure my
Indian brothers would like to deal with others as they would have
others to deal with them. I think you can now understand the
question of homes.

"When the Indians settle on a reserve and have a sufficient number
of children to be taught, the Queen would maintain a school.
Another thing, that affects you all, some of you have temptations
as the white men have, and therefore the fire-water which does so
much harm will not be allowed to be sold or used in the reserve.
Then before I leave the question of reserves I will tell you how we
will help you to make your homes there. We would give to every
family actually cultivating the soil the following articles, viz.,
two hoes, one spade, one scythe, one axe, and then to help in
breaking the land, one plough and two harrows for every ten
families; and to help you to put up houses we give to each Chief
for his band, one chest of carpenter's tools, one cross-cut saw,
five hand saws, one pit saw and files, five augers and one
grindstone. Then if a band settles on its reserves the people will
require something to aid them in breaking the soil. They could not
draw the ploughs themselves, therefore we will give to each Chief
for the use of his band one or two yokes of oxen according to the
number in the band. In order to encourage the keeping of cattle we
would give each band a bull and four cows; having all these things
we would give each band enough potatoes, oats, barley and wheat for
seed to plant the land actually broken. This would be done once for
all to encourage them to grow for themselves.

"Chiefs ought to be respected, they ought to be looked up to by
their people; they ought to have good Councillors; the Chiefs and
Councillors should consult for the good of the people; the Queen
expects Indians and whites to obey her laws; she expects them to
live at peace with other Indians and with the white men; the Chiefs
and Councillors should teach their people so, and once the Queen
approves a Chief or Councillor he cannot be removed unless he
behaves badly.

"The Chiefs and head men are not to be lightly put aside. When a
treaty is made they become servants of the Queen; they are to try
and keep order amongst their people. We will try to keep order in
the whole country.

"A Chief has his braves; you see here the braves of our Queen, and
why are they here? To see that no white man does wrong to the
Indian. To see that none give liquor to the Indian. To see that the
Indians do no harm to each other. Three years ago some Americans
killed some Indians; when the Queen's Councillors heard of it they
said, we will send men there to protect the Indians, the Queen's
subjects shall not be shot down by the Americans; now you
understand why the police force is in this country, and you should
rejoice.

"I have said a Chief was to be respected; I wear a uniform because
I am an officer of the Queen, the officers of the police wear
uniforms as servants of the Queen. So we give to Chiefs and
Councillors good and suitable uniform indicating their office, to
wear on these and other great days.

"We recognize four head men to each large band and two to each
small one.

"I have always been much pleased when Indians came to me and showed
me medals given to their grandfathers and transmitted to them; now
we have with us silver medals that no Chief need be ashamed to
wear, and I have no doubt that when the Chiefs are gone, they will
be passed on to their children. In addition each Chief will be
given a flag to put over his lodge to show that he is a Chief.

"I told you yesterday that I and my brother Commissioners were not
here as traders.

"There is one thing I ought to have mentioned in addition to what I
have already named, that is, if a treaty is made here and at Fort
Pitt, we will give every year to the Indians included in it, one
thousand five hundred dollars' worth of ammunition and twine.

"You think only for yourselves, we have to think of the Indians all
over the country, we cannot treat one better than another, it would
not be just, we will therefore do this, and what I tell you now is
the last.

"When the treaty is closed, if it be closed, we will make a present
to every man, woman and child, of twelve dollars, the money being
paid to the head of a family for his wife, and children not
married.

"To each Chief, instead of twelve, we give twenty-five dollars, and
to each head man fifteen dollars, their wives and children getting
the same as the others. I told you also that what I was promising
was not for to-day or to-morrow only, but should continue as long
as the sun shone and the river flowed. My words will pass away and
so will yours, so I always write down what I promise, that our
children may know what we said and did. Next year I shall send
copies of what is written in the treaty, printed on skin, so that
it cannot rub out nor be destroyed, and one shall be given to each
Chief so that there may be no mistakes.

"Then I promise to do as we have done with all before from Cypress
Hills to Lake Superior, the Queen will agree to pay yearly five
dollars per head for every man, woman and child. I cannot treat you
better than the others, but I am ready to treat you as well.

"A little thing I had forgotten, and I have done. The Chiefs' and
head men's coats will wear out, they are meant to be worn when it
is necessary to show that they are officers of the Queen, and every
third year they will be replaced by new ones.

"And now, Indians of the plains, I thank you for the open ear you
have given me; I hold out my hand to you full of the Queen's bounty
and I hope you will not put it back. We hate no object but to
discharge our duty to the Queen and towards you. Now that my hand
is stretched out to you, it is for you to say whether you will take
it and do as I think you ought--act for the good of your people.

"What I have said has been in the face of the people. These things
will hold good next year for those that are now away. I have done.
What do you say?"

MIS-TAH-WAH-SIS here came forward, shook hands with the Governor,
and said:--"We have heard all he has told us, but I want to tell
him how it is with us as well; when a thing is thought of quietly,
probably that is the best way. I ask this much from him this day
that we go and think of his words."

The Governor and Commissioners agreed to the request and asked the
Indians to meet them Monday morning at ten o'clock with as little
delay as possible.

Before parting, the Governor said to the Indians, "This is a great
day for us all. I have proposed on behalf of the Queen what I
believe to be for your good, and not for yours only, but for that
of your children's children, and when you go away think of my
words. Try to understand what my heart is towards you. I will trust
that we may come together hand to hand and heart to heart again. I
trust that God will bless this bright day for our good, and give
your Chiefs and Councillors wisdom so that you will accept the
words of your Governor. I have said."


Sunday, August 20th.

Divine service, which was largely attended, was held in the square
of Fort Carlton, by the Rev. John McKay, at half-past ten a.m.

At noon a message came from the encampment of Indians requesting
the Rev. Mr. McKay to hold service with them, which he did in the
afternoon, preaching in their own tongue to a congregation of over
two hundred adult Crees.


Monday, August 21st.

The principal Chief sent a message that as the Indians had held no
Council on Sunday, they wished to have Monday to themselves and
would if ready meet the Commissioners on Tuesday morning.


THIRD DAY

August 22nd.

The Governor and Commissioners having proceeded as usual to the camp,
the Indians soon assembled in order, when the Lieutenant-Governor said:

"Indian children of the Queen, it is now a week to-day since I came
here on the day I said I would; I have to go still further after I
leave here, and then a long journey home to Red River.

"I have not hurried you, you have had two days to think; I have
spoken much to you and now I wish to hear you, my ears are open and
I wish to hear the voices of your principal Chiefs or of those
chosen to speak for them. Now I am waiting."

OO-PEE-TOO-KERAH-HAN-AP-EE-WEE-YIN (the Pond-maker) came forward
and said:--"We have heard your words that you had to say to us as
the representative of the Queen. We were glad to hear what you had
to say and have gathered together in council and thought the words
over amongst us, we were glad to hear you tell us how we might live
by our own work. When I commence to settle on the lands to make a
living for myself and my children, I beg of you to assist me in
every way possible--when I am at a loss how to proceed I want the
advice and assistance of the Government; the children yet unborn,
I wish you to treat them in like manner as they advance in
civilization like the white man. This is all I have been told to
say now, if I have not said anything in a right manner I wish to be
excused; this is the voice of the people."

GOVERNOR:--"I have heard the voice of the people; I am glad to
learn that they are looking forward to having their children
civilized, that is the great object of the Government, as is proved
by what I have offered. Those that come after us in the Government
will think of your children as we think of you. The Queen's
Councillors intend to send a man to look after the Indians, to be
chief superintendent of Indian affairs, and under him there will be
two or three others to live in the country, that the Queen's
Councillors may know how the Indians are prospering.

"I cannot promise however, that the Government will feed and support
all the Indians; you are many, and if we were to try to do it, it
would take a great deal of money, and some of you would never do
anything for yourselves. What I have offered does not take away
your living, you will have it then as you have now, and what I
offer now is put on top of it. This I can tell you, the Queen's
Government will always take a deep interest in your living."

THE BADGER--"We want to think of our children; we do not want to be
too greedy; when we commence to settle down on the reserves that we
select, it is there we want your aid, when we cannot help ourselves
and in case of troubles seen and unforeseen in the future."

Sak-ah-moos and several other Indians in order repeated what The
Badger had said.

GOVERNOR--"I have told you that the money I have offered you would
be paid to you and to your children's children. I know that the
sympathy of the Queen, and her assistance, would be given you in
any unforeseen circumstances. You must trust to her generosity.
Last winter when some of the Indians wanted food because the crops
had been destroyed by grasshoppers, although it was not promised
in the treaty, nevertheless the Government sent money to buy them
food, and in the spring when many of them were sick a man was sent
to try and help them. We cannot foresee these things, and all I
can promise is that you will be treated kindly, and in that
extraordinary circumstances you must trust to the generosity of the
Queen. My brother Commissioner, Mr. McKay, will speak to you in
your own language."

MR. McKAY--"My friends, I wish to make you a clear explanation of
some things that it appears you do not understand. It has been said
to you by your Governor that we did not come here to barter or
trade with you for the land. You have made demands on the Governor,
and from the way you have put them a white man would understand
that you asked for daily provisions, also supplies for your hunt
and for your pleasure excursions. Now my reasons for explaining to
you are based on my past experience of treaties, for no sooner will
the Governor and Commissioners turn their backs on you than some of
you will say this thing and that thing was promised and the promise
not fulfilled; that you cannot rely on the Queen's representative,
that even he will not tell the truth, whilst among yourselves are
the falsifiers. Now before we rise from here it must be understood,
and it must be in writing, all that you are promised by the
Governor and Commissioners, and I hope you will not leave until you
have thoroughly understood the meaning of every word that comes
from us. We have not come here to deceive you, we have not come
here to rob you, we have not come here to take away anything that
belongs to you, and we are not here to make peace as we would to
hostile Indians, because you are the children of the Great Queen as
we are, and there has never been anything but peace between us.
What you have not understood clearly we will do our utmost to make
perfectly plain to you."

GOVERNOR--"I have another word to say to the Indians on this
matter: last year an unforeseen calamity came upon the people of
Red River, the grasshoppers came and ate all their crops. There is
no treaty between the people of Red River and the Queen except that
they are her subjects. There was no promise to help them, but I
sent down and said that unless help came some of the people would
die from want of food, and that they had nothing wherewith to
plant. The Queen's Councillors at once gave money to feed the
people, and seed that they might plant the ground; but that was
something out of and beyond every-day life, and therefore I say
that some great sickness or famine stands as a special case. You
may rest assured that when you go to your reserves you will be
followed by the watchful eye and sympathetic hand of the Queen's
Councillors."

THE BADGER--"I do not want you to feed me every day; you must not
understand that from what I have said. When we commence to settle
down on the ground to make there our own living, it is then we want
your help, and that is the only way that I can see how the poor can
get along."

GOVERNOR--"You will remember the promises which I have already
made; I said you would get seed; you need not concern yourselves so
much about what your grand-children are going to eat; your children
will be taught, and then they will be as well able to take care of
themselves as the whites around them."

MIS-TAH-WAH-SIS (one of the leading Chiefs)--"It is well known that
if we had plenty to live on from our gardens we would not still
insist on getting more provision, but it is in case of any
extremity, and from the ignorance of the Indian in commencing to
settle that we thus speak; we are as yet in the dark; this is not a
trivial matter for us.

"We were glad to hear what the Governor was saying to us and we
understood it, but we are not understood, we do not mean to ask for
food for every day but only when we commence and in case of famine
or calamity. What we speak of and do now will last as long as the
sun shines and the river runs, we are looking forward to our
children's children, for we are old and have but few days to live."

AH-TAHK-AH-COOP (the other leading Chief)--"The things we have been
talking about in our councils I believe are for our good. I think
of the good Councillors of the Queen and of her Commissioners; I
was told the Governor was a good man, and now that I see him I
believe he is; in coming to see us, and what he has spoken, he has
removed almost all obstacles and misunderstandings, and I hope he
may remove them all. I have heard the good things you promise us,
you have told us of the white man's way of living and mentioned
some of the animals by which he gets his living, others you did
not. We want food in the spring when we commence to farm; according
as the Indian settles down on his reserves, and in proportion as he
advances, his wants will increase."

The Indians here asked for the afternoon to hold further council.
To this the Governor said, "I grant the request of the Indians but
I give them a word of warning, do not listen to every voice in your
camp, listen to your wise men who know something of life, and do
not come asking what is unreasonable, it pains me to have to say
no, and I tell you again I cannot treat you with more favor than
the other Indians. To-morrow, when we meet, speak out your minds
openly, and I will answer, holding nothing back. Be ready to meet
me to-morrow, as soon as my flag is raised, for remember I have
a long journey before me and we ought to come to a speedy
understanding. I trust the God who made you will give you wisdom
in considering what you have to deal with."


FOURTH DAY

August 23rd.

Shortly after the business had commenced, proceedings were
interrupted by the loud talking of a Chippewa, who was addressing
the Indians gathered in front of the tent. The Governor said,
"There was an Indian, a Chippewa, stood and spoke to you, he did
not speak to his Governor as he should have done: I am willing to
hear what any band has to say, but they must speak to me. I have
been talking to the Crees for several days. I wish to go on with
the work; if the Chippewas want to talk with me I will hear them
afterwards. They are a little handful of strangers from the east, I
have treated with their whole nation, they are not wiser than their
people.

"There are many reasons why business should go on; I hear that the
buffalo are near you and you want to be off to your hunt; there are
many mouths here to feed and provisions are getting low; now my
friends I am ready to hear you."

TEE-TEE-QUAY-SAY--"Listen to me, my friends, all you who are
sitting around here, and you will soon hear what the interpreter
has to say for us."

The interpreter then read a list of the things the Indians had
agreed in council to ask, viz.:--One ox and cow for each family.
Four hoes, two spades, two scythes and a whetstone for each family.
Two axes, two hay forks, two reaping hooks, one plough and one
harrow for every three families. To each Chief one chest of tools
as proposed. Seed of every kind in full to every one actually
cultivating the soil. To make some provision for the poor,
unfortunate, blind and lame. To supply us with a minister and
school teacher of whatever denomination we belong to. To prevent
fire-water being sold in the whole Saskatchewan.

As the tribe advances in civilization, all agricultural implements
to be supplied in proportion.

When timber becomes scarcer on the reserves we select for
ourselves, we want to be free lo take it anywhere on the common. If
our choice of a reserve does not please us before it is surveyed we
want to be allowed to select another. We want to be at liberty to
hunt on any place as usual. If it should happen that a Government
bridge or scow is built on the Saskatchewan at any place, we want
passage free. One boar, two sows, one horse, harness and waggon for
each Chief. One cooking stove for each Chief. That we be supplied
with medicines free of cost. That a hand-mill be given to each
band. Lastly in case of war occurring in the country, we do not
want to be liable to serve in it.

TEE-TEE-QUAY-SAY then continued--"When we look back to the past we
do not see where the Cree nation has ever watered the ground with
the white man's blood, he has always been our friend and we his;
trusting to the Giver of all good, to the generosity of the Queen,
and to the Governor and his councillors, we hope you will grant us
this request."

WAH-WEE-KAH-NIHK-KAH-OO-TAH-MAH-HOTE (the man you strike in the
back)--"Pity the voice of the Indian, if you grant what we request
the sound will echo through the land; open the way; I speak for the
children that they may be glad; the land is wide, there is plenty
of room. My mouth is full of milk, I am only as a sucking child; I
am glad; have compassion on the manner in which I was brought up;
let our children be clothed; let us now stand in the light of day
to see our way on this earth; long ago it was good when we first
were made, I wish the same were back again. But now the law has
come, and in that I wish to walk. What God has said, and our mother
here (the earth), and these our brethren, let it be so."

To this the Governor replied--"Indians, I made you my offer. You
have asked me now for many things, some of which were already
promised. You are like other Indians I have met, you can ask very
well. You are right in asking, because you are saying what is in
your minds. I have had taken down a list of what you have asked,
and I will now consult with my brother Commissioners and give you
my answer in a little while."

After consultation, the Governor again had the Indians assembled,
and said--"I am ready now to answer you, but understand well, it is
not to be talked backwards and forwards. I am not going to act like
a man bargaining for a horse for you. I have considered well what
you have asked for, and my answer will be a final one. I cannot
grant everything you ask, but as far as I can go I will, and when
done I can only say you will be acting to your own interests if you
take my hand.

"I will speak of what you asked yesterday and to-day. I told you
yesterday that if any great sickness or general famine overtook
you, that on the Queen being informed of it by her Indian agent,
she in her goodness would give such help as she thought the Indians
needed. You asked for help when you settled on your reserves during
the time you were planting. You asked very broadly at first. I
think the request you make now is reasonable to a certain extent;
but help should be given after you settle on the reserve for three
years only, for after that time you should have food of your own
raising, besides all the things that are given to you; this
assistance would only be given to those actually cultivating the
soil. Therefore, I would agree to give every spring, for three
years, the sum of one thousand dollars to assist you in buying
provisions while planting the ground. I do this because you seem
anxious to make a living for yourselves, it is more than has been
done anywhere else; I must do it on my own responsibility, and
trust to the other Queen's councillors to ratify it.

"I will now answer what you had written down and asked to-day. I
expect you to be reasonable, none of us get all our own way. You
asked first for four hoes, two spades, two scythes and whetstone,
two axes, two hay forks and two reaping hooks for every family. I
am willing to give them to every family actually cultivating the
soil, for if given to all it would only encourage idleness. You ask
a plough and harrow for every three families; I am willing to give
them on the same conditions. The carpenters' tools, as well as the
seed grain, were already promised. I cannot undertake the
responsibility of promising provision for the poor, blind and lame.
In all parts of the Queen's dominions we have them; the poor whites
have as much reason to be helped as the poor Indian; they must be
left to the charity and kind hearts of the people. If you are
prosperous yourselves you can help your unfortunate brothers.

"You ask for school teachers and ministers. With regard to
ministers I cannot interfere. There are large societies formed for
the purpose of sending the gospel to the Indians. The Government
does not provide ministers anywhere in Canada. I had already
promised you that when you settled down, and there were enough
children, schools would be maintained. You see missionaries here on
the ground, both Roman Catholic and Protestant; they have been in
the country for many years. As it has been in the past, so it will
be again, you will not be forgotten.

"The police force is here to prevent the selling or giving of
liquor to the Indians. The Queen has made a strong law against the
fire-water; and the councillors of the country have made a law
against the use of poison for animals.

"You can have no difficulty in choosing your reserves; be sure to
take a good place so that there will be no need to change; you
would not be held to your choice until it was surveyed.

"You want to be at liberty to hunt as before. I told you we did not
want to take that means of living from you, you have it the same as
before, only this, if a man, whether Indian or Half-breed, had a
good field of grain, you would not destroy it with your hunt. In
regard to bridges and scows on which you want passage free, I do
not think it likely that the Government will build any, they prefer
to leave it to private enterprise to provide these things.

"In case of war you ask not to be compelled to fight. I trust there
will be no war, but if it should occur I think the Queen would
leave you to yourselves. I am sure she would not ask her Indian
children to fight for her unless they wished, but if she did call
for them and their wives and children were in danger they are not
the men I think them to be, if they did not come forward to their
protection.

"A medicine chest will be kept at the house of each Indian agent,
in case of sickness amongst you. I now come to two requests
which I shall have to change a little, you have to think only of
yourselves, we have to think of all the Indians and of the way in
which we can procure the money to purchase all these things the
Indians require. The Queen's Councillors will have to pay every
year to help the Indians a very large sum of money.

"I offered you to each band, according to size, two or four oxen,
also one bull and four cows, and now you ask for an ox and a cow
for each family. I suppose in this treaty there will be six hundred
families, so it would take very much money to grant these things,
and then all the other Indians would want them, so we cannot do
it: but that you may see it that we are anxious to have you raise
animals of your own we will give you for each band four oxen, one
bull, six cows, one boar and two pigs. After a band has settled on
a reserve and commenced to raise grain, we will give them a
hand-mill.

"At first we heard of only two Chiefs, now they are becoming many.
You ask a cooking-stove for each, this we cannot give; he must find
a way of cooking for himself. And now, although I fear I am going
too far, I will grant the request that each Chief be furnished with
a horse, harness, and waggon.

"I have answered your requests very fully, and that there may be no
mistake as to what we agree upon, it will be written down, and I
will leave a copy with the two principal Chiefs, and as soon as it
can be properly printed I will send copies to the Chiefs so that
they may know what is written, and there can be no mistake.

"It now rests with you, my friends, and I ask you without any
hesitation to take what I have offered you."

AH-TUCK-AH-COOP--"I never sent a letter to the Governor; I was
waiting to meet him, and what we have asked we considered would be
for the benefit of our children. I am not like some of my friends
who have sent their messages down, even stretched out their hands
to the Queen asking her to come; I have always said to my people
that I would wait to see the Governor arrive, then he would ask
what would benefit his children; now I ask my people, those that
are in favour of the offer, to say so."

They all assented by holding up their hands and shouting.

OO-PEE-TOO-KORAH-HAIR-AP-EE-WEE-YIN (The Pond-maker)--"I do not
differ from my people, but I want more explanation. I heard what
you said yesterday, and I thought that when the law was established
in this country it would be for our good. From what I can hear and
see now, I cannot understand that I shall be able to clothe my
children and feed them as long as sun shines and water runs. With
regard to the different Chiefs who are to occupy the reserves, I
expected they would receive sufficient for their support, this is
why I speak. In the presence of God and the Queen's representative
I say this, because I do not know how to build a house for myself,
you see how naked I am, and if I tried to do it my naked body would
suffer; again, I do not know how to cultivate the ground for
myself, at the same time I quite understand what you have offered
to assist us in this."

JOSEPH THOMA proposed to speak for The Red Pheasant, Chief of
Battle River Indians--"This is not my own desire that I speak now,
it is very hard we cannot all be of one mind. You know some were
not present when the list of articles mentioned was made, there are
many things overlooked in it; it is true that what has been done
this morning is good. What has been overlooked I will speak about.
The one that is next to the Chief (first head man) should have had
a horse as well. I want the Governor to give us somebody to build
our houses, we cannot manage it ourselves, for my own part you see
my crippled hand. It is true the Governor says he takes the
responsibility on himself in granting the extra requests of the
Indians, but let him consider on the quality of the land he has
already treated for. There is no farming land whatever at the
north-west angle, and he goes by what he has down there. What I
want, as he has said, is twenty-five dollars to each Chief and to
his head men twenty dollars. I do not want to keep the lands nor do
I give away, but I have set the value. I want to ask as much as
will cover the skin of the people, no more nor less. I think what
he has offered is too little. When you spoke you mentioned
ammunition, I did not hear mention of a gun; we will not be able to
kill anything simply by setting fire to powder. I want a gun for
each Chief and head man, and I want ten miles around the reserve
where I may be settled. I have told the value I have put on my
land."

GOVERNOR--"I have heard what has been said on behalf of the Red
Pheasant. I find fault that when there was handed me a list from
the Indians, the Red Pheasant sat still and led me to believe he
was a party to it. What I have offered was thought of long before I
saw you; it has been accepted by others more in number than you
are. I am glad that so many are of our mind. I am surprised you are
not all. I hold out a full hand to you, and it will be a bad day
for you and your children if I have to return and say that the
Indians threw away my hand. I cannot accede to the requests of the
Red Pheasant. I have heard and considered the wants of Mist-ow-asis
and Ah-tuck-ah-coop, and when the people were spoken to I
understood they were pleased. As for the little band who are not of
one mind with the great body, I am quite sure that a week will not
pass on leaving this before they will regret it. I want the Indians
to understand that all that has been offered is a gift, and they
still have the same mode of living as before."

Here the principal Chiefs intimated the acceptance of the proposal
of the Commissioners, the Red Pheasant repudiating the demands and
remarks of Joseph Thoma.

GOVERNOR--"I am happy at what we have done; I know it has been a
good work; I know your hearts will be glad as the days pass. This
will be the fourth time that I have done what we are going to do
to-day. I thank you for your trust in me. I have had written down
what I promised. For the Queen and in her name I will sign it,
likewise Mr. McKay and Mr. Christie. Then I will ask the Chiefs and
their head men to sign it in the presence of the witnesses, whites
and Metis, around us, some of whom I will also ask to sign. What we
have done has been done before the Great Spirit and in the face of
the people.

"I will ask the interpreter to read to you what has been written,
and before I go away I will have a copy made to leave with the
principal Chiefs. The payments will be made to-morrow, the suits of
clothes, medals and flags given also, besides which a present of
calicoes, shirts, tobacco, pipes and other articles will be given
to the Indians."

MIS-TOW-ASIS--"I wish to speak a word for some Half-breeds who wish
to live on the reserves with us, they are as poor as we are and
need help."

GOVERNOR--"How many are there?"

MIS-TOW-ASIS--"About twenty."

GOVERNOR--"The Queen has been kind to the Half-breeds of Red River
and has given them much land; we did not come as messengers to the
Half-breeds, but to the Indians. I have heard some Half-breeds want
to take lands at Red River and join the Indians here, but they
cannot take with both hands. The Half-breeds of the North-West
cannot come into the Treaty. The small class of Half-breeds who
live as Indians and with the Indians, can be regarded as Indians by
the Commissioners, who will judge of each case on its own merits as
it comes up, and will report their action to the Queen's
Councillors for their approval."

The treaty was then signed by the Lieutenant-Governor, Hon. James
McKay, Hon. W. J. Christie, Mist-ow-asis, Ah-tuck-ah-coop, and the
remainder of the Chiefs and the Councillors.


August 24th.

Immediately on meeting at ten a.m., the Governor called up
Mis-tow-asis and Ah-tuck-ah-coop, the two principal Chiefs, and
presented their uniforms, medals and flags; after them the lesser
Chiefs, their medals and flags, and told them they and their
Councillors would get their uniforms in the evening from the
stores. The Governor then told them that Mr. Christie would
commence payments as soon as he had finished talking with the few
Saulteaux; he expected the Chiefs and Councillors to assist in
every way possible; if any of the Chiefs had decided where they
would like to have their reserves, they could tell Mr. Christie
when they went to be paid. "Now, I have only to say farewell; we
have done a good work; we will never all of us meet again face to
face, but I go on to my other work, feeling that I have, in the
Queen's hands, been instrumental to your good. I pray God's
blessing upon you to make you happy and prosperous, and I bid you
farewell."

The Indians intimated their pleasure by a general shout of
approval, and thus broke up the conference which resulted in the
Treaty with the Carlton Crees.

The Lieutenant-Governor then met the few Chippewas who came
forward, and told them that they must be paid at the place where
they belonged, that they could not be paid at Fort Pitt, and said,
"If what I have heard is true I shall not be well pleased. I am
told you are of a bad mind; you proposed to prevent me from
crossing the river; [Footnote: South Saskatchewan.] if you did it
was very foolish; you could no more stop me than you could the
river itself. Then I am told you tried to prevent the other Indians
from making the treaty. I tell you this to your faces so if it is
not true you can say so; but whether it is or not it makes no
difference in my duty. The Queen has made treaties with the whole
Chippewa nation except two or three little wandering bands such as
you; you have heard all that has been said and done these many
days; I would like to see you helped as well as the other Indians;
I do not think you are wiser than the Chippewas from Lake Superior
to the North-West Angle; I went there with Mr. McKay, and we made a
treaty with twenty Chiefs and four thousand Chippewas."

NUS-WAS-OO-WAH-TUM--"When we asked the Cree bands what they
intended to do with regard to the treaty they would not come to us;
it is true we told them 'do not be in a hurry in giving your
assent;' you ought to be detained a little while; all along the
prices have been to one side, and we have had no say. He that made
us provided everything for our mode of living; I have seen this all
along, it has brought me up and I am not tired of it, and for you,
the white man, everything has been made for your maintenance, and
now that you come and stand on this our earth (ground) I do not
understand; I see dimly to-day what you are doing, and I find fault
with a portion of it; that is why I stand back; I would have been
glad if every white man of every denomination were now present to
hear what I say; through what you have done you have cheated my
kinsmen."

GOVERNOR--"I will not sit here and hear such words from the
Chippewas. Who are you? You come from my country and you tell me
the Queen has cheated you; it is not so. You say we have the best
of the bargains; you know it is not so. If you have any requests to
make in a respectful manner I am ready to hear."

CHIPPEWA--"The God that made us and who alone is our master, I am
afraid of Him to deviate from his commandment."

The Chippewas, about half a dozen in all, being from Quill Lake
chiefly, left, and Mr. Christie proceeded with the payments, which
occupied the remainder of the 24th and all the 25th. He paid in
all, Chiefs, 13; head men, 44; men, 262; women, 473; boys, 473;
girls, 481; from Treaty Number Four, 41; total, 1,787. A large
number of the tribe absent at the hunt will be paid next year.

Next morning, the 26th, the whole Cree camp, headed by their Chiefs
and head men, wearing their uniforms and medals, came to Carlton
House and assembled in the square to pay their farewell visit to
the Governor; the Chiefs came forward in order and shook hands,
each one making a few remarks expressive of their gratitude for the
benefits received and promised, and of their good will to the white
man.

The Governor briefly replied, telling them that he was much
gratified with the manner in which they had behaved throughout the
treaty; he had never dealt with a quieter, more orderly and
respectful body of Indians; he was pleased with the manner in which
they had met him and taken his advice; he was glad to hear that
they were determined to go to work and help themselves: he hoped
their Councils would always be wisely conducted, and that they
would do everything in their power to maintain peace amongst
themselves and with their neighbors; he hoped the Almighty would
give them wisdom and prosper them. They then gave three cheers for
the Queen, the Governor, the mounted police and Mr. Lawrence
Clarke, of Carlton House.

On the 27th a message was received from Duck Lake from the Willow
Indians, the band which had hitherto held aloof, in reply to a
message sent to them by the Governor, that they would meet the
Governor and Commissioners at the place designated by the Governor,
the camp of the Hon. James McKay, about five miles from Carlton
House. Accordingly, the next morning the Commissioners met them,
and after the usual ceremonial hand-shaking,

SAY-SWAY-PUS--"God has given us a beautiful day for which I feel
very grateful. In grasping your hand I am grasping that of our
Mother, the Queen. If it is your intention to honor me with a
Chief's clothing, I wish you would give me one that would
correspond with the sky above. I hope we will be able to understand
each other."

CHIN-UN-US-KUT (The Stump)--"I feel very grateful that I am spared
by the Great Spirit to see this day of his, may we be blessed in
whatever we do this day."

GOVERNOR--"Crees, my brother children of the Great Queen, I am glad
to meet you here to-day. I say as you said the first day I saw you,
'it is a bright day and I hope God will bless us.' I have been
sorry for you for many days. I took you by the hand on the first
day, but a wall rose up between us, it seemed as if you were trying
to draw away but I would not let your hand go. I talked for many
days with the great body of the Indians here but you refused to
meet me; the others and I understood each other. I was going away
to-day, but I thought pity of you who had not talked with me. I was
sent here to make you understand the Queen's will. I received your
letter last night and was glad to learn that you wanted to accept
the terms I had offered, and which had been accepted by the other
Indians. Before I received your letter I had sent you one asking
you to meet me here where we are now, and I am glad you have come,
as I could not otherwise have met you.

"One of you made a request that if he were accepted as a Chief, he
should have a blue coat. I do not yet know who the Chiefs are. To
be a Chief he must have followers. One man came forward as a Chief
and I had to tell him unless you have twenty tents you cannot
continue as a Chief.

"The color of your Chief's coat is perhaps a little thing; red is
the color all the Queen's Chiefs wear. I wear this coat, but it is
only worn by those who stand as the Queen's Councillors; her
soldiers and her officers wear red, and all the other Chiefs of the
Queen wear the coats we have brought, and the good of this is that
when the Chief is seen with his uniform and medal every one knows
he is an officer of hers. I should be sorry to see you different
from the others, and now that you understand you would not wish
it."

KAH-MEE-YIS-TOO-WAYS (The Beardy)--"I feel grateful for this day,
and I hope we will be blessed. I am glad that I see something that
will be of use; I wish that we all as a people may be benefitted by
this. I want that all these things should be preserved in a manner
that they might be useful to us all; it is in the power of man to
help each other. We should not act foolishly with the things that
are given us to live by. I think some things are too little, they
will not be sufficient for our wants. I do not want very much more
than what has been promised, only a little thing. I will be glad
if you will help me by writing my request down; on account of the
buffalo I am getting anxious. I wish that each one should have an
equal share, if that could be managed; in this I think we would be
doing good. Perhaps this is not the only time that we shall see
each other. Now I suppose another can say what he wishes."

SAY-SWAY-KUS--"What my brother has said, I say the same, but I want
to tell him and our mother the Queen, that although we understand
the help they offer us, I am getting alarmed when I look at the
buffalo, it appears to me as if there was only one. I trust to the
Queen and to the Governor, it is only through their aid we can
manage to preserve them. I want to hear from the Governor himself
an answer to what I have said, so I may thoroughly understand."

THE BEARDY--"Those things which the Almighty has provided for the
sustenance of his children may be given us as well; where our
Father has placed the truth we wish the same to be carried out
here, I do not set up a barrier to any road that my children may
live by: I want the payment to exist as long as the sun shines and
the river runs: if we exercise all our good, this surely will
happen: all of our words upon which we agree, I wish to have a copy
written on skin as promised; I want my brother to tell me where I
can get this. He has said, 'what I have done with the others I will
do with you:' I accept the terms, no doubt it will run further
according to our number. When I am utterly unable to help myself I
want to receive assistance. I will render all the assistance I can
to my brother in taking care of the country. I want from my brother
a suit of clothing in color resembling the sky so that he may be
able when he sees me to know me; I want these two (sitting by him)
to be Chiefs in our place with me and to have six Councillors (two
each) in all."

GOVERNOR--"I will speak to you in regard to food as I have spoken
to the other Indians; we cannot support or feed the Indians every
day, further than to help them to find the means of doing it for
themselves by cultivating the soil. If you were to be regularly fed
some of you would do nothing at all for your own support; in this
matter we will do as we have agreed with the other Indians, and no
more. You will get your share of the one thousand dollars' worth of
provisions when you commence to work on your reserves.

"In a national famine or general sickness, not what happens in
every day life, but if a great blow comes on the Indians, they
would not be allowed to die like dogs.

"What occurred in Red River last year from the destruction of crops
by the grasshoppers, affected our whole people, and without being
bound to do anything, the charity and humanity of the Government
sent means to help them.

"I cannot give the Chief a blue coat: he must accept the red one
and he must not suffer so small a matter as the color of a coat to
stand between us. I accept the three Chiefs with two Councillors
for each. With regard to the preservation of the buffalo, it is a
subject of great importance, it will be considered by the
Lieutenant-Governor and Council of the North-West Territories to
see if a wise law can be passed, one that will be a living law that
can be carried out and obeyed. If such a law be passed it will be
printed in Cree as well as in English and French; but what the law
will be I cannot tell--you held councils over the treaty, you did
not know before the councils closed what you would decide as to the
treat--no more can I tell what the North-West Council will decide."

A request was then made that the treaty should include the
Half-breeds, to which the Governor replied: "I have explained to
the other Indians that the Commissioners did not come to the
Half-breeds: there were however a certain class of Indian
Half-breeds who had always lived in the camp with the Indians and
were in fact Indians, would be recognized, but no others."

The Chiefs and head men then signed the treaty in the presence of
witnesses, the medals and flags were distributed, payments and
distribution of clothing proceeded with and finished, and the
conference came to an end.

The Lieutenant-Governor and party started from Carlton House on the
31st of August at noon, for Fort Pitt, and when within about six
miles of that post came up with a detachment of Mounted Police
under Inspectors Jarvis and Walker, who escorted them to the fort,
arriving on the day appointed (5th September) at an early hour.

There were already assembled near the fort and on the banks of the
Saskatchewan over one hundred lodges, and as more were immediately
expected they requested postponement of negotiations until the 7th
September.

On the morning of the 6th, Sweet Grass, one of the oldest and most
respected of the Cree Chiefs, with about thirty of his chief men,
who had left their hunt and come in to Fort Pitt purposely to
attend the treaty negotiations, called on the Governor to express
their satisfaction at his coming and their pleasure in seeing him;
the greeting which was certainly affectionate, consisted in the
embrace of both arms about the neck and a fraternal kiss on either
cheek; after a short conversation the Governor told them he
expected them to be ready to meet him at his tent in the morning;
time was rapidly passing and he had a long journey yet before him;
he trusted their Councils would be wise and the results would be
beneficial to them.

The Hon. Jas. McKay arrived from Battle River in the evening, and
reported that he had met there a number of Indians, principally
Saulteaux, who had been in camp at that place for some time. They
said there had been about seventy lodges altogether, but as the
buffalo were coming near, the poorer ones had started out to hunt,
leaving only about ten lodges there. The remaining ones expressed
good feeling and said they would like to have waited until the time
appointed (September 15th) to meet the Governor and take the
treaty, yet as the buffalo hunt was of so much importance to them
they could not afford to lose the time, knowing that the Governor
had to go to Fort Pitt and return before they could see him,
consequently the whole band went out to the plains. This band was
composed, it was afterwards ascertained, of the Saulteaux of Jack
Fish Lake and of some Crees under the Yellow Sky Chief, and were
favorably disposed though unable to remain. They numbered in all
sixty-seven tents.

September 7th.

At ten in the morning the Governor and Commissioners, escorted by
the Mounted Police, proceeded to the treaty tent a short distance
from the fort. About eleven o'clock the Indians commenced to
gather, as at Carlton, in a large semi-circle. In front were the
young men, galloping about on their horses, then the Chiefs and
head men, followed by the main body of the band to the number of
two or three hundred. As they approached the manoeuvres of the
horsemen became more and more excited and daring, racing wildly
about so rapidly as to be barely distinguishable; unfortunately,
from some mischance, two horses and their riders came into
collision with such tremendous force as to throw both horses and
men violently to the ground; both horses were severely injured and
one of the Indians had his hip put out of joint; fortunately, Dr.
Kittson of the police, was near by and speedily gave relief to the
poor sufferer. The ceremonies, however, still went on; four
pipe-stems were carried about and presented to be stroked in token
of good feeling and amity (during this performance the band of the
Mounted Police played "God save the Queen"), blessings invoked on
the whole gathering, the dances performed by the various bands, and
finally the pipes of peace smoked by the Governor and Commissioners
in turn. The stems, which were finely decorated, were placed with
great solemnity on the table in front of the Governor, to be
covered for the bearers with blue cloth.

The Chiefs and head men now seated themselves in front of the tent,
when the Governor addressed them:

"Indians of the plains, Crees, Chippewayans, Assiniboines and
Chippewas, my message is to all. I am here to-day as your Governor
under the Queen. The Crees for many days have sent word that they
wanted to see some one face to face. The Crees are the principal
tribe of the plain Indians, and it is for me a pleasant duty to be
here to-day and receive the welcome I have from them. I am here
because the Queen and her Councillors have the good of the Indian
at heart, because you are the Queen's children and we must think of
you for to-day and to-morrow; the condition of the Indians and
their future has given the Queen's Councillors much anxiety. In the
old provinces of Canada from which I came we have many Indians,
they are growing in numbers and are as a rule happy and prosperous;
for a hundred years red and white hands have been clasped together
in peace. The instructions of the Queen are to treat the Indians as
brothers, and so we ought to be. The Great Spirit made this earth
we are on. He planted the trees and made the rivers flow for the
good of all his people, white and red; the country is very wide and
there is room for all. It is six years since the Queen took back
into her own hands the government of her subjects, red and white,
in this country; it was thought her Indian children would be better
cared for in her own hand. This is the seventh time in the last
five years that her Indian children have been called together for
this purpose; this is the fourth time that I have met my Indian
brothers, and standing here on this bright day with the sun above
us, I cast my eyes to the East down to the great lakes and I see a
broad road leading from there to the Red River, I see it stretching
on to Ellice, I see it branching there, the one to Qu'Appelle and
Cypress Hills, the other by Pelly to Carlton; it is a wide and
plain trail. Anyone can see it, and on that road, taking for the
Queen, the hand of the Governor and Commissioners I see all the
Indians. I see the Queen's Councillors taking the Indian by the
hand saying we are brothers, we will lift you up, we will teach
you, if you will learn, the cunning of the white man. All along
that road I see Indians gathering, I see gardens growing and houses
building; I see them receiving money from the Queen's Commissioners
to purchase clothing for their children; at the same time I see
them enjoying their hunting and fishing as before, I see them
retaining their old mode of living with the Queen's gift in
addition.

"I met the Crees at Carlton, they heard my words there, they read
my face, and through that my heart, and said my words were true,
and they took my hand on behalf of the Queen. What they did I wish
you to do; I wish you to travel on the road I have spoken of, a
road I see stretching out broad and plain to the Rocky Mountains. I
know you have been told many stories, some of them not true; do not
listen to the bad voices of men who have their own ends to serve,
listen rather to those who have only your good at heart. I have
come a long way to meet you; last year I sent you a message that
you would be met this year, and I do not forget my promises.

"I went to Ottawa, where the Queen's Councillors have their council
chamber, to talk, amongst other things, about you.

"I have come seven hundred miles to see you. Why should I take all
this trouble? For two reasons, first, the duty was put upon me as
one of the Queen's Councillors, to see you with my brother
Commissioners, Hon. W. J. Christie and Hon. Jas. McKay. The other
reason is a personal one, because since I was a young man my heart
was warm to the Indians, and I have taken a great interest in them;
for more than twenty-five years I have studied their condition in
the present and in the future. I have been many years in public
life, but the first words I spoke in public were for the Indians,
and in that vision of the day I saw the Queen's white men
understanding their duty; I saw them understanding that they had no
right to wrap themselves up in a cold mantle of selfishness, that
they had no right to turn away and say, 'Am I my brother's keeper?'
On the contrary, I saw them saying, the Indians are our brothers,
we must try to help them to make a living for themselves and their
children. I tell you, you must think of those who will come after
you. As I came here I saw tracks leading to the lakes and
water-courses, once well beaten, now grown over with grass; I saw
bones bleaching by the wayside; I saw the places where the buffalo
had been, and I thought what will become of the Indian. I said to
myself, we must teach the children to prepare for the future; if we
do not, but a few suns will pass and they will melt away like snow
before the sun in spring-time. You know my words are true; you see
for yourselves and know that your numbers are lessening every year.
Now the whole burden of my message from the Queen is that we wish
to help you in the days that are to come, we do not want to take
away the means of living that you have now, we do not want to tie
you down; we want you to have homes of your own where your children
can be taught to raise for themselves food from the mother earth.
You may not all be ready for that, but some, I have no doubt, are,
and in a short time others will follow. I am here to talk plainly,
I have nothing to hide; I am here to tell you what we are ready to
do. Your tribe is not all here at the present time, some of the
principal Chiefs are absent, this cannot be avoided, the country is
wide and when the buffalo come near you must follow them; this does
not matter, for what I have to give is for the absent as well as
for the present. Next year if the treaty is made, a Commissioner
will be sent to you, and you will be notified of the times and
places of meeting, so that you will not have long journeys; after
that, two or three servants of the Queen will be appointed to live
in the country to look after the Indians, and see that the terms of
the treaty are carried out.

"I have not yet given you my message. I know you have heard what
your brothers did at Carlton, and I expect you to do the same here,
for if you do not you will be the first Indians who refused to take
my hand. At Carlton I had a slight difficulty; one of the Chiefs
dreamt that instead of making the treaty at the camp of the great
body of the Indians, I made it at his, and so his people stood
aside. I was sorry for him and his people. I did not wish to go and
leave them out. I sent him word after I had made the treaty, and
brought him in with the others. When I went to North-West Angle I
met the Chippewa nation; they were not all present, but the absent
ones were seen the next year. I told them the message from the
Queen, and what she wished to do for them; in all four thousand
Indians accepted the Treaty, and now, I am glad to say, many of
them have homes and gardens of their own. The next year I went to
Qu'Appelle and saw the Crees and Chippewas, and there five thousand
understood us and took our hands. Last summer I went with Mr. McKay
to Lake Winnipeg, and there all the Swampy Crees accepted the
Queen's terms. Now I have stroked the pipe with your brothers at
Carlton as with you.

"Three years ago a party of Assiniboines were shot by American
traders; men, women and children were killed; we reported the
affair to Ottawa; we said the time has come when you must send the
red-coated servants of the Queen to the North-West to protect the
Indian from fire-water, from being shot down by men who know no
law, to preserve peace between the Indians, to punish all who break
the law, to prevent whites from doing wrong to Indians, and they
are here to-day to do honor to the office which I hold. Our Indian
Chiefs wear red coats, and wherever they meet the police they will
know they meet friends. I know that you have been told that if war
came you would be put in the front, this is not so. Your brothers
at Carlton asked me that they might not be forced to fight, and I
tell you, as I assured them, you will never be asked to fight
against your will; and I trust the time will never come of war
between the Queen and the great country near us.

"Again, I say, all we seek is your good; I speak openly, as brother
to brother, as a father to his children, and I would give you a
last advice, hear my words, come and join the great band of Indians
who are walking hand-in-hand with us on the road I spoke of when I
began--a road, I believe in my heart, will lead the Indian on to a
much more comfortable state than he is in now. My words, when they
are accepted, are written down, and they last, as I have said to
the others, as long as the sun shines and the river runs. I expect
you are prepared for the message I have to deliver, and I will wait
to see if any of the Chiefs wish to speak before I go further."

Sweet Grass, the principal Cree Chief, rose, and taking the
Governor by the hand, said, "We have heard what the Governor has
said, and now the Indians want to hear the terms of the treaty,
after which they will all shake hands with the Governor and
Commissioners, we then want to go to our camp to meet in council."

The Governor then very carefully and distinctly explained the terms
and promises of the treaty as made at Carlton; this was received by
the Indians with loud assenting exclamations.

On the 8th the Indians sent a message that they required further
time for deliberation, and the meeting was put off until the 9th.

On the morning of the 9th the Indians were slow in gathering, as
they wished to settle all difficulties and misunderstandings
amongst themselves before coming to the treaty tent, this was
apparently accomplished about eleven a.m., when the whole body
approached and seated themselves in good order, when the Governor
said:--

"Indian children of the Great Queen, we meet again on a bright day;
you heard many words from me the other day; I delivered you my
message from the Queen; I held out my hand in the Queen's name,
full of her bounty. You asked time to consult together; I gave it
to you very gladly, because I did not come here to surprise you. I
trust the Great Spirit has put good thoughts into your hearts, and
your wise men have found my words good. I am now ready to hear
whether you are prepared to do as the great body of the Indian
people have done; it is now for the Indians to speak through those
whom they may choose; my heart is warm to you, and my ears are
open."

Ku-ye-win (The Eagle) addressed the Indians, telling them not to be
afraid, that the Governor was to them as a brother; that what the
Queen wished to establish through him was for their good, and if
any of them wished to speak to do so.

After waiting some time the Governor said, "I had hoped the Indians
would have taken me at my word, and taken me as a brother and a
friend. True, I am the Queen's Governor; that I am here to-day
shows me to be your friend. Why can you not open your hearts to me?
I have met many Indians before, but this is the first time I have
had all the talking to do myself. Now, cast everything behind your
backs, and speak to me face to face. I have offered as we have done
to the other Indians. Tell me now whether you will take my hand and
accept it; there is nothing to be ashamed of, nothing to be afraid
of; think of the good of your children and your children's
children. Stand up now like wise men and tell me if you will take
what I offered. I cannot believe it to be possible that you would
throw my hand back. Speak and do not be afraid or ashamed."

WEE-KAS-KOO-KEE-SAY-YIN (Sweet Grass)--"I thank you for this day,
and also I thank you for what I have seen and heard, I also thank
the Queen for sending you to act for our good. I am glad to have a
brother and friend in you, which undoubtedly will raise us above
our present condition. I am glad for your offers, and thank you
from my heart. I speak this in the presence of the Divine Being. It
is all for our good, I see nothing to be afraid of, I therefore
accept of it gladly and take your hand to my heart, may this
continue as long as this earth stands and the river flows. The
Great King, our Father, is now looking upon us this day, He regards
all the people equal with one another; He has mercy on the whole
earth; He has opened a new world to us. I have pity on all those
who have to live by the buffalo. If I am spared until this time
next year I want this my brother to commence to act for me,
thinking thereby that the buffalo may be protected. It is for that
reason I give you my hand. If spared, I shall commence at once to
clear a small piece of land for myself, and others of my kinsmen
will do the same. We will commence hand in hand to protect the
buffalo. When I hold your hand I feel as if the Great Father were
looking on us both as brothers. I am thankful. May this earth here
never see the white man's blood spilt on it. I thank God that we
stand together, that you all see us; I am thankful that I can raise
up my head, and the white man and red man can stand together as
long as the sun shines. When I hold your hands and touch your
heart, as I do now (suiting his action to the words), let us be as
one. Use your utmost to help me and help my children, so that they
may prosper."

The Chief's remarks were assented to by the Indians by loud
ejaculations.

GOVERNOR--"I rise with a glad heart; we have come together and
understood each other. I am glad that you have seen the right way.
I am glad you have accepted so unanimously the offer made. I will
tell the Queen's Councillors what good hearts their Indian children
have; I will tell them that they think of the good of their
children's children.

"I feel that we have done to-day a good work; the years will pass
away and we with them, but the work we have done to-day will stand
as the hills. What we have said and done has been written down; my
promises at Carlton have been written down and cannot be rubbed
out, so there can be no mistake about what is agreed upon. I will
now have the terms of the treaty fully read and explained to you,
and before I go away I will leave a copy with your principal Chief.

"After I and the Commissioners, for the Queen, have signed the
treaty, I will call upon your Chief and Councillors to do the same;
and before the payments are made by Mr. Christie, I will give the
Chiefs the medals of the Queen and their flags.

"Some of your Chiefs and people are away; next year we will send
men near to where their bands live, notice will be given, and those
who are away now will receive the present of money we are going to
give you, the same as if they had been here, and when you go back
to the plains I ask you to tell your brothers what we have done."

The Governor and Commissioners then signed the treaty on the part
of the Queen, and nine Chiefs and as many of their Councillors as
were with them signed on behalf of the Indians.

James Seenum, Chief of White Fish Lake Crees, said that when he
commenced to cultivate the soil some years ago, Mr. Christie, then
chief factor of the Hudson Bay Company, gave him a plough that he
had used but it was now broken. When he commenced he and his
brothers drew the plough themselves, and they pulled up roots and
used them for hoes. Mr. Christie also gave me a pit-saw and a
grindstone, and I am using them yet. I feel my heart sore in the
spring when my children want to plough--when they have no
implements to use, that is why I am asking them now to have them
sent as soon as possible. By following what I have been taught I
find it helps me a great deal.

THE LITTLE HUNTER--"I am here alone just now; if I am spared to see
next spring, then I will select my Councillors, those that I think
worthy I will choose. I am glad from my very heart. I feel in
taking the Governor's hand as if I was taking the Queen's. When I
hear her words that she is going to put to rights this country, it
is the help of God that has put it in her heart to come to our
assistance. In sending her bounty to us I wish an everlasting grasp
of her hand, as long as the sun moves and the river flows. I am
glad that the truth and all good things have been opened to us. I
am thankful for the children for they will prosper. All the
children who are sitting here hope that the Great Spirit will look
down upon us as one."

SEE-KAHS-KOOTCH (The Cut Arm)--"I am glad of the goodness of the
great Queen. I recognize now that this that I once dreaded most is
coming to my aid and doing for me what I could not do for myself."

TUS-TUK-EE-SKUAIS--"I am truly glad that the Queen has made a new
country for me. I am glad that all my friends and children will not
be in want of food hereafter. I am glad that we have everything
which we had before still extended to us."

PEE-QUAY-SIS--"I need not say anything; I have been well pleased
with all that I have heard, and I need not speak as we are all
agreed."

KIN-OO-SAY-OO (The Fish), Chief of the Chippewayans--"I shake hands
with the Queen, and I am glad for what she is doing and what she is
to do for us. If I could have used my own language I would then be
able to say more."

The Governor then called on Sweet Grass and placed the Queen's
medal around his neck, the band of the Police playing "God save the
Queen." The rest of the Chiefs' medals, flags and uniforms were
given as soon as possible, and Mr. Christie proceeded to make the
payments and distribute the presents.


September 13th.

The Chiefs and head men came to pay their respects to the
Commissioners in the morning, at Fort Pitt.

SWEET GRASS--"We are all glad to see you here, and we have come to
say good-bye before you leave."

THE BIG BEAR--"I find it difficult to express myself, because some
of the bands are not represented. I have come off to speak for the
different bands that are out on the plains. It is no small matter
we were to consult about. I expected the Chiefs here would have
waited until I arrived. The different bands that are out on the
plains told me that I should speak in their stead; the Stony
Indians as well. The people who have not come, stand as a barrier
before what I would have had to say; my mode of living is hard."

SWEET GRASS, to Big Bear--"My friend, you see the representative of
the Queen here, who do you suppose is the maker of it. I think the
Great Spirit put it into their hearts to come to our help; I feel
as if I saw life when I see the representative of the Queen; let
nothing be a barrier between you and him; it is through great
difficulty this has been brought to us. Think of our children and
those to come after, there is life and succor for them, say yes and
take his hand."

The White Fish Lake Chief said, "We have all taken it, and we think
it is for our good."

BIG BEAR--"Stop, stop, my friends, I have never seen the Governor
before; I have seen Mr. Christie many times. I heard the Governor
was to come and I said I shall see him; when I see him I will make
a request that he will save me from what I most dread, that is: the
rope to be about my neck (hanging), it was not given to us by the
Great Spirit that the red man or white man should shed each other's
blood."

GOVERNOR--"It was given us by the Great Spirit, man should not shed
his brother's blood, and it was spoken to us that he who shed his
brother's blood, should have his own spilt.

"No good Indian has the rope about his neck. If a white man killed
an Indian, not in self defence, the rope would be put around his
neck. He saw red-coats, they were here to protect Indians and
whites.

"If a man tried to kill you, you have a right to defend; but no man
has a right to kill another in cold blood, and we will do all we
can to punish such. The good Indian need never be afraid; their
lives will be safer than ever before. Look at the condition of the
Blackfeet. Before the red-coats went, the Americans were taking
their furs and robes and giving them whiskey--we stopped it, they
have been able to buy back two thousand horses--before that, robes
would have gone to Americans for whiskey."

BIG BEAR--"What we want is that we should hear what will make our
hearts glad, and all good peoples' hearts glad. There were plenty
things left undone, and it does not look well to leave them so."

GOVERNOR--"I do not know what has been left undone!"

BIG BEAR said he would like to see his people before he acted. "I
have told you what I wish, that there be no hanging."

GOVERNOR--"What you ask will not be granted, why are you so anxious
about bad men?

"The Queen's law punishes murder with death, and your request
cannot be granted."

BIG BEAR--"Then these Chiefs will help us to protect the buffalo,
that there may be enough for all. I have heard what has been said,
and I am glad we are to be helped; but why do these men not speak?"

The Chief of the Chippewayans said, "We do not speak, because Sweet
Grass has spoken for us all. What he says, we all say."

GOVERNOR--"I wish the Bear to tell Short Tail and See-yah-kee-maht,
the other Chiefs, what has been done, and that it is for them, as
if they had been here. Next year they and their people can join the
treaty and they will lose nothing. I wish you to understand fully
about two questions, and tell the others. The North-West Council is
considering the framing of a law to protect the buffaloes, and when
they make it, they will expect the Indians to obey it. The
Government will not interfere with the Indian's daily life, they
will not bind him. They will only help him to make a living on the
reserves, by giving him the means of growing from the soil, his
food. The only occasion when help would be given, would be if
Providence should send a great famine or pestilence upon the whole
Indian people included in the treaty. We only looked at something
unforseen and not at hard winters or the hardships of single bands,
and this, both you and I, fully understood.

"And now I have done, I am going away. The country is large,
another Governor will be sent in my place; I trust you will receive
him as you have done me, and give him your confidence. He will live
amongst you. Indians of the plains, I bid you farewell. I never
expect to see you again, face to face. I rejoice that you listened
to me, and when I go back to my home beyond the great lakes, I will
often think of you and will rejoice to hear of your prosperity. I
ask God to bless you and your children. Farewell."

The Indians responded by loud ejaculations of satisfaction, and the
Chiefs and Councillors, commencing with Sweet Grass, each shook
hands with the Governor, and addressed him in words of parting,
elevating his hand, as they grasped it, to heaven, and invoking the
blessings of the Great Spirit.

The Bear remained sitting until all had said good-bye to the
Governor, and then he rose and taking his hand, said, "I am glad to
meet you, I am alone; but if I had known the time, I would have
been here with all my people. I am not an undutiful child, I do not
throw back your hand; but as my people are not here, I do not sign.
I will tell them what I have heard, and next year I will come."
About an hour afterwards the Big Bear came to the Fort Pitt House
to see the Governor, and again repeated that he accepted the treaty
as if he had signed it, and would come next year, with all his
people, to meet the Commissioners and accept it.

The Governor and party left Fort Pitt for Battle River, on the 13th
at one o'clock, and arrived there on the 15th. There were no
Indians there, except the Red Pheasant's band, who had been treated
with at Battle River.

On the 16th the Red Pheasant and his Councillors came to see the
Governor and the Commissioners, with the following result:

THE RED PHEASANT--"I am a Battle River Indian, and I have chosen
this place before, and I am glad to see the Government here too, as
I know there is a chance of living. I want the Half-breed claims at
Battle River to be respected, and I do not wish to turn out any
white man; but I wish to return to my former mode of life.

"Ever since my grandfather lived at Battle River, it has been my
home. Our houses were swept off by a flood two years ago, and after
that we repaired some old houses that were built by outsiders
(other Indians), and we had fenced in the buildings; but a short
time ago some Canadians arrived, knocked down the fences, and built
inside the enclosure."

WAH-TAH-NEE--"We had chosen a point about a mile from the spot
where we are now speaking, and got out logs for fences and houses,
and when we returned from the plains we found they had all been
taken away. There are now twenty families, and ten more to come in
from the plains.

"We wish to be remembered to the Queen, and we are thankful to see
the Queen's soldiers coming to make their homes on the land that we
have been brought up on. I hope that the Queen will look upon our
poverty when she hears that we are poor Indians and have welcomed
her people to live amongst us. This is my country where I have
lived. I want to make way for the Queen's men, and I ask her in
return to keep me from want. Next spring I want to plant here,
wherever I can get a piece of ground. By that time I may have
selected a spot for my reserve. The reason I want to select my
reserve is, that I do not want to be cramped up by settlers. In the
meantime I do not want any white men to settle on the Eagle Hills.

"When I see that we are numerous, it will be the Eagle Hills I will
select as our reserve, although I am very reluctant to leave the
place I have been brought up on. If I see that we are not likely to
be numerous, I may select some other place across the Saskatchewan
River. This man, Peter Ballendine, knows that it is not because
settlers are coming here that we speak of this place, Battle River,
but because we were here from of old. I wish that the Governor
should give us some advice to think over during the winter."

GOVERNOR--"I am glad to give you a word of advice. Next summer,
Commissioners will come to make payments here, so that you may not
have so far to go, and also that other Indians we have not seen,
should come here also, to whom it may be convenient, and I hope
that then you will be able to talk with them where you want your
reserve. I will speak to you frankly, as if I was talking to my own
children; the sooner you select a place for your reserve the
better, so that you can have the animals and agricultural
implements promised to you, and so that you may have the increase
from the animals, and the tools to help you build houses, &c. When
you are away hunting and fishing, the heat of the sun and the rain
is making your crops to grow. I think you are showing wisdom in
taking a place away from here, although it has been your home. It
is better for the Indian to be away a little piece from the white
man. You will be near enough to bring your furs to a good market,
and by and by I hope you will have more potatoes than you require,
and have some to dispose of. I am very anxious that you should
think over this, and be able to tell the Commissioner next year
where you want your reserve.

"I have asked Mr. Fuller to let you have three acres of land to
plant your potatoes next spring, and he has replied that he will be
very happy to let you do so, and to plough it for you as well, in
the field he has enclosed.

"I am much pleased with the conduct of the Battle River Crees, and
will report it to the Queen's Councillors. I hope you will be
prosperous and happy."

This closed the interview.

The Commissioners left Battle River on the 19th of September. The
Lieutenant-Governor arrived at Fort Garry on the 6th of October.



CHAPTER X

TREATY NUMBER SEVEN; OR THE BLACKFEET TREATY


The making of this treaty, which completed the series of treaties,
extending from Lake Superior to the slopes of the Rocky Mountains,
was entrusted, by the Privy Council, to the Hon. David Laird (who,
after the effecting of the Carlton and Fort Pitt Treaties, had, in
1876, been appointed Lieutenant-Governor of the North-West
Territories, subsequently to the erection of these territories into
a distinct Government) and Lieut.-Col. McLeod, of the Mounted
Police Force. The necessity which had arisen for making the treaty
is thus stated by the Hon. the Minister of the Interior, the Hon.
David Mills, in his Annual Report for 1877:

"The conclusion, in 1876, of the treaty with the Crees, Assiniboine
and Saulteaux Indians (being the sixth of the series of treaties up
to that time negotiated with the Indians of the North-West) left
but a small portion of the territory lying between the boundary
line and the 54th parallel of latitude unsurrendered.

"The unsurrendered portion of the territory, including about fifty
thousand square miles, lies at the south-west angle of the
territories, north of the boundary line, east of the Rocky
Mountains, south of Red River (Treaty Number Six) and west of the
Cypress Hills, or Treaty Number Four. This portion of the
North-West is occupied by the Blackfeet, Blood, and Sarcees or
Piegan Indians, some of the most warlike and intelligent but
intractable bands of the North-West. These bands have for years
past been anxiously expecting to be treated with, and have been
much disappointed at the delay of negotiations.

"In last year's report I stated that His Honor Lieut.-Gov. Morris,
very strongly recommended that no further delay should take place
in entering into negotiations with these Indians. His Honor
reported, in effect, "that there was a general consent of opinion
amongst the missionaries settled in that territory, and others who
are acquainted with these Indians, as to the desirableness of
having such a treaty made at the earliest possible date, with a
view to preserving the present friendly disposition of these
tribes, which might easily give place to feelings of an unfriendly
or hostile nature, should the treaty negotiations be much longer
delayed."

"In view of these facts, and in order to satisfy these important
tribes, and to prevent the difficulties which might hereafter arise
through the settlement of whites, who are already flocking into
Fort McLeod and other portions of this territory, Your Excellency
decided that these Indians should be treated with this year, and
the Indians were notified accordingly.

"His Honor Mr. Laird, the Lieutenant-Governor of the North-West
Territories, and Lieut.-Col. James F. McLeod, C.M.G., were selected
by Your Excellency to negotiate the treaty. The former of these
gentlemen, had assisted in 1874 in negotiating Treaty Number Four,
with the Cree and Saulteaux Indians, and the latter, during his
residence for some years past at Fort McLeod, as Commandant of the
Mounted Police Force, had acquired the entire confidence and good
will of the Indian tribes proposed to be dealt with."

Besides all this, the Chiefs of the Blackfeet, in 1876, sent to the
Lieutenant-Governor of the North-West Territories, a letter, with
regard to a treaty, and also by a messenger, in whom they had
confidence, a message, to a similar effect. The Blackfeet Indians
are a bold and warlike race. When the Sioux war with the United
States was about being initiated, the Sioux invited them to join in
the war, but they promptly refused. They are unlikely to become
farmers, but as the country they inhabit presents unusual
facilities for that industry, they may be induced to adopt a
pastoral life. They already possess large herds of horses, and may
be taught to raise cattle also.

I requested the Rev. C. Scollen, who had for many years been a
missionary among the Plain Crees, and latterly, for several years,
among the Blackfeet, to make a report to me of the character,
habits and condition of this nation, with which request he
willingly complied. I now give place to this report, which gives a
vivid view of the character of this bold and warlike race, and
shews the benefits they had, so far back as 1876, derived from the
presence of the Mounted Police, the prohibition of liquor, and the
establishment of law and order in the North-West Territories, under
Canadian rule. I may here remark, that another great benefit has
resulted from the judicious steps taken by the Canadian Government,
and that is the cessation of warfare between the various tribes,
which was before of constant occurrence. An intelligent Ojibbeway
Indian trader told me, that the change was wonderful. "Before," he
said, "the Queen's Government came, we were never safe, and now,"
he said, "I can sleep in my tent anywhere, and have no fear. I can
go to the Blackfeet, and Cree camps, and they treat me as a
friend." The report of Mr. Scollen is as follows:

FORT PITT, September 8th, 1876.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR OF MANITOBA.

EXCELLENT GOVERNOR,--Having had some years of experience as a
missionary amongst the Cree and Blackfeet Indians of the North-West
Territory, I humbly undertake to submit to your consideration a few
details regarding the latter tribe of Her Majesty's Indian
subjects. I do this with all the more confidence as the successful
way in which you conducted the treaty with the Carlton Indians (a
treaty including no small difficulties), has convinced me of your
thorough knowledge of the character of this people. But, although
the general character of all the tribes may be nearly the same, yet
in their social dispositions they sometimes materially differ, and
this, I think, will be found to be the case with the Crees and
Blackfeet when compared on that point. The Crees have always looked
upon the white man as a friend, or, to use their own language, as a
brother. They have never been afraid of him, nor have they given
him any cause to be afraid of them. The Blackfeet have acted
somewhat differently; they have regarded the white man as a
demi-god, far superior to themselves in intelligence, capable of
doing them good or evil, according as he might be well or ill
disposed towards them, unscrupulous in his dealings with others,
and consequently a person to be flattered, feared and shunned, and
even injured, whenever this could be done with impunity. I am not
now describing the Blackfeet of the present day, but those of
fifteen years ago, when I first saw them. They were then a proud,
haughty, numerous people (perhaps ten thousand on the British side
of the line), having a regular politico-religious organization by
which their thirst for blood and their other barbarous passions
were constantly fired to the highest pitch of frenzy. Since that
time their number has decreased to less than one half, and their
systematic organizations have fallen into decay; in fact they have
been utterly demoralized as a people. This sudden decadence was
brought on by two causes: 1. About ten years ago the Americans
crossed the line and established themselves on Pelly River, where
they carried on to an extraordinary extent the illicit traffic in
intoxicating liquor to the Blackfeet. The fiery water flowed as
freely, if I may use the metaphor, as the streams running from the
Rocky Mountains, and hundreds of the poor Indians fell victims to
the white man's craving for money, some poisoned, some frozen to
death whilst in a state of intoxication, and many shot down by
American bullets. 2. Then in 1870 came that disease so fatal to
Indians, the small-pox which told upon the Blackfeet with terrible
effect, destroying between six hundred and eight hundred of them.
Surviving relatives went more and more for the use of alcohol; they
endeavoured to drown their grief in the poisonous beverage. They
sold their robes and their horses by the hundred for it, and now
they began killing one another, so that in a short time they were
divided into several small parties, afraid to meet. Fortunately for
them the Government were aware of the state of affairs in the
country and did not remain indifferent to it; and, as I have heard
yourself explain to the Indians, Her Gracious Majesty has at heart
the welfare of even the most obscure of her subjects. In the summer
of 1874, I was travelling amongst the Blackfeet. It was painful to
me to see the state of poverty to which they had been reduced.
Formerly they had been the most opulent Indians in the country, and
now they were clothed in rags, without horses and without guns. But
this was the year of their salvation; that very summer the Mounted
Police were struggling against the difficulties of a long journey
across the barren plains in order to bring them help. This noble
corps reached their destination that same fall, and with magic
effect put an entire stop to the abominable traffic of whiskey with
the Indians. Since that time the Blackfeet Indians are becoming
more and more prosperous. They are now well clothed and well
furnished with horses and guns. During the last two years I have
calculated that they have bought two thousand horses to replace
those they had given for whiskey. They are forced to acknowledge
that the arrival of the Red Coats has been to them the greatest
boon. But, although they are externally so friendly to the Police
and other strangers who now inhabit their country, yet underneath
this friendship remains hidden some of that dread which they have
always had of the white man's intention to cheat them; and here,
excellent Governor, I will state my reasons for believing that a
treaty should be concluded with them also at the earliest possible
date.

1st. The Blackfeet are extremely jealous of what they consider
their country, and never allowed any white men, Half-breeds, or
Crees to remain in it for any length of time; the only reason that
they never drove the Americans off, apart from their love for
whiskey, was their dread of the Henri rifle.

2nd. They have an awful dread of the future. They think that the
Police are in the country not only to keep out whiskey traders, but
also to protect white people against them, and that this country
will be gradually taken from them without any ceremony. This I can
certify, for although they may not say so to others yet they do not
hide it from me.

3rd. Numbers of people are settling around Fort McLeod and Fort
Calgary in order to farm, raise stock, etc. This will probably
drive the buffalo away through time from the ordinary hunting
grounds, and if so, the Blackfeet, being the most helpless Indians
in the country, and unaccustomed to anything else but hunting
buffalo, would suffer extremely.

4th. The settlers also are anxious that a treaty be made as soon as
possible, so that they may know what portions of land they can hold
without fear of being molested.

5th. The Blackfeet themselves are expecting to have a mutual
understanding with the Government, because they have been told of
it by several persons, and namely by Gen. Smythe last year.

Such are the principal reasons which occur to my mind for making a
treaty with the Blackfeet. It remains for you, excellent Governor,
to weigh their value. Of course you would find the same prejudices
amongst the Blackfeet that you have found amongst the Crees, but
you would have no greater difficulty in dispelling them. You would
have four clans to treat with, viz.: the Blackfeet, Bloods, and
Piegans, all of the same tribe, and the Sarcees, a branch of the
Peace River Indians called Beavers. As to the place of rendezvous
there would be no difficulty whatever; the Blackfeet live in large
camps under their respective Chiefs, and could go to any point
after due notice.

It remains for me now, excellent Governor, to beg you to excuse the
many defects of this communication, and to accept the assurance of
sincere esteem and profound respect of

                Your most humble servant,
                        CONSTANTINE SCOLLEN,
                                Priest, O.U.I.

P.S.--I am also aware that the Sioux Indians, now at war with the
Americans, have sent a message to the Blackfeet tribe, asking them
to make an alliance offensive and defensive against all white
people in the country.

C. SCOLLEN.

In order to effect a treaty, Lieut.-Gov. Laird, and Lieut.-Col.
James F. McLeod, met the Blackfeet, at the Blackfoot crossing, on
the Bow River on the 17th day of September, 1877, which day had
been selected for the time of meeting. Gov. Laird proceeded from
the temporary seat of the Government of the North-West Territories
at Swan River, and Col. McLeod from Fort McLeod, the head quarters
of the Mounted Police, to the appointed rendezvous.

The Commissioners met the Indians on that day, and after five days
of tedious negotiations, the treaty was satisfactorily concluded,
and signed by the Chiefs and head men present.

The total number of the Indians, represented at the making of the
treaty, and who were paid the gratuity under it, was four thousand
three hundred and ninety-two. The terms of the treaty, were
substantially the same as those contained in the North-West Angle
and Qu'Appelle treaties, except that as some of the bands were
disposed to engage in pastoral pursuits, it was arranged to give
them cattle instead of agricultural implements. The Minister of the
Interior well observes in his report "that the conclusion of this
treaty with these warlike and intractable tribes, at a time when
the Indian tribes, immediately across the border, were engaged in
open hostilities with the United States troops, is certainly a
conclusive proof of the just policy of the Government of Canada
toward the aboriginal population," and, I add, of the confidence of
the Indians in the promises and just dealing of the servants of the
British Crown, in Canada, a confidence that can only be kept up by
the strictest observance of the stipulations of the treaties.

I now append the interesting despatch of Lieut.-Gov. Laird, giving
a detailed account of the negotiation of the treaty, and a report
of the speeches of the Commissioners and Indians, extracted from a
report in the Globe newspaper, dated October 4th, 1877, which,
though not authentic, I believe, gives a general view of what
passed during the negotiations.

                GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
           BATTLEFORD, NORTH-WEST TERRITORY.

Sir,--I have the honor to inform you that on the 4th August I
received at Swan River your telegram dated on the first of that
month.

It notified me that a Commission appointing Lieut.-Col. James F.
McLeod, C.M.G., and myself, Commissioners to negotiate a treaty
with the Blackfeet and other Indians of the unsurrendered parts of
the North-West Territories adjoining the United States boundary,
had been forwarded to Fort McLeod.

I immediately made preparations for the journey. These occupied me
a week, as arrangements had to be made for the removal of furniture
and other property to Battle River, where the Government House for
the territories, in course of construction, would probably be ready
for occupation on my return from the treaty negotiations. On the
11th August I left Swan River for Fort McLeod, via Battleford,
proposing to go from the latter place by Cypress Hills to my
destination. I took the Quill Lake trail and came to the telegraph
line, about four miles from Big Stone Lake. Thence I followed
that line until I came to the trail at the elbow of the North
Saskatchewan leading to Battle River. Where the telegraph crosses
the South Saskatchewan I found an excellent ferry scow, and a
ferryman placed there by the Public Works Department. I arrived at
the ferry about noon on the 20th, and though a high wind rendered
it difficult to manage the scow, the horses, with the vehicles and
their contents, were safely ferried before sunset. On the following
evening I reached the Elbow, and the morning thereafter before
leaving camp, Inspector Walker, of Battleford, drove up, on his
way to Carlton, to arrange for the distribution of certain of the
articles intended for the Indians of Treaty Number Six, which had
not arrived when he paid the annuities at that post in the early
part of the month. Some of the Indians had not dispersed since
they received their payments, and interested parties were causing
dissatisfaction among them by reporting that the provisions
intended for them, while assembled to receive their annuities,
having now arrived, should be distributed to them, as well as the
agricultural implements and other articles promised.

I advised Inspector Walker to distribute to those Indians still
around Carlton their share of the presents, and to give them a
small quantity of provisions from the Government supplies, to
enable them to proceed without delay to their hunting grounds. I
then continued my journey to Battleford, which I reached on Monday,
the 24th, at noon. Here I was happy to meet Major Irvine, who
had come straight from Fort McLeod, across the Great Plains, to
conduct me on my journey, and to inform me that for satisfactory
reasons adduced by Crowfoot, the leading chief of the Blackfeet,
Lieut.-Col. McLeod, my associate Commissioner, had consented that
the meeting of the treaty should be held at the Blackfoot crossing
of the Bow River, instead of at Fort McLeod. Major Irvine had
reached Battleford only a few hours before me, and having a
Blackfoot Indian as guide, I abandoned my intention of going to
Fort McLeod by Cypress Hills, and resolved to take the more direct
and much shorter course by which that officer came.

On Friday I had interviews with several parties on business, among
whom were Red Pheasant, the Chief of the Battle River Crees, and
a portion of his band. He desired explanations about the articles
promised in the treaty of last year, and the reason they were so
late in being forwarded. I explained that the unusually heavy rains
in Manitoba and the eastern portion of the territories had made the
travelling so bad that the freighters had not been able to overtake
the journey in the time which they expected; that the Government
were very sorry at the disappointment, as it was their desire to
faithfully carry out all their promises. The officers here had done
their best to meet the difficulty and satisfy the Indians, though
at no little expense to the country.

The Chief appeared to be quite satisfied with the explanation, and
after some further conversation about the reserve, which he desires
to be located at Eagle Hills, he and his companions retired to
their lodges, situated for the present close to the south side of
Battle River, under the bank in front of Government House.

Inspector Walker having kindly given instructions to the
non-commissioned officer in charge of the Mounted Police in his
absence, that every assistance in his power was to be afforded to
me for continuing my journey, I was enabled to leave Battleford for
Fort McLeod with Major Irvine, on the 25th August. Besides us two,
the party consisted of four police constables, my personal servant
and the guide.

For the first day we followed a trail leading southward, but
afterwards our course was across the trackless plains until we
approached near our destination. On the third day out we first
sighted buffalo, and every day subsequently that we travelled,
except the last, we saw herds of the animals. Most of the herds,
however, were small, and we remarked with regret that very few
calves of this season were to be seen. We observed portions of many
buffalo carcasses on our route, from not a few of which the
peltries had not been removed. From this circumstance, as well as
from the fact that many of the skins are made into parchments and
coverings for lodges, and are used for other purposes, I concluded
that the export of buffalo robes from the territories does not
indicate even one-half the number of those valuable animals
slaughtered annually in our country.

Antelope, though not very abundant, are widely scattered over the
plains. The numerous lakelets abound with water fowl. Some of the
pools contain alkali, but we experienced no inconvenience on the
journey from scarcity of fresh water. The grass in many places is
short and thin, but in the hollows feed for horses is easily
obtained. Altogether, though the plains are perfectly treeless, not
even a shrub being visible, a journey across them in fine weather,
such as we experienced, when the "buffalo chips" are sufficiently
dry to make a good camp fire, is not disagreeable.

On the afternoon of the 29th we reached the lowest ford of the Red
Deer River, one hundred and sixty-eight miles, by our course, from
Battleford. On the north side of the river at this ford there is
quicksand. The water too, in mid-stream, was deep enough to flow
over the side-boards of our waggons, and at one place the current
was dangerously rapid. After repeated trials by some of the men on
horseback to find the best footing, we made the attempt, and the
whole party got safely across by night-fall. On Saturday evening,
the 1st of September, we arrived at the Blackfoot crossing of the
Bow River, one hundred and eighteen miles from where we forded the
Red Deer River. The Bow River is a noble stream. The current is
pretty rapid, but at this "ridge under the water" (which is the
literal translation of the Blackfoot name for the ford) the bed of
the river is pebbly and the footing consequently good. Though we
found the water almost as deep as at the Red Deer River, yet under
the guidance of Mr. French, a small trader who lives near the ford,
we, without almost any delay, crossed bravely over and camped until
Monday morning on the south bank of the river.

At this crossing, where the Indians had latterly been notified to
assemble for the treaty, there is a beautiful river bottom on the
south side of the river. It extended about one mile back from the
river, and is some three miles in length. The river, as far as the
eye can reach, is skirted close to the water by a narrow belt of
cotton-wood and other trees.

When I surveyed the clear waters of the stream, the fuel and
shelter which the wood afforded, the excellent herbage on hill and
dale, and the Indians camped in the vicinity crossing and
re-crossing the river on the "ridge" with ease and safety, I was
not surprised that the Blackfeet were attached to the locality, and
desired that such an important event in their history as concluding
a treaty with Her Majesty's Commissioners should take place at this
spot.

On Saturday evening and Sunday several of the Indians called to
shake hands with me, among whom was the Rainy Chief of the North
Bloods. Here also I met Monsieur Jean L. Heureux, a French
Canadian, who had spent nearly twenty years of his life among the
Blackfeet. From him I obtained much valuable information respecting
the numbers and wishes of the Indians, together with an elaborate
list of the different Chiefs and minor Chiefs of the Blackfeet,
Bloods, Piegans, and Sarcees, with the principal families of
their respective tribes and clans of divisions. This list the
Commissioners found very useful in enabling them to understand the
relative influence of the several Chiefs and the strength of their
bands.

On our journey, while within the limits of Treaty Number Six, we
met scarcely any Indians, but after we crossed Red Deer River we
met a few Crees and Half-breeds, and several hunting parties of
Blackfeet. The former generally use carts in travelling, but the
Blackfeet and their associates are always on horseback.

The Crees appeared friendly, but were not so demonstrative as the
Blackfeet, who always rode up at once with a smile on their
countenances and shook hands with us. They knew the uniform of the
Mounted Police at a distance, and at once recognized and approached
them as their friends.

We resumed our journey on Monday and arrived at Fort McLeod on the
Old Man's River, on Tuesday the 4th September. The distance between
the Blackfoot crossing of the Bow River and the Fort is about
seventy-nine miles, thus making the length of our journey from
Battleford three hundred and sixty-five miles as measured by Major
Irvine's odometer.

A few miles from Fort McLeod I was met by the Commissioners of the
Mounted Police and a large party of the Force, who escorted me into
the Fort, while a salute was fired by the artillery company from
one of the hills overlooking the line of march. The men, whose
horses were in excellent condition, looked exceedingly well, and
the officers performed their duties in a most efficient manner. The
villagers presented me with an address of welcome, and altogether
my reception at Fort McLeod was such as to satisfy the most
fastidious lover of display, and more than enough to satisfy the
writer.

At Fort McLeod, on my arrival, I received your despatch of first
August, covering the Commission relating to the Treaty and a copy
of the Order in Council of 12th July, in terms of which the
commission was issued. Also your letter of 27th July informing me
that it had been thought desirable to place the services of the
Rev. Father Lacombe at the disposal of the Commissioners while
negotiating the treaty. A few days afterwards I was sorry to learn
by telegraph that the reverend gentleman had been taken by illness
on the journey and would be unable to be present at the meeting
with the Indians. Here, however I was happy to meet Rev. Father
Scollen, a Roman Catholic missionary, who has labored for some
years among the Crees and Blackfeet in the western portion of the
territories. He kindly furnished me such information as he
possessed, and afterwards went to the treaty, where his assistance
was of some value, particularly in dealing with the Crees present.

While at the fort I had interviews with several of the Blood
Chiefs, who called upon me to inquire if they could not be treated
with there instead of at Bow River. I explained that hereafter the
Government would endeavor to pay them their annuities at places
most convenient for them, but that on the occasion of making a
treaty it was desirable that the several Chiefs and their principal
head men should meet together to talk over the matter, so that all
might feel that they had been consulted as to the terms of the
agreement. They went away satisfied, said they would do as the
Great Father advised, and go to Bow River.

I cannot speak too highly of the kind manner in which the officers
and men of the Mounted Police at Fort McLeod treat their Indian
visitors. Though the red man is somewhat intrusive, I never heard a
harsh word employed in asking him to retire. The beneficial effects
of this treatment, of the exclusion of intoxicants from the
country, and of impartially administering justice to whites and
Indians alike, were apparent in all my interviews with the Indians.
They always spoke of the officers of the Police in the highest
terms, and of the Commander of the Force, Lieut.-Col. McLeod,
especially as their great benefactor. The leading Chiefs of the
Blackfeet and kindred tribes, declared publicly at the treaty that
had it not been for the Mounted Police they would have all been
dead ere this time.

Having rested a week after my tedious journey of over seven hundred
miles, I then occupied myself for a few days in viewing the
surrounding country. In the village I found some excellent stores,
supplied with almost every article of dry goods, hardware and
groceries, that any inland community requires. Notably among these
were the stores of J. G. Baker & Co. and Messrs. T. C. Power & Bro.
There is also a good blacksmith's shop in the village in which coal
is used from the Pelly River, at a place some twenty miles distant
from Fort McLeod. I was told by the proprietor of the shop that the
coal answers tolerably well for blacksmithing purposes, and in the
fort it is extensively used for fuel. It burns nearly as well in a
stove as some varieties of Pictou coal.

The land around the fort, and indeed for almost the whole distance
between the Bow and Old Man's Rivers, is well adapted for grazing;
and where cultivation has been fairly attempted this season, grain
and vegetables have been a success. In short, I have very little
doubt that this portion of the territories, before many years, will
abound in herds of cattle, and be dotted with not a few comfortable
homesteads.

Lieut.-Col. McLeod having attended to forwarding the supplies to
Bow River, which had been previously delivered at the fort, left
for the Blackfoot crossing with some eighty officers and men of
the Police Force, on Wednesday, the 12th September. I followed on
Friday, and reached Bow River on Sunday morning. The Police having
arrived on Saturday, the Commissioners were fully prepared for
business on Monday, the 17th, the day which I had from the first
appointed for the opening of the treaty negotiations.

The Commissioners were visited by Crowfoot, the principal Chief of
the Blackfeet, shortly after their arrival. He desired to know when
he and his people might meet us. We ascertained that most of the
Indians on the ground were Blackfeet and Assiniboines or Stonies,
from the upper part of Bow River. But as the 17th was the day
named, the Commissioners determined to adhere to the appointment,
and sent a messenger early in the morning to invite the Indians
camped around to meet them at the council tent at two o'clock, p.m.

Half an hour before the time appointed a gun was fired as a signal
for the Indians to assemble. The meeting was well attended. The
Chiefs came forward first and were introduced to the Commissioners,
and their followers, on being invited, sat up close to the tent.

I addressed them, stating that the Queen's Government had last year
promised that they would this year be visited by Commissioners to
invite them to make a treaty. That months ago I had named this very
day to meet them, and that in accordance with the promises made,
the Commissioners were now here to discuss the terms of a treaty.
Yet as we had learned that very few of the Bloods, Sarcees or
Piegans had arrived, we would not unduly press forward the
negotiations, but wait until Wednesday to give the others time to
arrive.

The Indians listened attentively to what was said, and several of
the Chiefs expressed their satisfaction at not being asked to meet
us on the morrow. The Commissioners then told them there were
rations provided for them by the Government, and that those who
were in need of provisions might apply to certain of the Police
officers detailed to see to their proper distribution.

The Stonies and one Blood Chief applied for flour, tea, sugar and
tobacco, but said they were not then in need of beef. Crowfoot and
some other Chiefs under his influence would not accept any rations
until they would hear what terms the Commissioners were prepared to
offer them. He appeared to be under the impression that if the
Indians were fed by the bounty of the Government they would be
committed to the proposals of the Commissioners, whatever might be
their nature. Though I feared this refusal did not augur well for
the final success of the negotiations, yet I could not help wishing
that other Indians whom I have seen, had a little of the spirit in
regard to dependence upon the Government exhibited on this occasion
by the great Chief of the Blackfeet.

Among the visitors at the treaty I was pleased to meet the Rev.
John McDougall, Wesleyan missionary at Morley Ville, and son of the
late lamented Rev. George McDougall, so well and favourably known
in connection with Indian affairs in the North-West. Mr. McDougall
was present at the first interview the Commissioners held with
the Indians, and acted as interpreter for the Stonies, who do not
understand the Blackfoot language. He, as well as the Rev. C.
Scollen, rendered the Commissioners all the assistance in their
power. Traders, with large supplies of goods, were arriving on the
ground. They desired to erect buildings of logs to protect their
property, but as some of the Indian Chiefs objected to the trees
along the river being cut down for such a purpose until after
the treaty, the Commissioners deemed it prudent, to prevent
complications, to ask the traders to erect only temporary
stanchions sufficient to support canvas coverings. They complied
with our wishes, and the Indians gave us no further trouble on the
subject.

On the evening of Monday I also received a message from Bobtail, a
Cree Chief, who, with the larger portion of the band, had come to
the treaty grounds. He represented that he had not been received
into any treaty. He, however, had not attended the meeting that
day, because he was uncertain whether the Commissioners would be
willing to receive him along with the Blackfeet. I asked him and
his band to meet the Commissioners separate from the other Indians
on the following day.

On Tuesday, at two o'clock, the Cree Chief and his band assembled
according to appointment. The Commissioners ascertained from him
that he had frequented for some time the Upper Bow River country,
and might fairly be taken into the present treaty, but he expressed
a wish to have his reserve near Pigeon Lake, within the limits of
Treaty Number Six, and from what we could learn of the feelings of
the Blackfeet toward the Crees, we considered it advisable to keep
them separate as much as possible. We therefore informed the Chief
that it would be most expedient for him to give in his adhesion to
the treaty of last year, and be paid annually, on the north of Red
Deer River, with the other Cree Chiefs. He consented. We then told
him that we could not pay him until after the Blackfeet had been
dealt with, as it might create jealousy among them, but that in the
meantime his band could receive rations. He said it was right that
he should wait until we had settled with the Blackfeet, and agreed
to come and sign his adhesion to Treaty Number Six at any time I
was prepared to receive him.

During Tuesday, several parties of Indians came in, but the
principal Blood Chiefs had not yet arrived. According to
appointment, however, the Commissioners met the Indians at two
o'clock on Wednesday. An outline was given of the terms proposed
for their acceptance. We also informed them we did not expect an
answer that day, but we hoped to hear from them to-morrow.

That day we again intimated to the Indians that rations would be
delivered to such as applied for them. We told them the provisions
were a present, and their acceptance would not be regarded as
committing the Chiefs to the terms proposed by the Commissioners.
Most of the Chiefs at once applied for flour, tea, sugar and
tobacco, and in a day or two they also asked for meat. Even
Crowfoot, at last thankfully accepted his share of the rations, and
the beef cattle began to decrease rapidly.

On Tuesday we met the Indians at the usual hour. We further
explained the terms outlined to them yesterday, dwelling especially
upon the fact that by the Canadian Law their reserves could not be
taken from them, occupied or sold, without their consent. They were
also assured that their liberty of hunting over the open prairie
would not be interfered with, so long as they did not molest
settlers and others in the country.

We then invited the Chiefs to express their opinions. One of the
minor Blood Chiefs made a long speech. He told us the Mounted
Police had been in the country for four years, and had been
destroying a quantity of wood. For this wood he asked the
Commissioners should make the Indians a present payment of fifty
dollars a head to each Chief, and thirty dollars a head to all
others. He said the Blackfeet, Bloods, Sarcees and Piegans were all
one; but he asked that the Crees and Half-breeds should be sent
back to their own country. The Queen, he remarked, had sent the
police to protect them; they had made it safe for Indians to sleep
at night, and he hoped she would not soon take these men away.

Crowfoot said he would not speak until to-morrow. Old Sun, another
influential Blackfoot Chief, said the same. Eagle Tail, the head
Chief of the Piegans, remarked that he had always followed the
advice the officers of the Mounted Police gave him. He hoped the
promise which the Commissioners made would be secured to them as
long as the sun shone and water ran. The Stony Chiefs unreservedly
expressed their willingness to accept the terms offered.

Fearing that some of the Indians might regard the demands of the
Blood Chief who had spoken, if not promptly refused, as agreed to,
I told them he had asked too much. He had admitted the great
benefit the Police had been to the Indians, and yet he was so
unreasonable as to ask that the Government should pay a large
gratuity to each Indian for the little wood their benefactors had
used. On the contrary, I said, if there should be any pay in the
matter it ought to come from the Indians to the Queen for sending
them the Police. Hereupon, Crowfoot and the other Chiefs laughed
heartily at the Blood orator of the day.

I also said the Commissioners could not agree to exclude the Crees
and Half-breeds from the Blackfoot country; that they were the
Great Mother's children as much as the Blackfeet and Bloods, and
she did not wish to see any of them starve. Of course the Crees and
Half-breeds could be prosecuted for trespassing on their reserves.
In this the Indian Act secured them. The Local Government had
passed a law to protect the buffalo. It would have a tendency to
prevent numbers from visiting their country in the close season.
But to altogether exclude any class of the Queen's subjects, as
long as they obeyed the laws, from coming into any part of the
country, was contrary to the freedom which she allowed her people,
and the Commissioners would make no promise of the kind.

On the following morning there was a rumor that the Indians in
their own Councils could not agree, that a small party was opposed
to making a treaty. The opposition, however, could not have been
very formidable. The principal Chiefs seemed fully to understand
the importance of accepting some terms. About noon, Crowfoot, with
Mr. L'Heureux, as interpreter, came to my tent and asked for
explanations on some points, which I cheerfully gave him. During
the forenoon a large party of Bloods came in, among whom was Bad
Head, an aged minor Blood Chief, of considerable influence, who
attended the meeting in the afternoon.

When the Commissioners intimated that they were ready to hear what
the Chiefs had to say, Crowfoot was the first to speak. His remarks
were few, but he expressed his gratitude for the Mounted Police
being sent to them, and signified his intention to accept the
treaty. The Blood Chief who made the large demands on the previous
day said he would agree with the other Chiefs. Old Sun, head Chief
of the North Blackfeet, said Crowfoot spoke well. We are not going
to disappoint the Commissioners. He was glad they were all agreed
to the same terms. They wanted cattle, guns, ammunition, tobacco,
axes and money. Bull's Head, the principal Chief of the Sarcees,
said, we are all going to take your advice. Eagle Head, the Piegan
head Chief remarked, "I give you my hand. We all agree to what
Crowfoot says." Rainy Chief, head of the North Bloods, said he
never went against the white man's advice. Some of the minor Chiefs
spoke to the same effect.

The Commissioners expressed their satisfaction at the unanimity
among the Indians, and said they would prepare the treaty and bring
it to-morrow for signature. The only difficult matter then to be
arranged was the reserves. The Commissioners thought it would take
unnecessary time to discuss this question in open meeting, and
resolved that one of them should visit the head Chiefs at their
camps, and consult them separately as to the localities they might
desire to select. Lieut.-Col. McLeod undertook this duty, while I
attended to the preparation of the draft treaty. He succeeded so
well in his mission that we were able to name the places chosen in
the treaty.

On Saturday, 22nd September, we met the Indians to conclude the
treaty. Mekasto, or Red Crow the great Chief of the South Bloods,
had arrived the previous evening, or morning, on the ground, and
being present, came forward to be introduced to the Commissioners.

The assemblage of Indians was large. All the head Chiefs of the
several tribes were now present; only two Blackfeet and two Blood
minor Chiefs were absent. The representation was all that could be
expected.

The Commissioners had previously informed the Indians that they
would accept the Chiefs whom they acknowledged, and now close in
front of the tent sat those who had been presented to the
Commissioners as the recognized Chiefs of the respective bands.

The conditions of the treaty having been interpreted to the
Indians, some of the Blood Chiefs, who bad said very little on the
previous day, owing to Red Crow's absence, now spoke, he himself in
a few kind words agreeing to accept the treaty. Crowfoot then came
forward and requested his name to be written to the treaty. The
Commissioners having first signed it, Mr. L'Heureux, being familiar
with the Blackfoot language, attached the Chiefs' names to the
document at their request and witnessed to their marks.

While the signing was being proceeded with, a salute was fired from
the field guns in honor of the successful conclusion of the
negotiations.

I may mention, in this connection, that on Saturday also I was
waited upon by a deputation of Half-breeds, who presented me with a
petition, expressing the hope that the buffalo law might not be
stringently enforced during the approaching winter, and praying
that they might receive some assistance to commence farming. With
respect to the buffalo ordinance, I told them that the notice
having been short, the law would not be very strictly enforced for
the first winter, and in regard to their prayer for assistance to
farm, I said I would make it known at Ottawa.

On Monday, the 24th, the Commissioners met the Indians at ten a.m.
Some minor Chiefs who had not remained until the close of the
proceedings on Saturday signed the treaty this morning. The Chiefs
were then asked to stand up in a body, their names were read over
and the Indians once more asked to say whether they were their
recognized Chiefs. Heavy Shield, a brother of Old Sun, at the request
of the latter, took the place of head Chief of his band. It was,
however, ascertained that this arrangement caused dissatisfaction,
and Old Sun was restored to his position, and the band adhering to
his brother, was called the "Middle Blackfoot Band."

After their names were called over, I gave the head Chiefs of the
Blackfeet, Blood, Piegans, and Sarcees their flags and uniforms,
and invested them with their medals.

While I was shaking hands with them, acknowledging their Chiefs in
the name of the Great Mother, the band played "God Save the Queen."
The payments were then immediately begun by the officers of the
Mounted Police, one party taking the Blackfeet, and another the
Bloods, while a third was detailed to pay the Assiniboines, or
Stonies, near their encampment some two miles up the river.

The Commissioners went in the afternoon with the latter party, and
before the payments were commenced, presented the Chiefs with their
medals, flags and uniforms. The Stonies received us with quite
a demonstration. They are a well-behaved body of Indians. The
influence of the Christian missionary in their midst is apparent,
polygamy being now almost wholly a thing of the past.

On Tuesday I took the adhesion of Bobtail, the Cree Chief, and his
band, to Treaty Number Six, and they were paid out of the funds
which I had brought with me from Swan River.

On the invitation of the Blackfeet, Blood, and kindred Chiefs, the
Commissioners went on Wednesday to the Council tent to receive an
address of thanks. A large number of Indians were present. Mr.
L'Heureux spoke on their behalf, and expressed their gratitude
to the Commissioners generally for the kind manner in which they
conducted the negotiations, to me personally for having come so far
to meet them, and to Lieut.-Col. McLeod for all that he and the
Mounted Police had done for them since their arrival in the
country.

To this address the Commissioners feelingly replied, and expressed
their confidence that the Indians before them would not regret
having agreed to the treaty.

The Cree Chief and his band also waited upon us in the evening at
my tent, and through Father Scollen, as interpreter, thanked us for
the manner in which we had treated them. The presents sent for the
Indians were distributed to each band, after payment. On Wednesday
also the Commissioners drove to see the coal seam about five miles
east of the Blackfoot crossing. Under the guidance of Mr. French,
they found an outcrop of the seam at a coulee some three miles
south of the river. The seam there is from three to ten feet in
thickness, and the coal, some of which was burned every day in the
officers' mess tent at the treaty, is of a very fair quality.

About noon on Friday the payments were completed, and the
Commissioners proceeded to close the accounts. They found that the
number of Indians paid, who had accepted the terms of the new
treaty was as follows:--

  Head Chiefs                         10 at $25    $250
  Minor Chiefs and Councillors        40 at  15     600
  Men, women and children          4,342 at  12  52,104
                                   -----         ------
               Total               4,392        $52,954

The Crees who gave in their adhesion to Treaty Number Six were only
paid the gratuity, this year's annuity being still due them. These
were paid from the funds of Treaty Number Six as follows:--

  Chief                             1 at $25     $25
  Councillors                       2 at  15      30
  Men, women and children         429 at  12   5,148
                                  ---          -----
               Total              432         $5,203

The officers of the Police Force who conducted the payments,
discharged this duty in a most efficient manner. Not in regard to
the payments alone were the services of the officers most valuable.
With respect to the whole arrangements, Lieut.-Col. McLeod, my
associate Commissioner, both in that capacity and as Commander of
the Police, was indefatigable in his exertions to bring the
negotiations to a successful termination. The same laudable efforts
were put forth by Major Irvine and the other officers of the Force,
and their kindness to me, personally I shall never fail to
remember. The volunteer band of the Police at Fort McLeod deserve
more than a passing notice, as they did much to enliven the whole
proceedings.

The Commissioners at first had not a good interpreter of the
Blackfoot language, but on Wednesday they secured the services
of Mr. Bird, a brother of the late Dr. Bird, of Winnipeg. He has
been many years among the Piegans and Blackfeet and is a very
intelligent interpreter. Mr. L'Heureux also rendered good service
in this respect.

The accounts being closed and certified to by the Commissioners, I
commenced my return journey on the evening of the 28th September. I
came by a crossing of the Red Deer River some fifteen miles east of
the Hand Hills, travelled across the prairies further west than my
former route, and arrived at Battleford on the evening of Saturday
the 6th of October.

I transmit herewith the treaty as signed by the Commissioners and
Chiefs, and also the adhesion of the Cree Chief to Treaty Number
Six.

In conclusion I beg to offer a few observations on the treaty, and
subjects connected therewith.

1. With respect to the reserves, the Commissioners thought it
expedient to settle at once their location subject to the approval
of the Privy Council. By this course it is hoped that a great deal
of subsequent trouble in selecting reserves will be avoided. The
object of the ten years' reserve on the south side of Bow River is
to keep hunters from building winter shanties on the river bottom.
This practice has a tendency to alarm the buffalo, and keep them
from their feeding grounds on the lower part of the river. After
ten years it is feared the buffalo will have become nearly extinct,
and that further protection will be needless. At any rate by that
time the Indians hope to have herds of domestic cattle. The country
on the upper part of the Bow River is better adapted for settlement
than most of that included in the Blackfeet reserve, consequently
the Commissioners deemed it advisable to agree that a belt on the
south side of the river should be exempt from general occupation
for ten years, particularly as the Indians set great value on the
concession.

2. The articles promised in addition to the money payments may to
some appear excessive. The Stonies are the only Indians adhering to
this treaty who desired agricultural implements and seed. The
promises, therefore, respecting these things may be understood as
merely applicable to that tribe. The Blackfeet and Bloods asked for
nothing of this kind; they preferred cattle, and the Commissioners
being fully of opinion that such were likely to be much more
serviceable to them than seed and implements, encouraged them in
their request. The number of cattle promised may appear large; but
when it is considered that cows can be readily purchased at Fort
McLeod for twenty or twenty-five dollars per head, and their
delivery to the Indians will cost an inconsiderable sum, the total
expense of supplying the articles promised by this treaty will, I
am convinced, cost less than those under either Treaty number Four
or Number Six.

3. I would urge that the officers of the Mounted Police be
entrusted to make the annual payments to the Indians under this
treaty. The Chiefs themselves requested this, and I said I believed
the Government would gladly consent to the arrangement. The Indians
have confidence in the Police, and it might be some time before
they would acquire the same respect for strangers.

4. The organization of the Blackfeet bands is somewhat different
from that of the Saulteaux and Crees. They have large bands with
head and minor Chiefs, and as they preferred that this arrangement
should remain unchanged, the Commissioners gladly acceded to their
desire, as expense would be saved to the Government in clothing,
were councillors and head men not named. The Stonies, however asked
to be allowed councillors, and their request was granted to the
extent of two to each Chief.

5. Copies of the treaty printed on parchment should be forwarded to
Fort McLeod in good time to be delivered to each head and minor
Chief at next year's payment of annuities.

                I have the honour to be, Sir,
                             Your obedient servant,
                                        DAVID LAIRD,
                    Lieut.-Gov., and Special Indian Commissioner.



Report from correspondence in The Globe newspaper, Toronto.

FORT McLEOD, October 4, 1877.

The treaty with the Blackfeet nation has been concluded
satisfactorily, and was signed by the Chiefs of the Blackfeet,
Blood, Piegan and Sarcee tribes, in the presence of the
Commissioners--Governor Laird and Col. McLeod, C.M.G., and of Major
Irvine, Assistant Commissioner, North-West Mounted Police, and
officers of the Police Force, at the Council House, near "Ridge
under the Water," or "The Blackfoot Crossing" the Great Bow River,
on the 22nd September last.

On the morning of the 4th of September, Col. McLeod received
information from the ubiquitous Indian that the Queen's father
(Lieut.-Gov. Laird) was at Little Bow River, thirty miles north
from McLeod, and was accompanied by the "Buffalo Bull" (Major
Irvine), and that they would arrive before the sun sank below the
western horizon. At three p.m. the Commissioner left Fort McLeod,
accompanied by a guard of honor of one hundred mounted men, to meet
and escort the representative of Vice-Royalty to the first white
settlement in the Blackfeet country. The Governor was met three
miles north of Willow Creek, and expressed his surprise and
pleasure at the splendid appearance of the well-mounted,
well-equipped, well-drilled body of men who formed the guard of
honour. When the head of the column forming the escort wound
round the bend of Willow Creek, and the extensive wooded valley on
which McLeod is built appeared in view, the guns, which had been
unlimbered and placed in position on the highest of the bluffs
which girdle the north side of Old Man's River, fired a salute of
thirteen guns. On the arrival of the cortege at the upper or south
end of the village, the police band took the lead and welcomed
the Governor with its lively music. The whole white, Half-breed
and Indian population of McLeod turned out to obtain a view of
the great man who had arrived. At the request of the leading
inhabitants of McLeod the carriage of the Governor was halted in
the centre of the village, and the following neatly worded address
was read and presented to His Honor by Mr. John C. Bell:

TO THE HONORABLE DAVID LAIRD,
                Lieutenant-Governor, N.-W. T.

We, the citizens of Fort McLeod, beg to welcome you to this little
village, one of the pioneer settlements of this great North-West.

To have so distinguished a visitor in our midst is an honor we all
appreciate, as in that visit we feel an assurance of your interest
in our welfare and prosperity, which had its dawn with the advent
of the Mounted Police in the North-West, and which, through their
vigilance and care, has continued to this time.

We trust that your visit here will be as pleasant to you as it will
be long remembered by us.

    CHAS. E. CONRAD,
    THOMAS J. BOGY,
    DANIEL SAMPLE,
    LIONEL E. MANNING,
    JOHN C. BELL.

To which the Governor replied--

GENTLEMEN,--I thank you for your kind address, and for the hearty
welcome you have extended to me on my first visit to this pioneer
settlement of the Canadian North-West. After roughing it for the
last twenty-four days on the broad unsettled prairies, you have
surprised me by a reception which betokens all the elements of
civilization.

It affords me unfeigned pleasure to learn that the advent of the
Mounted Police in this country has been fraught with such
advantages to you as a community.

Permit me to express the conviction that in return for that
diligence and care on the part of the Police Force which you so
highly and justly value, you will always be found conducting
yourselves as becomes worthy subjects of that illustrious Sovereign
whom I have the distinguished honour to represent in these
territories.

In conclusion, I would remark that you have taken me so
unexpectedly by your address that I feel unequal to making an
appropriate reply; but the agreeableness of the surprise will tend
to heighten the pleasure of my visit, as well as to render abiding
the interest which I undoubtedly feel in your welfare and
prosperity.

During his stay at Fort McLeod, which extended to the 14th of
the month, the Lieutenant-Governor reviewed the garrison, which
consisted of troops C and D, and two divisions of artillery. They
deployed past at a walk, trot and gallop, and His Honor expressed
his unqualified admiration of the splendid form of the men. He was
especially pleased with the artillery, whose horses and equipments
were in beautiful condition, and requested Col. McLeod to convey to
the officers and men his surprise and pleasure at finding the force
at this post so perfectly drilled and acquainted with their duties.

On the 12th the two troops and the artillery, accompanied by a
baggage train of six light waggons, left Fort McLeod en route for
the scene of the treaty. The Commissioner took command of the
detachment, and the Assistant Commissioner remained behind to
accompany the Governor on the 14th.

The force accomplished the march in three days, and pitched the
tents on ground previously laid out for the encampment by Inspector
Crozier, at the head of a magnificently wooded valley, of about a
mile in width and extending for several miles along the Big Bow. It
is a lovely spot, this "Ridge under the Water," and has always been
a favorite camping ground of the Blackfeet nation.


Monday, 17th October.

This was the day appointed for the opening of the Treaty, but as a
number of the Indian Chiefs, who had a long distance to come, were
absent, it was deferred until the following Wednesday. The
Governor, however, addressed a number of the Chiefs who were
assembled at the Council House. He said, "Last year a message was
sent to you by the Councillors of the Great Mother that they would
meet you at an early date, and as her Councillors always keep their
promises, they have appointed Col. McLeod and myself to meet you
here now. We appointed this day, and I have come a very long
distance to keep my promise, and have called you together to
discover if you all have responded to my summons, and if any Chiefs
are now absent, to learn when they shall arrive. You say that some
of the Blood Chiefs are absent, and as it is our wish to speak to
them as well as to you, and as they have a very long way to come to
reach this place, we shall give them until next Wednesday to come
in. On that day, I will deliver to you the Queen's message, but if
any of the Chiefs would desire to speak now, we will be glad to
listen to them. I would tell you now, that while you remain,
provisions will be issued for the use of those who wish to accept
them."

CROWFOOT--"I am glad to see the Queen's Chief and Stamixotokon (Col
McLeod), who is a great Chief and our friend. I will wait and hold
a council with my own children (the Blackfeet), and be ready on
Wednesday to hear the Great Mother's message."

PIEGAN CHIEF--"My children (the North Piegans) have looked long for
the arrival of the Great Mother's Chief; one day, we did not look
for him, and he passed us; we have travelled after him for fourteen
nights, and now are glad to see and shake hands with the Great
Chief."

BEAR'S PAW (Stony Chief)--"We have been watching for you for many
moons now, and a long time has gone by since I and my children
first heard of your coming. Our hearts are now glad to see the
Chief of the Great Mother, and to receive flour and meat and
anything you may give us. We are all of one mind, and will say what
we think on Wednesday."

On Wednesday the Commissioners met the Chiefs at the great Council
House. A guard of honor of fifty mounted men accompanied them,
commanded by Major Irvine. The Police band received them, and at
one o'clock the guns fired a salute as the Governor and Col. McLeod
took their seats. There were present at the opening of the treaty,
a number of ladies and gentlemen who had come long distances to
witness this novel spectacle. Mrs. McLeod, Mrs. Winder, Mrs.
Shurtleff, and a number of other ladies from Morleyville and
Edmonton, also the Rev. Messrs. Scollen and McDougall, Mr. De
L'Hereux, Mr. Conrad, Mr. Bogy, and the whole white population of
Fort McLeod. Nearly all of the Chiefs and minor Chiefs of the
Blackfeet, Blood, Piegan, Stony, and Sarcee tribes were seated
directly in front of the Council House; and forming a semicircle of
about one-third of a mile beyond the Chiefs, about four thousand
men, women, and children were squatted on the grass, watching with
keen interest the commencement of the proceedings. Lieut.-Gov.
Laird delivered the following speech:

"The Great Spirit has made all things--the sun, the moon, and the
stars, the earth, the forests, and the swift running rivers. It is
by the Great Spirit that the Queen rules over this great country
and other great countries. The Great Spirit has made the white man
and the red man brothers, and we should take each other by the
hand. The Great Mother loves all her children, white man and red
man alike; she wishes to do them all good. The bad white man and
the bad Indian she alone does not love, and them she punishes for
their wickedness. The good Indian has nothing to fear from the
Queen or her officers. You Indians know this to be true. When bad
white men brought you whiskey, robbed you, and made you poor, and,
through whiskey, quarrel amongst yourselves, she sent the Police to
put an end to it. You know how they stopped this and punished the
offenders, and how much good this has done. I have to tell you how
much pleased the Queen is that you have taken the Police by the
hands and helped them, and obeyed her laws since the arrival of the
Police. She hopes that you will continue to do so, and you will
always find the Police on your side if you keep the Queen's laws.
The Great Mother heard that the buffalo were being killed very
fast, and to prevent them from being destroyed her Councillors have
made a law to protect them. This law is for your good. It says that
the calves are not to be killed, so that they may grow up and
increase; that the cows are not to be killed in winter or spring,
excepting by the Indians when they are in need of them as food.
This will save the buffalo, and provide you with food for many
years yet, and it shews you that the Queen and her Councillors wish
you well.

"Many years ago our Great Mother made a treaty with the Indians far
away by the great waters in the east. A few years ago she made a
treaty with those beyond the Touchwood Hills and the Woody
Mountains. Last year a treaty was made with the Crees along the
Saskatchewan, and now the Queen has sent Col. McLeod and myself to
ask you to make a treaty. But in a very few years the buffalo will
probably be all destroyed, and for this reason the Queen wishes to
help you to live in the future in some other way. She wishes you to
allow her white children to come and live on your land and raise
cattle, and should you agree to this she will assist you to raise
cattle and grain, and thus give you the means of living when the
buffalo are no more. She will also pay you and your children money
every year, which you can spend as you please. By being paid in
money you cannot be cheated, as with it you can buy what you may
think proper.

"The Queen wishes us to offer you the same as was accepted by the
Crees. I do not mean exactly the same terms, but equivalent terms,
that will cost the Queen the same amount of money. Some of the
other Indians wanted farming implements, but these you do not
require, as your lands are more adapted to raising cattle, and
cattle, perhaps, would be better for you. The Commissioners will
give you your choice, whether cattle or farming implements. I have
already said we will give you money, I will now tell you how much.
If you sign the treaty every man, woman and child will get twelve
dollars each; the money will be paid to the head of each family for
himself, women and children; every year, for ever, you, your women
and your children will get five dollars each. This year Chiefs and
Councillors will be paid a larger sum than this; Chiefs will get a
suit of clothes, a silver medal, and flag, and every third year
will get another suit. A reserve of land will be set apart for
yourselves and your cattle, upon which none others will be
permitted to encroach; for every five persons one square mile will
be allotted on this reserve, on which they can cut the trees and
brush for firewood and other purposes. The Queen's officers will
permit no white man or Half-breed to build or cut the timber on
your reserves. If required roads will be cut through them. Cattle
will be given to you, and potatoes, the same as are grown at Fort
McLeod. The Commissioners would strongly advise the Indians to take
cattle, as you understand cattle better than you will farming for
some time, at least as long as you continue to move about in
lodges.

"Ammunition will be issued to you each year, and as soon as you
sign the treaty one thousand five hundred dollars' worth will be
distributed amongst the tribes, and as soon as you settle, teachers
will be sent to you to instruct your children to read books like
this one (the Governor referred to a Bible), which is impossible so
long as you continue to move from place to place. I have now
spoken. I have made you acquainted with the principal terms
contained in the treaty which you are asked to sign.

"You may wish time to talk it over in your council lodges; you may
not know what to do before you speak your thoughts in council. Go,
therefore, to your councils, and I hope that you may be able to
give me an answer to-morrow. Before you leave I will hear your
questions and explain any matter that may not appear clear to you."

A few questions by the Chiefs were answered, and the council was
closed for the day.


Thursday, October 19th.

The Governor, on arriving at the Council House, where all the
Chiefs were awaiting him, said that he was glad to see them all
there, and that he had only a few words to say to them. He said, "I
expect to listen to what you have to say to-day, but, first, I
would explain that it is your privilege to hunt all over the
prairies, and that should you desire to sell any portion of your
land, or any coal or timber from off your reserves, the Government
will see that you receive just and fair prices, and that you can
rely on all the Queen's promises being fulfilled. Your payments
will be punctually made. You all know the Police; you know that no
promise of theirs to you has ever been broken; they speak and act
straight. You have perfect confidence in them, and by the past
conduct of the Police towards you, you can judge of the future. I
think I have now said all, and will listen to you and explain
anything you wish to know; we wish to keep nothing back."

BUTTON CHIEF--"The Great Spirit sent the white man across the great
waters to carry out His (the Great Spirit's) ends. The Great
Spirit, and not the Great Mother, gave us this land, The Great
Mother sent Stamixotokon (Col. McLeod) and the Police to put an end
to the traffic in fire-water. I can sleep now safely. Before the
arrival of the Police, when I laid my head down at night, every
sound frightened me; my sleep was broken; now I can sleep sound and
am not afraid. The Great Mother sent you to this country, and we
hope she will be good to us for many years. I hope and expect to
get plenty; we think we will not get so much as the Indians receive
from the Americans on the other side; they get large presents of
flour, sugar, tea, and blankets. The Americans gave at first large
bags of flour, sugar, and many blankets; the next year it was only
half the quantity, and the following years it grew less and less,
and now they give only a handful of flour. We want to get fifty
dollars for the Chiefs and thirty dollars each for all the others,
men, women, and children, and we want the same every year for the
future. We want to be paid for all the timber that the Police and
whites have used since they first came to our country. If it
continues to be used as it is, there will soon be no firewood left
for the Indians. I hope, Great Father, that you will give us all
this that we ask."

CROWFOOT--"Great Father, what do you think now, what do you say to
that? What I have to say will be spoken to-morrow. My brother
Chiefs will speak now."

EAGLE TAIL--"Great Father, from our Great Mother, Stamixotokon and
officers of the Police, the advice and help I received from the
Police I shall never forget as long as the moon brightens the
night, as long as water runs and the grass grows in spring, and I
expect to get the same from our Great Mother. I hope she will
supply us with flour, tea, tobacco and cattle, seed and farming
implements. I have done at present."

OLD SUN--"Father and sons, I shall speak to-morrow."

GOVERNOR--"I fear Button Chief is asking too much. He has told us
of the great good the Police have done for him and his tribe and
throughout the country by driving away the whiskey traders, and now
he wants us to pay the Chiefs fifty dollars and others thirty
dollars per head, and to pay him for the timber that has been used.
Why, you Indians ought to pay us rather, for sending these traders
in fire-water away and giving you security and peace, rather than
we pay you for the timber used. (Here the Indians indulged in a
general hearty laugh at this proposition.) We cannot do you good
and pay you too for our protection. Button Chief wants us to
prevent the Crees and Half-breeds from coming in and killing the
buffalo. They too are the Queen's children, as well as the
Blackfeet and Crees. We have done all we can do in preventing the
slaying of the young buffalo, and this law will preserve the
buffalo for many years. Button Chief wishes to get the same every
year as this year; this we cannot promise. We cannot make a treaty
with you every year. We will give you something to eat each year,
but not so much as you will receive now. He says the Americans at
first gave the Indians many large sacks of flour, and now they only
receive a handful. From us you receive money to purchase what you
may see fit; and as your children increase yearly, you will get the
more money in the future, as you are paid so much per head.

"(To the Stony Chiefs)--When your reserves will be allotted to you
no wood can be cut or be permitted to be taken away from them
without your own consent. The reserve will be given to you without
depriving you of the privilege to hunt over the plains until the
land be taken up."

Bear's Paw said that he was pleased with the treaty, the Police,
and the prospect of getting provisions and money, and hoped that
the Commissioners would give his tribe (the Stonies) as much as
possible, and that as speedily as possible. This Chief appeared by
his speech to be of a mercenary bent of mind.


Friday, October 20th.

On this day the Indians accepted the terms of the treaty, and
several of the Chiefs made speeches. The first speaker was
Crowfoot.

CROWFOOT--"While I speak, be kind and patient. I have to speak for
my people, who are numerous, and who rely upon me to follow that
course which in the future will tend to their good. The plains are
large and wide. We are the children of the plains, it is our home,
and the buffalo has been our food always. I hope you look upon the
Blackfeet, Blood, and Sarcees as your children now, and that you
will be indulgent and charitable to them. They all expect me to
speak now for them, and I trust the Great Spirit will put into
their breasts to be a good people--into the minds of the men, women
and children, and their future generations. The advice given me and
my people has proved to be very good. If the Police had not come to
the, country, where would we be all now? Bad men and whiskey were
killing us so fast that very few, indeed, of us would have been
left to-day. The Police have protected us as the feathers of the
bird protect it from the frosts of winter. I wish them all good,
and trust that all our hearts will increase in goodness from this
time forward. I am satisfied. I will sign the treaty."

BUTTON CHIEF--"I must say what all the people say, and I agree with
what they say. I cannot make new laws. I will sign."

RED CROW--"Three years ago, when the Police first came to the
country, I met and shook hands with Stamixotokon (Col. McLeod) at
Pelly River. Since that time he made me many promises. He kept them
all--not one of them was ever broken. Everything that the police
have done has been good. I entirely trust Stamixotokon, and will
leave everything to him. I will sign with Crowfoot."

FATHER OF MANY CHILDREN--"I have come a long way, and far behind
the rest of the bands. I have travelled with these traveaux that
you now see outside there with my women and children. I cannot
speak much now, but I agree with Crowfoot, and will sign."

OLD SUN--"Crowfoot speaks well. We were summoned to meet the Great
Mother's Chiefs here, and we would not disappoint them; we have
come, and will sign the treaty. During the past Crowfoot has been
called by us our Great Father. The Great Mother's Chief (Governor
Laird) will now be our Great Father. Everything you say appears to
me to be very good, and I hope that you will give us all we
ask--cattle, money, tobacco, guns, and axes, and that you will not
let the white man use poison on the prairies. It kills horses and
buffalo as well as wolves, and it may kill men. We can ourselves
kill the wolves, and set traps for them. We all agree with
Crowfoot."

The remainder of the day was consumed by about a dozen other chiefs
speaking in favour of the treaty. On the following day all the
chiefs and counsellors signed their names under the signatures of
the Commissioners, and a salute of thirteen guns announced the
final conclusion of the last treaty with the Indians of the
North-West.

On Sunday afternoon the Indians fought a sham battle on horseback.
They only wore the breech-cloths. They fired off their rifles in
all directions, and sent the bullets whistling past the spectators
in such close proximity as to create most unpleasant feelings. I
was heartily glad when they defiled past singly on the way back to
their lodges, and the last of their unearthly yells had died away
in the distance.

Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday were occupied in paying off the
different tribes. They were paid by Inspector Winder, Sub-Inspector
Denny, and Sub-Inspector Antrobus, each assisted by a constable of
the Force. It was hard work to find out the correct number of each
family. Many after receiving their money would return to say that
they had made a wrong count; one would discover that he had another
wife, another two more children, and others that they had blind
mothers and lame sisters. In some cases they wanted to be paid for
the babies that were expected to come soon.

On Wednesday the Chiefs presented an address to the Commissioners,
expressing the entire satisfaction of the whole nation with the
treaty, and to the way in which the terms had been carried out.
They tendered their well wishes to the Queen, the Governor, Col.
McLeod, and the Police Force. They spoke in the most flattering and
enthusiastic manner of the Commissioner, Assistant-Commissioner,
officers, and the Force in general, and said that it was their firm
determination to adhere to the terms of the treaty, and abide by
the laws of the Great Mother. Potts, the interpreter at Fort
McLeod, said he never heard Indians speak out their minds so freely
in his life before.

In reply, the Lieutenant-Governor said he was much pleased to
receive this address from the Chiefs of the great Blackfeet nation,
which in fact was to the Great Mother, as the Commissioners were
merely acting for her, and carrying out her wishes. He was certain
she would be gratified to learn of the approval of the Chiefs and
their acceptance of her offers. In return the Great Mother only
required of them to abide by her laws.

Lieut.-Col. McLeod said in reply:--"The Chiefs all here know what I
said to them three years ago, when the Police first came to the
country--that nothing would be taken away from them without their
own consent. You all see to-day that what I told you then was true.
I also told you that the Mounted Police were your friends, and
would not wrong you or see you wronged in any way. This also you
see is true. The Police will continue to be your friends, and be
always glad to see you. On your part you must keep the Queen's
laws, and give every information to them in order that they may see
the laws obeyed and offenders punished. You may still look to me as
your friend, and at any time when I can do anything for your
welfare, I shall only be too happy to do so. You say that I have
always kept my promises. As surely as my past promises have been
kept, so surely shall those made by the Commissioners be carried
out in the future. If they were broken I would be ashamed to meet
you or look you in the face; but every promise will be solemnly
fulfilled as certainly as the sun now shines down upon us from the
heavens. I shall always remember the kind manner in which you have
to-day spoken of me."

After this there was a great shaking of hands, and the Great
Council ended.

On Thursday afternoon the Lieutenant-Governor departed for
Battleford. On leaving the grounds the usual honors were paid to
him. The Commissioner left the following day for Fort Walsh to
attend the Commission that was to meet the Sitting Bull.

The traders were notified that they were to cease trading and move
off the reservation not later than the following Tuesday, at ten
p.m. By this hour they had all departed, and at noon on the same
day the Force commenced its return journey to McLeod, which was
accomplished in two days and a half. All were glad to get back to
headquarters, as the weather had been for some days intensely cold
and the prairies covered with snow.



CHAPTER XI

THE SIOUX IN THE NORTH-WEST TERRITORIES


Much interest has been awakened with regard to this warlike race,
owing to recent events; namely, the war between them and the United
States, the destruction by them of Captain Custer's command, and
their subsequent flight into British territory, and now prolonged
sojourn therein.

Prior, however, to this irruption, a portion of the Sioux tribe of
American Indians, took refuge in the Red River settlement, after
the massacre of the whites by the Indians in Minnesota, in the year
1862. Their arrival caused great consternation in the settlement.
The main body took up a position at Sturgeon Creek, about six miles
from Fort Garry, now the City of Winnipeg, and others, at Poplar
Point, and the Turtle Mountain. The Governor and Council of
Assiniboia then governed the Province of Assiniboia, under the
Hudson's Bay Company, and was composed of representative men.
Their deliberations were grave and anxious. In December, 1863,
the Governor-in-Chief, Mr. Dallas, reported to the Council, that
he had visited the principal camp of the Sioux at Sturgeon Creek,
and found there about five hundred men, women and children,
and more had since arrived; that he had found them in great
destitution and suffering, from want of food and clothing, and
that after consultation with Governor Mactavish, of the Province
of Assiniboia, he had offered sufficient provisions to enable them
to remove to such a distance from the settlement as would place
it beyond all danger and apprehension, and also offered to have
the provisions conveyed for them, and ammunition supplied them to
procure game, but they had positively refused to go away--giving
as a reason the inability of the old men, women and children, to
travel in the winter. The Governor was in consequence authorized
by the Council, to offer them the means of transport, for those
who were unable to walk. The Indians then removed to White Horse
Plains, a distance of twenty miles only from Fort Garry, and camped
there. A supply of food was given them, but no ammunition. The
United States military authorities in December, 1863, sent an envoy
to see the Governor-in-Chief of Rupert's Land, and the North-West
Territories, with a view to ordering the Sioux to return to United
States territory. The Governor was assured, that, though the
American authorities would punish such of the Sioux as had actually
been engaged in the massacre, they would furnish the innocent with
all needful supplies of food and clothing for the winter, in the
event of giving themselves up peaceably. The Council, on hearing
this statement, authorized the granting permission to the American
authorities to enter into negotiations with the Sioux in the
territories, on condition that they adopted no aggressive measures
against them, and that in the event of the Americans accepting the
proposed permission, they should protect themselves by a sufficient
guard to preclude the danger of attack from the Indians, and to
ensure the preservation of peace.

In January, 1864, the Council considered a despatch from Major
Hatch, in command of the American forces, representing that on the
approach of spring, he apprehended a renewal of the barbarous
scenes of 1862 and 1863, and asked authority to cross the national
boundaries and pursue and capture the murderers, wherever they
might be found. The Council accorded the permission asked, but it
was never acted on. It is not likely that a permission to cross our
borders in pursuit of a flying enemy would ever again be granted.
It was conceded in exceptional circumstances by an irresponsible
Government, but the growth of the Dominion of Canada has been such,
and its relations to the empire have become so intimate, that it
would not in my judgment be granted, if at all, except in concert
with the Imperal Government. The Governor also reported to the
Council, that the main body of the Sioux on the Missouri in the
United States had sent him a message asking his advice as to making
peace with the Americans, and expressing a desire to visit Red
River in spring, and that he had advised the Sioux to make peace
with the Americans, as otherwise, the war would be renewed with
increased vigor next summer. He had also counselled them not to
visit the Red River country. The Council warned the Sioux not to
visit the settlement, but in the summer of 1866, the advice was
disregarded. A band of Sioux came to Fort Garry and were leaving
quietly, with a number of Saulteaux, but when about a mile from the
Fort they were attacked by a band of Red Lake Saulteaux Indians,
who had just come into the settlement from the United States and
five of them were shot. The remainder fled for their lives.

The Council apprehended that the Sioux might congregate in force,
and a collision take place between the Sioux and the Saulteaux, and
therefore authorized the formation of a body of from fifty to one
hundred mounted armed men from among the settlers, to prevent the
Sioux from coming into the settlement. Fortunately they did not
return and a collision was avoided.

In 1866, the American authorities again opened up communications
with the Governor and Council of Assiniboia, through Colonel Adams,
who intimated that he had been authorized by Brevet Major-General
Corse, commanding the District of Minnesota, "to use every possible
means to induce the hostile Sioux to surrender themselves at Fort
Abercrombie, and to grant them protection and entire absolution for
all past offences in the event of giving themselves up," and asking
the aid of the Council, to endeavor to influence the Sioux to
accede to the proposals he made. The Council accordingly authorized
Judge Black and Mr. McClure to communicate to the Chiefs of the
Sioux, the letter of Colonel Adams, and endeavor to induce them to
accept of it, and to supply them with what provisions might be
necessary to carry the Sioux to Fort Abercrombie.

All efforts having that end in view failed, and the Sioux remained,
some in the Province of Assiniboia, and others in the territories
beyond. As time went on, in 1870, the country passed under the rule
of Canada, and when the Government of Canada was established in the
Province of Manitoba, which included the district of Assiniboia,
the Sioux were found living quietly in tents, in the parishes of
Poplar Point, High Bluff, and Portage la Prairie, in what became
the new Province of Manitoba. Immigrants from Ontario, had begun to
settle in that section of the Province, and the settlement rapidly
increased.

The Sioux were found very useful, and were employed as labourers,
cutting grain, making fence-rails, and ploughing for the settlers.
They also endeavored to gain a subsistence, by killing game and
fur-bearing animals, and by fishing. They frequently applied to
Lieut.-Gov. Archibald, to be allowed to settle on a reserve, where
they might support themselves by farming, a step which that officer
favored. In 1873, they renewed the application to his successor,
Lieut.-Gov. Morris, who having obtained authority to do so,
promised to give them a reserve; upwards of one hundred of these
Sioux, resident within Manitoba, having waited upon him, and
represented "that they had no homes or means of living," and asked
for land and agricultural implements.

They were informed, that the case was exceptional, and that what
would be done, would be as a matter of grace and not of right,
which they admitted. They were also told that the reserve would be
for themselves alone, and that the Sioux now in the States must
remain there. A reserve was proposed to them on Lake Manitoba, but
they were unwilling to go there, being afraid of the Saulteaux, and
especially the Red Lake Saulteaux.

It is satisfactory to state, that after the treaty at the
North-West Angle, the Saulteaux having become bound to live at
peace with all people under Canadian authority, sent the aged Chief
Kou-croche to see the Lieutenant-Governor at Fort Garry, to
acquaint him of their desire to make peace with the Sioux. The
Chief said the words he had heard at the Angle were good, he had
promised to live at peace with all men, and he now wished to make
friends with the Sioux. The distrust between the two tribes had
been great, owing to past events. At the Angle, but for the
presence of the troops, the Chippewas would have fled, it having
been circulated among them, that the Sioux were coming to attack
them. Permission was given to the Chief to pay his visit to the
Sioux, and messengers were sent to them, in advance, to explain the
object of his visit.

The result of the interview was satisfactory, and the ancient feud
was buried. In 1874, two reserves were allotted the Sioux, one on
the Assiniboine River, at Oak River, and another still further
west, at Bird Tail Creek. These reserves were surveyed, the former
containing eight thousand and the latter seven thousand acres.

Settlements, were commenced, on both reserves, and cattle, seed and
agricultural implements were supplied to them. In 1875, the
Lieutenant-Governor finding that a large number still continued
their nomadic life, in the vicinity of Poplar Point and Portage la
Prairie, visited them, and obtained their promise to remove to the
reserves--which the majority eventually did. Kenneth Mackenzie,
Esq., M.P.P., a very successful farmer from Ontario, who had
largely employed Sioux laborers, kindly agreed to visit the
Assiniboine reserve and direct them from time to time as to the
agricultural operations. The Church of England undertook the
establishment of a mission and erected buildings there, while the
Presbyterians opened a mission at Bird Tail Creek, and obtained the
services of a native ordained Sioux minister, from the Presbytery
of Dakotah. The number of these Sioux is estimated at about fifteen
hundred. Both settlements give promise of becoming self-sustaining,
and in view of the rapid settlement of the country, some disposition
of them had become necessary.

During their sojourn of thirteen years on British territory, these
Indians have on the whole, been orderly, and there was only one
grave crime committed among them, under peculiar circumstances--the
putting to death of one of their number, which was done under their
tribal laws. An indictment was laid before the Grand Jury of
Manitoba, and a true bill found against those concerned in this
affair, but the chief actors in the tragedy fled. Had they been
tried, their defence would probably have been that the act was
committed in self-defence. The slain man having, as the Chief
represented, killed one of the tribe, cruelly assaulted another,
and threatened the lives of others. When the war broke out between
the Sioux and the American Government, the American Sioux,
endeavored to induce those in Canadian territory to join them,
but they refused. Precautionary measures were however taken, and
messengers sent to them, by the Lieutenant-Governor, to warn
them against taking any part. They disclaimed all intention to
do so, and said they meant to live peacefully, being grateful
for the kindness with which they had been treated. Besides these
Manitoban Sioux, there were two other bands in the North-West
Territories--one at Turtle Mountains, and another large party
in the bounds of the Qu'Appelle Treaty. In 1876 the latter sent
their Chiefs to see Lieut.-Gov. Morris and the Hon. Mr. Laird, at
Qu'Appelle, and asked to be assigned a home. They were told that
their case would be represented to the Canadian authorities. In
1877, the Sioux at the Turtle Mountains, sent two deputations to
the Lieutenant-Governor, to ask for a reserve in that region. They
said they had lived for fifteen years in British territory, they
wanted land to be given them and implements to cultivate the soil,
and seed to sow, and scythes and sickles to reap their grain, and
some cattle.

They were told that they had no claim on the Queen, as they were
not British Indians, unless she chose to help them out of her
benevolence. This they cheerfully admitted, but hoped that they
would be helped. They were further informed, that if a reserve was
granted them, it could not be near the boundary line as they
wished, and that they must avoid all interference with the American
trouble with their nation. This they willingly promised and said
"they had already taken care to have nothing to do with the
matter." These Sioux were very intelligent and superior Indians,
and were well dressed. A reserve was subsequently allotted to them
in the year 1876, in the vicinity of Oak Lake, about fifty miles
due north of Turtle Mountains, allowing them the same quantity of
land, which had been given the Manitoba Sioux, viz., 80 acres to
each band of five persons, and they will doubtless follow the
example of their brethren on the other two reserves. With regard to
the Sioux to whom reserves have been assigned, the then Minister of
the Interior, the Hon. David Mills, thus reported in 1877: "The
report of the Deputy Superintendent-General in 1877 gives some
details respecting the operations of the Manitoba Sioux on their
reserves, during the past year. He says: 'Upon the whole, they
appear to have made fair progress in cultivating the land, and
their prospects for the future, had they the advice and assistance
of some good farmers, for a few years, would be encouraging.
Indeed, the Sioux generally, who are resident in Canada, appear to
be more intelligent, industrious, and self-reliant, than the other
Indian bands in the North West.'"

While the authorities were thus successfully dealing with the
problem of how to provide a future for these wandering Sioux, a
grave difficulty presented itself by the incursion into the
North-West Territories of a large body of American Sioux (supposed
to be under the lead of what is now an historic name, the Sitting
Bull), who had fled from the American troops. The Minister of the
Interior, the Hon. David Mills, in 1877, thus alluded to this
difficult subject:

"The presence of Sitting Bull and his warriors in Canada is a
source of anxiety both to the Government of Canada and the United
States. These Indians harbor feelings of fierce hostility towards,
and thorough distrust of, the United States people and Government.
These feelings may be traced to two principal causes, the
dishonesty of Indian agents and the failure of the Federal
authorities to protect the Indian reservations from being taken
possession of by an adventurous and somewhat lawless white
population. The officers of the North-West Mounted Police have been
instructed to impress upon Sitting Bull and his warriors the
necessity of keeping the peace towards the people of the United
States, and there is no reason for supposing they will not heed the
warnings which have been given them. It is not, however, desirable
to encourage them to remain on Canadian territory, and Col. McLeod
has been accordingly instructed to impress them with their probable
future hardships after the failure of the buffalo, should they
elect to remain in Canada; that the President of the United States
and his Cabinet are upright men, willing and anxious to do justice
to the Indians; and should they return peacefully they will be
properly cared for, and any treaty made with them will be honestly
fulfilled. It is desirable that as wards of the United States they
should return to that country, upon the Government of which morally
devolves the burden and the responsibility of their civilization."

The Sioux have since continued within the borders of Canada, and
the Minister of the Interior, Sir John Macdonald, reported in 1878,
"That it is only just to them to say, that they have behaved
remarkably well ever since they crossed into Canada." Their
presence in the North-West Territories has, however, been attended
and will be followed, in any event, by serious consequences. The
natural food supply of our Canadian Indians, the Crees, Chippewas,
Assiniboines and Blackfeet, of the Plain Country, viz., the
buffalo, was rapidly diminishing, and the advent of so large a body
of foreign Indians has precipitated its diminution, so that the
final extinction of the buffalo is fast drawing near. Already the
Government of Canada, in the discharge of a national obligation,
which has ever been recognized by all civilized authorities, has
been obliged to come to the aid of the Blackfeet and other Indians
to avert the danger and suffering from famine. The Sioux are
already feeling the hardships of their position, and it will tax
the skill and energies of the Government of Canada to provide a
remedy. Already, at the instance of the Hon. David Mills, then
Minister of the Interior (who visited Washington for the purpose),
an effort was made by the American Government to induce the Sioux
to return to their homes. Envoys were sent to them from the United
States, but they declined to accept the overtures made to them. On
the previous occasion of the flight into our territories of the
Sioux, the American Government, as has been before recited, after
an interval of nearly four years, offered them protection on their
return journey from British territory to their homes in the United
States and "entire absolution for all past offences". This forms a
precedent which should be invoked and would doubtless be accepted
by the Sioux if they can be induced to believe in the good faith of
the American Government towards them. Every effort should be made
to bring about so desirable a result, and the subject will
doubtless engage in the future, as it has done in the past, the
anxious consideration and wise action of the Canadian Government,
who have a right to appeal to the President of the United States
and his advisers, to relieve them from the incubus of the presence
in our territories of so many of the wards of that Government, and
who are without the means or opportunities of obtaining a
livelihood for themselves.



CHAPTER XII

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE TREATIES--THE HALF-BREEDS--THE FUTURE
OF THE INDIAN TRIBES


Having placed before my readers, a history of the treaties of
Canada with the Indian tribes, of Manitoba, the North-West
Territories and Kee-wa-tin, I now proceed, in conclusion, to deal
with the administration of these treaties and to consider the
future of these interesting aboriginal races. I remark in the first
place that the provisions of these treaties must be carried out
with the utmost good faith and the nicest exactness. The Indians of
Canada have, owing to the manner in which they were dealt with for
generations by the Hudson's Bay Company, the former rulers of these
vast territories, an abiding confidence in the Government of the
Queen, or the Great Mother, as they style her. This must not, at
all hazards, be shaken. It can be easily and fully maintained. The
treaties are all based upon the models of that made at the Stone
Fort in 1871 and the one made in 1873 at the north-west angle of
the Lake of the Woods with the Chippewa tribes, and these again are
based, in many material features, on those made by the Hon. W. B.
Robinson with the Chippewas dwelling on the shores of Lakes Huron
and Superior in 1860.

These may be summarized thus:

1. A relinquishment, in all the great region from Lake Superior to
the foot of the Rocky Mountains, of all their right and title to
the lands covered by the treaties, saving certain reservations for
their own use, and

2. In return for such relinquishment, permission to the Indians to
hunt over the ceded territory and to fish in the waters thereof,
excepting such portions of the territory as pass from the Crown
into the occupation of individuals or otherwise.

3. The perpetual payment of annuities of five dollars per head to
each Indian--man, woman and child. The payment of an annual salary
of twenty-five dollars to each Chief, and of fifteen dollars to
each Councillor, or head man, of a Chief (thus making them in a
sense officers of the Crown), and in addition, suits of official
clothing for the Chiefs and head men, British flags for the Chiefs,
and silver medals. These last are given both in the United States
and in Canada, in conformity with an ancient custom, and are much
prized and cherished by the Chiefs and their families. Frequently
the Indians have exhibited to me with pride, old medals issued,
with the likeness of the King before the American war of
Independence, and which have passed down as heirlooms of their
families. On one occasion a young Chief, who had come of age and
aspired to be recognized as a Chief, was decorated in my presence
with the old King George silver medal, by one of the band, to whom
it had been entrusted for safe keeping by the young man's father,
who was a Chief, with the charge that on the boy's coming of age,
it would be delivered over to him. The Chieftainships were at first
partly hereditary, partly won by deeds of daring and of leadership
against the foe. They are now generally elected, though the
tendency to hereditary succession still largely exists. The power
of the Chiefs has been much broken of late, and I am of opinion
that it is of importance to strengthen the hands of the Chiefs
and Councillors by a due recognition of their offices and respect
being shewn them. They should be strongly impressed with the belief
that they are officers of the Crown, and that it is their duty
to see that the Indians of their tribes obey the provisions of
the treaties. The importance of upholding the Chiefs, may be
illustrated by an incident which occurred near Fort Ellice, after
the making of the treaty. A party composed of three men and the
wife of one of them, were travelling as freighters; two of the
men were Half-breeds, the other a Canadian. One night, one of the
Half-breeds shot the Canadian, and attempted to kill the other
Half-breed, who fled to an Indian camp in the vicinity. The Chief
of the band was there, and he at once took his young men with him,
proceeded to the scene of the murder, and after making the offender
a prisoner, took him to the nearest police station and delivered
him to the authorities. The culprit was subsequently tried in
Manitoba, convicted of murder and hanged. For this action the Chief
received the thanks of His Excellency the Earl of Dufferin, then
Governor-General of Canada. This case affords an illustration of
the value of the recognition of the Chiefs of the various bands,
and shews of how much advantage, it is to the Crown to possess so
large a number of Indian officials, duly recognized as such, and
who can be inspired with a proper sense of their responsibility to
the Government and to their bands, as well as to others. In all the
negotiations for treaties, the Chiefs took a controlling part, and
generally exhibited great common sense and excellent judgment. It
is therefore of the utmost importance to retain their confidence
and cause their office to be recognized and respected by both
whites and Indians.

4. The allotment of lands to the Indians, to be set aside as
reserves for them for homes and agricultural purposes, and which
cannot be sold or alienated without their consent, and then only
for their benefit; the extent of lands thus set apart being
generally one section for each family of five. I regard this
system as of great value. It at once secures to the Indian tribes
tracts of land, which cannot be interfered with, by the rush of
immigration, and affords the means of inducing them to establish
homes and learn the arts of agriculture. I regard the Canadian
system of allotting reserves to one or more bands together, in the
localities in which they have had the habit of living, as far
preferable to the American system of placing whole tribes, in large
reserves, which eventually become the object of cupidity to the
whites, and the breaking up of which, has so often led to Indian
wars and great discontent even if warfare did not result. The
Indians, have a strong attachment to the localities, in which they
and their fathers have been accustomed to dwell, and it is
desirable to cultivate this home feeling of attachment to the soil.
Moreover, the Canadian system of band reserves has a tendency to
diminish the offensive strength of the Indian tribes, should they
ever become restless, a remote contingency, if the treaties are
carefully observed. Besides, the fact of the reserves being
scattered throughout the territories, will enable the Indians to
obtain markets among the white settlers, for any surplus produce
they may eventually have to dispose of. It will be found desirable,
to assign to each family parts of the reserve for their own use, so
as to give them a sense of property in it, but all power of sale or
alienation of such lands should be rigidly prohibited. Any
premature enfranchisement of the Indians, or power given them to
part with their lands, would inevitably lead to the speedy breaking
up of the reserves, and the return of the Indians to their
wandering mode of life, and thereby to the re-creation of a
difficulty which the assignment of reserves was calculated to
obviate. There is no parallel between the condition of the
North-Western Indians, and that of the Indians who have so long
been under the fostering care of the Government in the older
Provinces of Ontario and Quebec.

5. A very important feature of all the treaties, is the giving to
the Indian bands, agricultural implements, oxen, cattle (to form
the nuclei of herds), and seed grain.

The Indians are fully aware that their old mode of life is passing
away. They are not "unconscious of their destiny;" on the contrary,
they are harassed with fears as to the future of their children and
the hard present of their own lives. They are tractable, docile,
and willing to learn. They recognize the fact that they must seek
part of their living from "the mother earth," to use their own
phraseology. A Chief at Fort Pitt said to me,--"I got a plough from
Mr. Christie of the Company twelve years ago. I have no cattle; I
put myself and my young men in front of it in the spring, and drag
it through the ground. I have no hoes; I make them out of the roots
of trees. Surely, when the Great Mother hears of our needs, she
will come to our help." [Footnote: This band a year ago raised
sufficient farm produce to support themselves without hunting.]
Such a disposition as this should be encouraged. Induce the Indians
to erect houses on their farms, and plant their "gardens" as they
call them, and then while away on their hunts, their wives and
children will have houses to dwell in, and will care for their
patches of corn and grain and potatoes. Then, too, the cattle given
them will expand into herds. It is true that the number assigned
to each band is comparatively limited, and the Government are
not bound to extend the number. This was done advisedly, by the
successive Governments of Canada, and the Commissioners, acting
under their instructions; for it was felt, that it was an
experiment to entrust them with cattle, owing to their inexperience
with regard to housing them and providing fodder for them in
winter, and owing, moreover, to the danger of their using them for
food, if short of buffalo meat or game. Besides, it was felt, that
as the Indian is, and naturally so, always asking, it was better,
that if the Government saw their way safely to increase the number
of cattle given to any band, it should be, not as a matter of
right, but of grace and favor, and as a reward for exertion in
the care of them, and as an incentive to industry. Already, the
prospect of many of the bands turning their attention to raising
food from the soil is very hopeful. In the reserve of St. Peter's,
in Manitoba, the Church of England has for many years had a church
and mission, and long before the advent of Canada as ruler of the
lands, the Indians of the Indian settlement had their houses and
gardens, the produce of which, went to supplement the results of
fishing and hunting. And so on the shores and islands of the Lake
of the Woods and on Rainy Lake, the Indians had their gardens.
Since the treaties, the Indians are turning their attention
much more to cultivating the soil. The Indian district agent in
the Qu'Appelle region, reported in November, 1878, that of the
twenty-four bands in this treaty, eleven are gradually turning
their attention to farming, and of these Chief Cote, of Swan River,
is the most advanced, having harvested that year two hundred and
eighty bushels of barley, over three thousand bushels of potatoes,
and a large quantity of other vegetables. The increase from the
four cows he received two years since is eleven head. This may
appear large, but such is the fact.

Lieut.-Gov. Laird reported in 1877, "That some of the bands within
the limits of Treaties Numbers Four and Six sowed grain and
potatoes with good results that year, one band having about one
hundred acres under cultivation." He also states that the Indians
are very desirous of farming, and that he has hopes that a much
larger quantity of seed will be sown next year (1879). He also
states that the band at White Fish Lake, raised enough that year to
maintain themselves without going to hunt. The Superintendent also
reported that in the Manitoba superintendency "a general desire to
be taught farming, building and other civilized arts exists, and
some of the Indians in Treaty Number Three, living in the vicinity
of Fort Francis, are said to evince enterprise and progress in
their farming operations." At Lac Seule, also in this treaty, the
progress of the Indians is quite marked. They have established two
villages in order to have the benefit of schools.

The Indian agent in the Lake Manitoba district makes a similar
statement. One band has eighteen small farms of one hundred acres
in all, on which they raise potatoes, Indian corn and garden
vegetables. They have twenty-nine houses, twenty-four horses, and
thirty-six head of cattle, of their own. Another built during the
year a good school-house, nineteen new houses, and had one hundred
and twenty-five acres under cultivation. Another had just begun
farming, built six houses, two stables and a barn, and possess
seven head of cattle. Still another had twenty-three houses and one
hundred and fifty acres under tillage, raising barley, wheat,
potatoes and vegetables, and having thirty-six head of cattle. It
is unnecessary to multiply instances, of the aptitude, the Indians
are exhibiting, within so recent a period after the completion of
the treaties, to avail themselves of obtaining their subsistence
from the soil. Their desire to do so, should be cultivated to the
fullest extent. They are, of course, generally ignorant of the
proper mode of farming. In the year 1876, I reported to the
Minister of the Interior, the Hon. David Mills, after my return
from the negotiation of the treaties at Forts Carlton and Pitt,
"that measures ought to be taken to instruct the Indians in farming
and building."

I said "that their present mode of living is passing away; the
Indians are tractable, docile and willing to learn. I think that
advantage should be taken of this disposition to teach them to
become self-supporting, which can best be accomplished by the aid
of a few practical farmers and carpenters to instruct them in
farming and house-building."

This view was corroborated by my successor, Lieutenant-Governor
Laird, who in 1878 reported from Battleford "that if it were
possible to employ a few good, practical men to aid and instruct
the Indians at seed time, I am of opinion that most of the bands on
the Saskatchewan would soon be able to raise sufficient crops to
meet their most pressing wants."

It is satisfactory to know, that the Government of Canada, decided
to act on these suggestions, at least in part, and have during the
past summer sent farm instructors into the Plain country. It is to
be hoped, that this step may prove as fruitful of good results, as
the earnest desire of the Indians to farm would lead us to believe
it may be.

SCHOOLS

6. The treaties provide for the establishment of schools, on the
reserves, for the instruction of the Indian children. This is a
very important feature, and is deserving of being pressed with the
utmost energy. The new generation can be trained in the habits and
ways of civilized life--prepared to encounter the difficulties with
which they will be surrounded, by the influx of settlers, and
fitted for maintaining themselves as tillers of the soil. The
erection of a school-house on a reserve will be attended with
slight expense, and the Indians would often give their labour
towards its construction.

7. The treaties all provide for the exclusion of the sale of
spirits, or "fire-water," on the reserves. The Indians themselves
know their weakness. Their wise men say, "If it is there we will
use it, give us a strong law against it." A general prohibitory
liquor law, originally enacted by the North-West Council and
re-enacted by the Parliament of Canada, is in force in the
North-West Territories and has been productive of much benefit, but
will, in the near future, be difficult of enforcement owing to the
vast extent of the territory.

Such are the main features of the treaties between Canada and the
Indians, and, few as they are, they comprehend the whole future of
the Indians and of their relations to the Dominion.

MACHINERY OF GOVERNMENT

To carry them out, the treaty area has been divided into two
Superintendencies, that of Manitoba, including Treaties Numbers
One, Two, Three and Four, and that of the North-West Territories,
including Treaties Numbers Five, Six and Seven. Mr. Dewdney, late
a Member of the House of Commons from British Columbia, has
recently been appointed to the latter Superintendency as Chief
Superintendent, and has spent the summer among the Indian tribes.
He has had large experience among Indians, and will prove, I have
no doubt, an efficient and able officer. His residence will be
in his Superintendency, and he will be able to meet the Indians
and supervise his deputies. Under the Superintendents are agents
having charge of particular districts and the bands within them,
who reside among them. The Chief Superintendents and agents are
officers of the Department of the Interior, and are directed by and
report to the Deputy Superintendent of Indian Affairs at Ottawa,
Lawrence Vankoughnet, Esq., who has had long experience of Indian
management in the older Provinces, and his superior, Col. Dennis,
Deputy Minister of the Interior, who had a large practical
acquaintance with the North-West, and the head of the Department,
now the Premier of the Dominion, the Right Hon. Sir John Macdonald.
The system of management is thus a complete one, and doubtless, day
by day, its mode of management, will be perfected and adapted to
the growing exigencies and wants of the native population.

THE HALF-BREEDS

Ere passing from the subject, I cannot refrain from alluding to the
Half-breed population of the North-West Territories. Those people
are mainly of French Canadian descent, though there are a few of
Scotch blood in the territories. Their influence with the Indian
population is extensive. In Manitoba there is a large population of
French Metis and Scotch Half-breeds, and they are proud of their
mixed blood. This race is an important factor with regard to all
North-West questions. His Excellency the Earl of Dufferin, with his
keen appreciation of men and facts, astutely seized the position
and thus referred to them in his speech at a banquet in his honor,
given by the citizens of the whilome hamlet, and now city of
Winnipeg, on the occasion of his visit to the Province of Manitoba
in the year 1877.

"There is no doubt that a great deal of the good feeling thus
subsisting between the red men and ourselves is due to the
influence and interposition of that invaluable class of men the
Half-breed settlers and pioneers of Manitoba, who, combining as
they do the hardihood, the endurance and love of enterprise
generated by the strain of Indian blood within their veins, with
the civilization, the instruction, and the intellectual power
derived from their fathers, have preached the Gospel of peace and
good will, and mutual respect, with equally beneficent results to
the Indian chieftain in his lodge and to the British settler in the
shanty. They have been the ambassadors between the east and the
west; the interpreters of civilization and its exigencies to the
dwellers on the prairie as well as the exponents to the white men
of the consideration justly due to the susceptibilities, the
sensitive self-respect, the prejudices, the innate craving for
justice, of the Indian race. In fact they have done for the colony
what otherwise would have been left unaccomplished and have
introduced between the white population and the red man a
traditional feeling of amity and friendship which but for them it
might have been impossible to establish."

For my own part, I can frankly say, that I always had the
confidence, support and active co-operation of the Half-breeds of
all origins, in my negotiations with the Indian tribes, and I owe
them this full acknowledgment thereof. The Half-breeds in the
territories are of three classes--1st, those who as at St. Laurent,
near Prince Albert, the Qu'Appelle Lakes and Edmonton, have their
farms and homes; 2nd, those who are entirely identified with the
Indians, living with them, and speaking their language; 3rd, those
who do not farm, but live after the habits of the Indians, by the
pursuit of the buffalo and the chase.

As to the first class, the question is an easy one. They will, of
course, be recognized as possessors of the soil, and confirmed by
the Government in their holdings, and will continue to make their
living by farming and trading.

The second class have been recognized as Indians, and have passed
into the bands among whom they reside.

The position of the third class is more difficult. The loss of the
means of livelihood by the destruction of the buffalo, presses upon
them, as upon our Indian tribes; and with regard to them I reported
in 1876, and I have seen no reason to change my views, as follows:

"There is another class of the population in the North-West whose
position I desire to bring under the notice of the Privy Council. I
refer to the wandering Half-breeds of the plains, who are chiefly
of French descent and live the life of the Indians. There are a few
who are identified with the Indians, but there is a large class of
Metis who live by the hunt of the buffalo, and have no settled
homes. I think that a census of the numbers of these should be
procured, and while I would not be disposed to recommend their
being brought under the treaties, I would suggest that land should
be assigned to them, and that on their settling down, if after an
examination into their circumstances, it should be found necessary
and expedient, some assistance should be given them to enable them
to enter upon agricultural operations."

FUTURE OF THE INDIANS

And now I come, to a very important question, What is to be the
future of the Indian population of the North-West? I believe it to
be a hopeful one. I have every confidence in the desire and ability
of the present administration, as of any succeeding one, to carry
out the provisions of the treaties, and to extend a helping hand to
this helpless population. That, conceded, with the machinery at
their disposal, with a judicious selection of agents and farm
instructors, and the additional aid of well-selected carpenters,
and efficient school teachers, I look forward to seeing the
Indians, faithful allies of the Crown, while they can gradually be
made an increasing and self-supporting population.

They are wards of Canada, let us do our duty by them, and repeat in
the North-west, the success which has attended our dealings with
them in old Canada, for the last hundred years.

But the Churches too have their duties to fulfil. There is a common
ground between the Christian Churches and the Indians, as they all
believe as we do, in a Great Spirit. The transition thence to the
Christian's God is an easy one.

Many of them appeal for missionaries, and utter the Macedonian cry,
"come over and help us." The Churches have already done and are
doing much. The Church of Rome has its bishops and clergy, who have
long been laboring assiduously and actively. The Church of England
has its bishops and clergy on the shores of the Hudson's Bay, in
the cold region of the Mackenzie and the dioceses of Rupert's Land
and Saskatchewan. The Methodist Church has its missions on Lake
Winnipeg, in the Saskatchewan Valley, and on the slopes of the
Rocky Mountains. The Presbyterians have lately commenced a work
among the Chippewas and Sioux. There is room enough and to spare,
for all, and the Churches should expand and maintain their work.
Already many of the missionaries have made records which will live
in history: among those of recent times, Archbishop Tache, Bishop
Grandin, Pere Lacombe, and many others of the Catholic Church;
Bishops Machray, Bompas, Archdeacons Cochran and Cowley of the
Church of England; Revs. Messrs. Macdougall of the Wesleyan and
Nisbet of the Presbyterian Churches, have lived and labored, and
though some of them have gone to their rest, they have left and
will leave behind them a record of self-denial, untiring zeal, and
many good results. Let the Churches persevere and prosper.

And now I close. Let us have Christianity and civilization to
leaven the mass of heathenism and paganism among the Indian tribes;
let us have a wise and paternal Government faithfully carrying out
the provisions of our treaties, and doing its utmost to help and
elevate the Indian population, who have been cast upon our care,
and we will have peace, progress, and concord among them in the
North-West; and instead of the Indian melting away, as one of them
in older Canada, tersely put it, "as snow before the sun," we will
see our Indian population, loyal subjects of the Crown, happy,
prosperous and self-sustaining, and Canada will be enabled to feel,
that in a truly patriotic spirit, our country has done its duty by
the red men of the North-West, and thereby to herself. So may it
be.

[Illustration: NOTE.--The foregoing represents a copy of the
signatures of the contracting parties to the Selkirk Treaty, the
Indians signing by their own distinctive marks, and also affixing
their signs opposite the tracts of country claimed by them.]



APPENDIX

TEXTS OF TREATIES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ADHESIONS THERETO


THE SELKIRK TREATY

This indenture, made on the eighteenth day of July, in the
fifty-seventh year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord King George
the Third, and in the year of our Lord eighteen hundred and
seventeen, between the undersigned Chiefs and warriors of the
Chippeway or Saulteaux Nation and of the Killistine or Cree Nation,
on the one part, and the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Selkirk, on
the other part:

Witnesseth, that for and in consideration of the annual present or
quit rent hereinafter mentioned, the said Chiefs have given,
granted and confirmed, and do, by these presents, give, grant and
confirm unto our Sovereign Lord the King all that tract of land
adjacent to Red River and Ossiniboyne River, beginning at the mouth
of Red River and extending along same as far as Great Forks at the
mouth of Red Lake River, and along Ossiniboyne River, otherwise
called Riviere des Champignons, and extending to the distance of
six miles from Fort Douglas on every side, and likewise from Fort
Doer, and also from the Great Forks and in other parts extending in
breadth to the distance of two English statute miles back from the
banks of the said rivers, on each side, together with all the
appurtenances whatsoever of the said tract of land, to have and to
hold forever the said tract of land and appurtenances to the use of
the said Earl of Selkirk, and of the settlers being established
thereon, with the consent and permission of our Sovereign Lord the
King, or of the said Earl of Selkirk. Provided always, and these
presents are under the express condition that the said Earl, his
heirs and successors, or their agents, shall annually pay to the
Chiefs and warriors of the Chippeway or Saulteaux Nation, the
present or quit rent consisting of one hundred pounds weight of
good and merchantable tobacco, to be delivered on or before the
tenth day of October at the forks of Ossiniboyne River--and to
the Chiefs and warriors of the Killistine or Cree Nation, a like
present or quit rent of one hundred pounds of tobacco, to be
delivered to them on or before the said tenth day of October, at
Portage de la Prairie, on the banks of Ossiniboyne River. Provided
always that the traders hitherto established upon any part of
the above-mentioned tract of land shall not be molested in the
possession of the lands which they have already cultivated and
improved, till His Majesty's pleasure shall be known.

In witness whereof the Chiefs aforesaid have set their marks, at
the Forks of Red River on the day aforesaid.

                   (Signed) SELKIRK.
                            MACHE WHESEAB,       His x mark.
                                 Le Sonnant.
                            MECHKADDEWIKONAIE,    "  x  "
                                 La robe noire.
                            KAYAJIESKEBINOA,      "  x  "
                                 L'Homme Noir.
                            PEGOWIS.              "  x  "
                            OUCKIDOAT,            "  x  "
                                 Le Premier.
Signed in presence of
  THOMAS THOMAS.
  JAMES BIRD.
  F. MATTHEY,
       Captain.
  P. D. ORSONNENS,
       Captain.
  MILES MACDONELL.
  J. BTE. CHARLES DE LORIMIER.
  LOUIS NOLIN,
       Interpreter.



INDENTURE OF SALE FROM THE HUDSON'S BAY COMPANY TO THE EARL OF SELKIRK

This indenture, made the twelfth day of June, in the fifty-first
year of the reign of Our Sovereign Lord George the Third, by the
grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland,
King, Defender of the Faith, and in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and eleven, between the Governor and Company
of Adventurers of England, trading into Hudson's Bay, of the one
part, and the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Selkirk, of the other
part:

Whereas the said Governor and Company are seized to them and their
successors in fee simple, as absolute lords and proprietors of all
the lands and territories situate upon the coasts and confines of
the seas, streights, bays, lakes, rivers, creeks, and sounds,
within the entrance of the streights commonly called Hudson's
Streights, in the north-west part of America, and which lands and
territories are reputed as one of the plantations or colonies
belonging or annexed to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, and are called Rupert's Land.

And whereas the said Governor and Company have, for divers good and
valuable causes and considerations them thereunto moving, agreed to
convey and assure a certain tract or parcel of the said lands and
territories hereinafter described, unto and to the use of the said
Earl of Selkirk, his heirs and assigns, under and subject to
certain conditions hereinafter expressed and contained. Now,
therefore, this indenture witnesseth, that in pursuance of such
agreement, and in consideration of the sum of ten shillings of
lawful money of Great Britain to the said Governor and Company,
well and truly paid by the said Earl of Selkirk, at or before the
execution of these presents (the receipt whereof is hereby
acknowledged), and for divers good and other valuable causes and
considerations, them, the said Governor and Company hereunto
moving, the said Governor and Company have given, granted, aliened,
enfeoffed and confirmed, and by these presents do give, grant,
alien, enfeoff, and confirm unto the said Earl of Selkirk, his
heirs and assigns, all that tract of land or territory, being
within and forming part of the aforesaid lands and territories of
the said Governor and Company, bounded by an imaginary line running
as follows, that is to say: beginning on the western shore of the
Lake Winnipie, otherwise Winnipey, at a point in fifty-two degrees,
and thirty north latitude, and thence running due west to the Lake
Winnipegoos, otherwise called Little Winnipey, then in a southerly
direction through the said lake so as to strike its western shore
in latitude fifty-two degrees, then due west to the place where the
parallel of fifty-two degrees north latitude intersects the western
branch of Red River, otherwise called Assiniboyne River, then due
south from that point of intersection to the height of land which
separates the waters running into Hudson's Bay, from those of the
Missouri and Mississippi, then in an easterly direction along the
said height of land to the source of the River Winnipie, or
Winnipey (meaning by such last named river, the principal branch of
the waters which unite in Lake Saginagus), thence along the main
stream of these waters and the middle of the several lakes through
which they flow to the mouth of the Winnipie River, and thence in a
northerly direction through the middle of Lake Winnipie to the
place of beginning.

In witness whereof the said parties to these presents have hereunto
set their hands and seals the day and year first above written.

    (Signed) SELKIRK.        [L. S.]
             ALEXANDER LEAN, [L. S.]
    Secretary of the Hudson's Bay Company.

Indorsed.--Sealed under the common seal of the within mentioned
Governor and Company, and signed and delivered by Alexander Lean,
their Secretary, pursuant to their order and appointment, and
signed, sealed and delivered by the within mentioned Thomas, Earl
of Selkirk (being first duly stamped), in the presence of

    ALEXANDER MUNDELL,
        Parliament Street, Westminster.
    EDWARD ROBERTS,
        Hudson's Bay House.

Suit l'attestation ecrite et assermentie du premier de ces deux
temoins, Alex. Mundell, en presence du Maire de Londres.

Sworn at the Mansion House,
  London, this twenty-third day     (Signed) ALEXANDER MUNDELL.
  of April, 1819, before me,
                                             JOHN AIKINS,   [L. S.]
                                                 Mayor.

Puis, Attestation notariee, in testimonium veritatis.

                                    (Signed) WILLIAM DUFF,
                                                 Notary Public.

Be it remembered that on the fourth day of September, in the year
1812, at the Forks of Red River, peaceable possession of the land
and hereditaments by the within written indenture, granted and
enfeoffed, or otherwise assured or expressed, and intended so to
be, was taken, had and delivered, by the within named William
Hillier, one of the attorneys for that purpose appointed, unto the
within named Miles Macdonell, Esquire, who was duly authorized to
receive the same, to and for the use of the within named Earl of
Selkirk, his heirs and assigns according to the form and effect of
the within written indenture in the presence of

    (Signed) JOHN McLEOD,
             RODERICK McKENZIE.



THE ROBINSON SUPERIOR TREATY

This agreement, made and entered into on the seventh day of
September, in the year of Our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
fifty, at Sault Ste. Marie, in the Province of Canada, between
the Honorable William Benjamin Robinson, of the one part, on
behalf of Her Majesty the Queen, and Joseph Peandechat, John
Iuinway, Mishe-Muckqua, Totomencie, Chiefs, and Jacob Warpela,
Ahmutchiwagabou, Michel Shelageshick, Manitoshainse, and Chiginans,
principal men of the Ojibewa Indians inhabiting the Northern
Shore of Lake Superior, in the said Province of Canada, from
Batchewananng Bay to Pigeon River, at the western extremity of said
lake, and inland throughout the extent to the height of land which
separates the territory covered by the charter of the Honorable the
Hudson's Bay Company from the said tract, and also the islands in
the said lake within the boundaries of the British possessions
therein, of the other part, witnesseth:

That for and in consideration of the sum of two thousand pounds of
good and lawful money of Upper Canada, to them in hand paid, and
for the further perpetual annuity of five hundred pounds, the same
to be paid and delivered to the said Chiefs and their tribes at
a convenient season of each summer, not later than the first day
of August at the Honorable the Hudson's Bay Company's Posts of
Michipicoton and Fort William, they the said Chiefs and principal
men do freely, fully and voluntarily surrender, cede, grant and
convey unto Her Majesty, Her heirs and successors forever, all
their right, title and interest in the whole of the territory
above described, save and except the reservations set forth in
the schedule hereunto annexed, which reservations shall be held
and occupied by the said Chiefs and their tribes in common, for
the purposes of residence and cultivation,--and should the said
Chiefs and their respective tribes at any time desire to dispose
of any mineral or other valuable productions upon the said
reservations, the same will be at their request sold by order of
the Superintendent-General of the Indian Department for the time
being, for their sole use and benefit, and to the best advantage.

And the said William Benjamin Robinson of the first part, on behalf
of Her Majesty and the Government of this Province, hereby promises
and agrees to make the payments as before mentioned; and further to
allow the said Chiefs and their tribes the full and free privilege
to hunt over the territory now ceded by them, and to fish in the
waters thereof as they have heretofore been in the habit of doing,
saving and excepting only such portions of the said territory
as may from time to time be sold or leased to individuals, or
companies of individuals, and occupied by them with the consent of
the Provincial Government. The parties of the second part further
promise and agree that they will not sell, lease, or otherwise
dispose of any portion of their reservations without the consent of
the Superintendent-General of Indian Affairs being first had and
obtained; nor will they at any time hinder or prevent persons from
exploring or searching for minerals or other valuable productions
in any part of the territory hereby ceded to Her Majesty as before
mentioned. The parties of the second part also agree that in case
the Government of this Province should before the date of this
agreement have sold, or bargained to sell, any mining locations or
other property on the portions of the territory hereby reserved for
their use and benefit, then and in that case such sale, or promise
of sale, shall be perfected, if the parties interested desire it,
by the Government, and the amount accruing therefrom shall be paid
to the tribe to whom the reservation belongs. The said William
Benjamin Robinson on behalf of Her Majesty, who desires to deal
liberally and justly with all her subjects, further promises and
agrees that in case the territory hereby ceded by the parties of
the second part shall at any future period produce an amount which
will enable the Government of this Province without incurring loss
to increase the annuity hereby secured to them, then, and in that
case, the same shall be augmented from time to time, provided that
the amount paid to each individual shall not exceed the sum of one
pound provincial currency in any one year, or such further sum
as Her Majesty may be graciously pleased to order; and provided
further that the number of Indians entitled to the benefit of this
treaty shall amount to two-thirds of their present numbers (which
is twelve hundred and forty) to entitle them to claim the full
benefit thereof, and should their numbers at any future period not
amount to two-thirds of twelve hundred and forty, the annuity shall
be diminished in proportion to their actual numbers.

Schedule of Reservations made by the above named and subscribing
Chiefs and principal men.

First--Joseph Pean-de-chat and his tribe, the reserve to commence
about two miles from Fort William (inland), on the right bank of
the River Kiministiquia; thence westerly six miles, parallel to the
shores of the lake; thence northerly five miles, thence easterly to
the right bank of the said river, so as not to interfere with any
acquired rights of the Honorable Hudson's Bay Company.

Second--Four miles square at Gros Cap, being a valley near the
Honorable Hudson's Bay Company's post of Michipicoton, for
Totominai and tribe.

Third--Four miles square on Gull River, near Lake Nipigon, on both
sides of said river, for the Chief Mishimuckqua and tribe.

      (Signed)  W. B. ROBINSON.
                JOSEPH PEAN-DE-CHAT.   His x mark. [L. S.]
                JOHN MINWAY.            "  x  "    [L. S.]
                MISHE-MUCKQUA.          "  x  "    [L. S.]
                TOTOMINAI.              "  x  "    [L. S.]
                JACOB WAPELA.           "  x  "    [L. S.]
                AH-MUTCHINAGALON.       "  x  "    [L. S.]
                MICHEL SHELAGESHICK.    "  x  "    [L. S.]
                MANITOU SHAINSE.        "  x  "    [L. S.]
                CHIGINANS.              "  x  "    [L. S.]

Signed, sealed and delivered at Sault Ste. Marie, the day and year
first above written, in presence of--

(Signed) GEORGE IRONSIDE,
             S. I. Affairs.
         ASTLEY P. COOPER,
             Capt. Com. Rifle Brig.
         H. M. BALFOUR,
             2nd Lieut. Rifle Brig.
         JOHN SWANSTON,
             C. F. Hon. Hud. Bay Co.
         GEORGE JOHNSTON,
             Interpreter.
         F. W. KEATING.



THE ROBINSON HURON TREATY

This agreement, made and entered into this ninth day of September,
in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and fifty, at
Sault Ste. Marie, in the Province of Canada, between the Honorable
William Benjamin Robinson, of the one part, on behalf of Her Majesty
the Queen, and Shinguacouse Nebenaigoching, Keokouse, Mishequonga,
Tagawinini, Shabokishick, Dokis, Ponekeosh, Windawtegowinini,
Shawenakeshick, Namassin, Naoquagabo, Wabakekik, Kitchepossigun,
by Papasainse, Wagemaki, Pamequonaisheung, Chiefs; and John Bell,
Paqwatchinini, Mashekyash, Idowekesis, Waquacomick, Ocheek,
Metigomin, Watachewana, Minwawapenasse, Shenaoquom, Oningegun,
Panaissy, Papasainse, Ashewasega, Kageshewawetung, Shawonebin; and
also Chief Maisquaso (also Chiefs Muckata, Mishoquet, and Mekis),
and Mishoquetto and Asa Waswanay and Pawiss, principal men of the
Ojibewa Indians, inhabiting and claiming the eastern and northern
shores of Lake Huron, from Penetanguishene to Sault Ste. Marie, and
thence to Batchewanaung Bay, on the northern shore of Lake Superior,
together with the Islands in the said Lakes, opposite to the shores
thereof, and inland to the height of land which separates the
territory covered by the charter of the Honorable Hudson's Bay
Company from Canada; as well as all unconceded lands within the
limits of Canada West to which they have any just claim, of the
other part, witnesseth:

That for and in consideration of the sum of two thousand pounds of
good and lawful money of Upper Canada, to them in hand paid, and
for the further perpetual annuity of six hundred pounds of like
money, the same to be paid and delivered to the said Chiefs and
their tribes at a convenient season of each year, of which due
notice will be given, at such places as may be appointed for that
purpose, they the said Chiefs and principal men, on behalf of their
respective tribes or bands, do hereby fully, freely and voluntarily
surrender, cede, grant, and convey unto Her Majesty, her heirs and
successors forever, all their right, title, and interest to, and in
the whole of, the territory above described, save and except the
reservations set forth in the schedule hereunto annexed; which
reservations shall be held and occupied by the said Chiefs and
their tribes in common, for their own use and benefit.

And should the said Chiefs and their respective tribes at any time
desire to dispose of any such reservations, or of any mineral or
other valuable productions thereon, the same will be sold or leased
at their request by the Superintendent-General of Indian Affairs
for the time being, or other officer having authority so to do, for
their sole benefit, and to the best advantage.

And the said William Benjamin Robinson of the first part, on behalf of
Her Majesty and the Government of this Province, hereby promises and
agrees to make, or cause to be made, the payments as before mentioned;
and further to allow the said Chiefs and their tribes the full and free
privilege to hunt over the territory now ceded by them, and to fish
in the waters thereof, as they have heretofore been in the habit of
doing; saving and excepting such portions of the said territory as may
from time to time be sold or leased to individuals or companies of
individuals, and occupied by them with the consent of the Provincial
Government.

The parties of the second part further promise and agree that they
will not sell, lease or otherwise dispose of any portion of their
Reservations without the consent of the Superintendent-General of
Indian Affairs, or other officer of like authority, being first had
and obtained. Nor will they at any time hinder or prevent persons
from exploring or searching for minerals, or other valuable
productions, in any part of the territory hereby ceded to Her
Majesty, as before mentioned. The parties of the second part also
agree, that in case the Government of this Province should before
the date of this agreement have sold, or bargained to sell, any
mining locations, or other property, on the portions of the
territory hereby reserved for their use; then and in that case such
sale, or promise of sale, shall be perfected by the Government, if
the parties claiming it shall have fulfilled all the conditions
upon which such locations were made, and the amount accruing
therefrom shall be paid to the tribe to whom the Reservation
belongs.

The said William Benjamin Robinson, on behalf of Her Majesty, who
desires to deal liberally and justly with all her subjects, further
promises and agrees, that should the territory hereby ceded by the
parties of the second part at any future period produce such an
amount as will enable the Government of this Province, without
incurring loss, to increase the annuity hereby secured to them,
then and in that case the same shall be augmented from time to
time, provided that the amount paid to each individual shall not
exceed the sum of one pound Provincial currency in any one year, or
such further sum as Her Majesty may be graciously pleased to order;
and provided further that the number of Indians entitled to the
benefit of this treaty shall amount to two-thirds of their present
number, which is fourteen hundred and twenty-two, to entitle them
to claim the full benefit thereof. And should they not at any
future period amount to two-thirds of fourteen hundred and
twenty-two, then the said annuity shall be diminished in proportion
to their actual numbers.

The said William Benjamin Robinson of the first part further
agrees, on the part of Her Majesty and the Government of this
Province, that in consequence of the Indians inhabiting French
River and Lake Nipissing having become parties to this treaty, the
further sum of one hundred and sixty pounds Provincial currency
shall be paid in addition to the two thousand pounds above
mentioned.

Schedule of Reservations made by the above-named subscribing Chiefs
and Principal Men.

First--Pamequonaishcung and his band, a tract of land to commence
seven miles, from the mouth of the River Maganetawang, and
extending six miles east and west by three miles north.

Second--Wagemake and his band, a tract of land to commence at a
place called Nekickshegeshing, six miles from east to west, by
three miles in depth.

Third--Kitcheposkissegan (by Papasainse), from Point Grondine
westward, six miles inland, by two miles in front, so as to include
the small Lake Nessinassung--a tract for themselves and their
bands.

Fourth--Wabakekik, three miles front, near Shebawenaning, by five
miles inland, for himself and band.

Fifth--Namassin and Naoquagabo and their bands, a tract of land
commencing near Quacloche, at the Hudson Bay Company's boundary;
thence westerly to the mouth of the Spanish River; then four miles
up the south bank of said river, and across to the place of
beginning.

Sixth--Shawenakishick and his band, a tract of land now occupied by
them, and contained between two rivers, called Whitefish River, and
Wanabitaseke, seven miles inland.

Seventh--Windawtegawinini and his band, the Peninsula east of Serpent
River, and formed by it, now occupied by them.

Eighth--Ponekeosh and his band, the land contained between the
River Mississaga and the River Penebewabecong, up to the first
rapids.

Ninth--Dokis and his band, three miles square at Wanabeyakokaun,
near Lake Nipissing and the Island near the Fall of Okickandawt.

Tenth--Shabokishick and his band, from their present planting
grounds on Lake Nipissing to the Hudson Bay Company's post, six
miles in depth.

Eleventh--Tagawinini and his band, two miles square at Wanabitibing,
a place about forty miles inland, near Lake Nipissing.

Twelfth--Keokouse and his band, four miles front from Thessalon
River eastward, by four miles inland.

Thirteenth--Mishequanga and his band, two miles on the lake shore
east and west of Ogawaminang, by one mile inland.

Fourteenth--For Shinguacouse and his band, a tract of land
extending from Maskinonge Bay, inclusive, to Partridge Point, above
Garden River on the front, and inland ten miles, throughout the
whole distance; and also Squirrel Island.

Fifteenth--For Nebenaigoching and his band, a tract of land
extending from Wanabekineyunnung west of Gros Cap to the boundary
of the lands ceded by the Chiefs of Lake Superior, and inland ten
miles throughout the whole distance, including Batchewanaunng Bay;
and also the small island at Sault Ste. Marie used by them as a
fishing station.

Sixteenth--For Chief Mekis and his band, residing at Wasaquesing
(Sandy Island), a tract of land at a place on the main shore
opposite the Island; being the place now occupied by them for
residence and cultivation, four miles square.

Seventeenth--For Chief Muckatamishaquet and his band, a tract of
land on the east side of the River Naishconteong, near Pointe aux
Barils, three miles square; and also a small tract in Washauwenega
Bay--now occupied by a part of the band--three miles square.

   (Signed) W. B. ROBINSON.
            SHINGUACOUSE.         His x mark. [L. S.]
            NEBENAIGOCHING.        "  x  "    [L. S.]
            KEOKOUSE.              "  x  "    [L. S.]
            MISHEQUONGA.           "  x  "    [L. S.]
            TAGAWININI.            "  x  "    [L. S.]
            SHABOKESHICK.          "  x  "    [L. S.]
            DOKIS.                 "  x  "    [L. S.]
            PONEKEOSH.             "  x  "    [L. S.]
            WINDAWTEGOWININI.      "  x  "    [L. S.]
            SHAWENAKESHICK.        "  x  "    [L. S.]
            NAMASSIN.              "  x  "    [L. S.]
            MUCKATA MISHAQUET.     "  x  "    [L. S.]
            MEKIS.                 "  x  "    [L. S.]
            MAISQUASO.             "  x  "    [L. S.]
            NAOQUAGABO.            "  x  "    [L. S.]
            WABOKEKICK.            "  x  "    [L. S.]
            KITCHEPOSSEGUN         "  x  "    [L. S.]
                  (by Papasainse).
            WAGEMAKE.              "  x  "    [L. S.]
            PAMEQUONAISHCUNG.      "  x  "    [L. S.]
            JOHN BELL.             "  x  "    [L. S.]
            PAQWATCHININI.         "  x  "    [L. S.]
            MASHEKYASH.            "  x  "    [L. S.]
            IDOWEKESIS.            "  x  "    [L. S.]
            WAQUACOMICK.           "  x  "    [L. S.]
            MISHOQUETTO.           "  x  "    [L. S.]
            ASA WASWANAY.          "  x  "    [L. S.]
            PAWISS.                "  x  "    [L. S.]
            OCHEEK.                "  x  "    [L. S.]
            METIGOMIN.             "  x  "    [L. S.]
            WATACHEWANA.           "  x  "    [L. S.]
            MIMEWAWAPENASSE.       "  x  "    [L. S.]
            SHENAOQUM.             "  x  "    [L. S.]
            ONINGEGUN.             "  x  "    [L. S.]
            PANAISSY.              "  x  "    [L. S.]
            PAPASAINSE.            "  x  "    [L. S.]
            ASHEWASEGA.            "  x  "    [L. S.]
            KAGISHEWAWETUNG        "  x  "    [L. S.]
                  (by Baboncung).
            SHAWONEBIN.            "  x  "    [L. S.]

Signed, sealed and delivered at Sault Ste. Marie, the day and year
first above written, in presence of

(Signed) ASTLEY P. COOPER,
             Capt. Rifle Brig.
         GEORGE IRONSIDE,
             S. I. Affairs.
         F. W. BALFOUR,
             Lieut. Rifle Brig.
         ALLAN MACDONELL.
         GEO. JOHNSON,
             Interpreter.
         LOUIS CADOTT.
         J. B. ASSIKINACK.
         T. W. KEATING.
         JOS. WILSON.

Witnesses to signatures of Muckata Mishaquet, Mekis, Mishoquetto,
Asa Waswanay, and Pawiss--

    T. G. ANDERSON, S. I. A.
    W. B. HAMILTON.
    W. SIMPSON.
    ALFRED A. THOMPSON.



THE MANITOULIN ISLAND TREATY

Articles of agreement and convention made and concluded at
Manitowaning, on the Great Manitoulin Island, in the Province of
Canada, the sixth day of October, Anno Domini 1862, between the
Hon. William McDougall, Superintendent-General of Indian Affairs,
and William Spragge, Esquire, Deputy Superintendent of Indian
Affairs, on the part of the Crown and Government of said Province,
of the first part, and Mai-she-quong-gai, Oke-mah-be-ness, J. B.
Assiginock, Benjamin Assiginock, Mai-be-nesse-ma, She-no-tah-gun,
George Ah-be-tos-o-wai, Paim-o-quo-waish-gung, Abence, Tai-bose-gai,
Ato-wish-cosh, Nai-wan-dai-ge-zhik, Wan-kan-o-say, Keesh-kewan-bik,
Chiefs and principal men of the Ottawa, Chippewa, and other Indians
occupying the said Island, on behalf of the said Indians, of the
second part:

Whereas, the Indian title to said Island was surrendered to the
Crown on the ninth August, Anno Domini 1836, under and by virtue of
a treaty made between Sir Francis Bond Head, then Governor of Upper
Canada, and the Chiefs and principal men of the Ottawas and
Chippewas then occupying and claiming title thereto, in order that
the same might "be made the property (under their Great Father's
control) of all Indians whom he should allow to reside thereon;"

And whereas, but few Indians from the mainland whom it was intended
to transfer to the Island, have ever come to reside thereon;

And whereas, it has been deemed expedient (with a view to the
improvement of the condition of the Indians, as well as the
settlement and improvement of the country), to assign to the
Indians now upon the Island certain specified portions thereof, to
be held by patent from the Crown, and to sell the other portions
thereof fit for cultivation to settlers, and to invest the proceeds
thereof, after deducting the expenses of survey and management, for
the benefit of the Indians;

And whereas, a majority of the Chiefs of certain bands residing on
that portion of the Island easterly of Heywood Sound and the
Manitoulin Gulf have expressed their unwillingness to accede to
this proposal as respects that portion of the Island, but have
assented to the same as respects all other portions thereof; and
whereas the Chiefs and principal men of the bands residing on the
Island westerly of the said Sound and Gulf have agreed to accede to
the said proposal:

Now this agreement witnesseth that in consideration of the sum of
seven hundred dollars now in hand paid (which sum is to be
hereafter deducted from the proceeds of lands sold to settlers),
the receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, and in further
consideration of such sums as may be realized from time to time as
interest upon the purchase money of the lands to be sold for their
benefit as aforesaid, the parties hereto of the second part have
and hereby do release, surrender and give up to Her Majesty the
Queen, all the right, title, interest and claim of the parties of
the second part, and of the Ottawa, Chippewa and other Indians in
whose behalf they act, of, in and to the Great Manitoulin Island,
and also of, in and to the Islands adjacent, which have been deemed
or claimed to be appertinent or belonging thereto, to have and to
hold the same and every part thereof to Her Majesty, her heirs and
successors forever.

And it is hereby agreed by and between the parties hereto as
follows:

Firstly--A survey of the said Manitoulin Island shall be made as
soon as conveniently may be, under the authority of the Department
of Crown Lands.

Secondly--The Crown will, as soon as conveniently may be, grant by
deed for the benefit of each Indian being the head of a family and
residing on the said Island, one hundred acres of land; to each
single person over twenty-one years of age, residing as aforesaid,
fifty acres of land; to each family of orphan children under
twenty-one years of age, containing two or more persons, one
hundred acres of land; and to each single orphan child under
twenty-one years of age, fifty acres of land; to be selected and
located under the following rules and conditions: Each Indian
entitled to land under this agreement may make his own selection of
any land on the Great Manitoulin Island:

Provided, 1st. That the lots selected shall be contiguous or
adjacent to each other, so that Indian settlements on the Island
may be as compact as possible. 2nd. That if two or more Indians
claim the same lot of land, the matter shall be referred to the
Resident Superintendent, who shall examine the case and decide
between them. 3rd. That selections for orphan children may be made
by their friends, subject to the approval of the Resident
Superintendent. 4th. Should any lot or lots, selected as aforesaid,
be contiguous to any bay or harbor, or any stream of water, upon
which a mill site shall be found, and should the Government be of
opinion that such lot or lots ought to be reserved for the use of
the public, or for village or park lots, or such mill site be sold
with a view to the erection of a mill thereon, and shall signify
such its opinion through its proper agent, then the Indian who has
selected, or who wishes to select such lot, shall make another
selection; but if he has made any improvements thereon, he shall be
allowed a fair compensation therefor. 5th. The selections shall all
be made within one year after the completion of the survey, and
for that purpose plans of the survey shall be deposited with
the Resident Superintendent as soon as they are approved by the
Department of Crown Lands, and shall be open to the inspection of
all Indians entitled to make selections as aforesaid.

Thirdly--The interests which may accrue from the investment of the
proceeds of sales of lands as aforesaid, shall be payable annually,
and shall be apportioned among the Indians now residing westerly of
the said Sound and Gulf, and their descendants per capita, but
every Chief lawfully appointed shall be entitled to two portions.

Fourthly--So soon as one hundred thousand acres of the said land is
sold, such portion of the salary of the Resident Superintendent,
and of the expenses of his office as the Government may deem
equitable, shall become a charge upon the said fund.

Fifthly--The deeds or patents for the lands to be selected as
aforesaid, shall contain such conditions for the protection of the
grantees as the Governor in Council may, under the law, deem
requisite.

Sixthly--All the rights and privileges in respect to the taking of
fish in the lakes, bays, creeks and waters within and adjacent to
the said Island, which may be lawfully exercised and enjoyed by the
white settlers thereon, may be exercised and enjoyed by the
Indians.

Seventhly--That portion of the Island easterly of Heywood Sound and
Manitoulin Gulf, and the Indians now residing there, are exempted
from the operation of this agreement as respects survey, sale of
lots, granting deeds to Indians, and payment in respect of moneys
derived from sales in other parts of the Island. But the said
Indians will remain under the protection of the Government as
formerly, and the said easterly part or division of the Island will
remain open for the occupation of any Indians entitled to reside
upon the Island as formerly, subject, in case of dispute, to the
approval of the Government.

Eighthly--Whenever a majority of the Chiefs and principal men at a
council of the Indians residing easterly of the said Sound and
Gulf, to be called and held for the purpose, shall declare their
willingness to accede to the present agreement in all respects and
portions thereof, and the Indians there shall be entitled to the
same privileges in every respect from and after the date of such
approval by the Government, as those residing in other parts of the
Island.

Ninthly--This agreement shall be obligatory and binding on the
contracting parties as soon as the same shall be approved by the
Governor in Council.

In witness whereof the said Superintendent-General of Indian
affairs, and Deputy Superintendent, and the undersigned Chiefs and
principal men of the Ottawa, Chippewa and other Indians have hereto
set their hands and seals at Manitowaning, the sixth day of
October, in the year first above written.

     (Signed)  WM. McDOUGALL.          [L. S.]
               WM. SPRAGGE             [L. S.]
               J. B. ASSIGINACK.       [L. S.]
               MAISHEGUONG-PAI.        [L. S.]
               OKEMAHBENESS.           [L. S.]
               BENJAMIN ASSIGINACK.    [L. S.]
               WAIBENESSIENNE.         [L. S.]
               SHEWETOGUN.             [L. S.]
               GEORGE WEBETOOSOWN.     [L. S.]
               PAIMOQUONAISHKING.      [L. S.]
               ABENCE.                 [L. S.]
               TAIBOSEGAI.             [L. S.]
               ATOWISHCOSTE.           [L. S.]
               WETCOWSAI.              [L. S.]
               KUSHKEWABIE.            [L. S.]
               BAIBONISAI.             [L. S.]
               KEGHIKGODONESS.         [L. S.]
               PALTAHDOGINSHKING.      [L. S.]

Executed in the presence of (having been first read, translated and
explained):

(Signed) GEORGE IRONSIDE,
             S. I. Affairs.
         S. PHILLIPS DAY.
         WM. GIBBARD.
         DAVID S. LAYTON.
         JOSEPH WILSON. [L. S.]
         JOHN H. McDOUGALL.
         F. ASSICKINACK.
         PETER JACOBS,
             Church of England Mission.
         McGREGOR IRONSIDE.

The undersigned is one of the Chiefs of the Wequainorekong band,
and appends his signature in testimony of his general approval and
his assent as an individual to all the terms of the above
agreement.

      (Signed) SIHKUMMEH.              [L. S.]
               RUNIC SAHLENG.          [L. S.]

MANITOWANING, October 6th, 1862.

Memorandum from Captain Ironside of Indian settlements on the
Manitoulin Island:

  Man-a-to-wan-ning.           She-she-gwan-a-sing.
  She-qui-ain-dand.            Min-de-moo-ya-se-be.
  Y-a-be-je-wong.              Che-to-wai-e-gun-ning (West).
  Me-che-co-wed-e-nong.        Weg-wai-me-kong.
  Mai-mon-a-ke-kong.           Weg-wai-me-kos-ing.
  She-she-gwan-ning.           Ohe-to-wai-e-gun-ning (East).



TREATIES IN MANITOBA, THE NORTH-WEST TERRITORIES, AND KEE-WA-TIN


TREATY NUMBER ONE

Articles of a treaty, made and concluded this third day of
August, in the year of our Lord, one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-one, between Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen of
Great Britain and Ireland, by Her Commissioner Wemyss M. Simpson,
Esquire, of the one part, and the Chippewa and Swampy Cree
Tribes of Indians, inhabitants of the country within the limits
hereinafter defined and described by their Chiefs, chosen and named
as hereinafter mentioned, of the other part:

Whereas, all the Indians inhabiting the said country have, pursuant
to an appointment made by the said Commissioner, been convened at
the Stone Fort, otherwise called Lower Fort Garry, to deliberate
upon certain matters of interest to Her Most Gracious Majesty of
the one part, and to the said Indians of the other; and whereas the
said Indians have been notified and informed by Her Majesty's said
Commissioner, that it is the desire of Her Majesty to open up to
settlement and immigration a tract of country bounded and described
as hereinafter mentioned, and to obtain the consent thereto of her
Indian subjects inhabiting the said tract and to make a treaty and
arrangements with them, so that there may be peace and good will
between them and Her Majesty, and that they may know and be assured
of what allowance they are to count upon and receive, year by year,
from Her Majesty's bounty and benevolence.

And whereas the Indians of the said tract, duly convened in
Council as aforesaid, and being requested by Her Majesty's said
Commissioner to name certain Chiefs and head men, who should be
authorized on their behalf to conduct such negotiations, and sign
any treaty to be founded thereon, and to become responsible to Her
Majesty for the faithful performance, by their respective bands,
of such obligations as should be assumed by them the said Indians,
have thereupon named the following persons for that purpose,
that is to say: Mis-koo-kenew, or Red Eagle, (Henry Prince);
Ka-ke-ka-penais, or Bird for ever; Na-sha-ke-penais, or Flying down
Bird; Na-na-wa-nana, or Centre of Bird's Tail; Ke-we-tayash, or
Flying round; Wa-ko-wash, or Whip-poor-Will; Oo-za-we-kwun, or
Yellow Quill; and thereupon, in open Council, the different bands
have presented their respective Chiefs to His Excellency the
Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Manitoba, and of the
North-West Territory, being present at such Council, and to the
said Commissioner, as the Chiefs and head men for the purposes
aforesaid, of the respective bands of Indians inhabiting the
said District, hereinafter described; and whereas the said
Lieutenant-Governor and the said Commissioner, then and there
received and acknowledged the persons so presented as Chiefs
and head men, for the purpose aforesaid; and whereas the said
Commissioner has proceeded to negotiate a treaty with the said
Indians, and the same has finally been agreed upon and concluded as
follows, that is to say:

The Chippewa and Swampy Cree Tribes of Indians, and all other the
Indians inhabiting the district hereinafter described and defined,
do hereby cede, release, surrender, and yield up to Her Majesty
the Queen, and her successors for ever, all the lands included
within the following limits, that is to say: Beginning at the
International boundary line near its junction with the Lake of the
Woods, at a point due north from the centre of Roseau Lake, thence
to run due north to the centre of Roseau Lake; thence northward to
the centre of White Mouth Lake, otherwise called White Mud Lake;
thence by the middle of the lake and the middle of the river
issuing therefrom, to the mouth thereof in Winnipeg River; thence
by the Winnipeg River to its mouth; thence westwardly, including
all the islands near the south end of the lake, across the lake to
the mouth of the Drunken River; thence westwardly, to a point on
Lake Manitoba, half way between Oak Point and the mouth of Swan
Creek; thence across Lake Manitoba, on a line due west to its
western shore; thence in a straight line to the crossing of the
Rapids on the Assiniboine; thence due south to the International
boundary line, and thence easterly by the said line to the place of
beginning; to have and to hold the same to Her said Majesty the
Queen, and her successors for ever; and Her Majesty the Queen,
hereby agrees and undertakes to lay aside and reserve for the sole
and exclusive use of the Indians, the following tracts of land,
that is to say: For the use of the Indians belonging to the band of
which Henry Prince, otherwise called Mis-koo-ke-new, is the Chief,
so much of land on both sides of the Red River, beginning at the
south line of St. Peter's Parish, as will furnish one hundred and
sixty acres for each family of five, or in that proportion for
larger or smaller families; and for the use of the Indians of whom
Na-sha-ke-penais, Na-na-wa-nanan, Ke-we-tayash, and Wa-ko-wush,
are the Chiefs, so much land on the Roseau River, as will furnish
one hundred and sixty acres for each family of five, or in that
proportion for larger or smaller families, beginning from the
mouth of the river; and for the use of the Indians, of which
Ka-ke-ka-penais is the Chief, so much land on the Winnipeg River,
above Fort Alexander, as will furnish one hundred and sixty
acres for each family of five, or in that proportion for larger
or smaller families, beginning at a distance of a mile or
thereabout above the Fort; and for the use of the Indians, of whom
Oo-za-we-Kwun is Chief, so much land on the south and east side
of the Assiniboine, about twenty miles above the Portage, as will
furnish one hundred and sixty acres for each family of five, or in
that proportion for larger or smaller families, reserving also a
further tract enclosing said reserve, to comprise an equivalent to
twenty-five square miles of equal breadth, to be laid out round the
reserve; it being understood, however, that if at the date of the
execution of this treaty, there are any settlers within the bounds
of any lands reserved by any band, Her Majesty reserves the right
to deal with such settlers as she shall deem just, so as not to
diminish the extent of land allotted to the Indians.

And with a view to show the satisfaction of Her Majesty with the
behaviour and good conduct of her Indians, parties to this treaty,
she hereby, through her Commissioner, makes them a present of three
dollars for each Indian man, woman and child belonging to the bands
here represented.

And further, Her Majesty agrees to maintain a school on each
reserve hereby made, whenever the Indians of the reserve should
desire it.

Within the boundary of Indian Reserves, until otherwise enacted by
the proper legislative authority, no intoxicating liquor shall be
allowed to be introduced or sold, and all laws now in force or
hereafter to be enacted to preserve Her Majesty's Indian subjects,
inhabiting the reserves or living elsewhere, from the evil
influence of the use of intoxicating liquors, shall be strictly
enforced.

Her Majesty's Commissioner shall, as soon as possible after the
execution of this treaty, cause to be taken an accurate census
of all the Indians inhabiting the district above described,
distributing them in families, and shall in every year ensuing the
date hereof, at some period during the month of July in each year,
to be duly notified to the Indians, and at or near the respective
reserves, pay to each Indian family of five persons the sum of
fifteen dollars Canadian currency, or in like proportion for a
larger or smaller family, such payment to be made in such articles
as the Indians shall require of blankets, clothing, prints
(assorted colors), twine or traps, at the current cost price in
Montreal, or otherwise, if Her Majesty shall deem the same
desirable in the interests of Her Indian people, in cash.

And the undersigned Chiefs do hereby bind and pledge themselves and
their people strictly to observe this treaty, and to maintain
perpetual peace between themselves and Her Majesty's white
subjects, and not to interfere with the property or in any way
molest the persons of Her Majesty's white or other subjects.

In witness whereof Her Majesty's said Commissioner and the said
Indian Chiefs have hereunto subscribed and set their hand and seal,
at the Lower Fort Garry, this day and year herein first above
mentioned.

(Signed) WEMYSS M. SIMPSON,                             [L. S.]
                    Indian Commissioner.
         MIS-KOO-KE-NEW (or Red Eagle)               His x mark.
              (Henry Prince).
         KA-KE-KA-PENAIS (or Bird Forever)            "  x  "
              (William Pennefather).
         NA-SHA-KE-PENAIS (or Flying down Bird).      "  x  "
         NA-NA-WA-NANAN (or Centre of Bird's Tail).   "  x  "
         KE-WE-TAY-ASH (or Flying Round).             "  x  "
         WA-KO-WUSH (or Whip-poor-will).              "  x  "
         OO-ZA-WE-KWUN (or Yellow Quill).             "  x  "

Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of (the same having
been first read and explained)--

(Signed) ADAMS G. ARCHIBALD,
             Lieut.-Gov. of Manitoba, and the N.-W. Territories.
         JAMES McKAY, P.L.C.
         A. G. IRVINE,
             Major.
         ABRAHAM COWLEY.
         DONALD GUNN, M.L.C.
         THOMAS HOWARD.
         HENRY COCHRANE.
         JAMES McARRISTER.
         HUGH McARRISTER.
         E. ALICE ARCHIBALD.
         HENRY BOUTHILLIER.



TREATY NUMBER TWO

Articles of a treaty made and concluded this twenty-first day of
August, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-one, between Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen of Great
Britain and Ireland, by Her Commissioner, Wemyss M. Simpson,
Esquire, of the one part, and the Chippewa tribe of Indians,
inhabitants of the country within the limits hereinafter defined
and described by their Chiefs, chosen and named as hereinafter
mentioned, of the other part:

Whereas, all the Indians inhabiting the said country have, pursuant
to an appointment made by the said Commissioner, been convened at a
meeting at Manitoba Post, to deliberate upon certain matters of
interest to Her Most Gracious Majesty of the one part, and to the
said Indians of the other; and whereas the said Indians have been
notified and informed by Her Majesty's said Commissioner, that it
is the desire of Her Majesty to open up to settlement and
immigration a tract of country bounded and described as hereinafter
mentioned, and to obtain the consent thereto of her Indian subjects
inhabiting the said tract, and to make a treaty and arrangement
with them, so that there may be peace and good will between them
and Her Majesty, and that they may know and be assured of what
allowance they are to count upon and receive from Her Majesty's
bounty and benevolence.

And whereas the Indians of the said tract, duly convened in
Council as aforesaid, and being requested by Her Majesty's said
Commissioner to name certain Chiefs and head men who should be
authorized on their behalf to conduct such negotiations and sign
any treaty to be founded thereon, and to become responsible to Her
Majesty for the faithful performance by their respective bands of
such obligations as shall be assumed by them, the said Indians have
thereupon named the following persons for that purpose, that is to
say:

For the Swan Creek and Lake Manitoba Indians, Sou-sonse, or Little
Long Ears; for the Indians of Fairford and the neighboring
localities, Ma-sah-kee-yash, or, He who flies to the bottom, and
Richard Woodhouse, whose Indian name is Ke-wee-tah-quun-na-yash,
or, He who flies round the feathers; for the Indians of Waterhen
River and Crane River and the neighboring localities, Francois, or,
Broken Fingers; and for the Indians of Riding Mountains and Dauphin
Lake, and the remainder of the territory hereby ceded, Mekis (the
Eagle), or, Giroux. And thereupon, in open Council, the different
bands have presented their respective Chiefs to His Excellency the
Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba and of the North-West Territory,
being present at such Council, and to the said Commissioner, as the
Chiefs and head men for the purposes aforesaid of the respective
bands of Indians inhabiting the said district hereinafter
described; and whereas the said Lieutenant-Governor and the said
Commissioner then and there received and acknowledged the persons
so presented as Chiefs and head men, for the purpose aforesaid, of
the respective bands of Indians inhabiting the said district
hereinafter described; and whereas the said Commissioner has
proceeded to negotiate a treaty with the said Indians, and the same
has finally been agreed upon and concluded as follows, that is to
say:--

The Chippewa tribe of Indians, and all other the Indians inhabiting
the district hereinafter described and defined, do hereby cede,
release, surrender and yield up to Her Majesty the Queen, and her
successors forever, all the lands included within the following
limits, that is to say:--All that tract of country lying partly to
the north and partly to the west of a tract of land ceded to Her
Majesty the Queen by the Indians inhabiting the Province of
Manitoba, and certain adjoining localities, under the terms of a
treaty made at Lower Fort Garry, on the third day of August last
past, the land now intended to be ceded and surrendered, being
particularly described as follows, that is to say:--Beginning at
the mouth of Winnipeg River, on the north line of the lands ceded
by said treaty, thence running along the eastern shore of Lake
Winnipeg, northwardly as far as the mouth of Berens River; thence
across said lake to its western shore at the north bank of the
mouth of the Little Saskatchewan or Dauphin River; thence up said
stream and along the northern and western shores thereof, and of
St. Martin's Lake and along the north bank of the stream flowing
into St. Martin's Lake from Lake Manitoba by the general course of
such stream to such last mentioned lake; thence by the eastern and
northern shores of Lake Manitoba to the mouth of the Waterhen
River; thence by the eastern and northern shores of said river up
stream to the northernmost extremity of a small lake known as
Waterhen Lake; thence in a line due west to and across Lake
Winnepegosis; thence in a straight line to the most northerly
waters forming the source of the Shell River; thence to a point
west of the same, two miles distant from the river, measuring at
right angles thereto; thence by a line parallel with the Shell
River to its mouth and then crossing the Assiniboine River and
running parallel thereto and two miles distant therefrom and to the
westward thereof to a point opposite Fort Ellice; thence in a
southwesterly course to the northwestern point of the Moose
Mountains; thence by a line due south to the United States
frontier; thence by the frontier eastwardly to the westward line of
said tract ceded by treaty as aforesaid; thence bounded thereby, by
the west, north-west and north lines of said tract to the place of
beginning at the mouth of Winnipeg River; to have and to hold the
same to Her Majesty the Queen and her successors for ever, and Her
Majesty the Queen hereby agrees and undertakes to lay aside and
reserve, for the sole and exclusive use of the Indians inhabiting
the said tract, the following lots of land, that is to say:

For the use of the Indians belonging to the band of which Mekis is
Chief, so much land between Turtle River and Valley River on the
south side of Lake Dauphin as will make one hundred and sixty acres
for each family of five persons, or in the same proportion for a
greater or smaller number of persons. And for the use of the
Indians belonging to the band of which Francois, or Broken Fingers,
is Chief, so much land on Crane River running into Lake Manitoba as
will make one hundred and sixty acres for each family of five
persons, or in the same proportion for a greater or smaller number
of persons. And for the use of the band of Indians belonging to the
bands of which Ma-sah-kee-yash and Richard Woodhouse are Chiefs, so
much land on the river between Lake Manitoba and St. Martin's
Lake,--known as "Fairford River," and including the present Indian
Mission grounds,--as will make one hundred and sixty acres for each
family of five persons, or in the same proportion for a greater or
smaller number of persons. And for the use of the Indians of whom
Son-sense is Chief, so much land on the east side of Lake Manitoba
to be laid off north of the creek near which a fallen elm tree now
lies, and about half-way between Oak Point and Manitoba Post, so
much land as will make one hundred and sixty acres for each family
of five persons, or in the same proportion for a greater or smaller
number of persons. Saving, nevertheless, the rights of any white or
other settler now in occupation of any land within the lines of any
such reserve.

And with a view to show the satisfaction of Her Majesty with the
behaviour and good conduct of her Indians, parties to this treaty,
she hereby, through her Commissioner makes them a present of three
dollars for each Indian--man, woman, and child belonging to the
bands here represented.

And further, Her Majesty agrees to maintain a school in each
reserve hereby made, whenever the Indians of the reserve shall
desire it.

Her Majesty further agrees with her said Indians, that within the
boundary of Indian reserves, until otherwise enacted by the proper
legislative authority, no intoxicating liquors shall be allowed to
be introduced or sold; and all laws now in force or hereafter to be
enacted to preserve her Indian subjects inhabiting the reserves or
living elsewhere within her North-West Territories, from the evil
influence of the use of intoxicating liquors, shall be strictly
enforced.

And further, that Her Majesty's Commissioner shall, as soon as
possible after the execution of this treaty, cause to be taken an
accurate census of all the Indians inhabiting the tract above
described, distributing them in families, and shall in every year
ensuing the date hereof, at some period during the month of August
in each year, to be duly notified to the Indians, and at or near
the respective reserves, pay to each Indian family of five persons,
the sum of fifteen dollars, Canadian currency; or in like
proportion for a larger or smaller family; such payment to be made
in such articles as the Indians shall require of blankets,
clothing, prints (assorted colors), twine or traps, at the current
cash price in Montreal, or otherwise, if Her Majesty shall deem the
same desirable in the interest of her Indian people, in cash.

And the undersigned Chiefs, on their own behalf, and on behalf of
all other Indians inhabiting the tract within ceded, do hereby
solemnly promise and engage, to strictly observe this treaty, and
also to conduct and behave themselves as good and loyal subjects of
Her Majesty the Queen. They promise and engage that they will, in
all respects, obey and abide by the law; that they will maintain
peace and good order between each other and also between themselves
and other tribes of Indians, and between themselves and others of
Her Majesty's subjects, whether Indians or whites, now inhabiting,
or hereafter to inhabit, any part of the said ceded tract; and that
they will not molest the person or property of any inhabitants of
such ceded tract; or the property of Her Majesty the Queen, or
interfere with or trouble any person passing or travelling through
the said tract or any part thereof; and that they will aid and
assist the officers of Her Majesty in bringing to justice and
punishment any Indian offending against the stipulations of this
treaty, or infringing the laws in force in the country so ceded.

In witness whereof, Her Majesty's said Commissioner and the said
Indian Chiefs have hereunto subscribed and set their hands at
Manitoba Post, this day and year first above named.

  (Signed) WEMYSS M. SIMPSON,
                  Indian Commissioner.
           MEKIS.             His x Mark.
           SON-SENSE.          "  x  "
           MA-SAH-KEE-YASH.    "  x  "
           FRANCOIS.           "  x  "
           RICHARD WOODHOUSE.

Signed by the Chiefs within named in presence of the following
witnesses (the same having been first read and explained)--

(Signed)
   ADAMS G. ARCHIBALD,
           Lieut.-Gov. of Manitoba and the N.-W. Territories.
   JAMES McKAY, P.C.C.
   MOLYNEUX ST. JOHN.
   E. A. ARCHIBALD.
   LILY ARCHIBALD.
   HENRI BOUTHILLIER.
   PAUL DE LARONDE.
   DONALD McDONALD.
   ELIZA McDONALD.
   ALEXANDER MUIR, SR.



THE NORTH-WEST ANGLE TREATY, NUMBER THREE

Articles of a Treaty made and concluded this third day of
October, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-three, between Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen of Great
Britain and Ireland, by her Commissioners, the Hon. Alexander
Morris, Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Manitoba and the
North West Territories, Joseph Albert Norbert Provencher and Simon
James Dawson, of the one part, and the Saulteaux tribe of the
Ojibbeway Indians, inhabitants of the country within the limits
hereinafter defined and described, by their Chiefs, chosen and
named as hereinafter mentioned, of the other part:

Whereas the Indians inhabiting the said country have, pursuant to
an appointment made by the said Commissioners, been convened at
a meeting at the North-West angle of the Lake of the Woods, to
deliberate upon certain matters of interest to Her Most Gracious
Majesty, of the one part, and the said Indians of the other;

And whereas the said Indians have been notified and informed by Her
Majesty's said Commissioners, that it is the desire of Her Majesty
to open up for settlement, immigration, and such other purposes
as to Her Majesty may seem meet, a tract of country bounded and
described as hereinafter mentioned, and to obtain the consent
thereto of her Indian subjects inhabiting the said tract, and to
make a treaty and arrange with them, so that there may be peace and
good will between them and Her Majesty, and that they may know and
be assured of what allowance they are to count upon and receive
from Her Majesty's bounty and benevolence:

And whereas, the Indians of the said tract, duly convened in Council, as
aforesaid, and being requested by Her Majesty's said Commissioners to
name certain Chiefs and head men, who should be authorized on their
behalf to conduct such negotiations, and sign any treaty to be founded
thereon, and to become responsible to Her Majesty for the faithful
performance by their respective bands of such obligations as shall be
assumed by them, the said Indians have thereupon named the following
persons for that purpose, that is to say:--Kee-tak-pay-pi-nais (Rainy
River), Kitihi-gay-lake (Rainy River), Note-na-qua-hung (North-West
Angle), Mawe-do-pe-nais (Rainy River), Pow-wa-sang (North-West Angle),
Canda-com-igo-wi-ninie (North-West Angle), Pa-pa-ska-gin (Rainy River),
May-no-wah-tau-ways-kung (North-West Angle), Kitchi-ne-ka-be-han (Rainy
River), Sah-katch-eway (Lake Seul), Muka-day-wah-sin (Kettle Falls),
Me-kie-sies (Rainy Lake, Fort Francis), Oos-con-na-geist (Rainy Lake),
Wah-shis-kince (Eagle Lake), Rab-kie-y-ash (Flower Lake), Go-bay (Rainy
Lake), Ka-me-ti-ash (White Fish Lake), Nee-sho-tal (Rainy River),
Kee-gee-go-kay (Rainy River), Sha-sha-gance (Shoal Lake),
Shah-win-na-bi-nais (Shoal Lake), Ay-ash-a-wash (Buffalo Point),
Pay-ah-be-wash (White Fish Bay), Rah-tay-tay-pa-o-cutch (Lake of the
Woods).

And thereupon in open council the different bands having presented
their Chiefs to the said Commissioners as the Chiefs and head men
for the purposes aforesaid of the respective bands of Indians
inhabiting the said district hereinafter described.

And whereas the said Commissioners then and there received and
acknowledged the persons so presented as Chiefs and head men for
the purposes aforesaid of the respective bands of Indians
inhabiting the said district hereinafter described;

And whereas the said Commissioners have proceeded to negotiate a
treaty with the said Indians, and the same has been finally agreed
upon and concluded as follows, that is to say:

The Saulteaux tribe of the Ojibbeway Indians, and all other the
Indians inhabiting the district hereinafter described and defined,
do hereby cede, release, surrender, and yield up to the Government
of the Dominion of Canada, for Her Majesty the Queen and her
successors forever, all their rights, titles and privileges
whatsoever to the lands included within the following limits, that
is to say:

Commencing at a point on the Pigeon River route where the
international boundary line between the territories of Great
Britain and the United States intersects the height of land
separating the waters running to Lake Superior from those flowing
to Lake Winnipeg thence northerly, westerly and easterly, along the
height of land aforesaid, following its sinuosities, whatever their
course may be, to the point at which the said height of land meets
the summit of the water-shed from which the streams flow to Lake
Nepigon, thence northerly and westerly, or whatever may be its
course along the ridge separating the waters of the Nepigon and the
Winnipeg to the height of land dividing the waters of the Albany
and the Winnipeg, thence westerly and north-westerly along the
height of land dividing the waters flowing to Hudson's Bay by the
Albany or other rivers from those running to English River and
the Winnipeg to a point on the said height of land bearing north
forty-five degrees east from Fort Alexander at the mouth of the
Winnipeg; thence south forty-five degrees west to Fort Alexander at
the mouth of the Winnipeg; thence southerly along the eastern bank
of the Winnipeg to the mouth of White Mouth River, thence southerly
by the line described as in that part forming the eastern boundary
of the tract surrendered by the Chippewa and Swampy Cree tribes of
Indians to Her Majesty on the third of August, one thousand eight
hundred and seventy-one, namely, by White Mouth River to White
Mouth Lake and thence on a line having the general bearing of White
Mouth River to the forty-ninth parallel of north latitude; thence
by the forty-ninth parallel of north latitude to the Lake of the
Woods, and from thence by the international boundary line to the
place of beginning.

The tract comprised within the lines above described embracing an
area of fifty-five thousand square miles, be the same more or less.

To have and to hold the same to Her Majesty the Queen and her
successors forever.

And Her Majesty the Queen hereby agrees and undertakes to lay aside
reserves for farming lands, due respect being had to lands at
present cultivated by the said Indians, and also to lay aside and
reserve for the benefit of the said Indians, to be administered and
dealt with for them by Her Majesty's Government of the Dominion of
Canada, in such a manner as shall seem best, other reserves of land
in the said territory hereby ceded, which said reserves shall be
selected and set aside where it shall be deemed most convenient and
advantageous for each band or bands of Indians, by the officers of
the said Government appointed for that purpose, and such selection
shall be so made after conference with the Indians: Provided,
however, that such reserve whether for farming or other purposes
shall in nowise exceed in all one square mile for each family of
five, or in that proportion for larger or smaller families, and
such selection shall be made if possible during the course of next
summer or as soon thereafter as may be found practicable, it being
understood, however, that if at the time of any such selection of
any reserves as aforesaid, there are any settlers within the bounds
of the lands reserved by any band, Her Majesty reserves the right
to deal with such settlers as she shall deem just, so as not to
diminish the extent of land allotted to Indians; and provided also
that the aforesaid reserves of lands or any interest or right
therein or appurtenant thereto, may be sold, leased or otherwise
disposed of by the said Government for the use and benefit of the
said Indians, with the consent of the Indians entitled thereto
first had and obtained.

And with a view to show the satisfaction of Her Majesty with the
behavior and good conduct of her Indians, she hereby, through her
Commissioners, makes them a present of twelve dollars for each man,
woman and child belonging to the bands here represented, in
extinguishment of all claims heretofore preferred.

And further, Her Majesty agrees to maintain schools for instruction
in such reserves hereby made as to her Government of her Dominion
of Canada may seem advisable, whenever the Indians of the reserve
shall desire it.

Her Majesty further agrees with her said Indians, that within the
boundary of Indian reserves, until otherwise determined by the
Government of the Dominion of Canada, no intoxicating liquor shall
be allowed to be introduced or sold, and all laws now in force,
or hereafter to be enacted to preserve her Indian subjects
inhabiting the reserves, or living elsewhere within her North-West
Territories, from the evil influence of the use of intoxicating
liquors shall be strictly enforced.

Her Majesty further agrees with her said Indians, that they,
the said Indians, shall have right to pursue their avocations
of hunting and fishing throughout the tract surrendered as
hereinbefore described, subject to such regulations as may from
time to time be made by her Government of her Dominion of Canada,
and saving and excepting such tracts as may from time to time be
required or taken up for settlement, mining, lumbering or other
purposes, by her said Government of the Dominion of Canada, or by
any of the subjects thereof duly authorized therefor by the said
Government.

It is further agreed between Her Majesty and her said Indians that
such sections of the reserves above indicated as may at any time be
required for public works or buildings, of what nature soever, may
be appropriated for that purpose by Her Majesty's Government of the
Dominion of Canada, due compensation being made for the value of
any improvements thereon.

And further, that Her Majesty's Commissioners shall, as soon as
possible, after the execution of this treaty, cause to be taken an
accurate census of all the Indians inhabiting the tract above
described, distributing them in families, and shall in every year
ensuing the date hereof at some period in each year, to be duly
notified to the Indians, and at a place or places to be appointed
for that purpose within the territory ceded, pay to each Indian
person the sum of five dollars per head yearly.

It is further agreed between Her Majesty and the said Indians, that
the sum of fifteen hundred dollars per annum shall be yearly and
every year expended by Her Majesty in the purchase of ammunition,
and twine for nets for the use of the said Indians.

It is further agreed between Her Majesty and the said Indians, that
the following articles shall be supplied to any band of the said
Indians who are now actually cultivating the soil, or who shall
hereafter commence to cultivate the land, that is to say--two hoes
for every family actually cultivating; also one spade per family
as aforesaid; one plough for every ten families as aforesaid; five
harrows for every twenty families as aforesaid; one scythe for
every family as aforesaid; and also one axe and one cross-cut saw,
one hand saw, one pit saw, the necessary files, one grindstone, one
auger for each band, and also for each Chief for the use of his
band, one chest of ordinary carpenter's tools; also for each band,
enough of wheat, barley, potatoes and oats to plant the land
actually broken up for cultivation by such band; also for each
band, one yoke of oxen, one bull and four cows; all the aforesaid
articles to be given once for all for the encouragement of the
practice of agriculture among the Indians.

It is further agreed between Her Majesty and the said Indians, that
each Chief, duly recognized as such, shall receive an annual salary
of twenty-five dollars per annum, and each subordinate officer, not
exceeding three for each band, shall receive fifteen dollars per
annum; and each such Chief and subordinate officer as aforesaid
shall also receive, once in every three years, a suitable suit of
clothing; and each Chief shall receive, in recognition of the
closing of the treaty, a suitable flag and medal.

And the undersigned Chiefs, on their own behalf and on behalf of
all other Indians inhabiting the tract within ceded, do hereby
solemnly promise and engage to strictly observe this treaty, and
also to conduct and behave themselves as good and loyal subjects
of Her Majesty the Queen. They promise and engage that they will,
in all respects obey and abide by the law; that they will maintain
peace and good order between each other, and also between
themselves and other tribes of Indians, and between themselves and
others of Her Majesty's subjects, whether Indians or whites, now
inhabiting or hereafter to inhabit any part of the said ceded
tract; and that they will not molest the person or property of any
inhabitant of such ceded tract, or the property of Her Majesty
the Queen, or interfere with or trouble any person passing or
travelling through the said tract or any part thereof; and that
they will aid and assist the officers of Her Majesty in bringing
to justice and punishment any Indian offending against the
stipulations of this treaty, or infringing the laws in force in
the country so ceded.

In witness whereof, Her Majesty's said Commissioners and the said
Indian Chiefs have hereunto subscribed and set their hands, at the
north-west angle of the Lake of the Woods, this day and year herein
first above-named.

    (Signed) ALEXANDER MORRIS,                 [L. S.]
                 Lieutenant-Governor.
             J. A. N. PROVENCHER,
                 Indian Commissioner.
             S. J. DAWSON,
                 Indian Commissioner.
             KEE-TA-KAY-PI-NAIS.       His x mark.
             KITIHI-GAY-KAKE.           "  x  "
             NO-TE-NA-QUA-HUNG.         "  x  "
             MAWE-DO-PE-NAIS.           "  x  "
             POW-WA-SANG.               "  x  "
             CANDA-COM-IGO-WI-NINIE.    "  x  "
             PA-PA-SKA-GIN.             "  x  "
             MAY-NO-WAH-TAU-WAYS-KUNG.  "  x  "
             KITCHI-NE-KA-BE-HAN.       "  x  "
             SAH-KATCH-EWAY.            "  x  "
             MUKA-DAY-WAH-SIN.          "  x  "
             ME-KIE-SIES.               "  x  "
             OOS-CON-NA-GEIST.          "  x  "
             WAH-SHIS-KINCE.            "  x  "
             RAH-KIE-Y-ASH.             "  x  "
             GO-BAY.                    "  x  "
             KA-ME-TI-ASH.              "  x  "
             NEE-SHO-TAL.               "  x  "
             KEE-JEE-GO-KAY.            "  x  "
             SHA-SHA-GANCE.             "  x  "
             SHAH-WIN-NA-BI-NAIS.       "  x  "
             AY-ASH-A-WASH.             "  x  "
             PAY-AH-BEE-WASH.           "  x  "
             RAH-TAY-TAY-PA-O-CUTCH.    "  x  "

Signed by the Chiefs within named in presence of the following
witnesses, the same having been first read and explained by the
Honorable James McKay:--

(Signed) JAMES McKAY.
         MOLYNEUX ST. JOHN.
         ROBERT PITHER.
         CHRISTINE V. K. MORRIS.
         CHARLES NOLIN.
         A. McDONALD,
             Captain commanding escort to
                 Lieutenant-Governor.
         JAMES F. GRAHAM.
         JOSEPH NOLIN.
         A. McLEOD.
         GEORGE McPHERSON, SEN.
         SEDLEY BLANCHARD.
         W. FRED. BUCHANAN.
         FRANK G. BECHER.
         ALFRED CODD, M.D.
         GORDON S. CORBAULT.
         PIERRE LEVIELLER.
         NICHOLAS CHATELAINE.

We hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the original
articles of treaty of which it purports to be a copy.

    (Signed) ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                 Lieutenant-Governor.
             J. A. N. PROVENCHER,
                 Indian Commissioner.
             S. J. DAWSON,
                 Indian Commissioner.

We having had communication of the treaty, certified copy whereof
is hereto annexed, but not having been at the Councils held at the
north-west angle of the Lake of the Woods, between Her Majesty's
Commissioners, and the several Indian Chiefs and others therein
named, at which the articles of the said treaty were agreed upon,
hereby, for ourselves and the several bands of Indians which we
represent, in consideration of the provisions of the said treaty
being extended to us and the said bands which we represent,
transfer, surrender and relinquish to Her Majesty the Queen, her
heirs and successors, to and for the use of her Dominion of Canada,
all our right, title and privilege whatsoever, which we, the said
Chiefs, and the said bands which we represent, have held, or enjoy,
of, in and to the territory, described and fully set out in the
said articles of treaty and every part thereof, to have and to hold
the same unto the use of Her said Majesty the Queen, her heirs and
successors for ever.

And we hereby agree to accept the several provisions, payments and
reserves of the said treaty as therein stated, and solemnly promise
and engage to abide by, carry out and fulfil all the stipulations,
obligations and conditions therein contained, on the part of the
said Chiefs and Indians therein named to be observed and performed,
and in all things to conform to the articles of the said treaty, as
if we our selves, and the bands which we represent had been
originally contracting parties thereto, and had been present and
attached our signatures to the said treaty.

In witness whereof, Her Majesty's said Commissioners and the said
Indian Chiefs have hereunto subscribed and set their hands, this
thirteenth day of October, in the year of Our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-three.

For and on behalf of the Commissioners, the Honorable Alexander
Morris, Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba and the North-West
Territories, Joseph Albert Norbert Provencher, Esq., and the
undersigned:

                      (Signed)   S. J. DAWSON,
                                        Commissioner.
                                 PAY-BA-MA-CHAS.        His x mark.
                                 RE-BA-QUIN.             "  x  "
                                 ME-TAS-SO-QUE-NE-SKANK. "  x  "

Signed by S. J. Dawson, Esq., one of Her Majesty's said
Commissioners, for and on behalf, and with the authority and
consent of the Honorable Alexander Morris, Lieutenant-Governor of
Manitoba and the North-West Territories, and J. A. N. Provencher,
Esq., the remaining two Commissioners, and himself, and by the
Chiefs within named on behalf of themselves and the several bands
which they represent, the same and the annexed certified copy of
articles of treaty having been first read and explained in presence
of the following witnesses:

(Signed) THOS. A. P. TOWERS.
         JOHN AITKEN.
         A. J. McDONALD.
         UNZZAKI.
         JAS. LOGANOSH, His x mark,
         PINLLSISE.



REPORT OF COMMISSIONER DAWSON

OTTAWA, 26th December, 1873.

Sir,--I beg leave to inform you that, after the treaty had been
concluded with certain bands of the Saulteaux tribe of the
Ojibbeway Indians, at the north-west angle of the Lake of the
Woods, by arrangements made with my associate Commissioners, His
Honor the Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba and the North-West
Territories, and Mr. Provencher, I came eastward and convened the
leading people of the remaining bands at Shebandowan where they
also, through their Chiefs, accepted and signed the treaty.

I have much satisfaction in saying that these Indians were most
friendly in their bearing, and desired me to convey to the
Government their cordial expressions of loyalty to their Great
Mother, Her Majesty the Queen.

They took some time to deliberate over the provisions of the treaty
and asked me occasionally to explain certain passages, more
especially those in relation to the reserves.

Before signing it they comprehended perfectly the nature of the
obligations into which they were about to enter, that the surrender
of their territorial rights would be irrevocable, and that they
were to stand forever afterwards in new relations to the white man.

This, the Chiefs themselves stated with great solemnity to their
people, in short but impressive speeches, as they each in turn
advanced to touch the pen.

One cause of delay at the Lake of the Woods arose from the
circumstance of there being a number of aspirants to the office of
Chief; but at Shebandowan I had no such difficulty, for the whole
of the bands east of the narrows of Rainy Lake, are under three
principal Chiefs, whose authority is unquestioned.

The names of these Chiefs and their respective districts are as
follows:

Pay-ba-ma-chas, Chief of the country intervening between the
narrows of Rainy Lake and Sturgeon Falls, and of the region drained
by the River Seine and its tributary streams, between the latter
place (Sturgeon Falls) and Lac des Mille Lacs. This is a very
extensive district, and in it are many valuable groves of pine.

Ke-ba-quin, Chief of the region intervening between the present
line of the Red River route and the United States boundary line,
east of Rainy Lake and west of the height of land. The gold bearing
country is in this Chief's district.

Metas-so-que-nes-hauk, Chief of Lac des Mille Lacs and the district
to the north, lying along the height of land between that lake and
the waters of the Nipegon and Lac Seul. This Chief is a very
intelligent man, and has already begun, to make his people clear
land and grow crops.

Each of these three principal Chiefs will have a staff of
Lieutenants or subordinate Chiefs, not exceeding three to their
respective bands, as provided for in the treaty but they preferred
not to name them at once, saying that the selection was a matter of
some delicacy to them, and requiring a little time.

In regard to the reserves provided for in the treaty, I shall
as soon as possible submit a scheme which I think will meet
the circumstances, and at the same time draw attention to some
experience gained in negotiating with these Indians, which may
be of use in similar negotiations in the future.

[Footnote: In 1874 Mr. Dawson and Mr. Pither were appointed to meet
the Indians and arrange the position of the reserves, which they
did; but subsequently, the Indians claiming that they had not fully
understood the exact location or extent of some of the reserves,
Colonel Dennis, then Surveyor-General, now Deputy Minister of the
Interior, was instructed to visit the Indians comprised in Treaty
Number Three, and finally adjust the question of reserves. Colonel
Dennis undertook this duty in 1875 and satisfactorily arranged a
scheme of reserves for the different bands of the Lake of the Woods.
Colonel Dennis submitted a comprehensive report of the results of
his mission, and suggested the appointment of sub-agents, the fixing
of a specific day for payment to the Indians of their annuities in
each agency district, that the necessary funds and the articles for
distribution should be provided and in the agents' hands in good time.
He advised that the local agents should have some practical knowledge
of agriculture, as he believed that the Indians would succeed in
raising quantities of stock, though the character of the country
prevented their general success as farmers. He suggested further the
erection of halls at each agency and the employment of young Indians
by the builders entrusted with their construction, "as they are so
quick in perception and handy in the use of tools that they would
speedily become very expert." The author regrets that he did not
obtain communication of this valuable report until this work had
advanced too far to admit of its being incorporated with it.]

The copy of the treaty signed by these Chiefs is enclosed herewith
and to it is attached a document signed by the Lieutenant-Governor
of Manitoba and the North-West Territories, and Mr. Provencher,
empowering me to act for them in their absence, in their capacity
of Indian Commissioners.

           I have the honor to be, Sir,
                         Your obedient servant,
                           (Signed) S. J. DAWSON.
THE HONORABLE THE MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR,
                                       Ottawa.


ADHESION OF LAC SEUL INDIANS

LAC SEUL, 9th June, 1874.

We, the Chiefs and Councillors of Lac Seul, Seul, Trout and
Sturgeon Lakes, subscribe and set our marks, that we and our
followers will abide by the articles of the treaty made and
concluded with the Indians at the north-west angle of the Lake of
the Woods, on the third day of October, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and seventy-three, between Her Most Gracious
Majesty the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland, by Her Commissioners,
Hon. Alexander Morris, Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba and the
North-West Territories, Joseph Albert, N. Provencher and Simon J.
Dawson, of the one part, and the Saulteaux tribes of Ojibewa Indians,
inhabitants of the country as defined by the Treaty aforesaid.

In witness whereof, Her Majesty's Indian Agent and the Chiefs and
Councillors have hereto set their hands at Lac Seul, on the 9th day
of June, 1874.

            (Signed) R. J. N. PITHER,
                               Indian Agent.
                     JOHN CROMARTY,     His x mark.
                               Chief.
                     ACKEMENCE,          "  x  "
                     MAINEETAINEQUIRE,   "  x  "
                     NAH-KEE-JECKWAHE,   "  x  "
                               Councillors.

The whole treaty explained by R. J. N. Pither.

Witnesses:
(Signed) JAMES McKENZIE.
         LOUIS KITTSON.
         NICHOLAS CHATELAN. His x mark.



THE QU'APPELLE TREATY, NUMBER FOUR

Articles of a treaty made and concluded this fifteenth day of
September, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-four, between Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen of Great
Britain and Ireland, by Her Commissioners, the Honorable Alexander
Morris, Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Manitoba and the
North-West Territories, the Honorable David Laird, Minister of the
Interior, and William Joseph Christie Esq., of Brockville, Ontario,
of the one part; and the Cree, Saulteaux and other Indians,
inhabitants of the territory within the limits hereinafter defined
and described, by their Chiefs and head men, chosen and named as
hereinafter mentioned, of the other part;

Whereas, the Indians inhabiting the said territory have, pursuant
to an appointment made by the said Commissioners, been convened at
a meeting at Qu'Appelle Lakes, to deliberate upon certain matters
of interest to Her Most Gracious Majesty, of the one part and the
said Indians of the other:

And whereas, the said Indians have been notified and informed, by
Her Majesty's said Commissioners, that it is the desire of Her
Majesty to open up for settlement, immigration, trade and such
other purposes as to Her Majesty may seem meet, a tract of country
bounded and described as hereinafter mentioned; and to obtain the
consent thereto of her Indian subjects inhabiting the said tract;
and to make a treaty and arrange with them so that there may be
peace and good-will between them and Her Majesty, and between them
and Her Majesty's other subjects; and that her Indian people may
know and be assured of what allowance they are to count upon and
receive from Her Majesty's bounty and benevolence;

And whereas, the Indians of the said tract, duly convened in
councils as aforesaid, and being requested by Her Majesty's said
Commissioners to name certain Chiefs and head men who should be
authorized on their behalf to conduct such negotiations, and sign
any treaty to be founded thereon, and to become responsible to Her
Majesty for the faithful performance by their respective bands of
such obligations as shall be assumed by them, the said Indians have
thereupon named the following persons for that purpose, that is to
say: Ka-ki-sha-way, or Loud Voice (Qu'Appelle River); Pis-qua, or
The Plain (Leech Lake); Kea-wez-auce, or The Little Boy (Leech
Lake); Ka-ke-na-wup, or One that sits like an Eagle (Upper
Qu'Appelle Lakes); Kus-kee-tew-mus-coo-mus-qua, or Little Black
Bear (Cypress Hills); Ka-ne-on-us-ka-tew, or One that walks on four
claws (Little Touchwood Hills); Can-ah-ha-cha-pew, or Making ready
the Bow (south side of the south branch of the Saskatchewan);
Kii-si-can-ah-chuck, or Day Star (south side of the south branch of
the Saskatchewan); Ka-wa-ca-toose, or The Poor Man (Touchwood Hills
and Qu'Appelle Lakes); Ka-ku-wis-ta-haw, or Him that flies round
(towards the Cypress Hills); Cha-ca-chas (Qu'Appelle River);
Wah-pii-moose-too-siis, or White Calf, or Pus-coos (Qu'Appelle
River); Gabriel Cote, or Mee-may, or The Pigeon (Fort Pelly);

And thereupon in open council the different bands having presented
the men of their choice to the said Commissioners as the Chiefs and
head men for the purpose aforesaid of the respective bands of
Indians inhabiting the said district hereinafter described;

And whereas, the said Commissioners have proceeded to negotiate a
treaty with the said Indians, and the same has been finally agreed
upon and concluded as follows, that is to say:

The Cree and Saulteaux tribes of Indians, and all other the Indians
inhabiting the district hereinafter described and defined, do
hereby cede, release, surrender and yield up to the Government of
the Dominion of Canada for Her Majesty the Queen and her successors
forever, all their rights, titles and privileges whatsoever to the
lands included within the following limits, that is to say:

Commencing at a point on the United States frontier due south of
the north-western point of the Moose Mountains, thence due north to
said point of said Mountains, thence in a north-easterly course to
a point two miles due west of Fort Ellice, thence in a line
parallel with, and two miles westward from, the Assiniboine River
to the mouth of the Shell River, thence parallel to the said river,
and two miles distant therefrom, to its source; thence in a
straight line to a point on the western shore of Lake Winnipegoosis
due west from the most northern extremity of Waterhen Lake, thence
east to the centre of Lake Winnipegoosis, thence northwardly
through the middle of the said lake (including Birch Island) to the
mouth of Red Deer River, thence westwardly and south-westwardly
along and including the said Red Deer River and its lakes, Red Deer
and Etoimami, to the source of its western branch, thence in a
straight line to the source of the northern branch of the
Qu'Appelle, thence along and including said streams to the forks
near Long Lake, thence along and including the valley of the west
branch of the Qu'Appelle, thence along and including said river to
the mouth of Maple Creek; thence southwardly along said creek to a
point opposite the western extremity of the Cypress Hills; thence
due south to the international boundary; thence east along said
boundary to the place of commencement. Also all their rights,
titles and privileges whatsoever to all other lands wheresoever
situated within Her Majesty's North-West Territories, or any of
them, to have and to hold the same to Her Majesty the Queen and her
successors forever.

And Her Majesty the Queen hereby agrees, through the said
Commissioners, to assign reserves for said Indians, such reserves
to be selected by officers of Her Majesty's Government of the
Dominion of Canada appointed for that purpose, after conference
with each band of the Indians, and to be of sufficient area to
allow one square mile for each family of five, or in that
proportion for larger or smaller families.

Provided, however, that it be understood that if, at the time of
the selection of any reserves as aforesaid there are any settlers
within the bounds of the lands reserved for any band, Her Majesty
retains the right to deal with such settlers as she shall deem just
so as not to diminish the extent of lands allotted to the Indians;
and provided further that the aforesaid reserves of land, or any
part thereof, or any interest or right therein, or appurtenant
thereto, may be sold, leased or otherwise disposed of by the said
Government for the use and benefit of the said Indians, with the
consent of the Indians entitled thereto first had and obtained, but
in no wise shall the said Indians, or any of them, be entitled to
sell or otherwise alienate any of the lands allotted to them as
reserves.

In view of the satisfaction with which the Queen views the ready
response which Her Majesty's Indian subjects have accorded to the
invitation of her said Commissioners to meet them on this occasion;
and also in token of their general good conduct and behavior, she
hereby, through Her Commissioners, makes the Indians of the bands
here represented, a present--For each Chief, of twenty-five dollars
in cash, a coat, and a Queen's silver medal for each head man not
exceeding four in each band, fifteen dollars in cash, and a coat,
and for every other man, woman and child, twelve dollars in cash
and for those here assembled some powder, shot, blankets, calicoes
and other articles.

As soon as possible after the execution of this treaty, Her Majesty
shall cause a census to be taken of all the Indians inhabiting the
tract hereinbefore described, and shall next year, and annually
afterwards, forever, cause to be paid, in cash, at some suitable
season to be duly notified to the Indians, and at a place or places
to be appointed for that purpose within the territory ceded; each
Chief, twenty-five dollars; each head man, not exceeding four to a
band, fifteen dollars; and to every other Indian, man, woman and
child, five dollars per head; such payment to be made to the heads
of families for those belonging thereto, unless for some special
reason it be found objectionable.

Her Majesty also agrees that each Chief, and each head man, not to
exceed four in each band, once in every three years during the term
of their office, shall receive a suitable suit of clothing, and
that yearly and every year, she will cause to be distributed among
the different bands included in the limits of this treaty, powder,
shot, ball and twine, in all to the value of seven hundred and
fifty dollars, and each Chief shall receive hereafter, in
recognition of the closing of the treaty, a suitable flag.

It is further agreed between Her Majesty and the said Indians that
the following articles shall be supplied to any band thereof who
are now actually cultivating the soil, or who shall hereafter
settle on these reserves and commence to break up the land, that
is to say--two hoes, one spade, one scythe, and one axe for every
family so actually cultivating; and enough seed, wheat, barley,
oats and potatoes to plant such lands as they have broken up; also
one plough and two harrows for every ten families so cultivating
as aforesaid; and also to each Chief, for the use of his band
as aforesaid, one yoke of oxen, one bull, four cows, a chest of
ordinary carpenter's tools, five hand-saws, five augers, one
cross-cut saw, one pit saw, the necessary files, and one grindstone;
all the aforesaid articles to be given once for all, for the
encouragement of the practice of agriculture among the Indians.

Further, Her Majesty agrees to maintain a school in the reserve,
allotted to each band, as soon as they settle on said reserve, and
are prepared for a teacher.

Further, Her Majesty agrees that within the boundary of the Indian
reserves, until otherwise determined by the Government of the
Dominion of Canada, no intoxicating liquors shall be allowed to be
introduced or sold; and all laws now in force, or hereafter to be
enacted to preserve her Indian subjects inhabiting the reserves, or
living elsewhere within the North-West Territories, from the evil
effects of intoxication, shall be strictly enforced.

And further, Her Majesty agrees that her said Indians shall have
right to pursue their avocations of hunting, trapping and fishing
throughout the tract surrendered, subject to such regulations as
may from time to time be made by the Government of the country
acting under the authority of Her Majesty, and saving and excepting
such tracts as may be required or taken up from time to time for
settlement, mining or other purposes under grant, or other right
given by Her Majesty's said Government.

It is further agreed between Her Majesty and her said Indian
subjects that such sections of the reserves above indicated as may
at any time be required for public works or buildings, of whatever
nature, may be appropriated for that purpose by Her Majesty's
Government of the Dominion of Canada, due compensation being made
to the Indians for the value of any improvements thereon, and an
equivalent in land or money for the area of the reserve so
appropriated.

And the undersigned Chiefs and head men on their own behalf, and on
behalf of all other Indians inhabiting the tract within ceded, do
hereby solemnly promise and engage to strictly observe this treaty,
and also to conduct and behave themselves as good and loyal
subjects of Her Majesty the Queen.

They promise and engage that they will, in all respects, obey and
abide by the law: that they will maintain peace and good order
between each other, and between themselves and other tribes of
Indians, and between themselves and others of Her Majesty's
subjects, whether Indians, Half-breeds or whites, now inhabiting,
or hereafter to inhabit, any part of the said ceded tract; and that
they will not molest the person or property of any inhabitant of
such ceded tract, or the property of Her Majesty the Queen, or
interfere with or trouble any person passing or travelling through
the said tract or any part thereof: and that they will assist the
officers of Her Majesty in bringing to justice and punishment any
Indian offending against the stipulations of this treaty, or
infringing the laws in force in the country so ceded.

In witness whereof, Her Majesty's said Commissioners, and the said
Indian Chiefs and head men, have hereunto subscribed and set their
hands at Qu'Appelle, this day and year herein first-above written.

    (Signed) ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                 Lieut.-Gov. N.-W. Territories.
             DAVID LAIRD,
                 Indian Commissioner.
             WILLIAM J. CHRISTIE.
             KA-KII-SHI-WAY.                His x mark.
             PIS-QUA.                        "  x  "
             KA-WE-ZAUCE.                    "  x  "
             KA-KEE-NA-WUP.                  "  x  "
             KUS-KEE-TEW-MUS-COO-MUS-QUA.    "  x  "
             KA-NE-ON-US-KA-TEW.             "  x  "
             CAN-AH-HA-CHA-PEW.              "  x  "
             KII-SI-CAW-AH-CHUCK.            "  x  "
             KA-RA-CA-TOOSE.                 "  x  "
             KA-KII-NIS-TA-HAW.              "  x  "
             CHA-CA-CHAS.                    "  x  "
             WA-PII-MOOSE-TOO-SUS.           "  x  "
             GABRIEL COTE, or MEE-MAY.       "  x  "

Signed by the Chiefs and head men within named in presence of the
following witnesses, the same having been first read and explained
by Charles Pratt:

(Signed) W. OSBORNE SMITH, C.M.G.,
             Lieut.-Col. D.A.G.,
                   Commanding Dominion Forces in North-West.
         PASCAL BRELAND.
         EDWARD McKAY.
         CHARLES PRATT.
         PIERRE POITRAS.
         BAPTIST DAVIS.     His x mark.
         PIERRE DENOMME.     "  x  "
         JOSEPH McKAY.
         DONALD McDONALD.
         A. McDONALD,
             Captain Prov. Batt. Infantry.
         G. W. W. STREET,
             Ensign Prov. Batt. Infantry.
         ALFRED CODD, M.D.,
             Surgeon Prov. Batt. Infantry.
         W. M. HERCHMER,
             Captain.
         C. DE CAZES,
             Ensign.
         JOSEPH POITRON.
         M. G. DICKIESON,
             Private Secretary of the Minister of the Interior.
         PETER LAPIERRE.
         HELEN H. McLEAN.
         FLORA GARRIOCH.
         JOHN COTTON,
             Lieutenant Canadian Artillery.
         JOHN ALLAN,
             Lieutenant Prov. Batt. Infantry.


ADHESION OF THE FORT ELLICE SAULTEAUX INDIANS

We, members of the Saulteaux tribe of Indians, having had
communication of the treaty hereto annexed, made on the 15th day of
September instant, between Her Majesty the Queen and the Cree and
Saulteaux Indians and other Indians at Qu'Appelle Lakes, but not
having been present at the councils held at the Qu'Appelle Lakes
between Her Majesty's Commissioners and the several Indian Chiefs
and others therein named, at which the articles of the said treaty
were agreed upon, hereby for ourselves and the band which we
represent, in consideration of the provisions of the said treaty
being extended to us and the said band which we represent,
transfer, surrender and relinquish to Her Majesty the Queen, her
heirs and successors, to and for the use of her Government of her
Dominion of Canada, all our right, title and privileges whatsoever
which we and the said bands which were present have held or enjoy
of, in, and to the territory described and fully set out in the
said articles of treaty and every part thereof; also all our right,
title, and privileges whatsoever to all other lands wherever
situated, whether within the limit of any treaty formerly made, or
hereafter to be made, with the Saulteaux tribe or any other tribe
of Indians inhabiting Her Majesty's North-West territories, or any
of them, to have and to hold the same unto and to the use of her
said Majesty the Queen, her heirs and successors, forever.

And we hereby agree to accept the several provisions, payments and
reserves of the said treaty, signed at the Qu'Appelle Lakes as
therein stated, and solemnly promise, and engage to abide by, carry
out and fulfil all the stipulations, obligations and conditions
therein contained, on the part of the said Chiefs and Indians
therein named to be observed and performed, and in all things to
conform to the articles of the said treaty as if we ourselves and
the band which we represent had been originally contracting parties
thereto, and had been present and attached our signatures to the
said treaty.

In witness whereof, Her Majesty's said Commissioners and the said
Indian Chief and head man, have hereunto subscribed and set their
hands at Fort Ellice this twenty-first day of September, in the
year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and seventy-four.

    (Signed)   ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                   Lieut.-Gov. N.-W. Territories.
               DAVID LAIRD,
                   Indian Commissioner.
               W. J. CHRISTIE,
                   Indian Commissioner.
               WA-WA-SE-CAPOW (or The man
                 proud of standing upright).     His x mark.
               OTA-MA-KOO-EWIN (or Shapous-e-tung's
                 first son--The man
                 who stands on the earth).        "  x  "

Signed by the parties hereto in the presence of the undersigned
witnesses, the same having been first explained to the Indians by
Joseph Robillard:

(Signed) ARCH. McDONALD.
         GEORGE FLETT.
         A. MAXWELL.
         DAVID ARMIT.
         HENRY McKAY.
         ELLEN McDONALD.
         MARY ARMIT.


ADHESION OF SAULTEAUX AND ASSINIBOINE INDIANS

The members of the Saulteaux and Stoney tribes of Indians, having
had communication of the treaty hereto annexed, made on the 15th
day of September last, between Her Majesty the Queen and the Cree
and Saulteaux Indians and other Indians at Qu'Appelle Lakes, but
not having been present at the Councils held at the Qu'Appelle
Lakes, between Her Majesty's Commissioners and the several Indian
Chiefs and others therein named, at which the articles of the said
treaty were agreed upon, hereby for ourselves, and the bands which
we represent in consideration of the provisions of the said treaty
having been extended to us, and the said bands which we represent,
transfer, surrender, and relinquish, to Her Majesty the Queen, her
heirs and successors, to and for the use of her Government of her
Dominion of Canada, all our right, title and privileges whatsoever
which we and the said bands which we represent, have, hold or enjoy
of, in, and to the territory described and fully set out in the
said articles of treaty and every part thereof; also, all our
right, title and privileges whatsoever to all other lands wherever
situated, whether within the limit of any treaty formerly made or
hereafter to be made with the Saulteaux tribe or any other tribe of
Indians inhabiting Her Majesty's North-West Territories, or any of
them, to have and to hold the same unto and to the use of her said
Majesty the Queen, her heirs and successors forever.

And we hereby agree to accept the several provisions, payments and
reserves of the said treaty, signed at the Qu'Appelle Lakes as
therein stated, and solemnly promise and engage to abide by, carry
out and fulfil all the stipulations, obligations and conditions
therein contained on the part of said Chiefs and Indians therein
named to be observed and performed, and in all things to conform to
the articles of the said treaty as if we ourselves and the bands
which we represent had been originally contracting parties thereto,
and had been present and attached our signatures to the said
treaty.

In witness whereof, Her Majesty's Commissioners and the said Indian
Chiefs have hereunto subscribed and set their hands at Qu'Appelle
Lakes this eighth day of September, in the year of Our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and seventy-five.

    (Signed)  W. J. CHRISTIE,
                  Indian Commissioner.
              M. G. DICKIESON,
                  Acting Indian Commissioner.
              W. F. WRIGHT.
              CHEECUCK.             His x mark.

Signed by the parties hereto in the presence of the undersigned
witnesses, the same having been explained to the Indians by William
the Second McKay:--

(Signed) WILLIAM S. McKAY.
         A. McDONALD.
         PASCAL BRELAND.
         WILLIAM WAGNER.


ADHESION OF CREE, SAULTEAUX AND ASSINIBOINE INDIANS

We, members of the Cree, Saulteaux, and Stonie tribes of Indians,
having had communication of the treaty hereto annexed, made on the
fifteenth day of September last, between Her Majesty the Queen and
the Cree and Saulteaux Indians, and other Indians at Qu'Appelle
Lakes, but not having been present at the councils held at the
Qu'Appelle Lakes, between Her Majesty's Commissioners, and the
several Indian Chiefs and others therein named, at which the
articles of the said treaty were agreed upon, hereby for ourselves,
and the bands which we represent in consideration of the provisions
of the said treaty having been extended to us, and the said bands
which we represent, transfer, surrender and relinquish, to Her
Majesty the Queen, her heirs and successors, to and for the use of
her Government, of her Dominion of Canada, all our right, title,
and privileges whatsoever which we and the said bands which we
represent, have, hold or enjoy of, in, and to the territory
described and fully set out in the said articles of treaty and
every part thereof, also, all our right, title and privileges
whatsoever to all other lands wherever situated whether within the
limit of any treaty formerly made, or hereafter to be made with the
Saulteaux tribe or any other tribe of Indians inhabiting Her
Majesty's North-West Territories, or any of them. To have and to
hold the same, unto and to the use of her said Majesty the Queen,
her heirs and successors forever.

And we hereby agree to accept the several provisions, payments, and
reserves of the said treaty signed at the Qu'Appelle Lakes as
therein stated, and solemnly promise and engage to abide by, carry
out, and fulfil all the stipulations, obligations, and conditions
therein contained on the part of said Chiefs and Indians therein
named to be observed and performed, and in all things to conform to
the articles of the said treaty as if we ourselves and the bands
which we represent had been originally contracting parties thereto,
and had been present and attached our signatures to the said
treaty.

In witness whereof Her Majesty's Commissioners and the said Indian
Chiefs have hereunto subscribed and set their hands at Qu'Appelle
Lakes, this ninth day of September, in the year of Our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and seventy-five.

    (Signed)  W. J. CHRISTIE,
                  Indian Commissioner.
              M. G. DICKIESON,
                  Acting Indian Commissioner.
              W. J. WRIGHT.
              WAH-PEE-MAKWA,            His x mark.
                  (The White Bear).
              O'KANES,                   "  x  "
              PAYEPOT,                   "  x  "
              LE-CROUP-DE-PHEASANT,      "  x  "
              KITCHI-KAH-ME-WIN,         "  x  "

Signed by the parties hereto in the presence of the undersigned
witnesses, the same having been first explained to the Indians by
Charles Pratt.

(Signed)  CHARLES PRATT.
          A. McDONALD.
          JOS. READER.
          PASCAL BRELAND.



REVISION OF TREATIES NUMBERS ONE AND TWO

Copy of a report of a Committee of the Honorable the Privy Council,
approved by His Excellency the Governor-General in Council, on the
30th April, 1875.

On a memorandum dated 27th April, 1875, from the Honorable the
Minister of the Interior, bringing under consideration the very
unsatisfactory state of affairs arising out of the so called
"outside promises" in connection with the Indian Treaties Numbers
One and Two--Manitoba and North-West Territories--concluded, the
former on the 3rd August, 1871, and the latter on 21st of the same
month, and recommending for the reasons stated:

1st. That the written memorandum attached to Treaty Number One be
considered as part of that treaty and of Treaty Number Two, and
that the Indian Commissioner be instructed to carry out the
promises therein contained in so far as they have not yet been
carried out, and that the Commissioner be advised to inform the
Indians that he has been authorized so to do.

2nd. That the Indian Commissioner be instructed to inform the
Indians, parties to Treaties Numbers One and Two, that, while the
Government cannot admit their claim to anything which is not set
forth in the treaty and in the memorandum attached thereto, which
treaty is binding alike upon the Government and upon the Indians,
yet, as there seems to have been some misunderstanding between the
Indian Commissioner and the Indians in the matter of Treaties
Numbers One and Two, the Government out of good feeling to the
Indians and as a matter of benevolence, is willing to raise the
annual payment to each Indian under Treaties Numbers One and Two
from three dollars to five dollars per annum, and make payment over
and above such sum of five dollars, of twenty dollars each and
every year to each Chief, and a suit of clothing every three years
to each Chief and each head man, allowing two head men to each
band; on the express understanding, however, that each Chief or
other Indian who shall receive such increased annuity or annual
payment shall be held to abandon all claim whatever against the
Government in connection with the so called "outside promises"
other than those contained in the memorandum attached to the
treaty.

The committee submit the foregoing recommendation for Your
Excellency's approval.

          (Signed) W. A. HIMSWORTH,
                       Clerk, Privy Council.
Certified:
    W. A. HIMSWORTH,
        Clerk, Privy Council.


ACCEPTANCES THEREOF BY LAKE MANITOBA INDIANS AND THE OTHER BANDS

We, the undersigned Chiefs and head men of Indian bands
representing bands of Indians who were parties to the Treaties
Numbers One and Two mentioned in the report of a Committee of the
Queen's Privy Council of Canada above printed, having had
communication thereof and fully understanding the same, assent
thereto and accept the increase of annuities therein mentioned on
the condition therein stated and with the assent and approval of
their several bands, it being agreed, however, with the Queen's
Commissioners, that the number of braves and councillors for each
Chief shall be four as at present, instead of two as printed 1875.
(Treaty Number Two, 23rd August, 1875.)

Representing East Manitoba or Elm Point:
    (Signed)  SON-SONSE,              His x mark.
                  Chief.
              NA-KA-NA-WA-TANY.        "  x  "
              PA-PA-WE-GUN-WA-TAK,     "  x  "
                  Councillors.
Representing Fairford Prairie:
              MA-SAH-REE-YASH,        His x mark.
                  Chief.
              DAVID MARSDEN,           "  x  "
              JOSEPH SUMNER,           "  x  "
                  Councillors.
Representing Fairford Mission:
              RICHARD WOODHOUSE,      His x mark.
                  Chief.
              JOHN ANDERSON,           "  x  "
              JOHN THOMPSON,           "  x  "
                  Councillors.
Representing (formerly Crane River and now) Ebb and Flow Lake:
              OENAISE,                His x mark.
                  Chief.
              BAPTISTE                 "  x  "
                  (son of deceased Broken Finger).
              KA-NEE-GUA-NASH,         "  x  "
                  Councillors.
Representing Waterhen band:
              KA-TAH-KAK-WA-NA-YAAS,  His x mark.
                  Chief.
              WA-WAH-RON-WEK-AH-PON,   "  x  "
                  Councillor.
Representing the Turtle and Valley Rivers, and Riding Mountain:
              KEE-SICK-KOO-WE-NIN     His x mark.
                  (in place of Mekis, dead),
                  Chief.
              KEE-SAY-KEE-SICK,        "  x  "
                  Councillor.
              NOS-QUASH,               "  x  "
              BAPTISTE,
                  Braves.
Representing the St. Peter's band:
              MIS-KOO-KE-NEU          His x mark.
                  (or Red Eagle).
              MA-TWA-KA-KE-TOOH.       "  x  "
              I-AND-EVAYWAY.           "  x  "
              MA-KO-ME-WE-KEM.         "  x  "
              AS-SHO-AH-MEY.           "  x  "
In presence of the following:

(Signed)  ALEX. MORRIS,
              Lieut.-Governor.
          JAMES McKAY.
          JAMES F. GRAHAM.
          ISAAC COWIE.
          FRANCIS FIELD.
          JOHN A. DAVIDSON.
          CHARLES WOOD.

We, the undersigned, Chiefs and head men of Indian bands
representing bands of Indians who were parties to the Treaties
Numbers One and Two, mentioned in the report of a Committee of the
Queen's Privy Council of Canada, "as printed on the other side of
this parchment," having had communication thereof, and fully
understanding the same, assent thereto and accept the increase of
annuities therein mentioned on the condition therein stated, and
with the assent and approval of their several bands, it being
agreed, however, with the Queen's Commissioners, that the number of
braves and councillors for each Chief shall be four, as at present,
instead of two as printed, 1875.

Signed near Fort Alexander, on the Indian reserve, the twenty-third
day of August, in the year of Our Lord one thousand eight hundred
and seventy-five.

              KA-KE-KE-PENOIS              His x mark.
                   (William Pennefather).
              JOSEPH KENT.                  "  x  "
              PETANAQUAQE
                   (Henry Vane).            "  x  "
              PETER HENDERSON.              "  x  "
              KAY-PAYAHSINISK.              "  x  "

Witnesses:
(Signed)  J. A. N. PROVENCHER,
              Indian Commissioner.
          J. DUBUC.
          A. DUBUC.
          JOS. MONKMAN,
              Interpreter.
          WILLIAM LEUNT.

Signed at Broken Head River, the twenty-eighth day of August, in
the year of Our Lord one thousand eight hundred and seventy-five.

    (Signed)  J. A. N. PROVENCHER,
                  Indian Commissioner.
              NASHA-KE-PE-NOIS.       His x mark.
              AH-KEE-SEEK-WAS-KEMG.    "  x  "
              NAYWA-BE-BEE-KEE-SIK.    "  x  "
              MAY-JAH-KEE-GEE-QUAN.    "  x  "
              PAY-SAUGA.               "  x  "

Witnesses:
(Signed)  J. DUBUC.
          H. S. REYNOLDS.
          DANIEL DEVLIN.
          H. COOK.

Signed on the Reserve at Roseau River, eighth day of September, in
the year of Our Lord one thousand eight hundred and seventy-five.

    (Signed)  J. A. N. PROVENCHER,
                  Indian Commissioner.
              NA-NA-WA-NA-NAN                 His x mark.
                  (or, Centre of Bird's Tail),
              KE-WE-SAY-ASH                    "  x  "
                  (or, Flying Round),
              WA-KO-WASH (or, Whippoorwill),   "  x  "
                  Chiefs.
              OSAH-WEE-KA-KAY,                 "  x  "
              OSAYS-KOO-KOON,                  "  x  "
              SHAY-WAY-ASH,                    "  x  "
              SHE-SKE-PENSE,                   "  x  "
              MA-MEH-TAH-CUM-E-CUP,            "  x  "
              PAH-TE-CU-WEE-NIUN,              "  x  "
                  Councillors.
              KAK-KA-QUIN-IASH,                "  x  "
              ANA-WAY-WEE-TIN,                 "  x  "
              TIBIS-QUO-QE-SICK,               "  x  "
              WE-SHO-TA,                       "  x  "
              NAT-TEE-KEE-GET,                 "  x  "
                  Braves.
Witness:
(Signed)  JAMES F. GRAHAM.



THE LAKE WINNIPEG TREATY, NUMBER FIVE

Articles of a treaty made and concluded at Berens River the
twentieth day of September, and at Norway House the twenty-fourth
day of September in the year of Our Lord one thousand eight hundred
and seventy-five, between Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen of
Great Britain and Ireland, by her Commissioners, the Honorable
Alexander Morris, Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Manitoba
and the North-West Territories, and the Honorable James McKay, of
the one part, and the Saulteaux and Swampy Cree Tribes of Indians,
inhabitants of the country within the limits hereinafter defined
and described by their Chiefs, chosen and named as hereinafter
mentioned, of the other part:

Whereas the Indians inhabiting the said country have, pursuant to
an appointment made by the said Commissioners, been convened at
meetings at Berens River and Norway House, to deliberate upon
certain matters of interest to Her Most Gracious Majesty, of the
one part, and the said Indians of the other;

And whereas the said Indians have been notified and informed by Her
Majesty's said Commissioners, that it is the desire of Her Majesty
to open up for settlement, immigration, and such other purposes as
to Her Majesty may seem meet, a tract of country bounded and
described as hereinafter mentioned, and to obtain the consent
thereto of her Indian subjects inhabiting the said tract, and to
make a treaty and arrange with them, so that there may be peace and
good will between them and Her Majesty, and that they may know and
be assured of what allowance they are to count upon and receive
from Her Majesty's bounty and benevolence;

And whereas, the Indians of the said tract, duly convened in
council as aforesaid, and being requested by Her Majesty's said
Commissioners to name certain Chiefs and head men, who should be
authorized on their behalf to conduct such negotiations and sign
any treaty to be founded thereon, and to become responsible to Her
Majesty for the faithful performance by their respective bands of
such obligations as shall be assumed by them, the said Indians have
thereupon named the following persons for that purpose, that is to
say:--For the Indians within the Berens River region and their
several bands:

Nah-wee-kee-sick-quah-yash, Chief; Kah-nah-wah-kee-wee-nin and
Nah-kee-quan-nay-yash, Councillors, and Pee-wah-noo-wee-nin, of
Poplar River, Councillor; for the Indians within the Norway House
region and their several bands, David Rundle, Chief; James
Cochrane, Harry Constatag and Charles Pisequinip, Councillors; and
Ta-pas-ta-num, or Donald William Sinclair Ross, Chief; James
Garriock and Proud McKay, Councillors;

And thereupon in open council, the different bands having presented
their Chiefs to the said Commissioners as the Chiefs and head men,
for the purposes aforesaid, of the respective bands of Indians
inhabiting the said district hereinafter described;

And whereas, the said Commissioners then and there received and
acknowledged the persons so presented as Chiefs and head men, for
the purposes aforesaid, of the respective bands of Indians
inhabiting the said district hereinafter described;

And whereas, the said Commissioners have proceeded to negotiate a
treaty with the said Indians and the same has been finally agreed
upon and concluded as follows, that is to say:

The Saulteaux and Swampy Cree tribes of Indians and all other the
Indians inhabiting the district hereinafter described and defined,
do hereby cede, release, surrender, and yield up to the Government
of the Dominion of Canada, for Her Majesty the Queen and her
successors forever, all their rights, titles and privileges
whatsoever to the lands included within the following limits, that
is to say:

Commencing at the north corner or junction of Treaties Numbers One
and Three, thence easterly along the boundary of Treaty Number
Three to the height of land at the north-east corner of the said
treaty limits, a point dividing the waters of the Albany and
Winnipeg Rivers, thence due north along the said height of land to
a point intersected by the 53 degrees of north latitude and thence
north-westerly to Favourable Lake, thence following the east shore
of said lake to its northern limit, thence north-westerly to the
north end of Lake Winnipegosis, thence westerly to the height of
land called "Robinson's Portage," thence north-westerly to the
east end of Cross Lake, thence north-westerly crossing Fox's Lake,
thence north-westerly to the north end of Split Lake, thence
south-westerly to Pipestone Lake, on Burntwood River, thence
south-westerly to the western point of John Scott's Lake,
thence south-westerly to the north shore of Beaver Lake, thence
south-westerly to the west end of Cumberland Lake, thence due south
to the Saskatchewan River, thence due south to the north-west
corner of the northern limits of Treaty Number Four, including all
territory within the said limits, and all islands on all lakes
within the said limits as above described, and it being also
understood that in all cases where lakes form the treaty limits,
ten miles from the shore of the lake should he included in the
treaty;

And also all their rights, titles and privileges whatsoever to all
other lands wherever situated in the North-West Territories, or in
any other Province or portion of Her Majesty's Dominions situated
and being within the Dominion of Canada;

The tract comprised within the lines above described embracing an
area of one hundred thousand square miles, be the same, more or
less;

To have and to hold the same to Her Majesty the Queen and her
successors forever.

And Her Majesty the Queen hereby agrees and undertakes to lay aside
reserves for farming lands, due respect being had to lands at
present cultivated by the said Indians, and other reserves for
the benefit of the said Indians to be administered and dealt with
for them by Her Majesty's Government of the Dominion of Canada;
provided all such reserves shall not exceed in all one hundred
and sixty acres for each family of five, or in that proportion
for larger or smaller families in manner following, that is to
say:--For the band of Saulteaux in the Berens River region now
settled, or who may within two years settle therein, a reserve
commencing at the outlet of Berens River into Lake Winnipeg, and
extending along the shores of said lake and up said river and into
the interior behind said lake and river, so as to comprehend one
hundred and sixty acres for each family of five, a reasonable
addition being, however, to be made by Her Majesty to the extent of
the said reserve for the inclusion in the tract so reserved of
swamps, but reserving the free navigation of the said lake and
river, and free access to the shores and waters thereof for Her
Majesty and all her subjects, and excepting thereout such land as
may have been granted to or stipulated to be held by the Hudson's
Bay Company, and also such land as Her Majesty or her successors
may in her good pleasure see fit to grant to the mission
established at or near Berens River by the Methodist Church of
Canada, for a church, school-house, parsonage, burial ground and
farm, or other mission purposes; and to the Indians residing at
Poplar River, falling into Lake Winnipeg north of Berens River, a
reserve not exceeding one hundred and sixty acres to each family of
five, respecting as much as possible their present improvements;
and inasmuch as a number of the Indians now residing in and about
Norway House, of the band of whom David Rundle is Chief, are
desirous of removing to a locality where they can cultivate the
soil, Her Majesty the Queen hereby agrees to lay aside a reserve on
the west side of Lake Winnipeg, in the vicinity of Fisher River, so
as to give one hundred acres to each family of five, or in that
proportion for larger or smaller families, who shall remove to the
said locality within "three years," it being estimated that ninety
families or thereabout will remove within the said period, and that
a reserve will be laid aside sufficient for that or the actual
number; and it is further agreed that those of the band who remain
in the vicinity of "Norway House" shall retain for their own use
their present gardens, buildings and improvements until the same be
departed with by the Queen's Government, with their consent first
had and obtained for their individual benefit, if any value can be
realized therefor; and with regard to the band of Wood Indians of
whom Ta-pas-ta-num or Donald William Sinclair Ross is Chief, a
reserve at Otter Island on the west side of Cross Lake of one
hundred and sixty acres for each family of five, or in that
proportion for smaller families, reserving however to Her Majesty,
her successors, and her subjects, the free navigation of all lakes
and rivers, and free access to the shores thereof; Provided,
however, that Her Majesty reserves the right to deal with any
settlers within the bounds of any lands reserved for any band as
she shall deem fit, and also that the aforesaid reserves of land,
or any interest therein, may be sold or otherwise disposed of by
Her Majesty's Government for the use and benefit of the said
Indians entitled thereto, with their consent first had and
obtained; and with a view to shew the satisfaction of Her Majesty
with the behavior and good conduct of her Indians she hereby
through her Commissioners makes them a present of five dollars for
each man, woman and child belonging to the bands here represented,
in extinguishment of all claims heretofore preferred;

And further, Her Majesty agrees to maintain schools for instruction
in such reserves hereby made as to her Government of the Dominion
of Canada may seem advisable, whenever the Indians of the reserve
shall desire it;

Her Majesty further agrees with her said Indians, that within the
boundary of Indian reserves until otherwise determined by her
Government of the Dominion of Canada, no intoxicating liquor shall
be allowed to be introduced or sold, and all laws now in force, or
hereafter to be enacted, to preserve her Indian subjects inhabiting
the reserves or living elsewhere within her North-West Territories,
from the evil influence of the use of intoxicating liquors, shall
be strictly enforced;

Her Majesty further agrees with her said Indians that they,
the said Indians, shall have right to pursue their avocations
of hunting and fishing throughout the tract surrendered as
hereinbefore described, subject to such regulations as may from
time to time be made by her Government of her Dominion of Canada,
and saving and excepting such tracts as may from time to time be
required or taken up for settlement, mining, lumbering or other
purposes by her said Government of the Dominion of Canada, or by
any of the subjects thereof duly authorized therefor by the said
Government;

It is further agreed between Her Majesty and her said Indians, that
such sections of the reserves above indicated as may at any time be
required for public works or buildings, of what nature soever, may
be appropriated for that purpose by Her Majesty's Government of the
Dominion of Canada, due compensation being made for the value of
any improvement thereon;

And further, that Her Majesty's Commissioners shall, as soon as
possible after the execution of this treaty, cause to be taken an
accurate census of all the Indians inhabiting the tract above
described, distributing them in families, and shall in every year
ensuing the date hereof, at some period in each year, to be duly
notified to the Indians, and at a place or places to be appointed
for that purpose within the territory ceded, pay to each Indian
person the sum of five dollars per head yearly;

It is further agreed between Her Majesty and the said Indians that
the sum of five hundred dollars per annum shall be yearly and every
year expended by Her Majesty in the purchase of ammunition and
twine for nets for the use of the said Indians in manner following,
that is to say:--In the reasonable discretion as regards the
distribution thereof among the Indians inhabiting the several
reserves or otherwise included herein, of Her Majesty's Indian
Agent having the supervision of this treaty;

It is further agreed between Her Majesty and the said Indians that
the following articles shall be supplied to any band of the said
Indians who are now cultivating the soil, or who shall hereafter
commence to cultivate the land, that is to say:--Two hoes for
every family actually cultivating; also one spade per family as
aforesaid; one plough for every ten families as aforesaid; five
harrows for every twenty families as aforesaid; one scythe
for every family as aforesaid; and also one axe; and also one
cross-cut saw; one hand saw, one pit saw, the necessary files, one
grindstone, and one auger for each band; and also for each Chief
for the use of his band, one chest of ordinary carpenter's tools;
also, for each band, enough of wheat, barley, potatoes and oats to
plant the land actually broken up for cultivation by such band;
also, for each band, one yoke of oxen, one bull, and four cows:
all the aforesaid articles to be given once for all for the
encouragement of the practice of agriculture among the Indians.

It is further agreed between Her Majesty and the said Indians, that
each Chief, duly recognized as such, shall receive an annual salary
of twenty-five dollars per annum, and each subordinate officer, not
exceeding three for each band, shall receive fifteen dollars per
annum; and each such Chief and subordinate officer as aforesaid
shall also receive, once every three years, a suitable suit of
clothing; and each Chief shall receive, in recognition of the
closing of the treaty, a suitable flag and medal.

And the undersigned Chiefs, on their own behalf, and on behalf of
all other Indians inhabiting the tract within ceded, do hereby
solemnly promise and engage to strictly observe this treaty, and
also to conduct and behave themselves as good and loyal subjects of
Her Majesty the Queen. They promise and engage that they will, in
all respects, obey and abide by the law, and they will maintain
peace and good order between each other, and also between
themselves and other tribes of Indians, and between themselves and
others of Her Majesty's subjects, whether Indians or whites, now
inhabiting or hereafter to inhabit any part of the said ceded
tracts; and that they will not molest the person or property of any
inhabitant of such ceded tracts, or the property of Her Majesty
the Queen, or interfere with or trouble any person passing or
travelling through the said tracts or any part thereof: and that
they will aid and assist the officers of Her Majesty in bringing
to justice and punishment any Indian offending against the
stipulations of this treaty, or infringing the laws in force in
the country so ceded.

In witness whereof, Her Majesty's said Commissioners and the said
Indian Chiefs have hereunto subscribed and set their hands at
Berens River, this twentieth day of September, A.D. 1875, and at
Norway House, on the twenty-fourth day of the month and year herein
first above named.

(Signed) ALEXANDER MORRIS,                   [L. S.]
            Lieut.-Governor.
         JAMES McKAY,                        [L. S.]
         NAH-WEE-KEE-SICK-QUAH-YASH          His x mark.
             (otherwise Jacob Berens),
                   Chief.
         KAH-WAH-NAH-KEE-WEE-NIN              "  x  "
             (otherwise Antoine Gouin),
         NAH-KEE-QUAN-NAY-YAH,                "  x  "
         PEE-WAH-ROO-WEE-NIN,                 "  x  "
                   Councillors.

Signed by the Chiefs within named in presence of the following
witnesses, the same having been first read and explained by the
Honorable James McKay:

(Signed) THOMAS HOWARD.
         A. G. JACKES, M.D.
         CHRISTINE MORRIS.
         E. C. MORRIS.
         ELIZABETH YOUNG.
         EGERTON RYERSON YOUNG.
         WILLIAM McKAY.
         JOHN McKAY.

Signed at Norway House by the Chiefs and Councillors hereunto
subscribing in the presence of the undersigned witnesses, the same
having been first read and explained, by the Honorable James McKay:

       (Signed) ALEXANDER MORRIS,             [L.S.]
                    Lieut.-Governor.
                JAMES McKAY.                  [L.S.]
                DAVID RUNDLE,
                    Chief.
                JAMES COCHRANE,                His x mark.
                HARRY CONSTATAG,                "  x  "
                CHARLES PISEQUINIP,             "  x  "
                    Councillors.
                TA-PAS-TA-NUM                   "  x  "
                    (or Donald William
                     Sinclair Ross),
                    Chief.
                GEORGE GARRIOCK,
                PROUD McKAY,                    "  x  "
                    Councillors.
Witnesses:
(Signed) RODERICK ROSS.
         JOHN H. RUTTAN,
              Methodist Minister.
         O. GERMAN,
              Methodist Minister.
         D. C. McTAVISH.
         ALEXANDER SINCLAIR.
         L. C. McTAVISH.
         CHRISTINE V. K. MORRIS.
         E. C. MORRIS.
         A. G. JACKES, M.D.
         THOMAS HOWARD.


ADHESION OF SASKATCHEWAN INDIANS

We the band of the Saulteaux tribe of Indians, residing at the
mouth of the Saskatchewan River, on both sides thereof, having had
communication of the foregoing treaty, hereby, and in consideration
of the provisions of the said treaty being extended to us,
transfer, surrender, and relinquish to Her Majesty the Queen, her
heirs and successors, to and for the use of the Government of
Canada, all our right, title and privileges whatsoever, which we
have or enjoy in the territory described in the said treaty, and
every part thereof, to have and, to bold to the use of Her Majesty
the Queen, and her heirs and successors forever.

And Her Majesty agrees, through the said Commissioners, to assign a
reserve of sufficient area to allow one hundred and sixty acres to
each family of five, or in that proportion for larger or smaller
families--such reserves to be laid off and surveyed next year, on
the south side of the River Saskatchewan.

And having regard to the importance of the land where the said
Indians are now settled, in respect of the purposes of the
navigation of the said river, and transport in connection
therewith, and otherwise, and in view of the fact that many of the
said Indians have now houses and gardens on the other side of the
river, and elsewhere, which they will abandon, Her Majesty agrees,
through her said Commissioners, to grant a sum of five hundred
dollars to the said band, to be paid in equitable proportions to
such of them as have houses, to assist them in removing their
houses to the said reserve, or building others. And the said
Indians represented herein by their Chief and Councillors,
presented as such by the band, do hereby agree to accept the
several provisions, payments, and other benefits as stated in the
said treaty, and solemnly promise and engage to abide by, carry out
and fulfil all the stipulations, obligations and conditions therein
contained, on the part of the said Chiefs and Indians therein
named, to be observed and performed, and in all things to conform
to the articles of the said treaty as if we ourselves had been
originally contracting parties thereto.

In witness whereof, Her Majesty's said Commissioners and the said
Indian Chief and Councillors have hereunto subscribed and set their
hands, at the Grand Rapids, this twenty-seventh day of September,
in the year of Our Lord one thousand eight hundred and seventy-five.

      (Signed) ALEXANDER MORRIS,        [L.S.]
                    Lieut.-Governor.
               JAMES McKAY.             [L.S.]
               PETER BEARDY,            His x mark.
                    Chief.
               JOSEPH ATKINSON,          "  x  "
               ROBERT SANDERSON,         "  x  "
                    Councillors.

Signed by the parties in the presence of the undersigned witnesses,
the same having been first explained to the Indians by the
Honorable James McKay:

(Signed) THOMAS HOWARD.
         RODERICK ROSS.
         E. C. MORRIS.
         A. G. JACKES, M.D.
         ALEXANDER MATHESON.
         JOSEPH HOUSTON.
         CHRISTINE V. K. MORRIS.

Memorandum.

The Queen's Indian Commissioners having met Thickfoot and a portion
of the Islands band of Indians at Wapang or Dog Head Island, on the
twenty-eighth day of September A.D. 1875, request him to notify the
Island Indians and those of Jack Head Point, to meet at Wapang an
Indian agent next summer, to receive payments under the treaty,
which they have made with the Indians of Norway House, Berens
River, Grand Rapids and Lake Winnipeg, and in which they are
included, at a time of which they will be notified, and to be
prepared then to designate their Chief and two Councillors. The
Commissioners have agreed to give some of the Norway House Indians
a reserve at Fisher Creek, and they will give land to the Island
Indians at the same place.

Given at Wapang, this 28th day of September, A.D. 1875, under our
hands.

                ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                     Lieut.-Governor.
                JAMES McKAY.

I accept payments under the treaty for myself and those who may
adhere to me, and accept the same and all its provisions, as a
principal Indian, and agree to notify the Indians as above written.

  Wapang, September 28th, 1875.
                                (Signed) THICKFOOT.  His x mark.
Witness:
(Signed) THOMAS HOWARD.
         RODERICK ROSS.

Note--In 1876 Messrs. Howard and Reid obtained the adhesions to the
Winnipeg Treaty of the Indians of the Dog Head, Bloodvein River,
Big Island, and Jack Fish Head bands on Lake Winnipeg, and of the
Island and Grand Rapids of the Berens River band, and of the Pas,
Cumberland and Moose Lake bands on the Saskatchewan River, as will
be found stated in Chapter VIII.



THE TREATIES AT FORTS CARLTON AND PITT, NUMBER SIX

Articles of a treaty made and concluded near Carlton, on the
twenty-third day of August, and on the twenty-eighth day of said
month, respectively, and near Fort Pitt on the ninth day of
September, in the year of Our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-six, between Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen of Great
Britain and Ireland, by her Commissioners, the Honorable Alexander
Morris, Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Manitoba and the
North-West Territories, and the Honorable James McKay and the
Honorable William Joseph Christie, of the one part, and the Plain
and the Wood Cree Tribes of Indians, and the other Tribes of
Indians, inhabitants of the country within the limits hereinafter
defined and described, by their Chiefs, chosen and named as
hereinafter mentioned, of the other part.

Whereas the Indians inhabiting the said country have, pursuant to
an appointment made by the said Commissioners, been convened at
meetings at Fort Carlton, Fort Pitt and Battle River, to deliberate
upon certain matters of interest to Her Most Gracious Majesty, of
the one part, and the said Indians of the other;

And whereas the said Indians have been notified and informed by Her
Majesty's said Commissioners that it is the desire of Her Majesty
to open up for settlement, immigration and such other purposes as
to Her Majesty may seem meet, a tract of country, bounded and
described as hereinafter mentioned, and to obtain the consent
thereto of her Indian subjects inhabiting the said tract, and to
make a treaty and arrange with them, so that there may be peace and
good will between them and Her Majesty, and that they may know and
be assured of what allowance they are to count upon and receive
from Her Majesty's bounty and benevolence;

And whereas the Indians of the said tract, duly convened in council
as aforesaid, and being requested by Her Majesty's Commissioners to
name certain Chiefs and head men, who should be authorized, on
their behalf, to conduct each negotiations and sign any treaty
to be founded thereon, and to become responsible to Her Majesty
for the faithful performance by their respective bands of such
obligations as shall be assumed by them, the said Indians have
thereupon named for that purpose, that is to say:--representing
the Indians who make the treaty at Carlton, the several Chiefs
and Councillors who have subscribed hereto, and representing the
Indians who make the treaty at Fort Pitt, the several Chiefs and
Councillors who have subscribed hereto;

And thereupon, in open council, the different bands having
presented their Chiefs to the said Commissioners as the Chiefs and
head men, for the purposes aforesaid, of the respective bands of
Indians inhabiting the district hereinafter described;

And whereas the said Commissioners then and there received and
acknowledged the persons so represented, as Chiefs and head men,
for the purposes aforesaid, of the respective bands of Indians
inhabiting the said district hereinafter described;

And whereas the said Commissioners have proceeded to negotiate a
treaty with the said Indians, and the same has been finally agreed
upon and concluded as follows, that is to say:

The Plain and Wood Cree Tribes of Indians, and all other the
Indians inhabiting the district hereinafter described and defined,
do hereby cede, release, surrender and yield up to the Government
of the Dominion of Canada for Her Majesty the Queen and her
successors forever, all their rights titles and privileges
whatsoever, to the lands included within the following limits, that
is to say:

Commencing at the mouth of the river emptying into the north-west
angle of Cumberland Lake, thence westerly up the said river to the
source, thence on a straight line in a westerly direction to the
head of Green Lake, thence northerly to the elbow in the Beaver
River, thence down the said river northerly to a point twenty miles
from the said elbow; thence in a westerly direction, keeping on a
line generally parallel with the said Beaver River (above the
elbow), and about twenty miles distance therefrom, to the source of
the said river; thence northerly to the north-easterly point of the
south shore of Red Deer Lake, continuing westerly along the said
shore to the western limit thereof, and thence due west to the
Athabaska River, thence up the said river, against the stream to
the Jasper House, in the Rocky Mountains; thence on a course
south-eastwardly, following the easterly range of the Mountains, to
the source of the main branch of the Red Deer River; thence down
the said river, with the stream, to the junction therewith of the
outlet of the river, being the outlet of the Buffalo Lake; thence
due east twenty miles, thence on a straight line south-eastwardly
to the mouth of the said Red Deer River on the South Branch of the
Saskatchewan River; thence eastwardly and northwardly, following on
the boundaries of the tracts conceded by the several Treaties
numbered Four and Five, to the place of beginning;

And also all their rights, titles and privileges whatsoever, to all
other lands, wherever situated, in the North-West Territories, or
in any other Province or portion of Her Majesty's Dominions,
situated and being within the Dominion of Canada;

The tract comprised within the lines above described, embracing an
area of one hundred and twenty-one thousand square miles, be the
same more or less;

To have and to hold the same to Her Majesty the Queen and her
successors forever;

And Her Majesty the Queen hereby agrees and undertakes to lay aside
reserves for farming lands, due respect being had to lands at
present cultivated by the said Indians, and other reserves for the
benefit of the said Indians, to be administered and dealt with
for them by Her Majesty's Government of the Dominion of Canada,
provided all such reserves shall not exceed in all one square mile
for each family of five, or in that proportion for larger or
smaller families, in manner following that is to say:--

That the Chief Superintendent of Indian Affairs shall depute and
send a suitable person to determine and set apart the reserves for
each band, after consulting with the Indians thereof as to the
locality which may be found to be most suitable for them;

Provided, however, that Her Majesty reserves the right to deal with
any settlers within the bounds of any lands reserved for any band
as she shall deem fit, and also that the aforesaid reserves of land
or any interest therein may be sold or otherwise disposed of by Her
Majesty's Government for the use and benefit of the said Indians
entitled thereto, with their consent first had and obtained; and
with a view to show the satisfaction of Her Majesty with the
behavior and good conduct of her Indians, she hereby, through her
Commissioners, makes them a present of twelve dollars for each man,
woman and child belonging to the bands here represented, in
extinguishment of all claims heretofore preferred;

And further, Her Majesty agrees to maintain schools for instruction
in such reserves hereby made, as to her Government of the Dominion
of Canada may seem advisable, whenever the Indians of the reserve
shall desire it;

Her Majesty further agrees with her said Indians that within the
boundary of Indian reserves, until otherwise determined by her
Government of the Dominion of Canada, no intoxicating liquor shall
be allowed to be introduced or sold, and all laws now in force or
hereafter to be enacted to preserve her Indian subjects inhabiting
the reserves or living elsewhere within her North-West Territories
from the evil influence of the use of intoxicating liquors, shall
be strictly enforced;

Her Majesty further agrees with her said Indians that they the said
Indians, shall have right to pursue their avocations of hunting and
fishing throughout the tract surrendered as hereinbefore described,
subject to such regulations as may from time to time be made by her
Government of her Dominion of Canada, and saving and excepting such
tracts as may from time to time be required or taken up for
settlement, mining, lumbering or other purposes by her said
Government of the Dominion of Canada, or by any of the subjects
thereof, duly authorized therefor, by the said Government;

It is further agreed between Her Majesty and her said Indians, that
such sections of the reserves above indicated as may at any time be
required for public works or buildings of what nature soever, may
be appropriated for that purpose by Her Majesty's Government of the
Dominion of Canada, due compensation being made for the value of
any improvements thereon;

And further, that Her Majesty's Commissioners shall, as soon as
possible after the execution of this treaty, cause to be taken, an
accurate census of all the Indians inhabiting the tract above
described, distributing them in families, and shall in every year
ensuing the date hereof, at some period in each year, to be duly
notified to the Indians, and at a place or places to be appointed
for that purpose, within the territories ceded, pay to each Indian
person the sum of five dollars per head yearly;

It is further agreed between Her Majesty and the said Indians that
the sum of fifteen hundred dollars per annum shall be yearly and
every year expended by Her Majesty in the purchase of ammunition
and twine for nets for the use of the said Indians, in manner
following, that is to say:--In the reasonable discretion as regards
the distribution thereof, among the Indians inhabiting the several
reserves, or otherwise included herein, of Her Majesty's Indian
Agent having the supervision of this treaty;

It is further agreed between Her Majesty and the said Indians that
the following articles shall be supplied to any band of the said
Indians who are now cultivating the soil, or who shall hereafter
commence to cultivate the land, that is to say--Four hoes for every
family actually cultivating, also two spades per family as
aforesaid; one plough for every three families, as aforesaid, one
harrow for every three families as aforesaid; two scythes, and one
whetstone and two hayforks and two reaping-hooks for every family
as aforesaid; and also two axes, and also one cross cut saw, and
also one hand saw, one pit saw, the necessary files, one grindstone
and one auger for each band; and also for each Chief, for the use
of his band, one chest of ordinary carpenter's tools; also for each
band, enough of wheat, barley, potatoes and oats to plant the land
actually broken up for cultivation by such band; also for each
band, four oxen, one bull and six cows, also one boar and two sows,
and one handmill when any band shall raise sufficient grain
therefor; all the aforesaid articles to be given once for all for
the encouragement of the practice of agriculture among the Indians;

It is further agreed between Her Majesty and the said Indians, that
each Chief, duly recognized as such shall receive an annual salary
of twenty-five dollars per annum; and each subordinate officer, not
exceeding four for each band, shall receive fifteen dollars per
annum; and each such Chief and subordinate officer as aforesaid,
shall also receive, once every three years, a suitable suit of
clothing, and each Chief shall receive, in recognition of the
closing of the treaty, a suitable flag and medal, and also, as soon
as convenient, one horse, harness and waggon;

That in the event hereafter of the Indians comprised within this
treaty being overtaken by any pestilence, or by a general famine,
the Queen, on being satisfied and certified thereof by her Indian
Agent or Agents, will grant to the Indians assistance of such
character and to such extent as her Chief Superintendent of Indian
Affairs shall deem necessary and sufficient to relieve the Indians
from the calamity that shall have befallen them;

That during the next three years, after two or more of the reserves
hereby agreed to be set apart to the Indians, shall have been
agreed upon and surveyed, there shall be granted to the Indians
included under the Chiefs adhering to the treaty at Carlton, each
spring, the sum of one thousand dollars to be expended for them by
Her Majesty's Indian Agents, in the purchase of provisions for the
use of such of the band as are actually settled on the reserves and
are engaged in cultivating the soil, to assist them in such
cultivation;

That a medicine chest shall be kept at the house of each Indian
Agent for the use and benefit of the Indians, at the discretion of
such Agent;

That with regard to the Indians included under the Chiefs adhering
to the treaty at Fort Pitt, and to those under Chiefs within the
treaty limits who may hereafter give their adhesion hereto
(exclusively, however, of the Indians of the Carlton Region) there
shall, during three years, after two or more reserves shall have
been agreed upon and surveyed, be distributed each spring among the
bands cultivating the soil on such reserves, by Her Majesty's Chief
Indian Agent for this treaty in his discretion, a sum not exceeding
one thousand dollars, in the purchase of provisions for the use of
such members of the band as are actually settled on the reserves
and engaged in the cultivation of the soil, to assist and encourage
them in such cultivation;

That, in lieu of waggons, if they desire it, and declare their
option to that effect, there shall be given to each of the Chiefs
adhering hereto, at Fort Pitt or elsewhere hereafter (exclusively
of those in the Carlton District) in recognition of this treaty, so
soon as the same can be conveniently transported, two carts, with
iron bushings and tires;

And the undersigned Chiefs, on their behalf, and on behalf of all
other Indians inhabiting the tract within ceded, do hereby solemnly
promise and engage to strictly observe this treaty, and also to
conduct and behave themselves as good and loyal subjects of Her
Majesty the Queen;

They promise and engage that they will in all respects obey and
abide by the law, and they will maintain peace and good order
between each other, and also between themselves and other tribes of
Indians, and between themselves and others of Her Majesty's
subjects, whether Indians or whites, now inhabiting or hereafter to
inhabit any part of the said ceded tracts, and that they will not
molest the person or property of any inhabitant of such ceded
tracts, or the property of Her Majesty the Queen, or interfere with
or trouble any person passing or travelling through the said tracts
or any part thereof; and that they will aid and assist the officers
of Her Majesty in bringing to justice and punishment any Indian
offending against the stipulations of this treaty, or infringing
the laws in force in the country so ceded.

In witness whereof, Her Majesty's said Commissioners and the said
Indian Chiefs have hereunto subscribed and set their hands, at or
near Fort Carlton, on the day and year aforesaid, and near Fort
Pitt on the day above aforesaid.

(Signed) ALEXANDER MORRIS,
           Lieut.-Governor, N.-W.T.
         JAMES McKAY,
         W. J. CHRISTIE,
           Indian Commissioners.
         MIST-OW-AS-IS,               His x mark.
         AH-TUK-UK-KOOP,               "  x  "
           Head Chiefs of the Carlton Indians.
         PEE-YAHN-KAH-NIHK-OO-SIT,     "  x  "
         AH-YAH-TUS-KUM-IK-IM-UM,      "  x  "
         KEE-TOO-WA-HAN,               "  x  "
         CHA-KAS-TA-PAY-SIN,           "  x  "
         JOHN SMITH,                   "  x  "
         JAMES SMITH,                  "  x  "
         CHIP-EE-WAY-AN,               "  x  "
           Chiefs.
         MASSAN,                       "  x  "
         PIERRE CADIEN,                "  x  "
         OO-YAH-TIK-WAH-PAHN,          "  x  "
         MAHS-KEE-TE-TIM-UN,           "  x  "
           Councillors of Mist-ow-as-is.
         SAH-SAH-KOO-MOOS,             "  x  "
         BENJAMIN,                     "  x  "
         MEE-NOW-AH-CHAHK-WAY,         "  x  "
         KEE-SIK-OW-ASIS,              "  x  "
           Councillors of Ah-tuk-uk-koop.
         PEE-TOOK-AH-HAN-UP-EE-GIN-EW, "  x  "
         PEE-AY-CHEW,                  "  x  "
         TAH-WAH-PISK-EE-KAHP-POW,     "  x  "
         AHS-KOOS,                     "  x  "
           Councillors of Pee-yahn-kah-nihk-oo-sit.
         PET-E-QUA-CAY,                "  x  "
         JEAN BAPTISTE,                "  x  "
         ISIDORE WOLFE,                "  x  "
         KEE-KOO-HOOS,                 "  x  "
           Councillors of Kee-too-wa-han.
         OO-SAHN-ASKU-NUKIP,           "  x  "
         YAW-YAW-LOO-WAY,              "  x  "
         SOO-SOU-AIM-EE-LUAHN,         "  x  "
         NUS-YOH-YAK-EE-NAH-KOOS,      "  x  "
           Councillors of Ah-yah-tus-kum-ik-im-um.
         WILLIAM BADGER,
         BENJAMIN JOYFUL,              "  x  "
         JOHN BADGER,
         JAMES BEAR,
           Councillors of John Smith.
         KAH-TIP-IS-KOOR-AHT,          "  x  "
         KAH-KEW-EE-KWAHW-AHS-UM,      "  x  "
         NAH-PACH,                     "  x  "
         MUS-IN-AH-NE-HIM-AHN,         "  x  "
           Councillors of Cha-kas-ta-pay-sin.
         BERNARD CONSTANT,
         HENRY SMYTH,                  "  x  "
         MAH-TUA-AHS-TIM-OO-WE-GIN,    "  x  "
         JACOB McLEAN,                 "  x  "
           Councillors of James Smith.
         NAH-POO-CHEE-CHEES,           "  x  "
         NAH-WIS,                      "  x  "
         KAH-PAH-PAH-MAH-CHAHK-NAY,    "  x  "
         KEE-YEW-AH-KAH-PIM-WAHT,      "  x  "
           Councillors of Chip-ee-way-an.
         NAH-WEE-KAH-NICK-KAH-OO-
           TAH-MAH-HOTE                "  x  "
           (or Neeh-cha-aw-asis),
                Chief.

Signed by the Chiefs within named in the presence of the following
witnesses, the same having been first read and explained by Peter
Erasmus, Peter Ballendine and the Rev. John McKay:

(Signed) A. G. JACKES, M.D.
         JAMES WALKER,
         J. H. McILLREE,
                 N.-W.M.P.
         PIERRE LEVAILLER,  His x mark.
         ISIDORE DUMOND,     "  x  "
         JEAN DUMOND,        "  x  "
         PETER HOURIE,
         FRANCOIS GINGRAS,
         J. B. MITCHELL,
                Staff Constable, N.-W.M.P.
         J. H. PRICE,
                Hospital Steward, N.-W.M.P.
         XAVIER LETANGER,   His x mark.
         WILLIAM SINCLAIR,
         A. R. KENNEDY,
         R. J. PRITCHARD,
         L. CLARKE,
         W. McKAY,
         W. D. JARVIS,
                Inspector, N.-W.M.P.

Signed by the Chiefs and head men of the Willow Indians near Fort
Carlton, this 28th day of August, A.D. 1876, the same having been
first read and explained by the Honorable James McKay, and Peter
Erasmus, in the presence of the undersigned witnesses:

                 SEE-SEE-QUAM-ISH,             His x mark.
                 NEE-TOO-KEE-WEE-KAH-MAN,       "  x  "
                                 Councillors.
                 KAH-MEE-YIS-TOO-WAY-SIT,       "  x  "
                 KAH-PAY-YAK-WAHSK-OO-MUM,      "  x  "
                 SEE-SEE-KWAHN-IS,              "  x  "
                  Joint Chiefs of Willow Indians.
                 KAH-NAH-KAH-SKOW-WAHT.         "  x  "
                 KAH-AH-TEE-KOO-NEW.            "  x  "
                 KAH-NAH-MAH-CHEW.              "  x  "
                 MOON-OO-YAHS.                  "  x  "
                 PO-MIN-AH-KOW.                 "  x  "
                 OO-TUK-KOO-PAH-KAH-MAY-
                    TOU-MAY-YET.                "  x  "
(Signed) A. G. JACKES, M.D.
         JOSEPH GENTON.
         JOHN A. KERR.
         PIERRE LEVAILLER.    His x mark.
         W. D. JARVIS,
                N.-W.M.P.

Signed by Her Majesty's Commissioners, and by the Chiefs and head
men hereafter subscribing hereto, the same having been first read
and explained to the Indians by the Honorable James McKay and Peter
Erasmus, near Fort Pitt, this 9th day of September, A.D. 1876, in
the presence of the undersigned witnesses:

       (Signed) ALEXANDER MORRIS,
                      Lieut.-Governor, N.W.T.
                JAMES McKAY,
                W. J. CHRISTIE,
                        Indian Commissioners.
                WEE-KAS-KOO-KEE-PAY-YIN,          His x mark.
                PEE-YAS-EE-WAH-KAH-WE-CHAH-KOOT,   "  x  "
                JAMES SEENUM,                      "  x  "
                OO-NAH-LAT-MEE-NAH-HOOS,           "  x  "
                SEE-KAHS-KOOTCH,                   "  x  "
                TUS-TUSK-EE-SKWAIS,                "  x  "
                PEE-WAY-SIS,                       "  x  "
                KEE-YE-WIN,                        "  x  "
                        Cree Chiefs.
                KIN-OO-SAY-OO,                     "  x  "
                        Chippewayan Chief.
                SEE-WAS-KWAN,                      "  x  "
                WAH-WAY-SEE-HOO-WE-YIN,            "  x  "
                  Councillors to Wee-kas-koo-kee-pay-yin.
                TIP-EE-SKOW-AH-CHAK,               "  x  "
                PAY-PAY-SEE-SEE-MOO,               "  x  "
                  Councillors to Pee-yas-ee-wah-kah-
                         we-chah-koot.
                OO-NOW-UK-EE-PAH-CHAS,             "  x  "
                MY-OO-WAY-SEES,                    "  x  "
                  Councillors to See-kahs-kootch.
                OOS-PWAH-KHUN-IS,                  "  x  "
                NEE-YE-PEE-TAY-AS-EE-KAY-SE,
                  Councillors to Tus-tusk-ee-skwais.
                MAH-CHAH-MEE-NIS,                  "  x  "
                ISAAC CARDINAL,                    "  x  "
                  Councillors to Pee-way-sis.
                ANTOINE XAVIER,                    "  x  "
                  Councillor to Kin-oo-say-oo.
                WILLIAM BULL,                      "  x  "
                  Councillor to James Seenum.
                WAH-KEY-SEE-KOOT,                  "  x  "
                  Councillor to See-kahs-kootch.
                CHARLES CARDINAL,                  "  x  "
                PIERRE WAHBISKAW,                  "  x  "
                  Councillors to Kee-ye-win.
                KI-YAS-EE-KUN,                     "  x  "
                KAH-KEE-OO-PAH-TOW,                "  x  "
                  Councillors to Wee-kas koo-kee-pay-yin.
                CAKE-CAKE,                         "  x  "
                  Councillor to Oo-nah-lat-mee-nah-hoos.
                KAM-OO-NIN,                        "  x  "
                  Councillor to James Seenum.
                AH-SIS,                            "  x  "
                  Councillor to See-kahs-kootch.

Witnesses:

(Signed) A. G. JACKES, M.D.
         JAMES McLEOD,
                Com., N.-W.M.P.
         JAMES WALKER,
                Inspector, N.-W.M.P.
         E. DALRYMPLE CLARKE,
                Adjutant, N.-W.M.P.
         VITAL J. BISH,
                Of St. Albert, O.M.J.
         CONSTANTINE SCOLLEN,
                Priest, O.M.J.
         JOHN McDOUGALL,
                Methodist Missionary.
         JOHN McKAY.
         W. E. JONES.
         PETER C. PAMBRUN.
         A. K. KENNEDY.
         PETER ERASMUS.
         THOMAS McKAY.
         JAMES SIMPSON.
         ELIZA HARDISTY.
         MARY McKAY.


ADHESIONS TO TREATY NUMBER SIX

We, the undersigned Chiefs and head men of the Cree and other bands
of Indians having had communication of the treaty--a copy of which
is printed in the Report of the Minister of the Interior, for the
year ending 30th June, 1876, concluded at Forts Carlton and Pitt
between the Indians inhabiting the country described in said treaty
and Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland, by the
Commissioners the Honorable Alexander Morris, Lieutenant-Governor
of Manitoba and the North-West Territories, the Honorable W. J.
Christie, and the Honorable James McKay; but not having been
present when the negotiations were being conducted at the
above-mentioned places, do hereby, for ourselves and the bands
which we represent, agree to all the terms, conditions, covenants,
and engagements of whatever kind enumerated in the said treaty, and
accept the same as if we had been present, and had consented and
agreed to the same when the treaty was first signed and executed.

Witness our hands, at Fort Pitt, this ninth day of August, in the
year of Our Lord one thousand eight hundred and seventy-seven.

    (Signed) M. G. DICKIESON,
       Commissioner.
    PAY-MO-TAY-AH-SOO      His x mark.
    KAH-SEE-MUT-A-POO       "  x  "
    NAH-PAY-SIS             "  x  "
    KE-HI-WINS,
       Head man.

Signed by the Chiefs and head men (having been first read and
explained by Peter Erasmus) in the presence of

(Signed) PETER ERASMUS.
         RODERICK CAMPBELL.

Signed at Edmonton, this 21st day of August, in the year
above-written, by the Chiefs and head men hereto, the whole having
been first read and explained by Peter Erasmus, in the presence of
the following witnesses.

(Signed) ALEXIS KEES-KEE-CHEE-CHI,    His x mark.
                     Chief.
         OO-MUO-IN-AH-SOO-WAW-SIN-EE,  "  x  "
                     Head man.
         CATSCHIS-TAH-WAY-SKUM,        "  x  "
                     Chief.
         KOO-SAH-WAN-AS-KAY,           "  x  "
                     Head man.
         PAHS-PAHS-CHASE.              "  x  "
         TAH-KOOTCH.                   "  x  "

Witnesses:
(Signed) RIC HARDISTY.
H. LEDUC.
PETER ERASMUS.
W. D. JARVIS,
   Inspector, N.-W.M.P.

We, members of the Cree tribe of Indians, having had explained to
us the terms of the treaty, made and concluded near Carlton, on the
23rd day of August and on the 28th day of said month respectively,
and near Fort Pitt on the 9th day of September, 1876, between Her
Majesty the Queen, by the Commissioners duly appointed to negotiate
the said treaty, and the Plain and Wood Cree and other tribes of
Indians inhabiting the country within the limits defined in said
treaty; but not having been present at the council at which the
articles of the said treaty were agreed upon, do now hereby, for
ourselves and the band which we represent, in consideration of the
provisions of the said treaty being extended to us and the band
which we represent, transfer, surrender, and relinquish to Her
Majesty the Queen, her heirs and successors, to and for the use of
the Government of the Dominion of Canada, all our right, title and
interest whatsoever which we and the said band which we represent
have held or enjoyed of, in and to the territory described and
fully set out in the said treaty, also all our right, title and
interest whatsoever to all other lands wherever situated, whether
within the limits of any other treaty heretofore made, or hereafter
to be made with Indians, or elsewhere in Her Majesty's territories,
to have and to hold the same, unto and for the use of Her Majesty
the Queen, her heirs and successors forever;

And we hereby agree to accept the several benefits, payments, and
reserves promised to the Indians under the Chiefs adhering to the
said treaty at Fort Pitt, and solemnly engage to abide by, carry
out and fulfil, all the stipulations, obligations and conditions
therein contained, on the part of the Chiefs and Indians therein
named to be observed and performed, and in all things to conform to
the articles of the said treaty, as if we ourselves and the band
which we represent had been originally contracting parties thereto,
and been present at the councils held near Fort Pitt and had there
attached our signatures to the said treaty.

In witness whereof Her Majesty's Lieutenant-Governor and Indian
Superintendent for the North-West Territories, and the Chiefs and
Councillors of the band hereby giving their adhesion to the said
treaty, have hereunto subscribed and set their hands at the
Blackfoot Crossing of the Bow River this twenty-fifth day of
September, in the year of Our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-seven.

    (Signed)   DAVID LAIRD,
                  Lieut.-Governor and Indian
                     Superintendent, N.W.T.
               KIS-KAY-IM                  His x mark.
                  (or, Bob Tail),
                     Chief.
               MEM-IN-OROU-TAW              "  x  "
                  (or, Sometimes Glad),
               TCHO-WEK                     "  x  "
                  (or, Passing Sound),
                     Councillors.

Signed by the parties hereto in the presence of the undersigned
witnesses, the same having been first explained to the Indians by
Rev. J. MacDougall.

(Signed)   JAMES F. McLEOD,
               Com., N.-W.M.P.
           CONSTANTINE SCOLLEN.
           A. S. IRVINE,
               Assistant Commissioner.
           J. McDOUGALL,
               Missionary.

The undersigned Chiefs and head men of the Cree Nation having had
communication of the treaty concluded between Her Majesty the Queen
by her Commissioners and certain Chiefs of the Cree Nation, at Fort
Pitt on the 9th day of September 1876, agree to surrender our title
to all our lands in the North-West Territories and to abide by all
the promises set forth in the said treaty, on condition that all
the payments, reserves of land, and promises named therein are
secured to us by Her Majesty.

And the undersigned Superintendent of Indian Affairs for the
North-West Territories on behalf of Her Majesty agrees that all
the payments, reserves and promises named in the said treaty to be
made to each Cree Chief and his band shall be faithfully made and
carried out to the Chiefs who have subscribed to this memorandum
and to their people.

In witness whereof the undersigned Indian Superintendent, and
the undersigned Chiefs and head men have hereto set our hands
this nineteenth day of August, one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-eight.

  (Signed) DAVID LAIRD.
           PUS-KEE-YAH-KAY-WE-YIN.    His x mark.
           MAH-KAYO.                   "  x  "
           PAY-PAHM-US-KUM-ICK-NIUM.   "  x  "
           ISIDORE.                    "  x  "

Signed the day and year above written after having been read and
interpreted to the Chiefs and head men by Peter Erasmus, in the
presence of

(Signed) JOHN FRENCH,
              Sub-Inspector, N.-W.M.P.
          PETER ERASMUS.

We, the undersigned Chiefs and head men of the Wood Cree tribe of
Indians, having had communication of the treaty made and concluded
near Carlton, on the twenty-third and twenty-eighth days of August
respectively, and near Fort Pitt on the ninth day of September, one
thousand eight hundred and seventy-six, between Her Majesty the
Queen, by her Commissioners and the Plain and Wood Cree and other
tribes of Indians inhabitants of the country named therein, hereby
for ourselves and the bands which we represent, in consideration of
the provisions of the said treaty being extended to our bands,
cede, transfer, surrender and relinquish to Her Majesty the Queen,
her heirs and successors to and for the use of her Government of
the Dominion of Canada, all our right, title and privileges
whatsoever to all lands in the North-West Territories or elsewhere
in Her Majesty's Dominions, to have and to hold the same unto and
to the use of Her said Majesty the Queen, her heirs and successors
forever.

And we hereby agree to accept the several provisions, payments and
reserves of the said treaty as therein stated, and solemnly promise
and engage to abide by and carry out all the stipulations and
obligations therein contained, on the part of said Chiefs and
Indians therein named to be observed and performed, and in all
things to conform to the articles of the said treaty, as if we
ourselves and our band had originally been contracting parties
thereto.

And Her Majesty the Queen by her representative, the Honorable
David Laird, Indian Superintendent of the North-West Territories,
agrees that all the payments and provisions named in the said
treaty to be made to each Chief and his band shall be faithfully
made and fulfilled to the aforesaid Chiefs and their bands.

In witness whereof we, the said Indian Superintendent of the
North-West Territories, and the said Chief and head men of the
Stony tribe of Indians have hereto set our hands, at Battleford,
this twenty-ninth day of August, one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-eight.

  (Signed) DAVID LAIRD,
    Indian Superintendent.
  SW-KE-MAW                  His x mark.
    (or, Misketo).
  ETA-WE-PE-TON               "  x  "
    (or, Uses both Arms).
  NESS-AU-ASIS                "  x  "
    (or, Two Child).
  KA-WA-SU-SKO-HO-PAT-ISK     "  x  "
    (or, Lightning).

Signed by the parties hereto in the presence of the undersigned
witnesses, the same having been first explained to the Indians by
Peter Ballendine.

  (Signed) JAMES WALKER,
    Inspector N.-W.M.P.
  P. BALLENDINE.
  HAYTER REED.

We the undersigned Chief and head men of the Plain Stony tribe of
Indians, having had communication of the treaty made and concluded
near Carlton on the twenty-third and twenty-eighth days of August
respectively, and near Fort Pitt on the ninth of September, one
thousand eight hundred and seventy-six, between Her Majesty the
Queen by her Commissioners, and the Plain and Wood Crees and other
tribes of Indians, inhabitants of the country named therein, hereby
for ourselves and the band which we represent, in consideration of
the provisions of the said treaty being extended to our band, cede,
transfer, surrender and relinquish to Her Majesty the Queen, her
heirs and successors, to and for the use of the Government of the
Dominion of Canada, all our right, title and privileges whatsoever
to all lands in the North-West Territories, or elsewhere in Her
Majesty's Dominions, to have and to hold the same unto and to the
use of Her said Majesty the Queen, her heirs and successors
forever.

And we hereby agree to accept the several provisions, payments and
reserves of the said treaty as therein stated, and solemnly promise
and agree to abide by and carry out all the stipulations and
obligations therein contained, on the part of said Chiefs and
Indians therein named to be observed and performed, and in all
things to conform to the articles of the said treaty, as if we
ourselves and our band had originally been contracting parties
thereto.

And Her Majesty the Queen by her Representative the Honorable David
Laird, Indian Superintendent of the North-West Territories, agrees
that all the payments and provisions named in the said treaty to be
made to each Chief and his band, shall be faithfully made and
fulfilled to the aforesaid Chiefs and their bands.

In witness whereof, we, the said Indian Superintendent of the
North-West Territories, and the said Chiefs and head men of the
Wood Cree tribe of Indians, have hereto set our hands at Carlton
this third day of September, one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-eight.

       (Signed) DAVID LAIRD,
          Indian Superintendent.
       KO-PAT-A-WA-KE-NUM,     His x mark.
          Chief.
       BANJIEL MARISTZE,        "  x  "
       JAMES (Chief's son),     "  x  "
          Councillors.
       SA-SE-WA-HUM.            "  x  "
       KENE-MO-LAY.             "  x  "
       MAS-E-WAS-CHASE.         "  x  "

Signed by the Chiefs and Councillors within named in presence of
the following witnesses, the same having first been explained by
Peter Ballendine:

(Signed) L. CLARKE.
         A. E. FORGET.
         P. BALLENDINE.

We, the undersigned Indian Chief and head men, having had
communication of the treaty made and concluded at Forts Carlton and
Pitt, in the summer of 1876, but not having been present at the
conferences at which said treaty was negotiated, hereby agree to
accept the terms and conditions of the said treaty, and to abide
thereby in the same manner as if we had been present at the time
the said treaty was first signed.

As witness our hands this eighteenth day of September, one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-eight.

       (Signed) MICHAEL CALISTROIS.      His x mark.
                LOUIS PAY-FAHN-AH-WAYO.   "  x  "
                AC-OO-SEE.                "  x  "

Signed by the Chief and head men, after having been read and
explained by Peter Erasmus.

FORT WALSH, CYPRESS HILLS, 4th July, 1879.

Sir,--I have the honor to enclose an agreement made with two Cree
head men, who expressed to me a desire to join the treaty made at
Fort Carlton and Fort Pitt on the 9th September, 1876. Little Pine
is a Cree Chief who has for some time expressed his willingness to
take the treaty. Lucky Man is a head man lately made by the Indians
who have been followers of Big Bear but who have now left him.

Big Bear himself was present when both Little Pine and Lucky Man
signed, and, I think would have taken the treaty himself, had he
not felt ashamed at so many of his lodges leaving him. He is now
almost alone, only three or four followers having remained with
him. He states that he will take the treaty at Sounding Lake at the
time of the payments.

Both Little Pine and Lucky Man have requested that they may be paid
at Fort Walsh, as it is impossible for them to reach the more
northern agencies, and I have agreed to it. It will therefore be
necessary that enough money be forwarded to pay these Indians here.
Little Pine states he will have thirty-four lodges, and Lucky Man
twenty-five. Taking the average of a lodge at eight, which I
understand is a fair estimate, it will make four hundred and
seventy-two extra Indians to be paid.

                  I have, &c.,
           (Signed)    EDGAR DEWDNEY,
                          Indian Commissioner.
L. VANKOUGHNET, Esq.,
     Deputy Supt. General of Indian Affairs, Ottawa.

Whereas Little Pine, or Min-a-he-quo-sis, a Cree Chief on behalf of
his band and certain other Cree Indians comprising twenty lodges,
inhabitants of the country covered by the treaty commonly known as
Treaty Number Six made between Her Majesty the Queen by her
Commissioners, the Honorable Alexander Morris, the Honorable James
McKay and the Honorable William Joseph Christie, of the one part,
and the Plain and Wood Cree tribes of Indians of the other part, at
Carlton on the twenty-third and twenty-eighth days of August, and
near Fort Pitt on the ninth day of September in the year of our
Lord one thousand eight hundred and seventy-six, who have not yet
given in their adhesion to the said treaty, have presented
themselves to Edgar Dewdney Esq., Indian Commissioner for the
North-West Territories, and expressed a desire to join in the said
treaty. And whereas, the said Commissioner has recognized the said
Little Pine as the head man of his band, and the said band of
twenty lodges have selected and appointed Pap-a-way the Lucky Man,
one of their number, as the head man of their band, and have
presented him as such to the said Commissioner, who has recognized
and accepted him as such head man.

Now this instrument witnesseth that the said Little Pine and
Pap-a-way, or the Lucky Man, for themselves and on behalf of the
bands which they represent, do transfer, surrender and relinquish
to her Majesty the Queen, her heirs and successors to and for the
use of her Government of the Dominion of Canada, all their right,
title and interest whatsoever, which they have held or enjoyed, of,
in and to the territory described and fully set out in the said
treaty; also all their right, title and interest whatsoever to all
other lands wherever situated, whether within their limits of any
other treaty heretofore made or hereafter to be made with Indians
or elsewhere in Her Majesty's territories, to have and to hold the
same unto and for the use of Her Majesty the Queen, her heirs and
successors forever. And do hereby agree to accept the several
benefits, payments and reserves promised to the Indians adhering to
the said treaty at Carlton and Fort Pitt on the dates above
mentioned; and further, do solemnly engage to abide by, carry out
and fulfil all the stipulations, obligations and conditions
contained on the part of the Indians therein named, to be observed
and performed, and in all things to conform to the articles of the
said treaty, as if the said Little Pine and Pap-a-way or the Lucky
Man and the bands whom they represent had been originally
contracting parties thereto, and had been present at the treaty at
Carlton and Fort Pitt, and had there attached their signatures to
the said treaty.

In witness whereof Edgar Dewdney, Indian Commissioner for the
North-West Territories, and the said Little Pine and Pap-a-way or
the Lucky Man, head men of the said bands, hereby giving their
adhesion to the said treaty, have hereunto subscribed and set their
hands at Fort Walsh, in the said North-West Territories this second
day of July in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-nine.

         (Signed) EDGAR DEWDNEY,
                       Indian Commissioner.
                  LITTLE PINE.      His x mark.
                  THE LUCKY MAN.     "  x  "

Signed by the parties hereto, in the presence of the undersigned
witnesses, the same having been explained to the Indians by the
said Edgar Dewdney, Esq., Indian Commissioner, through the
interpreters Edward McKay and P. Leveiller.

(Signed) JAMES F. McLEOD,
            Com. N.-W.M.P.
         A. G. IRVINE,
            Assistant Com. N.-W.M.P.
         FRANK NORMAN,
            Staff Constable N.-W.M.P.



THE TREATY WITH THE BLACKFEET, NUMBER SEVEN

Articles of a treaty made and concluded this twenty-second day of
September, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-seven, between Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen of Great
Britain and Ireland, by her Commissioners, the Honorable David
Laird, Lieutenant-Governor and Indian Superintendent of the
North-West Territories, and James Farquharson McLeod, C.M.G.,
Commissioner of the North-West Mounted Police, of the one part, and
the Blackfeet, Blood, Piegan, Sarcee, Stony, and other Indians,
inhabitants of the territory north of the United States boundary
line, east of the central range of the Rocky Mountains, and south
and west of Treaties Numbers Six and Four, by their head Chiefs and
minor Chiefs or Councillors, chosen as hereinafter mentioned, of
the other part:

Whereas the Indians inhabiting the said territory, have pursuant to
an appointment made by the said Commissioners, been convened at a
meeting at the "Blackfoot crossing" of the Bow River, to deliberate
upon certain matters of interest to Her Most Gracious Majesty, of
the one part, and the said Indians of the other;

And whereas the said Indians have been informed by Her Majesty's
Commissioners that it is the desire of Her Majesty to open up for
settlement, and such other purposes as to Her Majesty may seem
meet, a tract of country, bounded and described as hereinafter
mentioned, and to obtain the consent thereto of her Indian subjects
inhabiting the said tract, and to make a treaty, and arrange with
them, so that there may be peace and good will between them and Her
Majesty, and between them and Her Majesty's other subjects; and
that her Indian people may know and feel assured of what allowance
they are to count upon and receive from Her Majesty's bounty and
benevolence;

And whereas the Indians of the said tract, duly convened in council,
and being requested by her Majesty's Commissioners to present
their head Chiefs and minor Chiefs, or Councillors, who shall be
authorized, on their behalf, to conduct such negotiations and sign
any treaty to be founded thereon, and to become responsible to Her
Majesty for the faithful performance by their respective bands of
such obligations as should be assumed by them, the said Blackfeet,
Blood, Piegan and Sarcee Indians have therefore acknowledged for
that purpose, the several head and minor Chiefs, and the said Stony
Indians, the Chiefs and Councillors who have subscribed hereto,
that thereupon in open council the said Commissioners received and
acknowledged the head and minor Chiefs and the Chiefs and Councillors
presented for the purpose aforesaid;

And whereas the said Commissioners have proceeded to negotiate a
treaty with the said Indians; and the same has been finally agreed
upon and concluded as follows, that is to say: the Blackfeet,
Blood, Piegan, Sarcee, Stony and other Indians inhabiting the
district hereinafter more fully described and defined, do hereby
cede, release, surrender, and yield up to the Government of Canada
for Her Majesty the Queen and her successors forever, all their
rights, titles and privileges whatsoever to the lands included
within the following limits, that is to say:

Commencing at a point on the international boundary due south of
the western extremity of the Cypress Hills; thence west along
the said boundary to the central range of the Rocky Mountains,
or to the boundary of the Province of British Columbia; thence
north-westerly along the said boundary to a point due west of
the source of the main branch of the Red Deer River; thence
south-westerly and southerly following on the boundaries of the
tracts ceded by the Treaties Numbered Six and Four to the place
of commencement; and also all their rights, titles and privileges
whatsoever, to all other lands wherever situated in the North-West
Territories, or in any other portion of the Dominion of Canada:

To have and to hold the same to Her Majesty the Queen and her
successors forever:

And Her Majesty the Queen hereby agrees with her said Indians,
that they shall have right to pursue their vocations of hunting
throughout the tract surrendered as heretofore described, subject
to such regulations as may, from time to time, be made by the
Government of the country, acting under the authority of Her
Majesty; and saving and excepting such tracts as may be required or
taken up from time to time for settlement, mining, trading or other
purposes by her Government of Canada, or by any of her Majesty's
subjects duly authorized therefor by the said Government.

It is also agreed between Her Majesty and her said Indians that
reserves shall be assigned them of sufficient area to allow one
square mile for each family of five persons, or in that proportion
for larger and smaller families, and that said reserves shall be
located as follows, that is to say:

First--The reserves of the Blackfeet, Blood and Sarcee bands of
Indians, shall consist of a belt of land on the north side of the
Bow and South Saskatchewan Rivers, of an average width of four
miles along said rivers, down stream, commencing at a point on the
Bow River twenty miles north-westerly of the "Blackfoot crossing"
thereof, and extending to the Red Deer River at its junction with
the South Saskatchewan, also for the term of ten years, and no
longer, from the date of the concluding of this treaty, when it
shall cease to be a portion of said Indian reserves, as fully to
all intents and purposes as if it had not at any time been included
therein, and without any compensation to individual Indians for
improvements, of a similar belt of land on the south side of the
Bow and Saskatchewan Rivers of an average width of one mile along
said rivers, down stream; commencing at the aforesaid point on the
Bow River, and extending to a point one mile west of the coal
seam on said river, about five miles below the said "Blackfoot
crossing;" beginning again one mile east of the said coal seam and
extending to the mouth of Maple Creek at its junction with the
South Saskatchewan; and beginning again at the junction of the Bow
River with the latter river, and extending on both sides of the
South Saskatchewan in an average width on each side thereof of one
mile, along said river against the stream, to the junction of the
Little Bow River with the latter river, reserving to Her Majesty,
as may now or hereafter be required by her for the use of her
Indian and other subjects, from all the reserves hereinbefore
described, the right to navigate the above mentioned rivers, to
land and receive fuel and cargoes on the shores and banks thereof,
to build bridges and establish ferries thereon, to use the fords
thereof and all the trails leading thereto, and to open such other
roads through the said reserves as may appear to Her Majesty's
Government of Canada, necessary for the ordinary travel of her
Indian and other subjects, due compensation being paid to
individual Indians for improvements, when the same may be in any
manner encroached upon by such roads.

Secondly--That the reserve of the Piegan band of Indians shall be
on the Old Man's River, near the foot of the Porcupine Hills, at a
place called "Crow's Creek."

And thirdly--The reserve of the Stony band of Indians shall be in
the vicinity of Morleyville.

In view of the satisfaction of Her Majesty with the recent general
good conduct of her said Indians, and in extinguishment of all
their past claims, she hereby, through her Commissioners, agrees to
make them a present payment of twelve dollars each in cash to each
man, woman, and child of the families here represented.

Her Majesty also agrees that next year, and annually afterwards
forever, she will cause to be paid to the said Indians, in cash, at
suitable places and dates, of which the said Indians shall be duly
notified, to each Chief, twenty-five dollars, each minor Chief or
Councillor (not exceeding fifteen minor Chiefs to the Blackfeet and
Blood Indians, and four to the Piegan and Sarcee bands, and five
Councillors to the Stony Indian Bands) fifteen dollars, and to
every other Indian of whatever age, five dollars; the same, unless
there be some exceptional reason, to be paid to the heads of
families for those belonging thereto.

Further, Her Majesty agrees that the sum of two thousand dollars
shall hereafter every year be expended in the purchase of
ammunition for distribution among the said Indians; provided that
if at any future time ammunition became comparatively unnecessary
for said Indians, her Government, with the consent of said Indians,
or any of the bands thereof, may expend the proportion due to such
band otherwise for their benefit.

Further, Her Majesty agrees that each head Chief and minor Chief,
and each Chief and Councillor duly recognized as such, shall, once
in every three years, during the term of their office, receive a
suitable suit of clothing, and each head Chief and Stony Chief, in
recognition of the closing of the treaty, a suitable medal and
flag, and next year, or as soon as convenient, each head Chief, and
minor Chief, and Stony Chief shall receive a Winchester rifle.

Further, Her Majesty agrees to pay the salary of such teachers to
instruct the children of said Indians as to her Government of
Canada may seem advisable, when said Indians are settled on their
reserves and shall desire teachers.

Further, Her Majesty agrees to supply each head and minor Chief,
and each Stony Chief, for the use of their bands, ten axes, five
handsaws, five augers, one grindstone, and the necessary files and
whetstones.

And further, Her Majesty agrees that the said Indians shall be
supplied as soon as convenient, after any band shall make due
application therefor, with the following cattle for raising stock,
that is to say: for every family of five persons, and under, two
cows; for every family of more than five persons, and less than ten
persons, three cows; for every family of over ten persons, four
cows; and every head and minor Chief, and every Stony Chief, for
the use of their bands, one bull; but if any band desire to
cultivate the soil as well as raise stock, each family of such band
shall receive one cow less than the above mentioned number, and in
lieu thereof, when settled on their reserves and prepared to break
up the soil, two hoes, one spade, one scythe, and two hay forks,
and for every three families, one plough and one harrow, and for
each band, enough potatoes, barley, oats, and wheat (if such seeds
be suited for the locality of their reserves) to plant the land
actually broken up. All the aforesaid articles to be given, once
for all, for the encouragement of the practice of agriculture among
the Indians.

And the undersigned Blackfeet, Blood, Piegan and Sarcee head Chiefs
and minor Chiefs, and Stony Chiefs and Councillors, on their own
behalf and on behalf of all other Indians inhabiting the tract
within ceded do hereby solemnly promise and engage to strictly
observe this treaty, and also to conduct and behave themselves as
good and loyal subjects of Her Majesty the Queen. They promise and
engage that they will, in all respects, obey and abide by the law,
that they will maintain peace and good order between each other and
between themselves and other tribes of Indians, and between
themselves and others of Her Majesty's subjects, whether Indians,
Half-breeds or whites, now inhabiting, or hereafter to inhabit, any
part of the said ceded tract; and that they will not molest the
person or property of any inhabitant of such ceded tract, or the
property of Her Majesty the Queen, or interfere with or trouble any
person, passing or travelling through the said tract or any part
thereof, and that they will assist the officers of Her Majesty in
bringing to justice and punishment any Indian offending against the
stipulations of this treaty, or infringing the laws in force in the
country so ceded.

In witness whereof Her Majesty's said Commissioners, and the said
Indian head and minor Chiefs, and Stony Chiefs and Councillors,
have hereunto subscribed and set their hands, at the "Blackfoot
crossing" of the Bow River, the day and year herein first above
written.

(Signed) DAVID LAIRD,
   Gov. of N.-W.T., and Special Indian Commissioner.
   JAMES F. McLEOD,
      Lieut.-Colonel, Com. N.-W.M.P., and
         Special Indian Commissioner.
   CHAPO-MEXICO (or Crowfoot),             His x mark.
      Head Chief of the South Blackfeet.
   MATOSE-APIW (or Old Sun),                "  x  "
      Head Chief of the North Blackfeet.
   STAMISCOTOCAR (or Bull Head),            "  x  "
      Head Chief of the Sarcees.
   MEKASTO (or Red Crow),                   "  x  "
      Head Chief of the South Bloods.
   NATOSE-ONISTORS (or Medicine Calf).      "  x  "
   POKAPIW-OTOIAN (or Bad Head).            "  x  "
   SOTENAH (or Rainy Chief),                "  x  "
      Head Chief of the North Bloods.
   TAKOYE-STAMIX (or Fiend Bull).           "  x  "
   AKKA-KITCIPIMIW-OTAS (or Many            "  x  "
      Spotted Horses).
   ATTTISTAH-MACAN (or Running Rabit).      "  x  "
   PITAH-PEKIS (or Eagle Rib).              "  x  "
   SAKOYE-AOTAN (or Heavy Shield),          "  x  "
      Head Chief of the Middle Blackfeet.
   ZOATZE-TAPITAPIW (or Setting on an       "  x  "
      Eagle Tail).
      Head Chief of the North Piegans.
   AKKA-MAKKOYE (or Many Swans).            "  x  "
   APENAKO-SAPOP, (or Morning Flume).       "  x  "
  *MAS-GWA-AH-SID (or Bear's Paw).          "  x  "
  *CHE-NE-KA (or John).                     "  x  "
  *KI-CHI-PWOT (or Jacob).                  "  x  "
   STAMIX-OSOK (or Bull Bacfat).            "  x  "
   EMITAH-APIAKINNE (or White Striped Dog). "  x  "
   MATAPI-KOMOTZIW (or the Captive or       "  x  "
      Stolen Person).
   APAWAWAKOSOW (or White Antelope).        "  x  "
   MAKOYE-KIN (or Wolf Collar).             "  x  "
   AYE-STIPIS-SIMAT (or Heavily Whipped).   "  x  "
   KISSOUM (or Day Light).                  "  x  "
   PITAH-OTOCAN (or Eagle Head).            "  x  "
   APAW-STAMIX (or Weasel Bull).            "  x  "
   ONISTAH-POKAH (or White Calf).           "  x  "
   NETAH-KITEI-PI-MEW (or Only Spot).       "  x  "
   AKAK-OTOS (or Many Horses).              "  x  "
   STOKIMATIS (or The Drum).                "  x  "
   PITAH-ANNES (or Eagle Robe).             "  x  "
   PITAH-OTSIKIN (or Eagle Shoe).           "  x  "
   STAMIX-OTA-KA-PIW (or Bull Turn Round).  "  x  "
   MASTE-PITAH (or Crow Eagle).             "  x  "
  #JAMES DIXON.                             "  x  "
  #ABRAHAM KECHEPWOT.                       "  x  "
  #PATRICK KECHEPWOT.                       "  x  "
  #GEORGE MOY-ANY-MEN.                      "  x  "
  #GEORGE CRAWLOR.                          "  x  "
   EKAS-KINE (or Low Horn).                 "  x  "
   KATO-OKOSIS (or Bear Shield).            "  x  "
   PONOKAH-STAMIX (or Bull Elk).            "  x  "
   OMAKSI SAPOP (or Big Plume).             "  x  "
   ONISTAH (or Calf Robe).                  "  x  "
   PITAH-SIKSINUM (or White Eagle).         "  x  "
   APAW-ONISTAW (or Weasel Calf).           "  x  "
   ATTISTA-HAES (or Rabbit Carrier).        "  x  "
   PITAH (or Eagle).                        "  x  "
   PITAH-ONISTAH (or Eagle White Calf).     "  x  "
   KAYE-TAPO (or Going to Bear).            "  x  "

      [* Stony Chiefs.
       # Stony Councillors.]

Signed by the Chiefs and Councillors within named in presence of
the following witnesses, the same having been first explained by
James Bird, Interpreter.

(Signed) A. G. IRVINE, Ass't Com., N.-W.M.P.
         J. McDougall, Missionary.
         JEAN L'HEUREUX,
         W. WINDER,
         T. N. F. CROZIER, Inspectors.
         E. DALRYMPLE CLARK, Lieut. and Adjutant. N.-W.M.P.
         A. SHURTLIFF,
         C. E. DENING,
         W. D. ANTROBUS, Sub-Inspectors.
         FRANK NORMAN, Staff Constable.
         MARY J. MACLEOD.
         JULIA WINDER.
         JULIA SHURTLIFF.
         E. HARDISTY.
         A. McDOUGALL.
         E. A. BARRETT.
         CONSTANTINE SCOLLEN, Priest, Witness
            to signatures of Stonixosak
            and those following.
         CHARLES E. CONRAD.
         THOS. J. BOGG.


ADHESION TO TREATY NUMBER SEVEN

We, the members of the Blackfoot tribe of Indians, having had
explained to us the terms of the treaty made and concluded at the
Blackfoot crossing of the Bow River, on the twenty-second day of
September, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-seven;

Between Her Majesty the Queen, by her Commissioners duly appointed
to negotiate the said treaty and the Blackfeet, Blood, Piegan,
Sarcee, Stony and other Indian inhabitants of the country within
the limits defined in the said treaty, but not having been present
at the Councils at which the articles of the said treaty were
agreed upon, do now hereby, for ourselves and the bands which we
represent, in consideration of the provisions of the said treaty
being extended to us and the bands which we represent, transfer,
surrender and relinquish to Her Majesty the Queen, her heirs and
successors, to and for the use of her Government of the Dominion of
Canada, all our right, title, and interest whatsoever, which we and
the said bands which we represent have held or enjoyed, of in and
to the territory described and fully set out in the said treaty;
also, all our right, title, and interest whatsoever to all other
lands wherever situated, whether within the limits of any other
treaty heretofore made or hereafter to be made with Indians, or
elsewhere in Her Majesty's territories, to have and to hold the
same unto and for the use of Her Majesty the Queen, her heirs and
successors forever;

And we hereby agree to accept the several benefits, payments, and
reserves promised to the Indians under the Chiefs adhering to the
said treaty at the Blackfoot crossing of the Bow River, and we
solemnly engage to abide by, carry out and fulfil all the
stipulations, obligations and conditions therein contained on the
part of the Chiefs and Indians therein named, to be observed and
performed and in all things to conform to the articles of the said
treaty, as if we ourselves and the bands which we represent had
been originally contracting parties thereto and had been present at
the Councils held at the Blackfoot crossing of the Bow River, and
had there attached our signatures to the said treaty.

In witness whereof James Farquharson McLeod, C.M.G., one of Her
Majesty's Commissioners appointed to negotiate the said treaty, and
the Chief of the band, hereby giving their adhesion to the said
treaty, have hereunto subscribed and set their hands at Fort
McLeod, this fourth day of December, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and seventy-seven.

(Signed) JAMES F. McLEOD,
           Lieut.-Col., Special Indian Commissioner.
         MEANXKISTOMACH        His x mark.
            (or Three Bulls).

Signed by the parties hereto in the presence of the undersigned
witnesses, the same having been explained to the Indians by the
said James Farquharson McLeod, one of the Commissioners appointed
to negotiate the said treaty, through the interpreter, Jerry Potts,
in the presence of

(Signed) A. G. IRVINE,
           Assistant Commissioner.
         E. DALRMYMLE CLARK,
           Lieutenant and Adjutant N.-W.M.P.
         CHARLES E. CONRAD,
         W. WINDER,
           Inspector.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Treaties of Canada with The
Indians of Manitoba
and the North-West Territories, by Alexander Morris

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TREATIES OF CANADA ***

This file should be named 7126.txt or 7126.zip

Produced by Andrew Sly, Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

