The Project Gutenberg EBook of Memoir and Letters of Francis W. Newman
by Giberne Sieveking

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: Memoir and Letters of Francis W. Newman

Author: Giberne Sieveking

Release Date: January, 2005 [EBook #7305]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on April 10, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-Latin-1

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LETTERS FRANCIS NEWMAN ***




Produced by Anne Soulard, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team




MEMOIR AND LETTERS OF FRANCIS W. NEWMAN




[Illustration: FROM A DAGUERREOTYPE OF 1851. PHOTO BY JOHN DAVIES,
WESTON-SUPER-MARE
Frontispiece]




MEMOIR AND LETTERS OF FRANCIS W. NEWMAN

BY
I. GIBERNE SIEVEKING

_outos ge axios estin epainesthai ostis an tois hetairois os teleion ti on
protithae to eu  neoterizein taen ton pollon katastasin_



THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED TO MY MOTHER




CONTENTS

       TO THE READER WHO UNDERSTANDS.

    I. FRANCIS NEWMAN'S ANCESTORS.

   II. THE TWO BROTHERS--SCHOOL AND COLLEGE DAYS.

  III. FRANCIS NEWMAN'S MISSIONARY JOURNEY TO THE EAST.

   IV. HIS MARRIAGE: HIS MOTHER'S DEATH: HIS CLASSICAL TUTORSHIP AT
       BRISTOL IN 1834.

    V. FRIENDSHIP WITH DR. MARTINEAU.

   VI. FRANCIS NEWMAN AS A TEACHER.

  VII. LETTERS TO ONE OF HIS GREATEST FRIENDS, DR. NICHOLSON.

 VIII. LETTERS TO DR. NICHOLSON FROM NEWMAN DURING THE FOLLOWING YEARS:
       1850 TO 1859.

   IX. LETTERS TO DR. NICHOLSON: CONTINUED.

    X. LETTERS WRITTEN TO MISS ANNA SWANWICK BETWEEN 1871 AND 1887.

   XI. THE STORY OF TWO PATRIOTS.

  XII. FOUR BARBARISMS OF CIVILIZATION.

 XIII. SOME LEGISLATIVE REFORMS SUGGESTED BY LECTURE AND ARTICLE

  XIV. DECENTRALIZATION AND LAND REFORM

   XV. VEGETARIANISM

  XVI. NATIVE REPRESENTATION IN INDIAN GOVERNMENT

 XVII. VOTES FOR WOMEN

XVIII. FRANCIS NEWMAN AND HIS RELIGION

  XIX. LAST YEARS, CHARACTERISTICS, AND SOME LETTERS RELATING TO THE
       "EARLY LIFE OF THE CARDINAL"

   XX. TOULMIN SMITH: AUTHOR, ANTIQUARIAN STUDENT, AND POLITICAL REFORMER

  XXI. LANDOWNERS AND WAGE RECEIVERS

 XXII. THE RIGHT AND DUTY OF EVERY STATE TO ENFORCE SOBRIETY ON ITS
       CITIZENS




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


PHOTO OF FRANCIS NEWMAN
From a Daguerreotype of 1851. Photo by Mr. John Davies, Weston-super-Mare.

JOHN NEWMAN
Father of Cardinal Newman and Francis Newman. From an old portrait. By
kind permission of Mr. J. R. Mozley.

SEALE'S COFFEE HOUSE, OXFORD
Now demolished. Done from an old drawing in the year when Francis Newman
and John Henry Newman stayed there with Blanco White.

WORCESTER COLLEGE, OXFORD
Specially photographed for this Memoir.

WORTON CHURCH, OXFORDSHIRE
From an old print. By kind permission of Rev. W. H. Langhorne.

HOLY TRINITY CHURCH, WEST END, OVER WORTON
By kind permission of Rev. W. H. Langhorne, present Rector of Worton.

OVER WORTON RECTORY, OXFORDSHIRE
By kind permission of Rev. W. H. Langhorne, present Rector of  Worton.

PHOTO FROM SKETCH OF THE NEWMAN FAMILY
By Maria Rosina Giberne. By kind permission of Mr. J. R. Mozley.

MARIA ROSINA GIBERNE
From a painting by herself.

PHOTO OF LORD CONGLETON
Leader of Syrian Missionary Journey. From his _Life_ by Groves.

DR. CRONIN
One of those who went to Syria with Francis Newman in 1830. From a photo
by Messrs. Webster, Clapham Common. By kind permission of Mrs. Cronin.

PERSIAN LADY AND PERSIAN SMOKING, DATE 1827
From _Persia_ in "Modern Traveller" series, 1830.

MARIA KENNAWAY
Francis Newman's first wife. From a miniature. Photo by Messrs. Webster,
Clapham Common. By kind permission of Sir John Kennaway.

DR. MARTINEAU
From the painting by A. E. Elmslie.

FRANCIS NEWMAN
In middle age. From photo by John Davies, Weston-super-Mare.

PHOTO OF BRONZE BUST OF FRANCIS NEWMAN
Emeritus Professor of London University. By Mrs. Georgina Bainsmith,
sculptor, of St. Ives, Cornwall. The bust is now in University College,
London.

ANOTHER VIEW OF THE BUST IN UNIVERSITY COLLEGE (OF FRANCIS NEWMAN), ON ITS
PLINTH
By Mrs. Georgina Bainsmith, sculptor, of St. Ives, Cornwall. This
reproduction is by Mr. J. C. Douglas, of St. Ives, Cornwall, and was
photographed from the clay before it was cast.

DR. NICHOLSON
From a photo taken at G�ttingen between 1855 and 1860. By kind permission
of Miss Nicholson, Penrith.

FACSIMILE OF LETTER FROM FRANCIS NEWMAN, DECEMBER, 1855
20 WHITE ROCK PLACE, AND 1A CARLISLE PARADE, HASTINGS
From photos taken in 1909 by Valentine Edgar Sieveking.

ANNA SWANWICK
From a portrait painted by Miss V. Bruce.

LOUIS KOSSUTH

CERTIFICATE OF HUNGARIAN FUND

FACSIMILE OF LETTER FROM KOSSUTH TO MESSRS. SIEVEKING, JANUARY, 1854

TOULMIN SMITH
Enlargement from a photo. By kind permission of Miss Toulmin Smith.

CARDINAL NEWMAN
From an oil painting by Miss Deane, of Bath. Photo by Messrs. Webster,
Clapham Common.




TO THE READER WHO UNDERSTANDS


MY DEAR READER,

Rightly understood, the two points of view, as regards Religion, of the
brothers, Cardinal Newman and Francis Newman, which most separated them,
would, together, have approached the realization of a great conception.

For the Cardinal, Authority was the _sine qu� non_ without which there
could be no real faith. Authority was the pilot, without whose steering he
could not feel secure in his personal ship. But with Authority at the
helm, his fears dispersed, his doubts removed.

     "I was not ever thus.....
  I loved to choose and see my path, but now
  Lead Thou me on!"

Over Francis Newman, dogma and the authority of the Church had no sway. He
dimly discerned a religion which should move forward with men's advance in
knowledge. He imagined an unformalized inward revelation which should
reveal new truths to those who passionately desired Truth above all
things. And when all is said, the union of Authority given in the past,
with the very real mental development which makes for spiritual progress
in the present, is not antagonistic to a wise, strong breadth of view in
the conception of a perfect Church.

But in both points of view, carried to extremes, there are grave perils to
the man who thinks. And I find it impossible to avoid saying here that
Francis Newman did not realize this risk when he refused to "ask for the
old paths," and determined to "see and choose his path" alone and unaided.
We know what the endeavour to found a new church in Syria ended in. We
know how, later, he wrote, held back by no reverence for revealed
religion, no reverence for other men's belief in it. Many of his writings
therefore are painful reading. Though from very early boyhood he had been
really a keen seeker after true religion, an earnest student of the Holy
Scriptures, and a deep thinker, yet, very soon after he had reached young
manhood, it began to be realized by all who knew him that he was very
evidently breaking away from all definite dogmatic faith. He was bent, so
to speak, on inventing a new religion for himself.

Gradually every year made the spiritual breach wider between him and those
who held the Christian Faith. Soon he did not hesitate to say out, in very
unguarded language, what he really thought of doctrines which he knew were
precious to them. Sometimes to-day, indeed, in reading his books, one
comes across some statement in letter, article, or lecture flung out
almost venomously; and one steps back mentally as if a spiritual hiss had
whipped the air from some inimical sentence which had suddenly lifted its
heretical head from amongst an otherwise quiet group of words.

At the end of life it is said that he showed signs of some return to the
early faith of his boyhood. That he said, just before his death, to Rev.
Temperley Grey, who was visiting him in his last illness, "I feel Paul is
less and less to me; and Christ is more and more."

And those who knew that side of him which was splendid in its untiring
effort for the betterment of mankind--for the righting of wrongs to women,
and others unable to achieve it for themselves--cannot but hope that the
faith of earlier days was his once more, before he passed into the silence
that lies--as far as we are concerned in this world--at the back of Death.

I remember being told once, that of Stanley it was said by someone who
knew him well, that she had always felt that "he believed more than he
knew he did."

And when one thinks how Francis Newman looked up in faith--even though it
was an absolutely undogmatic, formless faith--to a God who watched over
mankind, one may hope that he too "believed more than he knew he did."

This life is only a short chapter in our existence. Personality is in its
essence immortal, though not unchanging in its presentment. Some of us
have many "phases of faith" even in this short existence. Some of us, like
St. Paul, only two. The first, fiery in its denunciations, and
persecutions and uncompromising attitude towards all who differed from him
as regards the Faith which afterwards, "when the scales had fallen from
his eyes," he was to champion. The second, just as splendid in its
enthusiasm for the doctrine he had formerly abused. Just as passionate in
righting the wrongs of the people, as once in his first phase of faith he
had been in enforcing persecution and injustice upon them. By now, Newman
may have gained _his_ second sight. Whatever was the shortsightedness of
Francis Newman's spiritual focus, there can be no manner of doubt that
_he_ was an earnest seeker after Truth, though his methods of search were
sorely to be regretted, in so far as doctrinal theory was concerned, as in
his judgments on his brother's career.

According to his lights he lived his life. It was a life spent always in
untiring, unselfish effort for the good of his fellows. He was always in
the forefront of Social Reform, of social high principle and justice. He
was, at any rate, one with St. Paul--that champion of Christian Socialism
--in his attitude towards that larger half of mankind whose wrongs need
righting. He, too, practically said by his life, "Who is weak, and _I_ am
not weak? Who is afflicted, and I _burn_ not?" to avenge the injustice.

To-day, if more of Francis Newman's social views were voiced again,
England might take a glad step forward. For, undoubtedly, he _had_ a
message to deliver. And, equally undoubtedly, he delivered it to his
generation.

This message of Social Reform sounded in men's ears fifty years ago.

In his memoir it sounds again to-day.

My very hearty thanks are due to the following persons who have most
kindly helped me in this "Memoir," by lending me letters and photographs;
by writing reminiscences, and giving information, etc.: Sir John Kennaway,
Bart., Sir Alfred Wills, Sir Edward Fry, Mr. William de Morgan, Father
Bacchus, Mr. Talfourd Ely, Mr. Winterbotham, the present Rector of Worton,
Mr. Norris Mathews, Mr. George Hare Leonard, Mr. George Pearson, Miss
Humphreys, Miss Nicholson, Mrs. Heather (_n�e_ Wilson), Miss Bruce, Miss
Toulmin Smith, Miss Gertrude Martineau, Miss Elizabeth Pearson, Mrs.
Georgina Bainsmith, sculptor, Rev. Thomas Smith, Mrs. Kingsley Tarpey, Dr.
Makalua, and many others.

I. GIBERNE SIEVEKING.
1 EXMOUTH PLACE, HASTINGS.




MEMOIR AND LETTERS OF FRANCIS W. NEWMAN




CHAPTER I

HIS ANCESTORS


Of all the influences which have most to do in the making of an
individual, heredity is perhaps the greatest. It is the crucible in which
the gold and dross of many generations of his ancestors are melted down
and remixed in the man, who is, indeed, "a part of all" from whom he
claims descent.

There is no more engrossing study than to trace back through many a
century of ancestors, the various--often conflicting--elements which go to
make up the character of someone whose life (without the clue given by the
history of his forbears) is often a strange contradiction. Unable to
understand some disability which spoils an otherwise fine personality, one
looks back and there is the explanation. One's finger rests on the _raison
d'�tre_ of this disability. Long since it had its birth, its inauguration,
in the squeeze, so to speak, into that strange crucible, of the taint, the
essence, of some ancestor's moral lapses, or of the effect of his moral,
mental, or physical ill-health.

Dr. Maudsley says very definitely that the faults, the disabilities, of
men and women of to-day, are sometimes an undesirable inheritance. "Mental
derangement in one generation is sometimes the cause of an innate
deficiency, or absence of the moral sense in the succeeding generation."

I remember once hearing a London doctor strongly emphasize the need for
every family to keep a careful, conscientious family record book, which
from generation to generation should act as a _vade mecum_--showing what
failings must be fought at all costs, and what connections avoided, if we
would not perpetuate disease. Such a thing, if done universally, might
check many national evils in our midst to-day.

But even with no definite aim of this kind, the study of a long chain of
ancestors of some great man cannot fail to be of special interest. And
those of the subject of this memoir contain among their number many
honourable names--names of those who have done real and unforgettable
service to their country.

       *       *       *       *       *

Francis Newman's father, John Newman, is said to have belonged to a family
of small landed proprietors in Cambridgeshire, who originally came from
Holland--the name having been formerly spelt "Newmann." Thus it will be
seen, as I shall shortly show, that Francis Newman had Dutch blood in his
veins, both on his father's and mother's side.

[Illustration: JOHN NEWMAN
FATHER OF CARDINAL NEWMAN AND FRANCIS NEWMAN
FROM AN OLD PORTRAIT. BY KIND PERMISSION OF MR. J. R. MOZLEY]

John Newman was the only son of John Newman of Lombard Street, London, and
of Elizabeth Good, his wife. The arms granted the family on 15th Feb.,
1663-4, were _Or, fers dancettee between 3 hearts gules_. John Newman, the
father of Francis Newman, was partner in the banking house of Ramsbottom,
Newman and Co. He married Jemima Fourdrinier, 29th Oct., 1799, at St.
Mary's, Lambeth. [Footnote: She died at Littlemore, Oxon, at the age of
sixty-two.] In the portrait of him, which is shown in this memoir, there
is a strong resemblance to his son Francis.

By this marriage there were seven children. John Henry (the future
Cardinal), was the eldest. He was born 21st Feb., 1801. Charles Robert was
the second son; and Francis William, the third son, was born 27th June,
1805. Harriette Elizabeth was the eldest daughter, Jemima Charlotte the
second, and Mary Sophia, who was born in 1809, only lived to the age of
nineteen.

Francis Newman's ancestry, on his mother's side, is proved to have reached
back as far as 1575; of this one can be reasonably certain. It was then,
that Henri Fourdrinier was born at Caen, in Normandy. He was made Admiral
of France in later life, and crested Viscount. ARMS: _per bend argent and
sable, two anchors, the upper one reversed, counterchanged._ His son was
also Henri Fourdrinier. Indeed, the name "Henri" seemed like some rare
jewel which was bequeathed from father to son in never-failing regularity,
for there was always a "Henri" among the Fourdriniers from 1575 until
1766.

It was during the lifetime of this Henri Fourdrinier, the son of Admiral
Fourdrinier, that the family fled from France to Groningen, in Holland. In
all probability this flitting took place during those endless civil wars
which disturbed France at that time. Possibly at the time when the heavy
taxes imposed on the people made it almost impossible to live. The
"Fronde" was ravaging the country too, in 1648, and for four years later.
Of course it is possible that he did not leave France until 1685, when the
Revocation of the Edict of Nantes took place. But at whatever date he
actually went, his reasons for going were certainly no small ones. For
more than a hundred years the Huguenots--and the Fourdriniers were noted
Huguenots--had found France more and more an impossible country to live
in. Persecutions, massacres, torturings pursued them relentlessly.
Thousands of French Huguenots emigrated to England, Holland, and Germany.
And great was the loss which their emigration caused to France. For they
were the most intelligent and hardworking part of the French population,
so that when Louis XIV drove them away, he found out, only too surely, the
truth of the old proverb, that "Curses come home to roost." Trade slowly
but surely forsook France. The emigrants taught their arts and
manufactures to the countries where they had taken refuge; and gradually
trade guided its ships in their direction, and changed their course from
France to Holland and Germany.

The next entry [Footnote: I quote from a copy I had made from _Miscellanea
Genealogica et Heraldica_, N.S. III, 385.--_Pedigree of Fourdrinier and
Grolleau_, by Rev. Dr. Lee, Vicar of All Saints, Lambeth.] is dated from
Groningen, and concerns the birth of Paul Fourdrinier, 20th Dec., 1698.
Now in the _Dict. Nat. Biography_ there occurs the name of Peter
Fourdrinier, of whom no mention at all is made in the _Miscellanea
Genealogica et Heraldica_, amongst the record of the other Fourdriniers.
It is therefore not very clear to what branch of the family he belonged.
But as far as I can make out, he and Paul Fourdrinier seem to have come to
England about 1720. Certainly, in October, 1721, the latter's marriage
with Susanna Grolleau took place, as far as one can discover, in or near
Wandsworth. Susanna Grolleau died in 1766, and was buried at Wandsworth.
Here, I think, a few words with regard to the Grolleau family seem to be
called for.

Louis Grolleau, early in the seventeenth century, lived at Caen; and later
emigrated to Groningen. To me, everything seems to point to the fact that
the Fourdriniers and Grolleaus were in some way connected, either in
friendship or relationship. First, we find them resident at Caen: later,
at Groningen; and then again, later on still, members of both families
marry at Wandsworth, and there both Paul Fourdrinier's wife and her
sister, who married the son of a Captain Lloyd, are buried.

This Peter Fourdrinier mentioned by the _Dict. Nat. Biography_ seems to
have been pupil to Bernard Picart, at Amsterdam, for six years. By
profession he was an engraver of portraits and book illustrations. I
believe there are portraits extant engraved by him of Cardinal Wolsey and
Bishop Tonstall, amongst others. There is certainly an engraving of his
called _The Four Ages of Man_, after Laucret.

Some authorities believe him to have been identical with the Pierre
Fourdrinier who married, in 1689, Marthe Theroude. But if this was the
case, then he was not the Peter Fourdrinier who accompanied Paul to
England in 1720. Other authorities, again, attribute the engravings I have
just mentioned as having been the work of Paul Fourdrinier. At any rate,
it is certain that Paul Fourdrinier belonged to the parish of St.
Martin's-in-the-Fields. He died in February, 1758, and was buried at
Wandsworth.

His son Henry--by now the English spelling of the name is adopted--was
born February, 1730. He married Jemima White, and died in 1799. Apparently
now for the first time the interest in the town of Wandsworth ceased, for
the records show that both Henry and his wife were buried in St. Mary
Woolnoth. And now we come to the direct ancestors of Francis Newman, for
Henry Fourdrinier and Jemima White, his wife, were the parents of Jemima,
who married at St. Mary's, Lambeth, in 1799, John Newman of the firm of
Ramsbottom, Newman & Co., and gave birth in 1801 to John Henry, the future
Cardinal, and in 1805 to the subject of this memoir, Francis William.

       *       *       *       *       *

In _Civil Architecture_, by Chambers, it is mentioned that the plates were
engraved by "old Rooker, old Fourdrinier, and others," thus seeming to
imply that there was more than one Fourdrinier then in England.

Perhaps the most interesting of all the Fourdrinier family was the Henry
Fourdrinier, the eldest brother to the mother of Francis Newman. He was
born in 1766 at Burston Hall, Staffordshire, and lived until 1854. His
father was a paper-maker, and both he and his brother Sealey (born 1747,
and married Harriett, daughter of James Pownall, of Wilmslow) gave up
their time almost entirely to the invention of paper machinery. This
invention was finished in 18O7, [Footnote: _Dict. Nat. Biog._ Vol. XX.]
and then misfortune fell upon them: the misfortune that so often descends
like the "black bat night" upon those who have spent all their money,
thought, and labour on the effort to launch their self-designed ship upon
the uncertain sea of trade.

The Fourdrinier brothers had spent �60,000 upon this venture, and the
immediate result of the finished invention was bankruptcy to the
unfortunate inventors. Then, in 1814, the Emperor Alexander of Russia
promised to pay them �700 per annum during the space of ten years if he
could use two of their paper-making machines. Of this sum they saw not a
penny.

In 1840, Parliament voted the sum of �7000 to the Fourdriniers as a tardy
recognition of the great service they had rendered their adopted country
by their invention. The descendant of these gifted men showed no special
taste for invention along the lines taken by his ancestors, it is true;
but his brilliant intellect, no doubt, owed many of its qualities to their
inventive force and power. Where they made paper and spent their whole
energies in inventing machines for making it quicker, Francis Newman wrote
on it--used it as a medium for spreading far and wide his own splendid
aims and purposes for the betterment of existing social conditions. Before
all things, Newman was a Social Reformer. There was no possible doubt
that, as far as that question went, he left his country further forward on
the road to real progress as regarded conditions of life for her citizens,
and higher, broader ideas of her duty to other nations. As far as all
these questions went he did not live in vain, for to-day we are learning
the wisdom of his views for justice for the oppressed and for "the cause
that needs assistance."

He was essentially one of those rare men who _prefer_ to be on the weaker
side, and whose sword is ever ready for its defence and championship.




CHAPTER II

THE TWO BROTHERS--SCHOOL AND COLLEGE DAYS


Francis William Newman was born at 17 Southampton Street, Bloomsbury
Square, on 27th June, 1805. His father was a London banker. Rev. T.
Mozley, in his _Reminiscences of Oriel_, says he was partner in the firm
of "Ramsbottom, Newman, Ramsbottom & Co., 72 Lombard Street, which appears
in the lists of London bankers from 1807 to 1816 inclusive." He tells us
that the family of "Newman" (or, as it was originally spelt, "Newmann")
was of Dutch extraction. The father of Francis Newman had great schemes
for making England "independent of foreign timber by planking all our
waste lands."

In 1800 John Newman married Jemima Fourdrinier, and in the year 1801 John
Henry, the future Cardinal, was born. The latter and the subject of our
memoir were in effect the two sheaves before whom all the rest bowed down.
There were four other children: Charles Robert, Harriette Elizabeth,
Jemima Charlotte, and Mary Sophia.

[Illustration: SEALE'S COFFEE HOUSE, OXFORD
(NOW DEMOLISHED)
Done from an old drawing in the year when Francis Newman and John Henry
Newman stayed there with Blanco White.]

John Henry and Francis went to a school at Ealing (of which Dr. Nicholas
was head-master), then, as Mr. Mozley says, considered the best
preparatory school in the country. There were three hundred boys there at
that time, but none were so brilliant or showed so much talent as the two
Newmans. One after the other they rose to the top of the school. Frank was
captain in 1821. There was some talk of removing John Henry after he had
spent some years there, but he himself begged to be allowed to remain a
little longer. Miss Anne Mozley, in her _Life and Correspondence of John
Henry Newman_, quotes Dr. Nicholas as having said, "No boy had run through
the school from bottom to top as rapidly as John Newman." He was eight and
a half years at Ealing; yet during the whole of that time, it is reported
that his school-fellows declared they had hardly ever seen him play in any
game, though at that time games did not occupy the prominent place in the
curriculum of schools that now they do in our day.

It was not until his last half-year that one of the greatest spiritual
influences of his life began. It was one of those seemingly curious
chances which sometimes change a man's, or a woman's, whole outlook; and
beginning, as it seems at the time, quite casually, quite unconsciously,
lead not only the one chiefly concerned, but others, far afield into
absolutely new environments.

Quite, as it seems, by chance, the destiny of a lifetime approaches
through the conventional door of everyday life--steals up, lays the hand
that none can resist on the handle of some door which opens of itself into
a new, a wider world. Before one is aware of it, perhaps, one's feet have
crossed the threshold into the Land of the New Outlook, and "old things
are passed away."

In August, 1816, John Henry Newman found himself at school, in a sense
alone, because his special personal friends there had left, and thus he
began to be thrown more and more under the influence of the Rev. Walter
Mayer (of Pembroke College, Oxford), who was one of the classical masters.
Long religious talks with him had a great effect upon his mind, and he
himself traces much of his spiritual development to Mr. Mayer's point of
view in religion. He was what is known as a "high Calvinist." When school
was over for John Henry and Francis Newman, Mr. Mayer's influence was not
lost, for both the brothers wrote to him, and stayed with him, when some
time later he became curate to the Rev. William Wilson at Worton.

When his brother left school and went straight to Trinity College, Oxford
(though only fifteen years of age), Frank remained on at Ealing for a
time; and then, when he was seventeen, went up to Oxford to join him, and
be with him through the Long Vacations in preparation for entering
Worcester College in 1822. [Footnote: They lodged first at Scale's Coffee
House in 1821, then at Palmer's, in Merton Lane, in 1822. Both now are
pulled down.] In Anne Mozley's volume there occur several entries
regarding this time from J. H. Newman's letters. For instance, on 25th
Sept., "Expecting to see Frank. I am in fact expecting to see you all. I
shall require you to fill him full of all of you, that when he comes I may
squeeze and wring him out as some sponge."

It is necessary, before touching further on the college life of the two
famous brothers, to remember that early in life there was a strong
spiritual antagonism between them as regarded their points of view--
religious, social, political, etc. And this notwithstanding the fact that
a very real affection for each other existed in both, which made the
inevitable disputes in no sense unfriendly bouts, but only the exercise of
two keen wits of very different calibre.

[Illustration: WORCESTER COLLEGE, OXFORD
VIEW OF COLLEGE BUILDINGS FROM THE GARDENS]

[Illustration: WORCESTER COLLEGE, OXFORD
FRONT QUADRANGLE]

Both had been trained in a home of strict Calvinism. Both had eminently
religious tendencies. Both, when the time came for judging for themselves,
threw aside the grim tenets which they had been taught as children to
believe, and struck into absolutely different paths.

There is a very pathetic incident in their home life, which occurred just
before Frank Newman went to college, which reveals to the thoughtful
reader a world of information as to what was the attitude of thought in
that household.

I quote from J. H. Newman's diary:--

"Sept. 30, 1821. Sunday. After dinner to-day I was suddenly called
downstairs to give an opinion whether I thought it a sin to write a letter
on Sunday. I found dear F---- had refused to copy one. A scene ensued more
painful than any I have experienced." And adds, "I have been sadly
deficient in ... patience, and filial obedience."

I quote this chiefly to show that at sixteen Francis Newman [Footnote: In
later years Francis Newman declared that he had been "converted" in 1816,
and again confirmed in religious conviction in 1819, from the influence of
the writings of Dr. Doddridge.] was certainly under the Calvinistic
influence still, and that he was very dogged in upholding its rules and
restrictions. During the last months of the year 1822, the latter read
with his brother at Oxford, and from time to time, in his letters home, J.
H. Newman mentions him [Footnote: _Letters and Correspondence of J. H.
Newman_, by Anne Mozley.] as working and reading in preparation for
entering Worcester College.

"Frank ... seems to have much improved.... I am convinced that he knows
much of Greek as a language, in fact is a much better Greek scholar than
I.... Again, he is a much better mathematician than I am. I mean, he reads
more mathematically, as Aristotle would say."

It is necessary here to mention a great blow which fell on the Newman
family soon after John Henry Newman had gone to college. His father's bank
failed. There was no bankruptcy, and everyone was paid in full, but still
it naturally proved a time of great family trial; for though his father
took the Alton brewery and tried to make his way in this new line, yet it
was not a successful venture. Happily, by this time, J. H. Newman was not
only able to maintain himself, but also to help his people. Rev. T. Mozley
mentions that in 1823 Newman had been elected to a Fellowship at Oriel,
adding that "it was always a comfort to him that he had been able to give
his father" (who did not live many years after the bankruptcy), "this good
news at a time of great sorrow and embarrassment."

In 1826 Francis Newman took first-class honours in classics and
mathematics, and gained a Fellowship in Balliol College. The college
authorities described his as one of the best "Double Firsts" ever known.
As, however, he felt conscientiously unable to sign the Thirty-nine
Articles, he was obliged to resign his Fellowship, and could not take his
M.A. degree.

Many a man must have felt in his inmost self that a bona fide signing to
_all_ of the Articles was a task beyond his mental reach. There are points
in numbers 8, 17, 22, 25, for instance, which are difficult indeed to
reconcile with the highest ideal of the Christian religion. One looks at
the reprinted introduction (1562) which prefaces them, and one sees that
_it_ was traceable to that irreligious old sensualist, the father of Queen
Elizabeth. One sees that it dated back to the time when the Church in this
country began to be more especially "by _Law_ established," instead of "by
Christ established," as was the case in early ages of its formation. One
sees, too, that part of the reasons for this preface being set forth was
very evidently the reiteration of the kingly assertion that "We are
Supreme Governor of the Church of England," although the ostensible reason
was because of the "curious and unhappy differences" which seemed, in His
Majesty's opinion, to show the wisdom of decisive adjudication with
respect to those "fond things vainly invented," for which some of his
subjects had so great an affection.

Francis Newman by the time he had reached the age of twenty-five, however,
had been finding out, more and more, that he could not receive most of the
Church dogmas. While his brother and he had been practically re-adapting
to their needs and growing personal convictions the Calvinistic religion
(some writers, I am aware, consider that to have been more Puritan than
Calvinistic), given them by their mother in their childhood days, John
Henry Newman had drawn ever closer to the authority of the Church, while
Francis found himself seceding more and more from her, and more and more
drifting into undogmatic religion. It will be remembered that there had
been originally an idea that he should take Holy Orders. This, however,
very soon during his college life he found to be impracticable of
attainment, owing to his own pronounced and undogmatic views.

At that time, Cardinal Newman has said, earnest religious feeling among
the undergraduates was decidedly rare. Only one in every five could be
called religious-minded. So that the influence of these two young men,
whose very evident purpose was to attain some measure of spiritual truth,
was the more remarkable and powerful among their fellow students.

It was J. H. Newman, indeed, on one occasion who, on remonstrating with
those in authority, that the undergraduates should make their communions
at certain stated intervals because of the fact that he himself had seen
some of them get intoxicated at the college "breakfasts" on the _very_ day
after the service--was met by the remark that even if such a thing _did_
happen, they would rather not know of it!

Not far from Oxford there is a little village called Worton (or W_a_rton,
as I see in old papers it used to be spelt), or rather there are two
villages--Over Worton and Nether Worton, or Upper Worton and Lower Worton.
They lie between Banbury and Woodstock, near Oxford. Mr. Bateman, in his
_Life of Bishop Wilson_ (1860), says "their united population, consisting
of farmers and agricultural labourers, does not exceed two hundred." From
one village to the other is a distance of about three-quarters of a mile,
or perhaps a little less by the field path. Mr. Bateman says that before
Bishop Wilson came, "the church was much neglected, as a sporting curate
used to race through the services so as to get through in as little time
as possible."

Mr. Wilson revolutionized all this. He was accustomed to preach straight
to "his people." He seems, indeed, to have preached too "straight" for
some, for after some sermon he had given in an adjoining parish, a lady
who had "sat under him" said to her vicar, "_Pray_ do not let Mr. Wilson
preach here again. He alarms me so."

I am indebted to the Rev. W. H. Langhorne, present Rector of Worton, for
the following information about the place. He tells me that the church is
of the thirteenth or fourteenth century; Early decorated, but so altered
by Derick in 1844 "as almost to destroy its identity." The chalice in Over
Worton Church has the date 1574 upon it. The rectory is about one hundred
years old. The low building attached to it on the left (in the photograph)
was added in 1823. The parish of the two Wortons has for years been a
family living in the possession of the Wilsons, so an old friend, a
relation of Bishop Wilson, tells me. It was at Worton Church that John
Newman preached his first sermon, 23rd June, 1825.

Rev. Walter Mayers went as curate, in 1823, to Rev. William Wilson, and
took charge of Worton parish. In the following year he met--and later
married--my aunt Sarah Giberne. She and her sister had been staying with
Rev. and Mrs. William Wilson, and it was there that Mayers first made her
acquaintance. Mr. Mayers asked Frank Newman, during the Long Vacation, to
come and help him in teaching the pupils who came to read with him at
Worton. Newman was then nineteen. He had been four years longer at the
Ealing School, under the tuition of Walter Mayers, than his brother, who
had gone to Oxford, according to the notion prevalent at that time, at
about the age of fifteen or sixteen. Francis Newman says, consequently, "I
knew him (Mayers) much better than did my brother.... He allured me to his
new curacy, three miles from Deddington, Oxon, to help him in mathematics
with his pupils; first 1822, and again in 1823, after his marriage."

It was in connection with this marriage of Mr. Mayers to Sarah Giberne
that the two families of Newman and Giberne first became acquainted, and
that friendship began which lasted throughout their lives.

Sarah Giberne was the daughter of Mark Giberne, who, in partnership with
Mr. George Stainforth, was court wine merchant in 1750. He came of an old
French family, descended from the noble Jean de Giberne, Sieur de
Gibert�ne, in the sixteenth century. The family owned two castles in the
country of the Cevennes, which were destroyed by the Camisards. In the
seventeenth century some of the family came over and settled in England,
and it was from this branch of it that Gabriel de Giberne, secretary to
Sir Horace Mann, was descended, and from his son Mark--Sarah Giberne--who
married Rev. Walter Mayers.

I shall now give extracts from the diary of Mrs. Benjamin Pearson (_n�e_
Charlotte Elizabeth Giberne), to which I have access through the kindness
of my cousin, Mr. George Pearson. It was in the spring of 1823 that Sarah
and Charlotte Giberne spent a week with John Whitmore and his wife, Maria,
the daughter of their father's partner, Mr. Stainforth (of the firm
"Stainforth & Giberne"). Mrs. Pearson mentions that they both helped her
and her sisters to a "knowledge of the Scriptures and of the Christian
life."

[Illustration: WORTON CHURCH, OXFORDSHIRE
FROM AN OLD PRINT
BY KIND PERMISSION OF REV. V. H. LANGHORNE]

[Illustration: HOLY TRINITY, WEST END, OVER WORTON, MAY, 1905
BY KIND PERMISSION OF REV. W. H. LANGHORNE, PRESENT RECTOR OF WORTON]

"We were introduced by Maria, Mrs. Whitmore, about June, 1823, to a good
clergyman who had lately come to reside at Walthamstow, about two miles
from our home" (they were living at Wanstead), "the Rev. William Wilson,
who received us into his friendship, and whose preaching we attended with
joy and profit for several years.

"It was on Christmas Day of this year, I think, that we first heard the
Rev. Walter Mayers preach from Nahum i. 7 a most beautiful experimental
discourse which impressed us very much. On making enquiry concerning him,
we found that he was Mr. Wilson's curate at Worton, in Oxfordshire, and
that he received pupils into his house. Later, their brother, Charles
Giberne, was sent for a year to him. This led to Mr. Mayers being invited
to dinner at our house. There he formed an attachment to Sarah, to whom he
was married the following year, 1824.

"In the midsummer holidays, 1825, I went to pay a visit to Walter and
Sarah, and it was then I first made acquaintance with John and Frank
Newman. The latter was spending the Long Vacation with Mr. Mayers to
assist him in teaching the young men, though he was only nineteen. Among
these pupils was Charles Baring, seventeen years old, afterwards Bishop of
(the Palatinate see) Durham.

"John Newman walked over from Oxford to breakfast one morning: he was then
twenty-four, and a most interesting young man; but him I only saw then
once, whereas his brother (Frank) was our daily companion, and took great
pains in instructing Sarah (Mrs. Walter Mayers) and myself in Political
Economy. His talents and piety attracted my admiration, for I had never
seen such young men before. They had both been pupils of Mr. Mayers at a
large school at Ealing (in which he was a master), and were considered to
be converted in very early life."

Later on is another entry:--

"In the midsummer holidays of 1825" (John Henry Newman was ordained priest
on 29th May, 1825), "I went to stay with Walter and Sarah Mayers, and then
began my first acquaintance with John Henry Newman and his brother Frank.
The former having walked over from Oxford, seventeen miles, to breakfast,
and repeating Milman's beautiful hymn from the _Martyr of Antioch_,
'Brother, thou art gone before us.'

"He was just twenty-four, and his brother Frank, who came soon after to
assist Walter Mayers with his pupils ... was only twenty, but as bright a
specimen of a young Oxford student as I had ever met with. They had both
been considered converted in early youth, and so uncommon an event was it
to me to meet with Christian young men" (men, that is, whose religion was
their motive power, and not only used in the conventional and cold
formality then usual in the case of so many families in England), "that my
admiration knew no bounds. Of course, I told my sister Maria ... all this,
and she was quite prepared to appreciate in like manner, when she went to
stay at Worton the following summer."

We come now to the time which, whether for happiness or regret, inevitably
enters into the lives of most men on this earth--the time when they first
meet "the Woman they Never Forget." It does not follow that they are able
to marry her, but it _does_ follow that, meet whom they may later, no one
will ever oust from her place that first woman in their memories.

Francis Newman was only twenty-one when he first met her.

Maria Rosina Giberne was a beautiful girl, possessing special charm of
manner. It was not long after his first meeting with her that Frank Newman
fell passionately in love with her. Long talks on scientific and religious
subjects passed between them. But though he cared for her, evidently her
feeling for him was only that of friendship and interest, for when, later,
he asked her to marry him, she refused. He did not, however, take this for
an absolutely final decision (as in effect it was), for five or six years
later, when he was on his missionary journey to Syria, and he wrote and
begged her to give him a different answer, she refused him again.

[Illustration: OVER WORTON RECTORY, OXFORDSHIRE
BY KIND PERMISSION OF REV. W. H. LANGHORNE, PRESENT RECTOR OF WORTON]

The extracts that follow are from her diary of the summer at Worton in
1826--the year she first met the Newman brothers. The extracts are taken
from an autobiography of hers, which was originally written in French for
the nuns of the "Order of the Visitation" convent at Autun, Sa�ne et
Loire, to which she went, as professed nun, after her conversion to the
Roman Church.

This is Maria Rosina Giberne's description of Worton (to which I have
access by the kindness of my cousin):--

"It was a delightful place; far from towns and quite country. There I
spent my days as much as possible under the trees, or in the fields
sketching the lovely views. My sister had told me that Mr. Francis Newman
and a friend were coming to the village to spend the vacation. I did not
pay much attention, being preoccupied with this delicious solitude. In a
while the two friends appeared, and I enjoyed hearing them talk, having a
great respect for learned men, although far from being learned myself. I
asked them questions and propounded religious difficulties which troubled
me. I was struck with his (Frank Newman's) piety, which had nothing
affected about it like the manner of some good people. We often talked
whilst I was sketching in the fields, and he explained to me many things
in Holy Scripture that I had not understood. Before leaving the village he
expressed a wish that I could become acquainted with his sisters.... This
idea pleased me much, and on returning home I gave our mother no peace
until she gave me permission to invite two of his sisters to spend a
fortnight with us.

"They accepted the invitation, and Mrs. Newman brought her three
daughters--Harriet, Jemima, and Mary. She left Harriet and Mary with us. I
was much taken at once with Mary, who was nice-looking, unaffected, and
only seventeen years of age. I was resolved to make friends with them,
otherwise should not have been greatly attracted by Harriet who had a way
I could not understand, and who embarrassed me greatly by her knowledge of
religious matters, because I had thought that I might be able to lead
_them_ to the good way, [Footnote: In some notes she expressly says this
was Frank Newman's suggestion primarily.] and behold, they seemed to know
all beforehand, and often showed me that I was mistaken in my
explanations.... I remember the first thing I opposed with all my might
was the idea of a visible Church, and it was not till long afterwards,
when I was staying with their mother in the country, that I took up this
idea. It was, I think, in the winter of 1827 that I embraced this
doctrine.

"Then in the summer the Newman family stayed some months at Brighton.
After John Newman's death the family had no settled home, but moved from
place to place. It happened that one of Maria Rosina's married sisters was
also at Brighton, and consequently it naturally followed that the two
families of Newman and Giberne met often.

"Naturally we called now and then to see Mrs. Newman, who invited us one
day to spend the afternoon and evening, and then, for the first time, I
became acquainted with Mr. Newman, now Father Newman. It was a great
pleasure, for I had heard so much about him, and I enjoyed seeing him
though he spoke very little to me, and paid me no compliments or special
attentions like most young men of our acquaintance, who neglected the
ladies of their families. The delicate and repeated attention of Mr.
Newman to his mother and sisters therefore aroused my admiration and
respect."

[Illustration: SKETCH OF NEWMAN FAMILY BY MARIA ROSINA GIBERNE
BY KIND PERMISSION OF MR. J. R. MOZLEY.
As one faces the picture, John Henry is sitting on Mrs. Newman's right;
Francis William to her left; Harriet to the right of John; Jemima below
her mother.]

To my mind there speaks, in this last sentence, something unusual too as
regards the writer, who, accustomed to the "compliments and special
attentions" which other young men paid her, could yet appreciate and
admire these delicate thoughtfulnesses which _this_ young man, who saw so
much further into the inner heart and meaning of things, loved to show to
his own mother and sisters instead of to other people's sisters, as was
and is the ordinary way of most young men.

In some other MSS. by Maria Rosina, sent me from the Oratory, Birmingham,
[Footnote: By the kindness of Father Bacchus.] there is a rather different
account, in which there is mention of Frank Newman having even then shown
a great tendency to free thought.

She adds: "I had not a suspicion that there was any danger of his getting
to care for me, for, firstly, he was two years younger than I was; and,
secondly, because I myself was occupied almost altogether with the thought
of how to rid myself of the narrow religion which was becoming every day
more unbearable, and also because I had no other thought for him than for
Robert." (Robert Murcott was a young man belonging to a family with whom
her people were intimate, and who had always wished to marry her. He went
out to India, and when he died left her all his money.)

In years to come, a great and lasting friendship began between her and
Cardinal Newman--a friendship which lasted unbroken to the end. When he
went to Rome for the red hat, he was too ill to call and see her at Autun
on his way home, but he had previously been to see her there.

The picture of the Newman family given here was drawn in chalks by her
when she was a girl at a little cottage at Horspath (near Nuneham, in
1829), at which the Newmans were staying. It had been offered them by Mr.
Dornford, Fellow, tutor, and proctor of Oriel, and afterwards rector of
Plymtree.

In the book, to which allusion has before been made, by Rev. Thomas
Mozley, there is a description of Maria Rosina in later life. He says she
was "tall, strong of build, majestic, with aquiline nose, well-formed
mouth, dark penetrating eyes, and a luxuriance of glossy black hair. She
would command attention anywhere.... She was very early the warmest and
most appreciative of Newman's" (John Henry Newman's) "admirers.... Her
great power lay in the portraits she did in chalks.... Besides many
portraits of Newman himself ... she drew a portrait of old Mr.
Wilberforce...."

The portrait of Maria Rosina in this volume was painted by herself in the
spring of 1827, to send to her eldest brother, George Giberne (at Dhoolia,
Candeish), afterwards Judge in the Bombay Presidency (East India Co.). On
the back of it her brother had written in pencil:--

  "Yes, here's a silent, thoughtful thing, and yet
  Her soft blue eye beams Eloquence: her lips
  Oh! who could teach his spirit to forget
  Their deep expressiveness, that far eclipse
  All that kind nature to this world hath given,
  All we can see of Earth, or guess of Heaven."

[Illustration: MARIA ROSINA GIBERNE
FROM A PAINTING BY HERSELF]

At this time she had taken many portraits of her friends, and I have, in
my own possession, one of Miss Wigram, and one, in a riding-hat, of her
sister Emily, both done in chalks, as is her picture of herself sent to
her brother. Later on she went to Rome, where for twenty years she studied
art and copied pictures "for the use," Mr. Mozley says, "of English
chapels." Years after, when my aunt was in the convent of the Order of
Visitation at Autun, she wrote an interesting letter to Cardinal Newman,
which is given by Miss Anne Mozley in her _Letters and Correspondence of
John Henry Newman_ alluding to the old days when their friendship, which
had never wavered during all the years which had gone by, was but just
beginning:--

"I do not want to talk of myself. I want to tell you of my entire sympathy
with you in what you say and feel about the anniversary of dear Mary's"
(the Cardinal's youngest sister) "death." (She died 5th Jan., 1828.) "This
season never comes round without my repassing in my heart of hearts all
the circumstances of those few days--my first visit to your dear
family.... Who could ever have been acquainted with the soul and heart
that lent their expression to that face, and not love her? My sister Fanny
and I arrived at your house on 3rd January, and sweet Mary, who had drawn
figures under my advice when she was staying with us at Wanstead, leant
over me at a table in the drawing-room, and in that sweet voice said, 'I
am so glad you are come; I hope you will help me in my drawing.'"

The next day she was taken ill at dinner, and on the ensuing evening--
dead.

She goes on to say: "Do you recollect that you and I are the only
survivors of that event?"

But to go back to the end of the college life of the subject of this
memoir. In the year 1828, Frank Newman was working amongst the poor at
Littlemore, near Oxford. His brother [Footnote: _Reminiscences of Oriel_,
by Rev. T. Mozley.] at that time was vicar of S. Mary's, the University
Church, and as the hamlet of Littlemore had then no church, [Footnote: A
church was built there later by Newman. In Ingram's _Memorials of Oxford_,
1838, it is said that in former days Littlemore was beautifully wooded,
and that in Saxon times there was a convent (of which there still remain
some ruins) which was called by the Saxon name of the "Mynchery," and
which belonged to the nuns of the Benedictine Order, and the church which
Alfred built on the site of the University Church of to-day, was known as
early as the Conquest as "Our Lady of Littlemore."] he attended to the
spiritual needs of the people there. Indeed, he considered it his duty to
go there every day; and Francis worked also constantly with him in
teaching the villagers. Some little time later, his mother and sisters
came to live at Horspath, in Iffley village, close to Oxford. They, too,
assisted in parochial matters, taught in the schools, visited the sick,
and generally helped the brothers.

By this time John Henry Newman's sermons were attracting great attention
in Oxford, and whenever he preached his University sermons, he had a
crowded congregation of undergraduates. The college authorities, however,
did not approve of his popularity with the undergraduates, and in Canon
Carter's _Life and Letters of Archdeacon Hutchings_, there is a note
showing this:--"I went to Christ Church in 1827.... Newman was at Oriel,
and for the last two years of my time Vicar of S. Mary's. But it was the
object of the college authorities to prevent our going to hear him preach,
and the chapel services were so arranged as to make it impossible."

In 1829 Dr. Pusey was Professor of Hebrew and Canon of Christ Church, and
as he had been for some years the close friend of Frank Newman's brothers,
it was inevitable that the former should see a great deal of him at that
time. He was delighted with Pusey's first books; but it was for the
"pietism and rationalism" which he found in them, more than for any hint
of the spirit of Churchmanship which distinguished his other works so
much. J. H. Newman had been a tutor at Oriel College since 1826. Oriel
College, Rev. Thomas Mozley tells us, was then "held to be in the very
front of academic progress ... with a Provost" (Edward Hawkins) "who owed
his election largely to Newman." Newman, Robert Wilberforce, and Froude
were close friends. Dr. Hawkins had a strong influence over John Newman.
Indeed, he had won love and respect from almost everyone; "he spoke
incisively, and what he said remained in the memory"--so much a part of
his own strong convictions and thought did it seem to be.

Yet Francis Newman was as convincing in his _writings_, at any rate, as
his better-known brother, who, as some thought, "overshadowed" him in the
eyes of the world to a large extent. A friend of mine, writing to me a
short time since, said that a statement had been made recently, by some
one entitled to judge of the matter, that Francis was the "greater of the
two brothers."

Be this as it may, certainly both were pioneers "in a world movement of
reconstruction." Both were prophets in a sense. Both were mental Samsons--
giants among the crowd of those who never see a yard beyond their own
narrow scope of vision. Both were inspired movers of the crusade of
purity, of new and original points of view, and of reformation in the old.

It is true neither could work with the other shoulder to shoulder. _But
they worked._ And it is possible to have a great brotherly affection
notwithstanding strong antagonism of views which render combined work
impossible.




CHAPTER III

HIS MISSIONARY JOURNEY TO THE EAST


In 1826 Francis Newman gained, as it is said, with no special effort, one
of the best Double Firsts in classics and mathematics ever known. He had a
Fellowship in Balliol College, was Emeritus Professor later, and
considered to be one of the most promising, brilliant men at his
University. Many thought his intellect superior to that of his better-
known brother. Many thought also, later on, that, as I have said, all his
life he was more or less overshadowed by the fame of that elder brother.

Francis Newman never took his M.A. degree, and for this reason: he felt he
could not conscientiously sign the Thirty-nine Articles, in which all had
to profess belief. He could not reconcile this signing with his inner
convictions. Rather than do violence to them he preferred being without
the degree. No one could say of him that all his life long he did else
than bear his convictions boldly emblazoned on his shield. There could
never be any doubt of what he thought. He could not beat about the bush in
his beliefs--he would not keep them secret--he did not care for
unpopularity in the least. His great aim was to fight--at whatever odds--
for whatever he felt by dogged conviction. He was often wrong; but never
cowardly, never philandering, never vacillating. "I am anti-everything,"
as he said humorously of himself. And so he was. He _was_, in a sense,
"anti-everything," and though, sometimes through the training of previous
environments, sometimes through other reasons, he was "anti" things that
were right and of good report, he was never against social reform--never
against "the cause that needs assistance"; never against the oppressed
wherever and whenever they crossed his path. Newman thus gave up his
Balliol Fellowship, and with it--more or less--his chances of a brilliant
worldly career.

Briefly stated, these are the chief events of the years that followed the
taking of the Double First at Oxford. In 1827 he met Maria Rosina Giberne,
who was to strongly influence his life for the next six years. In 1828 he
was working with his brother at Littlemore; in 1829, I imagine, he met and
felt strongly in sympathy with some of those with whom, later, the
missionary journey to Syria was planned--Lord Congleton, Mr. Groves, Dr.
Cronin, and others.

People have said that Newman gave up all worldly hopes of fame for the
sake of this missionary venture. It may be that that is true in part. But,
for myself, I cannot help seeing too that there may very well have been
other powerful reasons which also influenced him in the matter. It was
about this time that he asked my aunt, Maria Rosina Giberne, to whom he
was passionately attached, to marry him, and was refused. I think it very
probable that this may have been a strong reason why he wished to break up
the old life and go for change abroad.

Originally there had been some idea that Francis Newman should take Holy
Orders, as well as his brother. This is evidenced by a poem by the latter.
Later, contrary tides swung the former from the mooring of the Anglican
Church. He could not sign her Thirty-nine Articles; he could not agree
with many of her doctrines. He drifted more and more away from her. Then
he fell in with Lord Congleton (then Mr. Parnell) and Mr. A. N. Groves--
both deeply religious men, though neither of them Churchmen.

Lord Congleton [Footnote: _Memoir of Lord Congleton_, by Henry Groves.]
had been given no definite religious training in his youth, though his
mother taught him to say daily prayers. Then, when a young man, he felt a
deep dissatisfaction with this vague religious teaching he had received,
and he began to read more and more in the New Testament, until at length
he became a Christian by sheer conviction. He felt his conversion as a
revelation.

Mr. Groves, who was a well-known dentist in Devonshire, felt about the
same time a great stirring towards missionary work. He offered his
services to the Church Missionary Society. He often stayed in Dublin with
Lord Congleton. In 1828, when they were walking together, one of those
strange mystical approaches of soul to kindred soul took place.

"This, I doubt not, is the mind of God concerning us, that we should come
together not waiting on any pulpit or minister, but trusting that the Lord
would edify us together by ministering as He pleased." Lord Congleton
adds: "At the moment he spoke these words I was assured my soul had got
the right idea, and that moment (I remember it as if it were but
yesterday) was the birth-place of my mind as a 'brother.'"

He mentions here Edward Cronin (who in 1830 formed one of the missionary
party with which Frank Newman was associated), at that time an
Independent, "but his mind was at the same time under a like influence, as
I may say of us all."

[Illustration: PHOTO OF LORD CONGLETON
(LEADER OF SYRIAN MISSIONARY JOURNEY)
FROM HIS "LIFE" BY GROVES]

I should perhaps say here (I have the information from the _Memoir of Lord
Congleton_ before mentioned), that the special truths by which Lord
Congleton, Mr. Groves, and Dr. Cronin were led then, were: "The oneness of
the Church of God, involving a fellowship large enough to embrace all
saints, and narrow enough to exclude the world. The completeness and
sufficiency of the written Word in all matters of faith, and preeminently
in things affecting our Church life and walk--the speedy pre-millennial
advent of the Lord Jesus."

All three of the men just named had made surrender of all that the world
had to offer them, Lord Congleton giving the whole of his fortune to
missionary work. It was he who provided most of the things needed for the
journey.

In 1830 (September) the following party left Dublin:--Lord Congleton (whom
in future it will be simpler to call by his family name of Mr. Parnell, as
Newman thus mentions him in his diary, the _Personal Narrative_, which he
kept throughout this journey to the East); Mr. Cronin; his mother Mrs.
Cronin, and her daughter Nancy Cronin (to whom Lord Congleton was
engaged); and Francis Newman. There was also a Mr. Hamilton, but later on
he found the work not suited to him, and returned to England. [Footnote:
Mr. Groves had already gone as a missionary to Bagdad in 1829, and they
were to join him later.]

Mr. Henry Groves says in the _Memoir_ that the travellers started with an
enormous quantity of luggage. They had practically a small library of
books, a lithographic press in two heavy boxes (for printing tracts,
etc.), and a large medicine chest, which was Mr. Cronin's property (he was
a doctor). When one thinks how the more one travels, even in these
travelling-made-easy days, the more one wishes to abridge one's
requirements and whittle down one's wants, it is not difficult to
understand that in 1830 the difficulties of the rough travelling were
largely increased by these foods for the mind and for the stomach which
travelled in the wake of the little party, nor how they were hampered by
these conditions.

I now quote from Francis Newman's _Personal Narrative_ (published 1856),
which is one of the most interesting of travel books, and very graphically
written in the form of letters to his friends at home. [Footnote: Newman
and Lord Congleton were both at this time about twenty-three years of
age.]

"River Garonne,
At Anchor in Steamboat,
_23rd Sept._, 1830.

"We sailed finely on Saturday from Dublin, while sheltered by the Irish
coast; but in the evening we tasted the Atlantic with a south-wester,
which proved a bitter dose. For nearly fifty hours we tossed, with very
slow progress, until all our bones were bruised, etc., etc.... I have
never seen anything like the sea on the French coast.

"The Bay of Biscay fulfilled all its proverbial roughness: the whole sea
was dells and knolls. It was terrible to see the pilot jump aboard while
his boat was alternately tossed above our deck; he was caught by the
sailors in their arms.... The custom-house officers have detained the ship
so long that we are left here by the tide.... The officers were very
civil. They were all amazed at the number of our packages" (as well they
might be!)... "The prospect of our porterages is frightful. Think of us at
the top of a hotel and an army of porters carrying up the height of three
stories many hundredweights of trunks, chests, hampers, bags, baskets, to
stow into our bedrooms _for the night!_ And this misery is to be repeated
everywhere....

"I talk French clumsily, yet get on somehow.... My French having been
chiefly mathematical, I do not know the names of many common things...."

At Toulouse in October:--"I am already a Frenchman. If you doubt it, learn
that I take wine or raisins for breakfast, and never speak to a peasant
without raising my hat.... This _vin ordinaire_ is not 'bad,' in the sense
of intoxicating, but in another way. However, if it supplies the place of
tea, it is vain to rail at it."

The next entry is while they were staying at Marseilles on 13th October,
and concerns the cheapness of the provisions.

"All provisions appear within reach of the poorest. I have been in some
very low eating-houses here, and perceive apparently poor people breakfast
on meat. Nothing seems dear but milk and butter; we get none but goats'
milk here.... The finest purple grapes are here 1d. or 3/4d. a pound, and
as much bread as I can eat for 1-1/2d.... I had a provoking accident at
B�ziers. On our leaving the barge, the carman drove off without securing
our boxes--he was in a violent passion against some girl porters (a
domestic institution of B�ziers).... I roared out, 'Arr�tez! Arri�re! Vous
n'avez pas attach� la corde!' But in vain; and in an instant down came
from the very top the little medicine chest given me by M----. It fell on
its corner, which saved the glass bottles; but every dovetailing is
broken, the hinges wrenched off, the panels split."

Of course the travelling is chiefly by diligence and canal boat, and for
English ladies very often terribly rough and trying. But Mrs. and Miss
Cronin had resolved to face discomforts, etc., equally with their
companions, and would have no little ameliorations in the way of comforts
for themselves.

One great danger, too, occurred, from which they were only rescued by the
promptitude of Newman and Mr. Parnell (as throughout the diary Newman
alludes to Lord Congleton). Once, in travelling by canal near Marseilles,
Newman found the level of the canal-boat was "dangerously high, from the
arches. Once we had a narrow escape. There was a sudden cry of '_A bas_!'
We turned and saw we were rapidly nearing an arch which would knock off
our heads. The horses kept at a short canter. Old Mrs. C. was sitting
quietly on deck, wholly absorbed, and never dreaming that the sailors
could be calling to her. Miss C. was sitting on a box, fast asleep.
Several of us rushed at once towards them, and pulled them off their seats
on to the deck. Literally they fell upon me in a heap, and we just passed
safe under the arch. Mrs. C.'s bonnet and my hat got smashed."

Here comes a touch of what later on in life was to be the subject of his
keenest thought--the subject of statesmanship, the chief aim of which
should be _the people:_ how to make the land sufficient for the people,
how to make the people sufficient for the land--a counsel of perfection
far removed from the party spirit of politicians, who then, as now, did
not recognize that principles and a sacred sense of responsibility for
their country should be their motive power.

"We are delayed here" (Marseilles) "for a ship. We are likely to go to
Cyprus. The vintage was going while we were _en route_ hither. I was
interested to see men walking bare-legged, stained purple nearly to the
knee, _with treading the wine vat_. I then understood the Scripture
metaphor.... The men seemed to have been wading in blood.... I should
deprecate a whole district being dependent for its livelihood on the sale
of wine.... for as _some_ seasons are sure to be fatal to the crop, the
failure, when it comes, is universal.... To make each component part--I
mean each _local_ part--of society self-supporting, and self-relieving
even in times of calamity, ought, I think, to be the aim of every
statesman."

As regards sight-seeing for sight-seeing's sake, it was _nil_. And for a
reason which seemed not to allow for any of the travellers having
discretion, "We make it a tacit rule never to go ten yards to see
anything; for if once we became sight-seers it is impossible to draw the
line. So in fact I see nothing but what I cannot help seeing."

The next diary-tic letter is not until 14th January of the next year
(1831), when the party had arrived at Aleppo.

Frank Newman had been studying Greek and talking it with a master, and
during the voyage from Marseilles landed for three days at Larnica. On the
ship was an old Greek, and he used to go and talk with him to practise his
Greek.

"You may be amused to hear his judgment of my Greek dialect; he called it
'very beautiful and very funny'; that is, no doubt, because I am apt to
mix up too much of the old Greek, which seems grandiloquent on trifling
subjects....

"Walking in the street at Larnica, I met a person whom I did not know,
who, to my extreme surprise, fell on my neck and kissed both cheeks quite
affectionately, I had not recognized my dirty acquaintance in this clean,
well-dressed gentleman, probably fresh from the bath."

Many were the difficulties Newman and his friends had to encounter in
hiring a vessel to sail to Ladak�a [Footnote: Laodicea of Syria.] on the
opposite coast. At last a bargain was struck with a Turkish ship for five
pounds. But the ship had battled already against the contretemps of too
many voyages. She could no longer beat against the wind as once she used
to do. Four times they set sail, and four times had to put back again into
port. The captain had only an old French map "marked with crosses at
certain places, the cross meaning _porto_, as the captain explained." He
needed help, however, from his passengers to be quite sure which was
which! In this ship they lived with discomfort for a whole month. Still,
all of the friends kept well. The distance from Ladak�a to Aleppo is about
120 English miles. And this journey added to discomfort, hardship, and to
hardship--lack of food for the mission party. It necessitated travelling
three miles into the hills, and when a lofty bleak plain was reached, the
muleteers made it clear that they were to spend the night there.

"We heaped our rudest boxes to make a wall, and on the lee side prepared a
sleeping-place, stretching over it some oilskins.... We had a small supply
of food in baskets.... All night the rain fell in torrents.... Our whole
floor was swamped; we had to sit on carpet bags and let them get wet.
Clothes, bedding, bags, baskets, were drenched, and we had to mount in the
morning in the midst of rain.... The roads were river-beds.... After
riding eleven hours without dismounting (the beasts never leave their
walking pace).... We had fasted the whole day, yet none of us suffered;
not even old Mrs. Cronin, for whom I greatly feared."

I should add here that Francis Newman was strongly in favour of women
riding astride instead of on the Early-Victorian side-saddle, which
necessitates a woman riding in an artificial, twisted position. Still, at
the period at which he is writing, Early-Victorian ideas about the fitness
of things were so much _de rigueur_ that Mrs. Cronin, when forced to ride
astride, was terribly disturbed.

"'Ach, Edward,' said she to her son, 'I expected they would persecute and
murdher us, but I never thought to ride across a mule!'... Three times did
her mule come down with her, poor lady, and all three in dangerous places.

"None of the rest suffered so many falls, nor, I think, any of the laden
beasts. Her son was in terrible distress at every fall, for he was
carrying his infant in his arms ... and he could not put the child down in
the mud without danger to it."

Indeed, it must have been a very distressful journey for all, and not
least for the poor little infant missionary! People may wonder what was
the necessity of taking this last at all. [Footnote: Dr. Cronin and his
wife were both engaged to come out to Mr. Groves. Then she died, and as he
felt bound to fulfil his promise and did not like to leave the baby, he
brought it too.] An old clergyman, however, once said to me, "I would
rather take an infant in arms with me, than go all by myself on a journey
abroad."

At last Aleppo was reached. In his letter, on 10th February to his mother,
Newman says how long their stay there would be is quite uncertain. He "is
taking daily lessons in Arabic, and speaking French."

"I am afraid you will not think the better of me when I tell you that I am
become a smoker; and this though I had so great a dislike to it in
England. I do not mean that I am always smoking--certainly not; but I have
bought two pipes and amber mouthpieces, and all the apparatus; which shows
that I am in earnest. When a man in college smoked cigars in his room, and
we (the Balliol fellows) generally condemned it, I remember, in reply to
my remark that a man who smoked made himself a nuisance, one of them said,
'It would not do to generalize; for in Germany the man who _objects_ to
smoking is the nuisance.' ... If anyone calls on me I must offer him a
pipe and smoke one myself; and, conversely, when I call on anyone, I must
not refuse the pipe.... The pipe fills up gaps of time, and 'breaks the
ice' like an Englishman's remarks on the weather....

"Now I am in for it, I will make you perfect in the theory of smoking. We
have here three sorts of pipes, of which I use but one, viz. the long
straight pipe. It is generally a cherry stick, and reaches from the mouth
to the ground as you sit on a low sofa. The bowl is supported in a tin
frame on the ground to catch the ashes; and you smoke in it _t�ot�on_,
which means common dry tobacco.... Ladies, as far as I know, do not smoke
the straight pipe, though I have seen Mussulman females, evidently of
humble rank, with the long pipe and its smoking bowl protruding from under
their long veil as they walked. The second sort is called _Narg�li_ ...
some pronounce it Narjili.... Narg�li means a cocoa-nut, which is used in
this apparatus to hold the water through which the smoke passes.
Vertically out of the cocoa-nut rises a pipe which ends in a long bowl
holding the _Tambac_, which is a second species of tobacco having broadish
yellow leaves worked up with wet. It needs a piece of red-hot coal laid
upon it, and left there, to kindle it. Slanting out of the cocoa-nut
proceeds upwards a second tube, a mere cane, which ends in the smoker's
mouth. He grasps the vertical tube in his left fist, and, if sitting,
rests the cocoa-nut on his knee. This is the way my hostess smokes--an
elegant Levantine lady.... I cannot smoke through water; I find it demands
too much work for my lungs. The third sort is the _Hooka_, a word which, I
believe, means the very long flexible tube which is here substituted for
the cane, while a glass vessel, standing on the ground, does duty for the
cocoa-nut. The principle of the smoking ... are the same as in the
Nargili.... Unless it be overdone, I think the exercise from early youth
must enlarge the capacity and power of the lungs.... When people have not
a second pipe to offer you, they hand the pipe from their own mouth, and
to wipe the mouthpiece before you suck it would be an insult."

Newman says that the Turks are supposed to have a great tenderness for
animals. There is a popular saying, which he quotes, "A Turk cares more
for the life of a cat than of a man." The following curious scene was
witnessed by him in a town on his way to Aleppo:--

"A goat was to be killed, and we had some chance of a bit if one of us
would seize a part of the animal before it was dead. _There_ stood the
victim and its priest.

"In front was a row of cats, sitting up with all the gravity of Egyptian
gods, or like the regiment of cats which were the van of Cambyses against
Egypt. On the other side a regiment of dogs. When the scarlet flood
spouted on to the ground the dogs took their portion of it. I know not
what etiquette or what hint from the sacrificer suddenly dispersed them:
then the cats came in due order and took _their_ portion.... Peace was
wonderfully kept between dogs and cats; but when it came to dividing the
offal, the cats had plenty of screaming, and, I rather think, some
fighting. The number of these wild cats here is a real nuisance."

In May we get another insight into the carrying out of Newman's precept to
himself, always to "live in Rome as the Romans."

"I believe you know it was always our idea that we must put on native
habits wherever we went, so far at least as to encounter no needless
friction. I had not then considered how seriously such change may after a
time affect one's own character, and the thought sometimes crosses the
mind anxiously.

"We smoke. Well. I say to myself, 'I must try not to be wedded to this
practice: I hope to leave it off the moment it proves inexpedient.'.... I
have taken to the Syrian gown and slippers; to walk actively in these is
arduous and, I suppose, very singular. Here is a question: May not my
bodily habit change with it? and may not that affect my mind?... The gown
is ridiculously feminine, beyond what I had been aware; not merely in
length and amplitude, but above the girdle it is puffed out into two
_bosoms_, which are used as pockets" (no doubt the _sinus_ of the Romans).
"... Some things which in company we do as seldom as possible, such as to
blow the nose, or (worse still) to spit, seem to be utterly forbidden
here.... The natives are reserved in the use of a pocket-handkerchief as
the most fastidious English lady.... I believe Xenophon praises the
Persians for never spitting in company." (Would that our own working
classes could, in this respect, be more Persian in their habits!) "Are not
all Eastern manners probably a plant of very ancient growth?" Then, on
religion: "I did not understand till lately how unintelligible to people
here is a religion which is not external and almost obtrusive. We are
certainly thought much better of, because, two of our party having pretty
good voices, we commonly sing praises in daily worship.... To pray
standing, or, as I should rather say, lying flat, at the corners of the
streets is not ostentation here: for so many do it that it has no pre-
eminence.... I always looked to see a missionary church formed in these
countries; but I did not foresee what I now discern, that it would not be
recognized as Christians at all, but be esteemed a mere Anglicism, not by
papists merely, but by Moslems too. I do not know, after all, whether that
could be ever a _permanent_ obstacle. I believe not; for it is not the
name, but the goodness of Christianity that must prevail. However, the now
current idea here is, that the English are very good men, but have _no_
religion--which means, as I said, no exterior; and in so far _our_
exterior inspires something of respect.... I had resolved to read the
Koran through--not in the original, but in a translation--that I might get
some insight into the Mussulman mind.... But I confess to you I have
broken sheer down in the attempt, ... the book makes no impression on my
mind. I cannot find where I left off when I recur to it. That so tedious
and shallow a work can meet such praises gives me a lower and lower idea
of the power of mind in these nations. I now think that the Arabs are
captivated by the tinkle and epigrammatic point of an old and sacred
dialect, while Turks and Persians take its literary beauty as a religious
fact to be believed, not to be felt. How wonderful is the power of
tradition!"

In July, Newman and his party were still at Aleppo. By now they had become
well accustomed to the native foods, but had at last come to the
conclusion that the meat (mutton) was certainly not good; unfortunately it
formed a large proportion of the stews. One dish consisted of rice,
dressed with butter and salt This is called "Pil�u" (pronounced "ow"), and
apparently is the same as that common in Russia to-day, which is
_delicious_.

"This pil�u is, fundamentally, rice dressed with butter and salt: the rice
is thrown into boiling water, and is boiled for twenty minutes only. This
is the highest luxury of the Bedouins. We saw a company of them dine on
it. They scraped the hot outside of the rice with the tips of their
fingers, squeezed it into a ball in their hand, and shot the ball into
their mouth. The dexterity of this, so as not to burn their fingers, miss
their mouths, nor drop about their garments, is astonishing.... Carrots
with lemon or sour milk make delicious fritters...."

It was during this month that the news came to them from Bagdad that Mr.
Groves (who, it will be remembered, had been there for some time,
expecting them later to join him) had just lost his wife from plague; that
she had been the only one who had caught the disease. Newman himself,
about this time, had a sharp attack of fever. Dr. Cronin was much alarmed
about him; indeed, he believed him to be dying, and leeched his temples
and bled his right arm. Then he tried calomel, and he said that he had
resolved on opening his temporal artery if his pulse had kept as rapid as
at first it was.

[Illustration: DR. CRONIN
ONE OF THOSE WHO WENT TO SYRIA WITH FRANCIS NEWMAN IN 1830
BY KIND PERMISSION OF MRS. CRONIN
PHOTO BY MESSRS. WEBSTER, CLAPHAM COMMON]

In Aleppo, he tells us in one of his letters home, "madmen are looked on
as sacred characters... there are no madhouses in the land.... Certainly
in England the results of turning all the mad loose would be awful.

"But when one sees the entire satisfaction there is here with so ugly and
revolting a state of things, and the inability people have to conceive the
inconvenience of it... I am driven to speculate.... Is insanity
excessively rare here, so that outrages, if they do occur, are naturally
very few? or is the insanity... always of the imbecile kind? Or is
insanity, at its worst, mollified by the respectful treatment which it
meets, as vicious horses by kindness?

"... Here is a people without lunatic asylums. Well, their lunatics are
few or harmless; what a comfortable coincidence! If insanity among _us_ is
caused by strong passions in one class and by intoxication in another,
while the Turkish populations are nearly free from both... it implies a
higher average morality.... Add to this there are no abandoned women
here."

Five months after the first attack of fever Newman was taken ill of a far
worse one, which gave a great shock to his nervous system. He was in real
danger of losing his life this time, possibly because, Dr. Cronin being
absent, there was no one to treat him. He suffered, too, greatly from
continual sleeplessness. When he was recovering, Dr. Cronin, who by now
had returned, ordered horse exercise for him, and Mr. Parnell very
generously bought a horse for him.

In December, 1831, Mr. and Mrs. Parnell [Footnote: Mr. Parnell meant to
have been married to Miss Cronin at Bordeaux, but this was found to be
impossible, so he was obliged to wait till they reached Aleppo, where the
ceremony took place in the early part of the year 1831.] went to Ladak�a
to help Mr. Hamilton, whose health had more or less broken down, secure a
vessel to take him to France _en route_ for England. He determined to see
him safely on board. Mrs. Parnell also insisted on coming with her
husband. But the travelling was rough, and she had had a bad fall from her
ass, and besides had been ill and had no doctor at hand.

Mr. Hamilton went away in the ship, but Mrs. Parnell became more and more
weak, until at last she died. Immediately on hearing of her death. Dr.
Cronin set out, full of sorrow at the loss of his sister, to see if he
could be of any help to Mr. Parnell. Newman writes:--

"The brother and mother here are so deeply afflicted, that I ask: What
does the noble-hearted bridegroom suffer, but so lately a bridegroom?

"I am astounded at the reverse. Two months back she was hanging over my
pillow weeping and kissing me as a dying man; now am I in youthful vigour,
and she is in her grave.

"What a meek and quiet spirit was she, active to laboriousness, though
refined in person. Affectionate she was, very dear to me also, but
unspeakable is the loss to others. This is the third wife taken from those
whom I desired as comrades: one died in Dublin, one in Bagdad, now one in
Ladak�a....

"No _blame_ against Mr. P. ought to be mixed with sympathy for this
melancholy event. His wife's brother, on medical grounds, saw no objection
to the journey.... Few English ladies are in body so well adapted as she
was to bear the inconveniences, the long weariness, or the dangerous
exposures of Turkish travel."

At last the time was come for the journey to Bagdad. Francis Newman and
his friends went with their own horses, and with European saddles and
stirrups.

"The native broad travelling saddle overlaps the animal's sides like a
table, and tilts both ways. To get up at the side without help is a feat
almost impossible. Many a time Mr. Parnell got off to search after some
article of food or convenience for old Mrs. Cronin. To get up again, his
most successful way was to make a run from behind and _divaricate_ on to
the horse's tail, like a boy playing at leap-frog; but the beast was
always frightened, and bolted before he was well on. You will imagine the
rest!... but we were all equally ludicrous, and indeed it is quite a
serious inconvenience."

The next entry mentions the return of Mr. Parnell. He told them that Mr.
Hamilton seemed absolutely unable to learn a foreign language, and this
undermined his spirits and health, and made him a depressing companion.

On 25th April Newman and his friends started from Aleppo. They had not
anticipated such serious difficulties as befell them during this journey.
In the first place, they were not aware of the habits of the camel (at all
events, his habits in the spring of the year). They found to their
consternation that they work from two or three in the morning and travel
till ten. Many people, not natives, had assured them that camels never
travel by night, so they were the more unprepared for this unwelcome fact.
The night travelling might not have mattered for younger people, but on
old Mrs. Cronin the discomfort fell heavily. She had to be "forced out of
her bed at one o'clock in the midst of the sharp cold of the night, and
then have to ride when she ought to sleep. The effect of it on her (for
she did not sleep by day) frightened us so much that at last we bought the
drivers over to our hours.... The caravanserai at Aintab is so
disagreeable a place for Mrs. Cronin that we enquired for a private house,
and... we have hired one at the absurd price of three-halfpence sterling!
It has a large grassy yard, very convenient for our horses, We have now
only four, with the ass...."

However, they were not long at Aintab, for they were summoned before the
Governor and accused of selling four Turkish Testaments. Then, being
unable to deny having done so, the Governor said, "You must leave Aintab
immediately." He provided camels, and they had perforce to go, as they had
been so dictatorially bidden. But this was not all. A mob of fanatics
beset them, followed them out into the country, and then pelted them with
stones--first with small ones, but later with bigger ones, which could
easily have stunned anyone who was hit by them. Presently a man galloped
up and tried to seize Newman's horse's bridle, but he beat him off with an
umbrella. Some of the crowd called out that the Governor had ordered them
to be killed.

By the time Newman returned to his party Mr. Cronin was lying on the
ground, and his mother declared that her son was dying. He had been set
upon by men who had come to attack them, and beaten with fists, clubs, and
stones. They tried their best to kill him. However, to Newman's intense
surprise he was not hurt inwardly, only weak from exhaustion and pain.
This was an almost unhoped-for comfort, and it was even found that he
could continue his journey before evening. By this time the crowd had
entirely dispersed, for an official had been sent by the Governor, and
eventually he was able to quiet the people and send them off. Many of the
travellers' possessions were lost, many stolen, but, at any rate, though
discomforts and dangers undreamt of had been theirs, at least they were
none of them seriously hurt; and that in itself was a thing for which they
felt infinitely thankful. At last the Euphrates was reached.

"We saw it first in splendid contrast to a chalk desert, the most odious
place through which I have travelled. We had soft chalk crumbling under
foot, into which the beasts sank over their fetlocks or deeper.... When we
surmounted the last chalk hills the green valley of the Euphrates burst
upon us.

"It runs in a lowland excavation, bounded by opposite lines of high
hills.... This valley was rich in the extreme, with trees scattered in it
like England; but the sides of the hills were well wooded.... The river is
very turbid, as if with white clay; it is unnaturally sweet, does not
taste gritty, and is painfully cold. We presume this is from the melting
of snow water.... The river is deep, rapid, smooth, and (I judge) as broad
as the Thames at Blackfriars...."

He thus describes the raft they were having made to take them down the
river to Bagdad:--"Rough branches of trees of most irregular shape and
quite small are strung together crosswise by ties of rope, and under them
are fastened a sort of flooring of goat-skins blown up like bladders....
On these is fixed a deck of planks. These rafts carry enormous weights and
draw very little water."

In the _Memoir of Lord Congleton_ the end of this journey is thus told:--
"They reached Bagdad on 27th June, and were met by Mr. Groves, who had for
so many months been anxiously waiting for their arrival, after sufferings
neither few nor light on both sides. It is hard to realize what such a
meeting would be after two such years of toil and suffering as the past
had been."


SECOND PART--BAGDAD

No sooner had the missionary party at length settled down at Bagdad than
more trouble fell upon them. Mrs. Cronin, who had suffered almost more
from the troubles, discomforts, and dangers of the journey than perhaps
her friends guessed, grew worse and worse. She told Mr. Groves "that she
was come hither to die," and it proved to be true; for only a few days
after her arrival she died, to the deep distress of her son. So already,
besides the unceasing discomforts, dangers, and disasters which had
befallen the missionaries, there had been the cost of these three lives--
Lord Congleton's wife, Mrs. Groves, and now old Mrs. Cronin, worn out by
the terrible weariness of their journeyings under such rough conditions.

There is one thing which has struck me very forcibly as regards Frank
Newman's _Personal Narrative_, and it is this: Throughout the whole book
there is no mention of actual missionary work--the aim and object of this
journey into Syria. There are, it is true, allusions to their own private
prayer-meetings (of course they were hardly what one generally understands
by the word "private," but still they could not be termed public) and to
the distribution of New Testaments, but no actual _teaching_ is mentioned.
Nor does Newman write his own views on the subject. The diary-letters are
chiefly filled with descriptions of the "perils of the way"--it is more or
less secular. To me this has always seemed strange, for there was no doubt
that he was, with the others, filled with a very real religious Christian
zeal _then_, although later his views unhappily underwent great change and
alteration, until a few years before his death, when his earlier faith was
restored. But this fact remains: but for one's own previous knowledge of
the aim of this journey, one would hardly recognize the _Narrative_ as a
missionary's diary at all.

In the _Memoir of Lord Congleton_ there is far more missionary spirit; but
still, even there, there is but very little detailed information as to
mission work. During their stay at Bagdad Lord Congleton and Mr. Groves
did indeed "develop plans for missionary work" which it was hoped would
soon prove successful. The former bought a large house in the midst of the
city for mission purposes. At first they thought of working among the
"Armenian and Roman Catholic Christian population," and also "among the
Jews," but they found the Mohammedans in Bagdad "peculiarly bigoted." And
they owned to themselves later that "Bagdad had proved a failure in a
missionary point of view." Mr. Groves, who wrote the _Memoir of Lord
Congleton_, indeed owns that, "To many who look at life superficially,
these years may seem lost; but He who often leads us 'about' (Deut. xxxii.
10) ... has purposes of which neither the one led, and still less the
lookers-on, have any conception.... Thus to some these years of toil and
sorrow _will_ appear a mistake."

It is impossible to doubt the earnest faith and missionary zeal of these
few who had come out to "do the Lord's work" in the East. But to many
Churchmen it will be difficult to reconcile the words of Mr. Groves, that
"the Coming of Christ, the powers of the Holy Ghost, were truths being
brought before the _Church of God_" when it is remembered that they had
practically severed themselves from the _visible_ body of Christ's Church
on earth, and were themselves (without Divine authority as delivered once
to the Apostles) celebrating each Sunday in their house the Lord's Supper.

Constant mention is made in the _Memoir_ of the open persecution which the
mission party suffered in Bagdad, and of "the impossibility of access to
the people." There were a few converts to Christianity made, but only a
few; and the disappointments were many and grievous.

Then, too, their party was lessened by the departure of Frank Newman and
Mr. Kitto for England. No reason is to be traced for this decision of
Newman's, and it is not easy to understand what it could have been. It
happened during the spring months of the year 1833, and shortly after his
second proposal to Maria Rosina Giberne and her second refusal. He had
written begging her come out to Bagdad, marry him, and work with them
there. No doubt her refusal was a bitter disappointment to him, and
possibly he wished to go back to England (he said in his diary he did not
know how long he might stay there), and try if he could not persuade her
personally. But if he thought this, he was again disappointed, for his
meeting with her (as I see from some papers written by my aunt and kindly
supplied me from the Oratory, Birmingham), was of no more avail than
before. She mentions having met him shortly after his return, and it is
evident that it was a meeting not devoid of awkwardness on her part and
disappointment on his.

To go back to the letters from Bagdad, after this digression, Newman gives
a very graphic account of the rafts used for travelling on the river from
Moosul.

[Illustrations: PERSIAN LADY AND PERSIAN SMOKING
DATE, 1827
FROM PERSIA IN "MODERN TRAVELLER" SERIES
BY JOSIAH CONDER (pub. 1830)]

"The rafts used for descending the river consist of a rude deck fastened
to a flooring of blown-up goatskins.... They are used for swimming
bladders as in the ancient world. They serve for barrels to carry
water.... The skins are also used in the bazaars ... for butter, treacle,
honey, etc.... The raft is not rowed, except barely to keep it in the
stream. It keeps twisting round and round, like a stone in the air;... but
... you have all the freshness and life of a vast streaming river and all
the tranquillity of a mere pond.... One day, a man who wished to go down
the river on our raft swam to us on a goatskin.... As a Thames wherry to a
Thames steamer, so is a goatskin to a raft.... It has no prow nor
stern.... If driven ashore it may burst many of the skins, some of which
indeed from time to time need to be blown and tied afresh.... The oars are
enormous, as in English barges. In our small raft two men at a time
rowed.... I cannot tell you now of Mr. Groves's plans. I have a great deal
to learn. The political state of this city, from within and without, is
the very reverse of satisfactory." Then there follows a sentence which
seems to imply that Mr. Groves was expecting too much from his "_monthly_
visits" to the Arabs in the way of moral results. Also there follows a
delightful account of the native doctor's methods of dealing with his
patients. He "contracts to _cure_ the patient ... for a definite sum,
which is paid to him at once. If the patient thinks the price too high,
the doctor lets him get worse; and when he applies anew, of course raises
his demand. Nothing can be recovered if not paid down. Mr. Cronin" (the
doctor travelling with them), "with all his practice at Aleppo, got fees
only once or twice the whole time. He and Groves both despair of it here."

English patients when they use to their doctor the familiar phrase, "I put
myself entirely in your hands," little think how completely and
practically this was understood by these Bagdad doctors, who considered
that a dollar in the hand is worth two promised _after_ treatment of a
case, and who, when they once had patients "in their hands," held them
tight!

It is clear, I think, from the following entry that Newman did not approve
thoroughly of Mr. Groves's methods of learning Arabic, any more than he
seems to do of his "monthly visits" to the Arabs. He says that a friend of
theirs, who had recently joined them, had studied Arabic and Persian
twenty-eight years, and is an accomplished Orientalist, yet he "ridicules
English notions of learning." Our religion, poetry, philosophy, science,
are so opposed to everything here "that, he says, nothing but long time in
the country can make an Englishman intelligible on religious subjects." To
confirm this theory that a perfect knowledge of the language of the people
to be taught is an absolute essential in a missionary--it is known, for an
absolute fact, that missionaries have been eight years in India preaching
until even they became convinced that sometimes they gave a totally wrong
impression of what they were trying to teach to the natives, and therefore
gave up all further efforts at teaching until they had learnt the language
more _thoroughly_, and had it at their finger's--or, to speak more
correctly, tongue's--end.

Eventually Mr. Groves came to the conclusion that for a long time to come
"the wisest method" was to "avoid controversy with the Moslems." He formed
schools not on the ground of "attending to the rising generation," but to
aid him in the language ... give him opportunities of "trying his wings
(as he calls it) against Christian errors, and exciting the attention of
Moslems. Indeed, several (chiefly Persians) have come privately and begged
New Testaments to send to their friends in Persia. At present I conceive
he has nearly the whole Christian population here in his hands." And
later, "Groves has not at all disappointed me, do not think that from
anything I have written. He is what I expected from his book, and a great
deal more. He has a practical organizing directing energy which fits him
to be the centre of many persons, especially since it is combined with
entire unselfishness and a total absence of personal ambition or _desire_
to take the lead which he does take. He is very sanguine.... I am apt to
be sadly faithless, and to see nothing but difficulties."

Perhaps his lack of conviction that this effort at missionary work _could_
make its way in spite of so many great difficulties, as well as his own
bad health (he states that he had not had a single day of real health
since they have been at Bagdad), had something to do with his decision to
return to England.

In August, 1832, Newman had a big class of boys every afternoon to whom he
taught English and Geography; he mentions that "into the latter" he puts
"a vast miscellany, physical, political, historical," from his knowledge
and power of talk.

On 18th Sept., 1833, he left Bagdad. There is no entry in his diary
between this and the last one in August, 1832, four months earlier. No
word of his parting with his friends; no word of his reluctance to give up
his missionary work.

But there is, I think, a good deal more in these words written on 18th
September than meets the eye:--

"I am on my way to England for reasons partly personal" (I think this
hints at a hope not altogether dead, which had been his close companion
through his two years of absence), "partly connected with the interests of
my Bagdad friends, _and my imagination is in England_."

In his journey through Teheraun and thence to Tabreez, he passed through
the celebrated rock of Besittoun. The sculptures there are said to
represent the conquest of Darius Hystaspis.

"Our caravan did not go close enough to see the sculptures; we were
probably half a mile off, but the muleteers were careful to point to them
and talk of them. So too in going from Babylonia into Media by the ancient
pass of Zagros, they were eager to draw my attention to the sculptures in
lofty, apparently inaccessible rocks. 'Your uncle made those,' said a
muleteer. At first I did not understand, but I found he meant by my uncle
some infidel. No true believer, he said, could have done it.... The pass
must be very ancient, and it is by far the noblest work I have seen in
Asia."

The next letter is from Constantinople, 9th April, 1833.

"I am on my way to England, but do not know how long I may stay there." In
his journey from Erzeroom to Scutari, he says he "became a mere animal";
he could only think of his horse's feet and his horse's footing. He never
felt secure, for this reason: that the Tartar's horse, behind whom he
rode, in the "ladder road" [Footnote: A "ladder road" is made by the
horses all following each other in one track, and each trying to step in
the steps made by the first horse.] beside the precipices, through the
snow, "fell eleven times with him," and more than once fell over him.
Frank Newman says his fear of falling prevented him from being able to
admire the scenery, when, as often, it was grand and striking. "The Tartar
starts at a fast walk, gets gradually into a shuffle, and studies the pace
and power of all the beasts; at last he takes a sharp trot, but slackens
before any of them lose breath. His great problem is, that the _weakest_
horse of the set (who really sets the pace) shall come in well at last....
I never imagined I could have gained a power of sleeping for an hour, or
two hours, and at last even for ten minutes ... in our last week, in which
I had no regular night sleep. He" (the Tartar) "could not sleep, for he
had two horses carrying gold ... but he dozed famously while on horseback.
Dr. Kidd used to tell us that the wrist, the eyelid, and the nape of the
neck went to sleep before the brain--a charitable excuse for one who drops
a Prayer Book in church from drowsiness. I wish I could get Dr. Kidd to
tell me whether the knee does not (at least by habit) remain awake after
the brain is asleep, for I never saw the Tartar loose in the saddle even
when he was all nidnodding." Then comes again the suggestion of the doubt
which beset Newman that the way in which his mission party at Bagdad, and
some Church Missionary workers at Constantinople laboured, was not a way
which could long endure. That difficulties in the future inevitably must
come as lions in the path. "Constantinople itself looks to me like mere
card-houses--bright blue and bright red; and they are not much better. By
being perched up so steep, they force themselves on the eye.... Perhaps I
am out of humour: Constantinople is so dreadfully dear to one who comes
from Asia (I pay ten piastres, or half-a-crown, for my mere bed--full
London price). It is also very chilly and raw.... Yet I do enjoy the bed
_with sheets_, it is an inexpressible luxury. How I have longed for it,
but in vain, when suffering fever, to be able really to undress! But I
must not write of such matters, nor of more serious ones that distract my
judgment and distress me.

"I have seen the American Missionaries here. He" (Mr. Goodall) "gives
himself entirely to promote the _self-reform_ of the Armenian Church. This
fundamentally agrees with what Mr. Hartley, of the Church Missionary
Society, told me was the Society's proceeding against the Greek Church....
It also agrees with Groves's plan at Bagdad. I cannot censure it: I must
approve it: yet I have a painful belief that it cannot long go on in the
friendly way they all design.... This zeal of the Americans for Turkish
Christianity is a new and striking phenomenon."

The last entry in the _Personal Narrative_ occurs on 14th April, 1833,
before Newman had left Constantinople. Very shortly after he departed, and
not very long after, all his connection with this two years and a half
missionary journey was a thing of the past.

It had been more or less a failure as far as regards outward consequences.
Of that there seems no doubt. But there is also no doubt that it made its
mark in spiritual matters in the minds of many. No doubt that it altered
for some their spiritual landmarks and rubicons. No doubt that the subject
of this memoir came home seeing religion from a different standpoint.

Archdeacon Wilberforce reminds us in one of his sermons, preached at
Westminster Abbey, that the astronomers who built the pyramids of the Nile
pierced a slanting shaft through the larger pyramid, which pointed direct
to the pole-star. Then, if you "gazed heavenward through the shaft into
the Eastern night, the pole-star alone would have met your gaze. It was in
the ages of the past; it was when the Southern Cross was visible from the
British Isles. Slowly, imperceptibly, the orientation of the planet has
changed. Did you now look up into the midnight sky through the shaft in
the Great Pyramid, you would not see the pole-star. New, brilliant space-
worlds would shine down on you. But the heavens have not altered, and the
shaft of the pyramid is not lying, or unorthodox. A new view of the
heavens has quietly come, for the earth's axis has changed its place."

Very slowly too, sometimes, the axis of a personality changes its place.
It may be that an entirely new point of view faces it. Some other view of
life "swims into its ken." The mental eye can no longer see through the
old means which served it in years gone by for lens. It is, as it were,
looking at a new place in life's sky: for a time it is quite unable to
reconcile its old ideas of religious astronomy with the new ones. What
then? The sky is the same; but there are many ways of looking at it; and
many spiritual atmospheres which cloud the outlook. Frank Newman could not
reconcile at this time, nor in those which were coming, his old
Calvinistic tendency of thought with new ideas which were forcing
themselves in upon him. At the very end of life he saw the star of
Christianity again, but this missionary journey which had just, for him,
terminated, seemed to be more or less the rubicon which divided him from
his old faith, and from the rationalism to which he drifted during the
years while he was at Manchester, and University College, London.




CHAPTER IV

HIS MARRIAGE: HIS MOTHER'S DEATH:
HIS CLASSICAL TUTORSHIP AT BRISTOL IN 1834


In Francis Newman's diary is this entry:--"On June 27th, my birthday, I
first saw Maria Kennaway at Escot." [Footnote: Escot, Ottery St. Mary, S.
Devon, now in the possession of the present Sir John Kennaway, M.P.]

Evidently the attraction between them was mutual, for the engagement
followed quickly, and they were married the same year.

Maria Kennaway was the daughter of the first Sir John Kennaway, who was
born at Exeter in 1758. In 1772 he sailed to India with his brother, the
late Richard Kennaway. In 1780 he received his captain's commission, and
in 1786 Marquis Cornwallis made him one of his aides-de-camp. I quote from
_New Monthly Magazine_ for 1836, which gave an account of some incidents
in the first Sir John Kennaway's life at the time of his death. [Footnote:
I am indebted for this account to the courtesy of the present Sir John
Kennaway.]

[Illustration: MARIA KENNAWAY
FRANCIS NEWMAN'S FIRST WIFE
From a miniature
PHOTO BY MESSRS. WEBSTER, CLAPHAM COMMON
BY KIND PERMISSION OF SIR JOHN KENNAWAY]

"In 1788 Lord Cornwallis sent him as envoy to the Court of Hyderabad to
demand from the Nizam the cession of ... Guntoor. In this mission he was
eminently successful, not only obtaining that which he came to demand, but
inducing the Nizam to enter into a treaty of offensive and defensive
alliance against Tippoo Sultan. For this service His Majesty was pleased
to create him a baronet (1791), and he received a mark of still further
approbation from the Court of Directors (East India Company) in a vote
which they passed to take out the patent of creation at the Company's
expense." Later, Sir John arranged a definite peace between the Nizam's
Commissioner and the Mahrattas with those of Tippoo Sultan. From this time
forward Sir John remained as Resident at the Court of the Nizam. But as
his health had suffered greatly from the Indian climate, he came back to
England in 1794, and the East India Company voted him "the unusual grant
of a pension of �500 per annum" on his retirement from official duties.

Soon after his return to England he met and married Charlotte Amyatt, and
went to live at Escot, Ottery St. Mary. Here their family of twelve
children was reared. Sir John, though his official life was over, yet
busied himself in many local matters. He acted as deputy-lieutenant and as
colonel-commandant of local militia and yeomanry. Then later, in advanced
age, there fell upon him a great trouble: he lost his sight entirely.
Curiously enough, his brother (who had served in the Civil Service of the
East India Company) suffered the same deprivation.

Everyone who remembers her describes Maria Kennaway, Sir John's daughter,
as possessing great beauty and attraction. She had hitherto spent her
girlhood in the daily service of the poor around her home. She and her
sisters started village schools in the neighbourhood, and taught the
children constantly the religious duties in which they themselves had
grown up.

Maria Kennaway--a Plymouth Sister as regards her religious profession--was
a girl of deep and earnest faith. After her marriage to Francis Newman, it
became a real grief to her to find that he was drifting further and
further away towards agnosticism. Loving him devotedly as she did, her
constant prayer was that he might return to his former faith: that the
"cloud," as she called it, which was over him might be dispersed, and that
he should believe as she did.

Like Moses, she never in this life saw her "Promised Land" (she never
doubted that he would _die_ in faith), for when she died in July, 1876
(devotedly nursed by her husband), she knew that _he_ thought, as he bent
over her at the end, that it was probably a _last_ farewell for both.

I give here, as it seems an appropriate place, Newman's letter (to Dr.
Nicholson) on his wife's death:--


"15 Arundel Crescent,
"Weston-super-Mare,
"_21st July_, 1876.

"My dear Nicholson,

"For more than forty years I have been in possession of a heart that loved
me ardently: that happiness is no more. But I kept my treasure ten years
longer than I had any reason to expect. Yesterday we committed my beloved
to the grave....

"I saw her declining in strength through failure of appetite, but ever
hoped for finer weather and change of air to restore her. But the fine
weather came too late to restore her. From want of blood her heart became
fatally weak, and she died just as her brother did, the late Sir John
Kennaway, through failure of the heart and consequent mortification of the
feet. I now believe that local death began on the night of the 5th. Her
sufferings in the feet were great, and we could do nothing to allay them.
Her breathlessness (also from weakness of the heart) we could aid by
fanning. She knew she could not recover, and only prayed for 'release.'
Her prayer was granted early on Sunday morning, 16th July.

"Of course I feel very desolate, and to live quite alone in declining
years [Footnote: Some few years later he married his first wife's devoted
friend and companion who had lived with them for eleven years, and who
took the greatest care of Newman till he died in 1897.] seems unnatural
and unhealthful; but I cannot form any decisions at present. I am
conscious of excellent health and unbroken strength, and after forty years
of happy love should be very ungrateful to repine.

"By God's help I mean to be cheerful and active....

"I am, your affectionate friend,

"F. W. Newman."


This is the epitaph Newman had placed over his wife's grave:--


"With no superiority of intellect, yet by the force of love, by sweet
piety, by tender compassion, by coming down to the lowly, by unselfishness
and simplicity of life, by a constant sense of God's Presence, by devout
exercises, private and social, she achieved much of Christian saintliness
and much of human happiness.

"She has left a large void in her husband's heart.

"Obiit, _16th July_, 1876."


Newman always spoke of his wife as "the most affectionate and tender-
hearted of mortals." There was always a very great affection between them.
His letters all show this. Their married life was a long intercourse of
happiness, _un_-"chequered by disputes." [Footnote: "Marriage is one long
conversation, chequered by disputes."--R. L. Stevenson.] Still, there was
not (as is shown, I think, in many ways) strong community of interests.
For in all Newman's laborious philological studies--his learned lectures,
articles, and researches, scriptural and literary, his speculations in the
realms of deep thought--she was to all intents and purposes practically
outside his mental door. She was never greatly inclined to join in the
society of his learned friends; but this was more from a sense of modesty,
because she was afraid of not being in sympathy with them; because she
thought that she was not clever enough.

She had the greatest admiration for her husband. It is easy, of course, to
understand that when Frank Newman came back from his missionary journey he
was just the sort of young man who would take a girl's fancy. It was a
thing not to be surprised at that she fell in love with him. She was
keenly interested in home missionary work among the poor villagers of her
own home. She knew that he had come through great dangers in his journey
to the Holy Land as a missionary. He had not then definitely cast aside
his old beliefs--that was to come later; _now_ he was on the brink of it,
and he was alone on this inward, personal brink. _She_ would not yet be
aware of it. Very probably he seemed a hero in her eyes, because of all
the dangers he had braved to preach the Gospel, and because he was one of
the most intellectual men of his day: had taken high honours at Oxford,
and had given them up for the sake of what he believed to be right.

In the beautiful little Devonshire town of Ottery St. Mary, very possibly
he was the greatest man who had come across her life's path. He very
evidently cared for her; the inevitable next thing seemed to be to care
for him. At that time his name was in everybody's mouth. Miss Frere wrote,
in 1833, that "the brother of Mr. Newman (John Henry Newman) is a young
man of great promise, who has left the fairest prospect of advancement in
England to go as a missionary to Persia."

At any rate, Destiny had brought them together, and they were married.

As a woman said once to me, "There is no choosing in love"--once the
_meeting_ has happened, all free choice is at an end.

Mrs. Francis Newman was not very strong, and later in life developed
greater delicacy. It will be remembered that Newman's mother and sisters
were living at Oxford at this time, and he was anxious some time later to
bring his bride to see them. Unfortunately she fell ill, and the treatment
given for her illness proved quite a mistaken one; consequently her
recovery was much slower than it need otherwise have been. The journey
was, besides, a tiring one for her in her state of health. They had to go
from Bristol to Oxford, for by this time Newman was settled at Bristol
College as classical tutor. He had previously been tutor in Dublin for a
short time.

In 1836 Francis Newman went through the ceremony of Baptism at a chapel in
Bristol. I say advisedly, "went through the ceremony," for I believe both
he and his brother had received the rite in early childhood, when their
father was alive.

Mr. George Hare Leonard, University College, Bristol, has kindly sent me
some information as regards Francis Newman's work at Bristol, as also has
Mr. Norris Mathews, the City Librarian of the Municipal Public Libraries
there.

From them I learn that the college at which Newman was classical tutor
was, not "Queen's," as has once or twice been asserted, but Bristol
College. It was founded in 1831, and only existed ten years. Mr. Hare
Leonard tells me that it was held in a large house in Park Row, and that
it had some very distinguished pupils, Sir Edward Fry, the late Sir George
Gabriel Stokes, [Footnote: Sir George Gabriel Stokes, Lucasian Professor
of Mathematics at Cambridge since 1849, and Fellow and President of
Pembroke College, Cambridge, was born in 1819; senior wrangler, 1841.
President of Royal Society 1885. Contributed many mathematical papers and
lectures to the Royal Society and other societies at Cambridge University,
Aberdeen, Edinburgh, etc.] and Walter Bagehot being amongst them.

At this time Newman was a member of the historic Baptist chapel at
Broadmead. I think it must have been in this chapel, indeed, that he was
re-baptized (as I mentioned a little earlier), and some of the
congregation anticipated his becoming one of the sect of Plymouth
Brethren.

Perhaps it is not generally known that Bristol College undertook to give
religious instruction on Church of England lines to those boys whose
parents wished it (I quote now from Mr. George Hare Leonard's letter to
me): "This was not obligatory upon all, and there was a fierce attack on
the college by certain of the clergy, and Bishop Gray was hostile. In
1841, under the influence of Monk (Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol),
Bishop's College was founded close by, and the older and more liberal
college was unable to stand the competition, and came to an end."

I quote here [Footnote: By the kindness of Miss Humphrey, Lensfield,
Cambridge, who gave me this extract from a memoir of her father.] an
account of the school life of the Vicar of St. Mary Redclyffe, Bristol:--

"In 1835 he went to Bristol College, a school that no longer exists, of
which Dr. Jerrard, his brother William's friend and a mathematician of
some note, was principal.... He remained for two years at Bristol College,
and considered that when there he owed much to the teaching of Francis
Newman, brother of the Cardinal, a man of charming character and great
attainments (afterwards made manifest in many ways), who was then lecturer
in elementary mathematics, and subsequently corresponded with him" (the
Vicar of St. Mary Redclyffe) "on mathematical subjects when both had
become famous."

This all seems to point, I think, to the fact that Bristol College had
certainly a distinguished roll of names in its short ten years' record.

1836 was the year of Mrs. Newman's death--Francis Newman's mother. His
wife was so alarmingly ill that he was not able to be present at his
mother's funeral; and so the last time he saw her alive was on the
occasion when he brought his bride to introduce to her at Oxford.

Miss Mozley says of his mother: "She was a woman content to live, as it
were, in the retirement of her thoughts. She had an influence, though not
a conspicuous one, on all about her. The trials of life had given a weight
to her judgment, and her remarkable composure and serenity of temper and
manner had its peculiar power. Under this gentle manner was a strong will
which could not be moved when her sense of duty dictated self-sacrifice."

A month after her death Cardinal Newman had written: [Footnote: _Letters
of John Henry Newman_, Anne Mozley.] "Of late years my mother has much
misunderstood my religious views, and considered she differed from me;
[Footnote: As of course she did.] and she thought I was surrounded by
admirers, and had everything my own way; and in consequence I, who am
conscious to myself I never thought anything more precious than her
sympathy and praise, had none of it." He goes on to say: "I think God
intends me to be lonely.... I think I am very cold and reserved to people,
but I cannot ever realize to myself that any one loves me."

Those who have read Miss Mozley's _Life of John Henry Newman_ will
remember how passionately devoted to her two sons Mrs. Newman was. Once or
twice she said that though "Frank was adamant" when she had wished to get
closer in touch with his interests and sympathies when he was quite a
young man, yet she was always _quite_ in sympathy with her eldest son.

Probably as time went on and she saw the latter drifting ever further and
further into religious views with which she had never been conversant,
insensibly to herself, her manner changed when he spoke to her of how
gradually the whole scope of his religion was widening and developing in a
direction in which she felt it impossible for herself to follow him.

One wonders if she had had any knowledge of the growing agnosticism of her
other son, but probably this was unlikely.

[Illustration: DR. MARTINEAU
FROM THE PAINTING BY A. E. ELMSLIE]




CHAPTER V

FRIENDSHIP WITH DR. MARTINEAU


In the year 1840 Francis Newman was made Classical Professor in Manchester
New College. That same year saw Dr. Martineau appointed Professor of
Mental and Moral Philosophy at the same college. It will be remembered
that for thirty-seven years Manchester New College had been at York, and
had now but just returned to its name-place.

Here then began the friendship which lasted unbroken until death.

Both men were keen searchers--each in his own way--after religious truth.
For both it was a subject that practically affected their whole lives. But
while in Martineau the result was a deep theology which found its
satisfaction in the fold of Unitarianism, in Newman dogma of any sort was
practically an unknown quantity. He drifted further and further from
revealed religion, until many of his letters and writings became to the
Christian minds of some who read them exceedingly painful. It is true that
before he died Mr. Temperley Grey, the minister who attended him in his
last illness, declared that there was a return to his original faith, but
still nothing can alter the effect of the written word, and there is a
passage in one of Newman's own letters which illustrates this fact very
clearly. "It is a sad thing to have printed erroneous fact. I have three
or four times contradicted and renounced a passage ... _but I cannot reach
those whom I have misled_." In those last nine words there is a world of
unexpressed regret--regret which no after endeavour can eradicate. Both
spoken and written words go to far mental ports, and very often-from being
out of our ken--unreachable ones for us. No later contradiction can reach
them and undo the once-made impression.

Martineau and Newman were not of one mind in the matter of religion. The
letters which passed between them show that; but they show, too, that no
dispute separated them. If for a time some painful passage in a letter of
Newman's troubled his friend, the matter was dealt with with
straightforward candour and unfailing forbearance and gentleness. There
were no harsh words between them. Both of them were naturally, innately
sweet and kindly in disposition. Even in matters of dispute which
concerned that subject which occupied so large a part in both their minds,
difference of opinion could not "separate very friends."

It will be remembered that the year before the regular correspondence
between the two began, Martineau had written a paper criticizing Newman's
_Phases of Faith_.

Before giving Newman's letters, perhaps a few words on Martineau himself
would not be out of place here. He came of an old Huguenot family. Mr.
Jackson, from whose biography of him I am quoting, says that Gaston
Martineau, who, tradition tells us, was a surgeon of Dieppe, came to
England after the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685, and that
though first he went to London to live, yet that eventually he settled
down at Norwich, and here all his children were born. The youngest of them
became the father of James Martineau, the theologian. He was born in the
same year as Francis Newman, and died just seven years before he did.

In the bringing up and early training of both men there was a large
element of Puritanism. Many of the most severe Calvinistic doctrines held
sway in Newman's home life, and even if the atmosphere was a little less
thickly charged with religious thunderclouds in the early environment of
Martineau, yet certainly, from all accounts, Sunday was pre-eminently a
day that "hid its real meaning and brightness behind a frowning face." I
cannot help quoting here a story which a little reveals the sort of
religious atmosphere which brooded over the day and the point of view
brought to bear on it by James Martineau's mother when he was a boy. The
mother had gone to church one Sunday evening, and left word in her little
home circle that they were to read the Bible.

When she came back she put the probing question to James: "What had he
read?" His answer was: "Isaiah." She at once replied that he couldn't have
read the whole; and he answered promptly, "Yes, mother, I have, skipping
the nonsense."

From eight years old to fourteen James Martineau went, as a day scholar,
to Norwich Grammar School. After school life he came to the conclusion
that he wished to give his life to the ministry, and as, of course, the
English universities were not open to anyone who refused to sign the
Thirty-nine Articles, he was sent to Manchester College. Here it became
evident to everybody that he was a student who would let nothing interfere
with his work. His masters were struck by his accurate habits of mind and
great perseverance in research.

In 1835 his ministry in Liverpool, as pastor in Paradise Street Chapel,
began, and to his work here was joined his work at Manchester New College,
which, as I mentioned before, began in 1840, the same year as Newman's own
connection with the college. But when, in 1853, the college was
transplanted to London, for four years Martineau continued to live as a
minister in Liverpool, and yet he kept up his classes at the college (six
hours by train from Liverpool).

In 1857 he was asked to come and live in town and devote his whole time to
his college work, and this he agreed to do. There were not then many
students, but among them were names which after years were destined to
make famous, and among these were Alexander Gordon, Estlin Carpenter, and
Philip Wicksteed.

In 1858 he was appointed minister to Little Portland Street Chapel.
Formerly the congregation belonging to the chapel were rigid, unbending
Unitarians. With the advent of Martineau began the newer, broader views of
Unitarianism. Throughout the years which now were to be passed in London,
Dr. Martineau's labours were unceasing as scholar, thinker, and
theologian. It is said that, though he wrote and taught so much, yet he
never let his reading be interfered with; he was always adding to his
stores of knowledge. For fifty years he was recognized as one of the most
profound thinkers of his day, as well as one of the finest writers.

The first letter from Francis Newman to Martineau, from which I quote, is
dated December, 1850, from Brighton:--


_Dr. Martineau from Newman._

"I seem to be out of joint with you in the two highest interests of man--
Religion and Politics ... I am ... become a Republican by principle, for
the continent Jefferson always held that constitutional monarchy was a
simple impossibility in a large continental country where great armies
were kept up; and I think the history of a millennium in Europe
demonstrates it. All royalties were in their origin constitutional; but in
the long run no dynasty ever resisted the temptation to overthrow the
barriers which fenced it in. _Our_ liberties seem to me rightly ascribed
to the fact that we are insular, and need only a _navy_ for protection.
Sweden for the same reason is able to retain its liberties.... I think
that in the order of Providence, royal power has served the purpose of
uniting nations in larger masses than would else have held together.

"Where it has done this without destroying municipal organization it is
clearly good in its result--as in Great Britain, Sweden, Germany; ... but
having served this function, it seems to me that Royalty (unless it could
again become elective) has done its work, and ought not to be
regretted.... On doctrinaire grounds, either to unsettle it where it works
well, or to desire to enforce it where it has violated its pledges and
forfeited all claims to love and devotion, seems to me a mistake similar
in kind.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Must not a time of weakness come when Austria is bankrupt--when an
Emperor of Russia is a dotard or a child, when provinces of Russia become
disaffected, or an army mutinies; or again, when France and Austria
seriously fall out?... You see I am dosing you with some of my most
pungent stuff, in proof that I trust your strength of stomach ...

"Your affectionate friend,

"FRANCIS W. NEWMAN."


In the letter which follows, Newman touches on two well-known
personalities of his day--Frederica Bremer and Charles Kingsley. He
mentions the fact of his having been engaged to meet Kossuth as the reason
why the first attempt to meet Miss Bremer was unsuccessful. It will be
remembered that Miss Bremer came to England in order to collect material
for her _Life in the Old World_. (This year was also the date of Kossuth's
first visit to our shores.) Miss Bremer was Swedish by descent, but
Finnish by birth, for she was born in Finland in the year 1801.

As regards Kingsley, in 1850 he had published tracts on "Christian
Socialism." _Alton Locke_ had already come out and met with scorn on the
part of the Press, though working men--who recognized Kingsley as their
truest friend--welcomed it gladly. In 1851--a year of great trouble and
distress all over England--he thought out plans to drain parts of Eversley
(his parish), for there had been many cases of fever there, and Kingsley
was pre-eminently a _practical_ Christian. He was also far ahead of his
time (as all great men invariably are), and he saw clearly how inseparably
close in this present world is the connection between physical matters and
spiritual. He recognized that if a man is _living_ in unsanitary
conditions, it affects in a very real though inexplicable way his
spiritual life. He could trace the connection in a parishioner's life
history between bad drainage and drunkenness: later on--though it might
perhaps be very much later on--a "bee-in-the-bonnet" of his child: and he
saw in this unhappy, unfortunate Little Result the outcome of someone's
sinful failure in his duty to his neighbour in years gone by, when the
first insanitary conditions were allowed to live and be mighty.

In some senses drainage, therefore, has a decided effect upon the
spiritual life of men and women. Everyone probably will remember Dr.
Nettleship's resolute assertion, that "even a stomach-ache could be a
spiritual experience."

And so Kingsley pushed forward the drainage improvements in his parish,
and considered it, what in very truth it was, a fitting subject for the
energies of a parish priest, at work night and day for the betterment of
the souls and bodies of his parishioners.

I cannot avoid quoting here Francis Newman's own strongly expressed views
on drainage of the land:--

"Now, the drains being out of sight, it is morally certain that defects
will exist, or be caused by wear and tear, unseen. In one place evil
liquids and gases will percolate; in another evil accumulations will
putrefy. Instead of blending small portions of needful manure quickly with
small portions of earth that needs it, we secure in the drains a slow
putrefaction and a permanent source of pestilence; we relieve a town by
imposing a grave vexation and danger on the whole neighbourhood where its
drains have exit; we make the mouth of every tide river a harbour and
storehouse of pollution; and after thus wasting an agricultural treasure
we send across the Atlantic ships for a foul commerce in a material
destined to replace it....

"It was quite notorious forty years ago that the refuse of the animal was
the food of the vegetable, and ought to be saved for use, not wasted in
poisoning waters. How could well-informed men delude themselves into an
approval of this course? Only one explanation occurs: _they despaired of
returning to Nature_. They assumed that we must live by artifice, and they
entitled artifice 'Science.'"

I return now to the letter from Newman to Martineau:--


_Dr. Martineau from Francis Newman._

"Southampton, Wednesday,
"_8th Oct._ 1851.

"My dear Martineau,

"Your interesting letter was sent to me by Monday afternoon, and first
told me that Miss Bremer was in London, which I learned only by a pencil
note on the outside, '142 Strand.' That evening I was going to see my two
sisters--one returned from the Continent, and one come from Derby. And on
Tuesday morning I was engaged to come hither to meet Kossuth! So I fear I
have missed Miss Bremer. But, from to-day's news, I fear there is no
chance of K. arriving till next Monday or Tuesday; and I shall probably go
back to-morrow. I will _try_ to see Miss Bremer immediately, but am much
disappointed.

"I have had a little correspondence with Mr. Kingsley lately--rising out
of a recent lecture of his, the practical results and practical principles
of which gave me great pleasure. He says he has 'done his work' of
protesting and denouncing capitalists, and now hopes to give himself to
_construction_ and practical creation; and much as I fear some of his
generalizations, I hope great good from his purely excellent aims, and the
amount of aid he can command. He agrees most heartily with my denunciation
of large towns as the monster evil, and takes the matter up agriculturally
thus: _No country can be underfed while it returns to the soil what it
takes out of it_"--[The italics are my own. Is not this sentence of
infinite value to us to-day?]--"for, in the long run, the soil will always
give back as much as it receives. Every country impoverishes itself which
pours into the rivers and sea the animal refuse which ought to be restored
to the soil.

"No community can avoid this prodigality, unless its inhabitants live upon
the soil. Therefore towns ought not to exceed the size at which the whole
animal refuse can be economically saved and directly applied to
agriculture.

"To me it seems that every reason--moral, political, agricultural,
economical, sanitary--converge to this same conclusion; and I apply
_Delenda est Carthago_ to every city in Europe.

"On the subject of masters and servants, he says, 'Masters should be
considered "_infamous_" who hired servants by the day or week, and not by
the year; or who dismissed old servants without any other reason than to
lower wages; but such a thing, to be possible and effective, must be
_mutual_. The servant must have no power to leave a good master in order
to _raise_ his wages. But at present, while the servant is under no bonds
to the master, and _does not like to bind himself_, it seems to me quite
impossible to treat the masters as having any moral responsibility for the
servants more than for foreigners. When we buy tea, we cannot ask whether
the Chinese get a comfortable livelihood by selling it at that price.'
That is an extreme and clear case to which we approach in every commercial
transaction in proportion as the other party claims that the relation
shall be one of mere marketing....

"Ever yours affectionately,

"Francis W. Newman."


The next letter, which is dated September, 1851, and which was written
just after Newman's return from his Swiss tour, goes on with the same
subject as the last, and also touches on the evils of _suddenly_
introducing machinery; while it shows clearly that, in the long run,
better wages are gained for the worker by its means--"Machinery is in
every light the friend of the poor." He says very truly, "The first great
want of the workmen is better morality and more thriftiness, _not_ better
masters or higher wages." Putting quite aside the question of whether
"higher wages" are not needed by the workman, nothing can be truer at the
present time than this fact, brought thus before us by Newman. It _is_,
beyond all question, these faults which run through the bulk of the
labouring classes (as we term them)--lack of the true spirit of morality
and thriftiness.

It is difficult altogether to account for the reason why the lack of these
characteristics is so much to the fore to-day, or to think of the remedy
which shall reach and cure them. But that it is a presence in our midst is
a self-evident fact. No one who has travelled much in France (to name only
one other country), but is aware how vast is the gulf which divides the
ways of living of our own labouring classes and of those which obtain
across the water. There, thriftiness is the rule. They use a far simpler
diet, and one which the land supplies them with, and are content. There is
a far more healthy tone about them, even if it be a rough one, than there
is among our own poor. I am constantly in France myself (it is the country
of my own ancestors), and I have never failed to be struck by the absence
there, in the country, of the vice which disfigures so often the home life
of our villagers. You do not see there the sights that make the streets on
Saturday evening in England a degrading scene. When the French villager is
happy, he can be it without the aid of drunkenness. And as far as the
cultivation of the land is concerned--well, we need only look at home in
our "French Farming" schemes to-day and we shall find that when we want to
come "back to the land," to find out how much care and industry will bring
out of it, we have to send for a Frenchman to show us his country's
secrets of manuring the land, so that the soil becomes precious and will
yield, even from so small a space as a quarter of an acre, incalculable
riches in the way of marketable goods.

As regards what Newman says about the work_women_ of England, it is
impossible to agree with him. It is most assuredly not the case in
thousands of instances that "there are _no_ good workwomen out of work, or
earning low wages," nor that "those who cannot get good wages are women
who have _spent their prime in idleness_ ... and sew badly."

One has but to refer to the statistics with which the Christian Social
Union supplies us, as well as other societies, to have this idea quickly
negatived. Mrs. Carlyle's experiences and Mrs. Newman's were evidently
involuntarily misleading.

There was a certain impulsiveness in discussing many subjects to which
Newman seems to have been peculiarly subject. He was sometimes so led away
by it as to dogmatize inaccurately or over-forcibly.


_Dr. Martineau from Francis Newman._

"My dear Martineau,

"... In a day or two I am meditating a visit to Froude, who is in Wales,
and too much in solitude." [Froude was then preparing or writing his
_History of England_. It will be remembered that Cardinal Newman's
influence over him at college decided him later on taking Holy Orders, but
he never went beyond the diaconate.] "Gladstone's letters just now are a
powerful stimulus to public opinion.... Not the Socialists only, but
numbers of workmen besides treat it as _an abstract wickedness_ in a
master to offer lower wages than are at any particular time existing. They
have never any objection to a _rise_ of wages; so I cannot say they treat
the existing rate as a divinely appointed amount; but they do not see that
if they are unwilling to bind themselves not to strike for a rise, they
ought to concede in the master a moral right to lower.... What is to be
done with those who will go on enunciating and propagating dangerous
general maxims as abstract axiomatic truth?... _Your_ method of making the
masters determine how many _shall enter_ a trade will succeed; but I do
not see that it will succeed in ejecting. In the years of railroad
excitement the London newspapers were enormously overworked, and a great
increase no doubt took place in the numbers of printers (perhaps also in
their wages); now the printers for some time have been in comparative
depression.... I do not contend that _all_ lowering of wages by masters is
merciful and just, but that _some_ may be; whereas the Socialists and Co.
instantly declaim against _all_ or _any_ lowering, without entering into
any details as to present or past history of the trade. When I said that
machinery is in every light the friend of the poor, I do not think I
overlooked the occasional mischief caused by its _sudden_ introduction....
The effect of machinery is in the long run a steady rise of wages as well
as a cheap supply of goods: the advantage to the poor is universal and
permanent, the evil is partial and transitory. Moreover, the evil is
immensely aggravated by their perverseness. Three generations of hand-loom
weavers have been propagated in spite of the notorious misery it must
cause. Machinery does _not_ raise the rate of profits or interest; it
_does_ raise the rate of wages: compare Manchester and Buckingham in
proof.... I do not think I am _at all_ carried into reaction by unjust
attacks on capitalists, but I am very strongly by the [right or wrong]
belief that the first great want of the workmen is better morality and
more thriftiness, _not_ better masters or higher wages. I have not dared
to print half of what are my convictions on this head.... The sufferings
of the poor from bad air and bad water are quite a separate chapter. High
wages do little to cure this. Indeed, in Manchester the workmen habitually
prefer to save a shilling a week in house rent and spend it in beefsteaks,
when the shilling would have got them a healthy instead of an unhealthy
lodging. Bricklayers' wages are at present high in London; what is the
consequence? I have at present a bit of a dwarf wall building in my
garden. The men leave their work; I complain; the builder replies: 'Men
will not come to work on a Monday without much trouble.' I fear this
_means_ that they drink on Sunday and are very 'seedy' on Monday morning.
The very men who are excited by high wages to drinking and idleness will
make a violent outcry when a fall of wages takes place, and _moreover_
will get the ear and sympathies of Maurice and Co. for their outcry."


"Maurice and Co." of course refers to Frederick Denison Maurice, who was
the principal mover in the Christian Socialism of the day, as he was in
all social reforms. He had met with much abuse and opposition, but still
there were very many who called him "Master." Amongst these last was
Charles Kingsley, who had been one of his pupils, and who had been very
greatly influenced by his opinion in religion and social matters.
[Footnote: Kingsley (see memoir) said to Maurice, when opposition was
fiercest against him: "Your cause is mine. We swim in the same boat, and
stand or fall thenceforth together."] Neither man could bear the
narrowness of "parties" in religion. They always demanded more toleration,
broader views, and refused to be bound by narrow creeds. It was owing
chiefly to Coleridge that Maurice took Holy Orders. He was born in that
year of great men, 1805, and by 1851 his socialistic ideas were well known
to the world.


"As to the milliners and tailors, my wife has the same experience as Mrs.
Carlyle, that there are _no_ good workwomen out of work, or earning low
wages. Mrs. Wedgwood tells me that the Ladies' Committee could not get
women to make the shirts.... Those who cannot get good wages are women who
have _spent their prime in idleness_, and cannot work well enough to
satisfy ladies. They sew badly, and get a poor pittance from the shops. As
to tailors, I give more for a coat by four or five shillings than I did
twenty-five years ago.... Until our national morality is much improved,
and our moral organization repaired, there must be a large body of persons
without any trade, art, or connection who will throw themselves into what
seems to be the easiest art, and by their numbers will swamp it....

"Ever your affectionate

"Francis W. Newman."


It should be mentioned here that in 1853 Manchester New College was moved
to London, but that it was not until 1857, that Dr. Martineau went to live
in town, in order to devote his time chiefly to the important work which
devolved upon him in connection with it. This he continued to do until
1885. Newman had been appointed in 1846 to the chair of Latin in
University College, a post he held until 1863.

The next letter of this period, addressed to Martineau, gives one an
insight as to the effect of beauty of scenery upon Newman. He was far
removed from the ordinary point of the rapid traveller of to-day, who only
seems to want to cover great distances at rapid speed, and can therefore
have no conception at all of what we might call the "atmospheric
environment" of a place, which can only be felt by quiet moving, as Newman
expresses it, "from point to point," to "see how aspects and proportions
change."


_Dr. Martineau from Francis Newman._
"Grisedale Bridge,
"Patterdale, near Penrith,
"_31st July_ 1854.

"My dear Martineau,

"I have been faithless in not writing to you before now....

"We are more delighted than ever with Patterdale. Probably enough you know
the beauties of _your_ neighbourhood so well, and esteem them so highly,
that you turn as deaf an ear as I do to all praises of other parts. I have
so strong a sense of the inexhaustibility of beauty, that it aids me to
repress the restlessness which is kindled by other persons' praises of
what is unknown to me....

"Unless I had _my own_ carriage I get little pleasure from touring. What I
want is to stop at the beautiful places, and go from point to point and
see how aspects and proportions change; this in fact you seldom do well
except on foot and at leisure. The walks here are inexhaustible, for
persons who can carry with them their book or other occupation, and stay
out four or five hours; but you want reasonably dry weather, else indeed
the swampiness of the mountains greatly lessens the number of feasible or
pleasant walks, besides impairing the beauty.

"I only get a newspaper once a week, and in such a crisis feel hungry for
news as the week goes on." [The "crisis," of course, was the near approach
at this time of the beginning of those hostilities which were to end in
the Crimean war.] "Lest the Eastern question should flag in interest by
lingering, lo! the Spanish insurrection breaks on us. I do not yet dare to
hope European benefits from Spain: should such be the ultimate result, it
will be a striking illustration how incalculable is the _course_ of
events, while the general end is not very obscure.

"Mr. Charles Loring Brace, of America (who, you may know, was imprisoned
in Hungary), sent to me an introduction from Theodore Parker. It is highly
probable he had one to you....

"The post summons.

"Ever yours,
"F. W. N."


Harriet Martineau, sister of Dr. Martineau, was fifty-three years of age
when Newman wrote to her brother about her illness. Practically for the
whole of her life she had been more or less of an invalid. Even as a girl
she suffered so much from deafness and wretched health, that she was
hardly ever free from anxiety and depression. Nevertheless she did not let
her ill-health prevent her from earning her livelihood by writing. Before
she made her name by the publication of her stories on political economy,
she experienced endless difficulties in her efforts to get publishers for
her books. But no sooner had these stories appeared than her fame was
assured, and money came in, so to speak, by handfuls, so that all
financial troubles were altogether at an end.

From 1839 till 1844 she was so terribly out of health that no treatment
produced any effect, until someone suggested that mesmerism should be
tried, and this succeeded so well that she recovered a certain amount of
strength and was able to go on with her writing. Nevertheless, that it did
not wholly restore her health is evident from the fact that in 1855, when
Newman was writing to her brother, he mentions her "formidable fainting
fits" and daily pains in the head. "Her letter tells me," he says, "how
very bad she is, that every day she feels shot in the head"; but he goes
on to say that he does not despair of her better health because (as indeed
her numerous books testify), her "body is so subject to her mind." It is,
I think, necessary to remember that in 1844, when Miss Martineau tried
mesmerism as a cure for her continued ill-health, mesmerism was
practically taking its first steps in the English medical world. This
science of healing, which began to be recognized in England about the
middle of the eighteenth century, through the medium of the afterwards
discredited Mesmer, has "in its day played many parts" and had more names
than one. In the first instance it was called mesmerism, then animal
magnetism, while to-day, when it has forced its way through incredulity,
distrust, and opposition of all sorts, and come to the front in very
truth, it faces us as a power which bids fair to be more and more with us
as time goes on under the name of Hypnotism.

Perhaps few people remember the name of the man who really brought animal
magnetism into prominence in the middle of the last century. Yet James
Braid, the Scotch surgeon, who then lived at Manchester, and pursued with
untiring thoroughness and perseverance his studies in the then little-
known science, was really the shoulder that pushed hypnotism into our
midst. It was Braid, indeed, who caused the name of "hypnotism" to eject
that of "mesmerism" in England. He was never properly appreciated during
his lifetime. But if he was not, he was only one of numerous examples
which are always being brought up before our eyes (among those of our
countrymen who have rendered their country signal services), who
illustrate the famous English quotation, "Thus angels walked the earth
unknown, and _when they flew were recognized_"

Braid, however, proved effectually that the mesmeric phenomena depend
altogether on the physiological condition of the person operated on, and
not on the power of the operator.


_Dr. Martineau from Newman._

"7 P.V.E.,
"_17th Feb._, 1855.

"My dear Martineau,

"You will believe that the state of your sister's health gives me much
concern. She has kindly written twice to me. The second letter tells of
formidable fainting fits, which I cannot explain away; yet, as I told her
in my reply to her first, her symptoms _in general_ are so similar to my
own that I cannot but hope her physician views them too seriously, and
_does her harm by it_. I, on the whole, believe that my own heart is
unsound organically (distended), but my experience certainly is that the
less I attend to it _in detail_ the better, though I must in prudence
avoid impure air and other evils. Her second letter tells me as a decisive
proof how very bad she is, that every day she feels _shot_ in the head.

"Now this is exactly the symptom I have for nine months been struggling to
subdue, and as my wife knows, I am, week by week, balancing whether to put
myself under a doctor for it.... The spasm which distresses me comes at
the crisis when I ought to go to sleep, and so wakes me up. I could not
get rid of it even in the summer, on days on which I had least mental
effort, and was in all other respects conscious of great vigour....

"I went to a physician to complain of _sleeplessness_ and got the reply
that it was my _heart_ that was diseased.... Your sister's body is so
subject to her mind that I do not despair that, either through mesmerism
restoring sleep or in some other way, she may rally far beyond her present
expectation. I know a lady who was dying of brain fever, and could get no
sleep until the physician called in a mesmerist; this gained sleep for
her, and by that alone she recovered without medicine."


Dr. Martineau was one of the founders of the _National Review_ in 1855,
and frequently contributed articles to it. This next letter treats mainly
of the proposed lines on which the magazine was to be run--its politics,
points of view, etc.


_Dr. Martineau from Newman._

"_14th June_, 1855.

"My dear Martineau,

"I have seen with interest that your scheme of the National Review is
resumed, and I am told that you and Walter Bagehot are the political
editors. Supposing that your politics are not essentially different from
those of the _Westminster_ the _Review_ is of _practical_ interest to me,
in spite of my unfortunate collision last year, for which I hope you have
forgiven me. I wrote in the last _Westminster_ the last article on the
"Administrative Example of the United States," and in the forthcoming
number I have written the second article on "International Immorality." I
wrote them freely, and indeed could not comfortably take money from
Chapman in his present circumstances, but I would much rather write for
the _National Review_ if I am admissible.... I value _forms_ of government
in proportion as they develop moral results in individual man; and if I
_now_ am democratic for Europe, it is not from any abstract and exclusive
zeal for democracy, all the weaknesses of which I keenly feel, but because
the dynasties, having first corrupted or destroyed the aristocracies, and
next become hateful, hated, and incurable themselves, have left no
government possible which shall have stability and morality except the
democratic. In England my desire is to ward off this result, to which, I
think, our aristocracy are driving fast by uniting their cause with the
perfidious immoralities of the Continent.

"Your political prospectus seems to me to be delusive by its vagueness. I
mean, that it is no sort of security after misunderstandings between
editors and writers. I think it is liable practically to lead to the
result that one man's mind seems undesirably to assume the authority of a
confederation;... but where Truth is sought, this is not easily borne.
Have you considered whether you may not do as the _Revue des Deux Mondes_,
which admits independent essays with the writer's name signed? I value the
convenience of anonymous writing, and I do not wish to see it destroyed;
but it is undoubtedly abused and overdone, and I think every movement in
the opposite direction has its use."

I think that when reviewing many of Newman's ideas--ideas considered as
strongly tending to socialism of a sort--it is wise to bear in mind these
words in this letter: "If I _now_ am democratic for Europe, it is not from
any abstract or exclusive zeal for democracy, all the weaknesses of which
I keenly feel." For they show very clearly that his was a mind which
refused any party labelling. The reform was the thing with him, and the
means by which this was brought about were only secondary and subordinate.

In September, 1856, Newman was at Ventnor; and though apparently still
suffering from his heart and indigestion, found that he was able to bathe
in the sea with much pleasure to himself. He gives voice to his surprise
that, in those days, there should be so strong a feeling against "mixed
bathing," as the term is: and he quotes articles and letters which he had
seen in which disgust was expressed at "ladies bathing within reach of
telescopes" and "at the indecency of promiscuous bathing"! This excessive
over-prudishness, which has always, since early Victorian days,
distinguished England, possesses as much vitality (even when, happily,
dying) as that of the conger eel, whom no killing seems really to kill!

The earlier part of the letter deals with the disputes of the "three
tutors against Dr. Hawkins," Provost of Oriel in 1830, and also with the
proposal that his brother, John Henry Newman, should be made third
secretary of the local Bible Society.

In the _Letters of Rev. J. B. Mozley, D.D._, edited by his sister in 1884,
there is a good deal of information given about the Oxford of that day,
and this account of the dispute in 1830 occurs in one of Dr. Mozley's
letters from Oriel College:--

"All sorts of rumours have gone abroad respecting the differences between
the tutors, and it has received a most amusing variety of versions. It has
been described as a strike for advance of wages or more pupils, which of
course has fitted well into the probable falling off of the college
consequent on the Heresy: at Tunbridge, a friend ... was told, the junior
fellows had combined to turn out the Provost! For my part, I think it no
more use trying to send abroad a correct account of it, for it is not easy
to make it obvious to the meanest capacities, and everybody nowadays seems
to feel himself justified in contending that to be truest which is the
most consonant to his understanding.... I take it there is little doubt of
H. Wilberforce being elected here, to Oriel, next year ... he is
considered sure of his Double First...."

Of the Rev. Mr. Hill, mentioned by Newman as the "old secretary of the
Bible Society," Dr. Mozley speaks in connection with the constant
opposition and ill-humoured references to Pusey which at that time were
rife at Oxford.

As regards "Bulteel" of Exeter College, Dr. Mozley thus speaks of him:
"Bulteel's sincere belief is that there is a new system of things in the
course of revelation now, as there was in our Saviour's time, and that God
has given him the power of working miracles for the same reason as He gave
it to the Apostles--in order to convince unbelievers.... There can be
little doubt that Bulteel is partially deranged. I should not be much
surprised if, before long, he attempts miracles of a more obvious kind."

As regards Hurrell Froude, Fellow and tutor of Oriel College, he, John
Henry Newman, and Pusey were all three close friends in 1822. Hurrell
Froude exercised a strong influence over J. H. Newman, and it was he who
was one of the leaders in the Tractarian movement in 1833. He was a man of
wonderful genius and originality, and it was a distinct loss to the world
when, in 1836, he died. I cannot help quoting here the "private critique"
written in 1838, and quoted by Miss Mozley in her volume, with reference
to his _Remains_:--

"It is very interesting and clever, but I must say I felt as if I was
committing an impertinence in reading his private journal-probably the
most really private journal that ever was written.... I am very curious to
know what kind of sensation his views will make, uttered so carelessly,
instead of in Keble's, or Pusey or Newman's grand style."

With respect to Dr. Hawkins, the Provost (whose influence was in many ways
a powerful one with J4 H. Newman), I quote two passages from letters of
Dr. Mozley. One is dated 1836 and the other 1847 (during the Gladstone
Election):--

"The Provost alluded in the most distant way to the sore subject (the
condemnation of heretics) last Sunday. He observed that it was a
disgusting habit in persons finding fault with other people's theology.
Nothing so tended to make the mind narrow and bitter. They had much better
be employing themselves in some active and useful way. This is laughable
as coming from the Provost, who has been doing nothing else but objecting
all his life." And:--

"The Provost has behaved very characteristically. He has been for once in
his life fairly perplexed; and he has doubled and doubled again, and
shifted and crept into holes; at last vanished up some dark crevice, and
nothing was seen but his tail. One thought one was to see no more of him,
when, on one of the polling mornings, he suddenly emerged, like a rat out
of a haystack, and voted for Round. The Heads, in fact, have been
thoroughly inefficient. The election has literally gone on _without_ them.
They have done nothing."


_Dr. Martineau from Francis Newman._

"_18th Sept._, 1856.

"My dear Martineau,

"Your welcome letter finds me still here. I certainly did not contemplate
that I was speaking for the public ear on such a subject. I have a pain
from it (chiefly from a sense, perhaps, that I should not like my brother
to know or suspect that the information came from me), yet I cannot blame
your proceeding, or question your right, so carefully and tenderly as you
guard against objection.... The Rev. Mr. Hill, Vice-Principal of St.
Edmund's Hall, was the old secretary of the (local) Bible Society. The
Rev. Benjamin Parson Symons (now warden of Wadham College) is he who
proposed and carried that my brother should be a third secretary.

"I think I told you that Symons was the _second_ secretary; but I now
doubt whether the second was not Rev.---- Bulteel, of Exeter College, then
an evangelical preacher of St. Ebb's Church in Oxford, much attended by
Edmund Hall men. The after vote rescinding my brother's secretaryship was
proposed by Benjamin Newton, a young Fellow of Exeter College, if this is
of any importance.... The affair of the three tutors against Dr. Hawkins
was told me exactly as I had it from my brother's lips; but the whole must
have been strictly public. The other tutors were Robert Isaac Wilberforce
(since Archdeacon and Roman Catholic), Richard Hurrell Froude, known by
his _Remains_; and a much older man, Dornford, now a rector in Devonshire,
who adhered to Hawkins. This took place in 1830, when my brother was only
twenty-nine, Wilberforce his junior, and Hurrell Froude _my_ junior in the
University; probably my equal in age, i.e. then twenty-five; so it was
_young_ Oxford versus old. When the three tutors resigned (whose youth was
a result of the Oriel Fellows going off so quick), Hawkins brought into
the tutorship young Coplestone, as he was called--a nephew of the
Bishop;... I almost think that for a time he resumed lecturing himself:
but it will not do to say so.... I have here found out (after more than
ten years' cessation) that I can swim as well as ever, and without
discomfort to my heart. I am becoming quite zealous for my daily swim,
even when (as to-day) the south-west gives us rather too much sea, to the
chagrin of the bathing men. Perhaps you have seen various letters in _The
Times_, etc., on the indecency of promiscuous bathing, etc. I cannot
understand why they all direct their attack to the wrong point, and insist
on driving people into solitudes and separations very inconvenient,
instead of demanding that, as on the Continent, both sexes be clad in the
water. Last year I saw an article that expressed disgust at ladies bathing
within reach of _telescopes_! There is here such a colony of foreigners,
that I hope they may teach this lesson. Besides the Pulszkys, who are a
family of twelve persons, there are seven of Kossuth's household, a large
family of Marras (Italian), three of Janza (Viennese), two or more
Piatti's (Italian), who keep company together, and very many of whom bathe
statedly. Mrs. Pulszky is not well this year for swimming; but last year
she swam daily, with her husband and an intimate male friend at her side.
He will not let her swim in the sea without him, and is amazed at English
husbands consenting to abandon their wives as they do. Mrs. Walter, her
mother, is a devoted bather, and whenever the breakers are formidable has
the aid of one or other male friend. It is a new fact to me, that the
Viennese ladies, as a thing of course, are taught to swim in the Danube.
There are regular teachers of swimming for both sexes, and a sort of
diploma is granted to those who swim well enough to be at home in the
water." [This is a phrase that was used to me; it now occurs to me that it
may have been merely _metaphorical_, when the teacher says _Macte
virtute_, etc., and concludes his lessons.]

"Of course, our climate does not allow the facilities of tropical waters
(where alligators and sharks, however, are not facilities!); but the sea
is fit for bathing with us as many months as the Danube, though I suppose
never so warm as the Danube at its warmest.... If I could be with you at
Derwentwater again, I think I should be less indisposed to try an oar.
Indigestion or sleeplessness, not exertion, seems to be the chief enemy of
my heart, which yet cannot bear exertion when so suffering. I am giving
myself abundant ease, and never enjoyed myself with so much 'abandon.' We
both like this place extremely.

"With kindest regards to all around you,

"I am, very affectionately yours,

"F. W. Newman."


In 1857, as I mentioned before, Dr. Martineau came up to London to live,
having been asked by the authorities of Manchester New College to take
more share in the work there than he had hitherto done. He was made
Principal of the College in 1868, and held the post until 1885.

There is something in the letter which follows which must have made a very
special appeal to Martineau--for this reason: that there is in it a
passionate "abandon" quite foreign to Newman's usual style. He seems to
have given rein to a sudden impulse of enthusiasm for his friend, and his
letter, from start to finish, is full of it. He is evidently longing that
Martineau should find in his London audience all the appreciation which
his great talents deserved. And perhaps this is the thought which prompted
those sentences which seem to urge him to curb the powerful steeds of his
intellectual vigour, and not to give so lavishly or in such unstinted
measure as in his sermons he had hitherto been accustomed to do. Newman
says that in his preaching "there is _superfluous_ intellectual effort."
He adds that from "_intellectual_ persons "he has heard the complaint that
the "effort to follow is too great"; and he entreats him to prepare each
sermon "with less _intellectual_ effort, though, of course, not with less
devotional purpose."


_Dr. Martineau from Newman._

"7 P.V.E.,
"_30th May_, 1857.

"My dear Martineau,

"Perhaps you are already pulling up your tent-pegs: rather a heart-
breaking work, especially to those who so love beauty and have surrounded
themselves within doors with so much. You _need_, dear friend, a broad and
fruitful field in London for your spiritual activity to recompense the
great--the very great--sacrifices you must make in parting from all that
you have loved in Liverpool. I have felt this so deeply that I never knew
exactly how to _wish_ that you might come to London; and, indeed, this
place, so emphatically _dissipated_," [that is, _mente dissipat�
distract�_] "does not prize its great minds so much as smaller places
would. ... Beloved friend, you know that great expectations are formed of
you. It is hard, most hard, not to let this draw you into great
intellectual effort, from which I fear much. For your literary lecturing,
of course, I have no word of dissuasion. But let me assure you that in
your preaching there is _superfluous_ intellectual effort. It would be
spiritually more effective if there were far less perfection of literary
beauty and less condensation of refined thought and imaginative metaphor.
I hear again and again from _intellectual_ persons the complaint that the
effort to follow your meaning is too great, and impairs both the pleasure
and profit of listening to you. I myself am conscious that wonder and
admiration of your talent is apt to absorb and stifle the properly
spiritual influence, and when I _read_ your sermons, I often pause so long
on single sentences as to be fully aware that I could have got little good
from _hearing_ them. I know that no two men's nature is the same, and
habit is a second nature. Do not imagine that I wish you not to be
yourself. (There is no danger of that.) But I am sure that by cultivating
more of what the French call 'abandon'--by preparing with less
_intellectual_ effort for each separate sermon--though, of course, not
with less devotional purpose--and by letting your immediate impulse have a
large play in comparison to your previous study, there will be less danger
of overworking your mind and fuller effect on those who are to benefit.
... I dare say you received from me the new volume of _Religious Duties_.
Its author seems to me _primitively_ to have belonged to what you call the
class of ethical minds, but to have passed beyond it, and now to be at
once Passionate and Spiritual. And is not this the natural and rightful
thing, that though we begin with a fragmentary, we tend towards an
integral religion? This book has been to me most delightful and
profitable, and I trust you will also find it so. Such a revelation of a
pure, tender, ardent spirit is itself an inexpressible stimulus, and has
given me quite a flood of joy and sympathy.

"The doctrine of immortality so unhesitatingly avowed (?) affects me as
nothing from Theodore Parker on the same subject ever did. The love and
joy in God flowing out of it is so spontaneous and kindling as to make me
long to say,--I now no longer _hope_ only, but _I am sure_. In any case I
do rejoice that others can so believe, and I pray that if this be a mere
cloud over _my_ eyes, it may at length be taken away. Not that I have any
deficiency of _happiness_ from this, but I have a great deficiency of
_power_, and I am painfully out of sympathy with others by it.

"I want to cultivate, if I knew how, rather more free communication with
those who supremely love God as the Good One, and who will bear with me! I
much need this, if I could get it. But however shut up I may seem, believe
that a fire of love for you burns in my heart. With warm regards to Mrs.
Martineau,

"Your affectionate friend,

"F. W. Newman."


I should like to quote here words illustrative of this side of Newman's
personality, that side which reveals him "at once passionate and
spiritual," longing to attain to religious truth, and not railing against
the forms of dogma which have led other men into "the kingdom of heaven,"
as was his too frequent habit. These words were written by him when he
seemed to himself to have reached some measure of spiritual intuition, and
there is great beauty in them:--

"None can enter the kingdom of heaven without becoming a little child. But
behind and after this, there is a mystery revealed to but few, namely,
that if the soul is to go on into higher spiritual blessedness it must
become a _woman_. Yes, however manly thou be among men, it must learn to
love being dependent; must lean on God, not solely from distress or alarm,
but because it does not like independence or loneliness.... God is not a
stern judge, exacting every tittle of some law from us.... He does _not_
act towards us (spiritually) by generalities... but His perfection
consists in dealing with each case by itself as if there were no others."

And now, before concluding this chapter, I take two much later letters
written by Newman to Martineau; one is dated 1888 and the other 1892. The
first one is written quite clearly--which is wonderful when one remembers
that he was then eighty-three--and the other, four years later, is cramped
and not so easy to decipher. Still, in the first of these letters he
himself says, "I have to write as slow as any little schoolboy... and
cannot help some blunders." He had been to Birmingham on the 20th June to
see Cardinal Newman, and mentions how travelling by rail tried his head.
The latter part of the letter relates to a big dinner composed chiefly of
Anglo-Indians and their _attach�s_. There is one lighted sentence near the
end which brings before one's mental eye his often-expressed "Mene, Mene,
Tekel Upharsin," with regard to the Indian Empire, our past
misgovernments, and our present failure to recognize old promises: "The
glorification of our Indian policy only made me melancholy."

The "degree" which Martineau was to receive was no doubt his "Doctor of
Divinity" degree which he took in 1884 (Edinburgh). Dr. Jowett, it will be
remembered, was, throughout his whole life, closely identified with
Balliol College. He was Fellow in 1838, tutor of his college from 1840
till 1870, when he was chosen as Master. Ruskin (to whom reference is made
in the second letter) gave the larger part of his originally large fortune
to the founding of St. George's Guild. This was intended to be a sort of
agricultural community of "old-world virtues" for young and old, "and
ancient and homely methods." One of his great aims was the promoting of
home industries. As regards Newman's reference to politics at the end of
letter No. 2 in 1888, Gladstone's Government was but just _breathing_
after the sharp tussle they had been through with the Home Rule party,
with Parnell at their head. In 1886 Gladstone had brought in the measure
which was to give Ireland a "statutory parliament." This was practically
the signal for a disastrous rent which tore his party in two, and was the
precursor of their defeat at the next General Election.


_Dr. Martineau from Newman._

"_6th July_, 1888.

"My dear Martineau,

"I did not know that the day of Oxford Convocation was June 20th. I was
engaged to the Worcester College Gaudy for the 21st. Had I known that on
the 20th you were to receive the degree, I should have been tempted to
come and 'assist,' though I have always had an instinctive hatred of such
mobs.

"I was at Birmingham on the 20th to see my brother. The noises on the rail
greatly affected my brain and stomach. Noise was increased in the bedroom
at Oxford, beside which heavy goods went to the rail, and I had two bad
nights, partly from that cause, aided by the mental excitement up to
midnight." [It is not difficult to understand this "excitement." The
meeting between the brothers was never devoid of a certain mental
reticence. It must almost have been impossible to forget the fact that
about the subject on which each had always been most keenly exercised,
they were worlds apart.]

"When I reached home I thought myself _quite well_, but soon found I could
not write a word without one or more blunders in several letters, and a
needful epistle became a heap of unsightly blots. This is only
exaggeration of a weakness becoming normal with me. I have to write as
slow as any little schoolboy. My housemaid was alarmed without my knowing
it; but mere rest and sleep in some days removed my wife's alarms. But I
still am forced to write very slowly, and cannot help some blunders.... On
the morning of the 22nd I called on Jowett, who instantly said, 'Tonight
is _our_ Gaudy; you _must_ come to it.' I had to beg off from my Worcester
College host. (I was on my way to see friends in a neighbouring village.)
I sat down to dinner with 102 guests; such a company as I never before
_looked_ at. I name chiefly high Anglo-Indians and their various
_attach�s_ (members of Balliol College): _oi peri_ Lords Northbrook,
Ripon, and Lansdowne, three Viceroys of India, and Sir Gordon Duff, late
Governor of Bombay." [It will not have been forgotten that the part played
by Lord Lansdowne and Lord Ripon in 1833, with respect to the Bill for the
discontinuance of the East India Company's trade, was not a very
distinguished one.]

"Many smaller stars, Mr. Ilbert of name well known, and (long ago to _me_
well known) General Richard Strachy, eager for bi-metallism. He began, but
alas! could not finish his elucidation to me, how it would relieve Indian
finance, without _anyone_ losing _any_thing, or any lessening of payment,
or dismissing officers, or the English Government paying anything, nor any
unlucky last holder of coin or paper losing. The miracle (as to me it
seemed) was to be wrought, not by a double standard--that was an ignorant
mistake--but by a _single standard metal_, composed of gold and silver in
fixed ratio. I was not happy enough (or unhappy enough) to _learn_ how
this was to result; but his eagerness and confidence were to me a
surprising phenomenon.

"A Worcester College man told me that your _Types of Morals_ had already
left a _strong_ impression on younger men. I think there has not yet been
time for the second great book and work.

"The glorification of our Indian Policy only made me melancholy. I hope
you now get full and real rest. Though I _feel_ as in perfect health, I
have to say to myself, _Non sum qualis eram_, and take warnings. Pray, do
you the same.

"Affectionately, to you and yours,

"F. W. Newman."


"In London vegetarianism seems going ahead. I have, still struggling
through the press, _Reminiscences of Two Exiles and Two Wars_. The Quakers
will be at once pleased and angry if that is possible."


 _Dr. Martineau from Newman._

"_19th Aug._, 1892.

"My dear Martineau,

"I seem to have allowed you to get quite out of my sight. This is a result
of my practical renunciation of London, the place which seems too exciting
for me. I do not wonder that you so early take refuge in far Scotland. I
so mortified my dear friend Anna Swanwick last year by my sudden retreat
from the overstrain of her house, that I did not dare to repeat the trial
this year; indeed, I should deeply alarm my wife by attempting it, and,
alas! dear Anna herself proved unable to sustain herself--due, I suppose,
to the self-imposed task of her new book. Though I am myself (foolishly
perhaps) reprinting a tract on Etruscan, I see how many things are better
left to younger minds. I am here (near Bewdley, Worcestershire) to make
personal acquaintance with a remarkable man who has made marked advances
to me for more (I think) than three years. He _was_ a prot�g� of Ruskin's
and member of St. George's Guild. As such he was (apparently) reared under
Emerson, Margaret Fuller, and Carlyle more than under Ruskin, and heard
all the side of English Agnosticism. But with the growth of his own mind
he became dissatisfied, and now for fourteen years he has given himself to
a fruit farm of four and a half acres, with a cow and kitchen-garden and
pigs! and abundant poultry, and looks the type of the future English
peasant. His wife and one trusty woman manage dairy and cookery with
eminent success, and various sales, while he is cow-milker and gardener,
student also of fruit and of the soil. _It is to me an interest as a
foresight of the future_. He is a _student_ of our hardest literature, and
employs no labourer under him. Ignorant of foreign tongues, he reads
German translations and Jowett's _Plato_.... A school friend of Mr.
Braithwaite lately sought my acquaintance.... He tells me that Mr.
Gladstone lately gave to the world the utterance that among the
possibilities of the immediate future he now sees, rather than any general
Agnosticism, a simple recurrence to the simple Judaic Godhead. I _wish_
well to Gladstone's new Cabinet, but fear that the trickiness by which he
led Parnell's folk to aid Salisbury's overthrow will arouse a fatal
resentment. If he espouse the Indian claims, that may save him. My best
regards to all yours, and earnest wishes.

"Your affectionate friend,

"F. W. Newman."


Mr. Estlin Carpenter wrote lately to me to say that he does not know of
any evidence to prove that Newman and Martineau were "acquainted, or at
least intimate," before the former became tutor of Manchester College. He
says their correspondence ended in 1892, and he imagines that Newman's
"declining health during the last two or three years made further writing
impossible," but that their warm regard for each other, up to the very
end, was unalterable.




CHAPTER VI

FRANCIS NEWMAN AS A TEACHER


Francis Newman was certainly one of the greatest mathematical and
classical scholars of his day. So that when the authorities of University
College secured him for their staff, they knew that they could have
obtained no better man for their purpose.

As a teacher he showed an infinite fertility of method in dealing with the
young men who, there for the purpose of learning, yet did not always
_want_ to learn! He had, in especial, that rather vague and narrow
definition of genius--"an infinite capacity for taking pains." He "took"
them always with any scholar who had failed to grasp his meaning in some
one of his instructions. He could put the whole matter in some absolutely
new light--take it from an utterly different point of view; so that, while
giving another chance to the slow-witted, he did not keep his whole class
waiting. The quality of teaching is not strained. It is doubtful if it is
capable of being learnt, if not in the first instance, in some measure,
innate. Lying dormant in a man's being--even if, perhaps, its presence is
unrecognized by its owner--it can certainly be developed by him when he is
conscious of it. But if the power in embryo be absent, it is a difficult
matter indeed to attain by effort any capacity of which one has not
already the beginnings in oneself. Indeed, a famous writer of another age
has written the word "impossible" against this attempt.

Frank Newman could, and would, take any trouble to help any dull student
over some mathematical or classical stile, but he was not an adept at
quickly getting into touch with that Presence which has moved, in
whimsical measure, through the ways and by-ways of this life since the
world began with coat of many colours, upon which the sun of merry
imagination was always sparkling, and cap and bells which could for the
moment ring sudden, spontaneous mirth across the shadows of the darkest
day. If in medieval days it could cross the cell of some grave and
reverend monastery, and guide the hand of some sculptor busy at his
gargoyle for some majestic church, surely it could, with the greatest ease
in the world, cross the threshold of some crowded class-room where a
learned, absorbed professor was endeavouring to gain the attention of a
number of young men rejoicing in their youth and on the look-out for the
first suggestion of the Spirit of Humour. Frank Newman was not quick at
appreciating the quips and cranks, the--to others--irresistibly mirth-
provoking sallies of humour. He was not quick at seeing a joke. And when
middle age was well past with him, he did not always see when he had
himself been provocative of an upset of gravity on the part of the
students. He did not always discover in time the pranks and designs for
diverting the course of true knowledge in which the average young
Englishman loves to indulge. He had not a very close focus for this sort
of thing, and probably the reason was, that he was so absolutely absorbed
in the subject which he was teaching or upon which he was lecturing. But
in teaching a mixed class of boys or young men it is a _sine qu� non_ that
one possesses a "mind's eye" with easily adjustable focus, as in a
photographic camera; otherwise one cannot keep in mental touch with those
members of the class who "come to" play "and remain to" distract the
attention of fellow-students. Another reason why Newman did not appeal to
these non-studious ones was attributable to the fact that he was, in many
ways, very eccentric both in manner and dress. Now, everyone who knows the
average English boy at all, knows that if there is one thing he cannot
stand it is eccentricity. To be eccentric is to be taboo. As regards the
"correct" thing to wear, and the "correct" thing to do and how to do it,
he is generally quite as particular as the average young woman over
fashion. And anyone who offends in these respects has his name written
upon the ostracisic shell. If it happens to be a master--well, his
peculiarities are quite enough to divert the boy's attention successfully
from the weightier matters in which the master is vainly endeavouring to
instruct him.

Sir Alfred Wills, Mr. Winterbotham, Sir Edward Fry, Mr. William de Morgan,
and others, to whose kindness I am indebted for many reminiscences of
Professor Newman as a teacher, tell me that he had many eccentricities
which perpetually aroused their sense of humour. Sir Edward Fry tells me
that his manner, when he himself was at college in 1848, was "somewhat
nervous, perhaps even a little irritable, and he was not exactly popular
as a professor. But his lectures were very interesting and stimulating."
He adds that he was "a very brilliant scholar, with a tendency towards
eccentricity."

This eccentricity showed itself in various forms, but one very noticeable
one was that of dress. I am told by a friend that he often dressed in the
onion fashion--three coats one over the other, and the last one--green!
That he often wore trousers edged with a few inches of leather, and that
his hats were not immaculate. Well, perhaps it has never been quite
understood from what part of old and unfashionable attire the Spirit of
Humour winks at one with such twinkling fun in the corner of its eye that
laughter is irresistible. But none the less, few there are of us who have
not--though it may be against our steadier and wiser judgment--at some
time or other caught sight of that wink, and laughed spontaneously. To
everyone who saw it, when the relics were collected and placed in his old
house in Cheyne Row, Carlyle's old 'top' hat was irresistibly funny.
Nothing loses caste more completely than a top hat when it is behind the
time, and the shine is off the silk.

Sir Alfred Wills mentions, in the reminiscences which follow, which he has
kindly sent me, that at one time Newman "took to walking from his house"
(in town) "to the college and back in cap and gown." This, however, was
not such a startling vagary of costume in a London street as was that of a
certain professor of my acquaintance, very absent-minded and dreamy, who,
intent on making some abstruse point clear to a young lady pupil, walked
one evening round and round a London square with her, talking earnestly,
and attired in his top hat and dressing-gown!

As regards Newman's teaching of Latin, Sir Alfred Wills says that "much
the best thing that" he "got from" him "was the practice in writing" it.
He tells us that his lectures showed signs of the most profound research,
and that he took untiring trouble in explaining any difficulty which had
arisen. If the difficulty had been that of some member of one of his
classes, he would not keep the whole class waiting while he went over the
difficult part of the lesson again, but he would approach the subject from
an altogether different point of view, and throw, for the class _in toto_,
a new light upon it.

Of course it was not only in Latin that he wished to make pupils think of
it as a "spoken language," for Mr. Darbishire tells us that "one of his
special endeavours was to accustom his students to deal with Greek _as a
spoken language_" [Footnote: It will be remembered that Francis Newman
introduced the "new" pronunciation of Latin.] (as, for instance) "in
reading Greek plays." Mr. Darbishire further tells us that Newman was
accustomed to have a series of meetings in his study for conversation in
Latin.

As regards old methods of teaching Latin, I should like to quote from a
paper on "Modern Latin" which Francis Newman wrote in 1862, because there
is very much in what he says which shows where the failure of the old
system comes in:--

"In general the old method was one of repetition: _it dealt immensely in
committing Latin to memory_. Ridiculous as was the system of giving to
boys a Latin syntax in the Latin language, it at any rate did accustom
them to the reiteration of a small number of words expressed in very
simple sentences, and conveying knowledge of _immediate utility_.... While
I nevertheless believe that at most schools the boys still learn grammar
by heart, I venture to remark that the newer method of teaching, so far as
known to me, has immensely lessened the _quantity_ of Latin which is thus
learned....

"Further, it seems to me that we want what I may call a Latin novel or
romance--that is, a pleasing _tale_ of _fiction_ which shall convey
numerous Latin words which do not easily find a place in poetry, history,
or philosophy. Nothing has struck me as being so much to the purpose as an
imitation of the story of Robinson Crusoe, which brings in much that is
technical to special occupations--as in nautical affairs--carpentering,
fowling, pottery, basket-making, agriculture, etc.... If anyone had genius
to produce in Terentian style Latin comedies worthy of engaging the minds
and hearts of youth (for I can never read a play of Terence to a young
class without the heartache), I should regard this as a valuable
contribution."

I pass on now to some reminiscences, kindly contributed by Sir Alfred
Wills, of the professor in relation to his University College students in
1846:--

"I have a very distinct recollection of the personality of Mr. F. W.
Newman. He was appointed to the Professorship of Latin in University
College in 1846, and I entered the college in October, 1846, and attended
his first lecture and all those he delivered in the course of that
session.

"He was of middle stature, very well made, with a face that always
reminded me of the type of the North American Indian, with which I was
familiar from Mrs. Catlin's book published in 1841. His complexion was
dark, his hair very black and with no tendency to curl, and he wore it
long, and his nose was aquiline. He differed from the Indian type,
however, in that his face was rather narrow than broad.

"His voice was particularly clear and 'carrying,' and every syllable could
be heard. I ought to have added to my description that his eyes were blue,
bright, very expressive, and his smile, not very often seen, peculiarly
sweet and engaging. He was decidedly eccentric. At one time, in dirty
winter weather, he wore trousers of which the lower six or eight inches
were of black leather; and at another time, upon what occasion I forget,
he took to walking from his house to the college and back in cap and gown.
There was a 'Cap and Gown' movement among the students, or some of them,
in the session 1847-8, but it was not upon that occasion, for I remember
seeing him in the streets in cap and gown, and during the session 1847-8,
I was at home in bad health, having overworked myself. He would now and
then, very seldom, ask some of the students to breakfast at his house. It
was an odd mixture of hospitality and formality. He never seemed quite at
his ease on such occasions, and I have a very distinct remembrance of one
of these occasions.

"It was in singularly gloomy and bitter weather in the winter or very
early spring of 1849. We were rather a large party. There was no fire
either in the room in which we assembled or in the breakfast room; and I
have not often been colder. There was only one guest who was not a
student, and he was a certain Herr Vukovich (that was how the name was
pronounced) who had been Hungarian Minister of Justice during the short
period when Kossuth was supreme in Hungary.

"When he came in, Professor Newman said: 'Gentlemen, this is Herr
Vukovich, lately Minister of Justice in Hungary,' and then turning to Herr
V., he added, 'I shall not introduce these gentlemen to you by name, as it
would be of no interest to you; and besides, you would forget their names
at once'; and then he went off at score with, 'I have never been able to
understand, Herr Vukovich, how it is that you have never introduced the
Bactrian camel into Hungary,' and then proceeded to enlarge upon the
admirable suitability of the Bactrian camel to the climate, soil, roads,
conditions of Hungary. Herr V. _looked_ very much as if he had never heard
of the Bactrian camel.

"During the whole of the session 1846-7, Newman's lectures were the wonder
of all who heard him. We read with him some of Cicero's letters to
Atticus, and his stores of information of every description--antiquarian,
philological, historical, and literary--were absolutely marvellous. I have
never destroyed or lost my notes of them, and I feel sure that they would
justify all that I have said. We all felt that we had secured for the
college an intellectual giant. I had the great advantage of being, during
my first session, in the senior class in both Latin and Greek, and we had
for our Greek Professor Mr. Malden, who, I should think, was unsurpassed
for sound and elegant scholarship, and in whose lectures I delighted from
first to last during my two sessions (1846-7 and 1848-9), but certainly
during the first session, Professor Newman's lectures were those which
made upon me the deepest impression, which remains unimpaired to this day.
It seemed as if no trouble was too great for him to take in preparing for
them and as if nothing which could throw any light upon a set of letters,
which are often obscure and difficult, ever escaped his eagle eye or his
profound research. When I returned to college in 1848, I met with a
profound disappointment. I have been asked for my recollections, and I
must make them truthful. Professor Newman was at that time much engrossed
with his theological and religious works.

"_The Soul_ was published in 1849, and whether that may account for the
change or not, the fact is that the lectures of that session presented a
marked contrast to those of the earlier session, and I don't think I am
exaggerating when I say that they were dry and jejune to the last extent.
And I felt throughout that session that much the best thing I got from it
was the practice in writing Latin, which was always an important part of
his teaching, and in which he was a master himself. I am sure it is true
that days often passed without there being anything in the lectures which
I cared to preserve or even to note. I had that year, however, the
privilege of reading the Nicomachean Ethics with him as a private pupil,
and found him as good in Greek and as interested in illustration as I had
previously found him in his Latin lectures.

"I forbear to touch upon his private character. That impressed itself
insensibly upon us as worthy of the highest respect. But it was simply
from the natural effluence of a noble character, for we came rarely into
anything like personal intimacy with him. He was reserved and even shy,
and I doubt if any of us knew much more of him privately than I did--which
was not much."

I think these reminiscences of Sir Alfred Wills bring before us very
vividly the sort of intercourse which existed between professor and pupil
in those days. It reveals Newman as a man with whom the pupil would not
feel altogether at his ease--towards whom he would not be moved to get
into close sympathy, and this, perhaps, very largely because of a certain
stiffness and formality of manner which unavoidably erects a barrier
before any natural, spontaneous conversation.

Sir Edward Fry mentions Newman's manner as a "nervous" one, but says that
his lectures were very stimulating, leading one to infer that even if the
delivery was not arresting or impressive, yet all this was made up for by
the force and brilliance of the matter itself.

It will be remembered that, at any rate, in his Oxford days, J. H. Newman
had not an impressive manner either.

We come now to some other keenly interesting recollections--those of Mr.
William de Morgan, who has kindly written them for this memoir. Mr. de
Morgan tells me that his father and Francis Newman were old friends, but
they were widely apart on religious questions, and that he remembers "when
the Martineau controversy was at its height" he said to him: "Newman and I
were very old colleagues, and I loved and respected him. But if I had been
supposed to have any official knowledge of Newman's views about
Christianity derived from my position as a Professor, I should have thrown
up my situation long ago." And Mr. de Morgan adds: "This had reference to
the absolute agnosis on religious views which was the banner U.C. nailed
to the mast in old days." He says he remembers, in his boyhood, that there
were many religious discussions between his parents and Francis Newman,
but that he was far too young to understand what they were about then, and
remembers them consequently but vaguely.

"When I came to see more of Newman as a Professor in class, I had arrived
at the condition of a pert and very foolish boy of sixteen who had made up
his mind to be an artist and failed altogether to take advantage of the
splendid opportunities before him. I attended Newman's classes; saw him
every day; might have acquired the knowledge of much of the Latin
classics. Somehow I missed my chances, and I cannot now recall a single
instance of my availing myself of the interviews he accorded so gladly to
any attentive student to get at difficult passages, and so on. In my time
I suspect his classes included a larger number than usual of bad and idle
young scaramouches, who deserved to be turned out of the class, instead of
the sort of over-forbearance their Professor showed. I feel sure now that
a more truculent character than his would have enforced order better, with
advantage to the weak and wavering pupils. He treated boys too much like
human creatures--and some of us were as mischievous as monkeys. I
recollect a particular instance illustrating this fact and his
forbearance.

"The weather was bad, and bad colds abounded. One day Newman ventured to
remonstrate gently with the victims of catarrh--indeed, the noise was
awful. But he had the indiscretion to add: 'Gentlemen, if you cannot wipe
your noses, I must really ask you to blow them outside the door.' Of
course the results were awful! The young imps rushed out incessantly into
the passage, and made noises like motor-cars. If the Professor committed
an error of judgment in his first edict, he certainly made up for it by
the way he kept his temper. In this he was really perfect. But the boys
presumed on it, of course. I remember that one of them, instead of
attending to his _Juvenal_, wrote a long poem about this nose incident,
which passed from hand to hand.

"There was another incident about that time which I fancy others may
remember better than I. It was snow time, and the schoolboys in the
playground were pelting papers in the college precinct. Newman passed by,
and a heavy volley all but destroyed his umbrella, which he used as a
shield. A few days after he came into the Common Room with a new umbrella.
'See what a beautiful present I've had,' he said, 'from my young friends
across the railings.' I have an impression that it was a guinea umbrella
bought with penny subscriptions; but this may be another story that has
got mixed with it."

Sir Edward Fry writes, in response to a request from me for his
recollections of Newman:--

"I attended Professor Newman's senior class on Latin literature for two or
three sessions in 1848, and I have a very vivid remembrance of him; at
that time he had not assumed a beard, and his clean-cut features were not
obscured by hair, as in later life. His lectures were very interesting and
stimulating. If I may venture to express an opinion on the point, I should
describe him as a very brilliant scholar, with a tendency towards
eccentricity.

"We read whilst I was with him some three or four of the early works of
Livy, and some of the histories of Tacitus; and his expansion of the
Constitution of Rome, both at the early and later date, was of very
unusual excellence. Such was my memory, and this has been confirmed by a
reference to my notebooks which I have made in consequence of your note. I
think his estimate of character did not always agree with that of Tacitus.
Other subjects which I recollect as having been expounded were the
relation of Latin to the Celtic group of languages, and that everlasting
question, the relation of the Etruscans and the Pelasgi.

"Once a week Newman used to give out a piece of English prose to be
rendered into Latin; these he corrected, reading also to us his own
version. Since your note I have looked at such notes of his lectures as I
can find, and at his corrections of my Latin prose."

Mr. Talfourd Ely, writing on Francis Newman as a teacher, says "he was
most careful and conscientious in his work. He was refined and even
fastidious in literary taste. To the ordinary undergraduate, such as
myself, he seemed too little like other men. We did not understand his
genius, and were too apt to judge him by peculiarities of garb and speech.
Like many other scholars, he could hardly keep in touch with young
athletes, and probably did not care to do so. But personally I was greatly
indebted to him, and I can never forget his generous help and kindly
thoughtfulness."

Mr. Winterbotham, also pupil of Francis Newman, says:--

"I was more keen on mathematics than classics, and was not what he would
have considered a promising pupil. My brother Edward, who was a year my
senior, was not much better.... My recollections are confined to the
peculiarities of his dress and manner: the rug with a hole in the middle
for his head, which formed his outer garment in winter. The complete suit
of dark grey alpaca, _tail_ coat, waistcoat, and trousers, which he donned
in warm weather.

"His remonstrance to the class on the indignity inflicted on him by the
boys at the adjoining school, who snowballed him and broke his umbrella,
was followed by his request that they would 'use their influence with the
boys' by way of protecting him in future, and his recognition of their
efforts next day, when he exhibited a new umbrella presented to him by the
boys.... For dear old De Morgan [Footnote: Father of the Mr. de Morgan who
contributes his reminiscences, and old friend of Newman.] I had a great
regard, and I was better able to appreciate his marvellous powers as a
mathematician."

Here is a short reminiscence by Professor Pye Smith:--

"Newman was a small, dark, slightly-built man, with black moustache and
beard, and a doubtful affected manner. He made us read long passages
without comment, and rarely went beyond the translation. I do not think I
ever spoke to him (or others of his class). The memory of his teaching
would, I think, be most valuable in correcting the Latin verses we made
for his comment and correction. The only professors at that time whom I
got great benefit from were Aston Key, De Morgan, and Masson."

The next reminiscence belongs to a much later date in the Professor's
life. In 1863 he was no longer teaching at University College. Mrs.
Kingsley Tarpey says she remembers him first in the summer of 1874 or
1875. Her descriptions of him, his opinions, and his life as she knew it
are full of keen interest.

[Illustration: FRANCIS NEWMAN
IN MIDDLE AGE
FROM PHOTO BY JOHN DAVIES, WESTON-SUPER-MARE]

In the quotation from a letter which follows, Professor Newman's own views
on teaching at the college are given:--

"You say there is a complaint that '_as the students cannot be got to
prepare their work_ the lessons _have come to be_ mere prelections from
the professors.' I am not aware of any change in the pupils since I have
been here, except that my classes are smaller, in part owing to the
removal of Coward College and the rivalry of the new institution in which
it is now comprised; in part (I happen to know) from dread of my personal
... influence; in part, I suspect, from the working of London University,
which I think bad; and others must add, whether worst of all is, my own
want of judgment in selecting subjects, and the mode of the treatment.
Undeniable it is that my classes are smaller, that my half-dozen best
scholars are decidedly below the half-dozen best I had in the first year
or two. But if I am myself to blame, it is, I think, _from the very
reverse process_ of that implied in the words above quoted, viz. I often
question whether it would not be at once wiser and more right to raise my
teaching to the small minority of my best pupils, and ignore the many who
come in on my classes unprepared. I have of late suspected that I allow
the University so to drag me down into school teaching that the abler and
advanced students are driven away from me. Moreover, I am getting quite
sick of going again and again over elementary books in mere school
fashion.

"To vary this, I have this term given one day a week in my senior class to
lecture _on_ books, viz. 1st, on Horace's _Odes_, which nine out of ten
have already read, and which I myself read with the junior class last
session (having engaged to do this before I guessed that the University
would select the same year for B.A.), and many of the junior class being
this year in my senior class. 2nd, on the _Epistles_ of Cicero, which are
enormously too long and too difficult for pupils to read, and in which,
nevertheless, candidates for honours at B.A. are liable to be examined. I
conjecture that somebody has seen this announcement of mine in our
prospectus, and imputes it to a _relaxation of discipline_ in my pupils
(indeed there is little enough, and always was, in the majority of mine;
they only want to scrape through their degree, and the University kindly
keeps its real demands at a minimum). On the contrary, it is an effort of
mine to make the lectures less unworthy of my more advanced pupils. I may
add that I have _always_ lectured more or less in this way on Cicero's
_Letters_.... At the same time I avow my entire dissatisfaction with
things as I have them. In June I have to print and publish the books in
which I will lecture from October to June next, _while I have not the
slightest idea who will be in the classes_. In August, out comes the
statement of University books for the following year, which often
increases my confusion. It is easier to complain of this than to remedy
it."

It is not difficult to understand Newman's point of view as regards the
almost impossibility of keeping in hand in one class a team of students--
some eagerly desirous of going forward into the real study of literature,
and others only anxious to "scrape through" for the purpose of obtaining
their degree.

Mrs. Kingsley Tarpey's reminiscences begin thus:--

I think it was in the summer of 1874 or 1875 that Professor Newman first
came to visit us. My mother had been much interested in some articles of
his on vegetarianism, and had corresponded with him on the subject, and
when the Annual Conference of the Vegetarian Society was held in
Manchester later on, he stayed with us. This visit was the beginning of a
very warm friendship with our family, which lasted close on twenty years.
During that time my mother corresponded regularly with Professor Newman,
but unfortunately only some eighteen or twenty of his letters have been
preserved. There is scarcely one of these, however, that does not contain
something of permanent interest and value.

I remember very well, in the days when we used to have visits from him,
that Professor Newman was looked upon by very many as a mere faddist. His
extreme views on several subjects no doubt took him out of range of the
sympathies of the "man in the street." But it is strange to find, on
looking through these letters, how advanced opinion is coming into line
with his so-called outrageous ideas of a generation ago. It would have
given him keen pleasure, if he could have lived till now, to see the
strides that have been made of late years in the Women's Suffrage
movement, and the admission of women to public bodies. In social and moral
reform, and in the Temperance movement also, the progress has been very
marked, and we may soon have an Act prohibiting the smoking of tobacco by
young boys--a matter on which Professor Newman had very strong views.
Last, but not least, the Vegetarian movement, in which he took so keen an
interest, has gained new vigour from the advocates of the simple life.

I remember that on the occasion of his first visit we children regarded
him with mingled awe and curiosity. His quaint appearance and his formal,
deliberate manner of speech made him seem to us like a being from another
world. We were at once fascinated and repelled, and I think he became at
first the object of our constant, though furtive, observation. But his
unvarying gentle kindness and extreme simplicity very soon won our
confidence, and later on an accident made us his fast friends and
admirers.

It happened that the second or third time that he came to Manchester for
the annual meeting of the Vegetarian Society, my father and mother were
away, and it fell to the younger members of the household to entertain our
distinguished visitor. It was an occasion looked forward to with
trepidation and misgiving, but we need not have felt alarmed. No one could
have been more genial in his attitude to the youthful housekeepers. He
would chat easily and pleasantly with even the youngest of us, and he
always managed to find some interesting topic. Sometimes he would give us
an account of the doings at the Conference during the day. I remember some
curious facts about some of the members. One man ate nothing but apples,
and considered them a complete and ideal food for man. Another varied his
diet between roots and nuts. He carried assorted strange nuts with him in
his pocket, and after his speech he presented some to the President. Our
Professor brought them home with him and wished us to try them, but I am
afraid that, with the conservative instinct of young animals, we
distrusted the unknown, and we did not venture. The Professor considered
that our molar teeth clearly indicated grain, roots, and nuts as our food,
and the incisors as clearly suggested fruit, but at that time he was in
some doubt about the canine teeth. At his request some of us gravely
cracked nuts with him, and after the experiment we agreed that human
beings more naturally crack nuts with the back teeth, where leverage is
most powerful. A suspicion remained that our pointed fangs _might_ have
been used to tear flesh!

During this same visit it was suggested that the Society should change its
name to one that would describe it more accurately, "Vegetarian,"
strictly, implying that the members would eat only vegetables. There was
much difficulty in finding a portmanteau word that would convey
vegetables, eggs, and milk. Professor Newman much disliked the idea of
calling it the VEM Society (the name that was afterwards adopted, I
think); his proposal was "Anti-creophagite," or "Anti-creophagist." But he
could get no support for this name; members objected that no one would
know what it meant or how to spell it. Professor Newman had been pained to
learn that only two or three people in the hall knew the Greek word.

He was very much interested in language, and it was characteristic of him
never to pass a word that he did not know. He had a great dislike and
contempt for _slang_, and he deplored the growing use of it, and the
impoverishment of the language that resulted. But dialect words, or old
words that lingered in some parts of the country, while they had dropped
out of common speech, interested him greatly. One day a younger sister of
mine brought him a footstool as he sat reading, and in offering it to him
called it a "buffet." It is not a word in common use, but I think we had
adopted it from the nursery rhyme about "Miss Muffett, who sat on a
buffet." The Professor was on the alert at once.

"That word is quite new to me," he said. "Did you say 'bussock'? I wonder
is that a Lancashire word, or does it come from Ireland? 'Bussock'! Will
you spell it for me, please?"

My sister was far too young and too shy to correct him, and after faintly
murmuring "buffet" again, she ran away in extreme confusion. I am afraid
"bussock" went down in the Professor's notebook as an interesting variant
of "hassock."

In this connection some delightful stories were told by Dr. Nicholson, of
Penrith, an old friend of Professor Newman's and of my father's. The
Professor was staying at Penrith, and the two friends had been walking up
a steep path. When they stopped to rest, the doctor was regretting that
his climbing days were virtually over.

"The truth is," he said humorously, "we are neither of us as steady on our
pins as we once were."

"Pins, Nicholson, pins! What are _pins_?" asked Professor Newman gravely.

On another occasion they were out walking together and the first Lord
Brougham passed them in an open carriage. Dr. Nicholson remarked upon Lord
Brougham wearing "goggles," and Professor Newman said, in his gentle
deliberate way, "Now, Nicholson, may I ask what you exactly mean by
'goggles'?"

The Professor wore hats that in those days were considered amazing: large
white or light grey hats made of soft felt. On one of his visits to
Penrith he had walked up from the station to the house, and he was
followed by a crowd of little boys shouting "Who's your hatter?" which was
a catch-phrase of the time. The Professor described to Dr. Nicholson what
an extraordinary interest the boys had shown. "They repeatedly asked me,"
he said, "to tell them who was my hatter, and really, Nicholson, at the
time I could not remember the man's name."

Miss Nicholson, of Penrith, adds another story which should have place
here.

"My own chief recollection of him," she writes, "is of a day when he and
the second Mrs. Newman came into Penrith with me, where I had some
shopping to do. On the way into the town Professor Newman said, 'You do
not seem to be very clear as to the history of John Brown and the battle
of Bull's Run.' I said I was not very clear about it, so he began from the
beginning, so to speak, and the story of John Brown lasted till we reached
home again. I went into shops to make my purchases, and on each occasion
as I came out Professor Newman took up his tale just where he had left
off. He showed no annoyance at the frequent interruptions or at my
inevitable lapses of attention. His wonderfully clear, distinct
enunciation, and his marvellous memory for facts, never faltered."

There was an extraordinary absence of humour about Professor Newman that
made him at times unconsciously very humorous. I wish I could remember the
quaint wording of an advertisement of his for a cook in a vegetarian
paper. There was a long and precise account of the services required for
"the smallest possible family," and application was to be made by letter
to "Emer. Prof. F. W. Newman," etc. We thought some of the cooks might be
puzzled to know what Emer. Prof. meant. I remember also an artless post
card he wrote after one visit explaining that he had forgotten his
_teeth_, and asking to have them sent after him.

He had a very odd theory about baldness in men. It sounds a little like a
joke, but I believe it was meant in all seriousness. He had observed that
men with a very strong growth of beard were more liable to go bald early
than those who had the hair on the face thin and scanty. He described this
as a kind of _landslip_, I remember, and his idea was that human beings
could only have a small crop of hair, and that a good crop on the chin
meant a failure higher up. And that, he thought, accounted for the fact
that women rarely go bald.

At the time of the visit I have described, our whole family had become
enthusiastic vegetarians--indeed, I may say the whole household of
fourteen, for the servants had followed suit. This was a great pleasure to
Professor Newman, for it was through his writings that my mother had first
become interested in the subject. He had great hopes at one time that she
would also share in some other crusades of his against alcohol, tobacco,
vaccination, etc. etc. He sent her a great number of leaflets and
pamphlets on all these subjects, but though my father was a non-smoker and
almost a total abstainer, he was so from habit and inclination and not
from any pledge, and I do not remember that the Professor made any convert
except myself. I came across a bundle of tracts of his which no one seemed
to be reading, and I devoured them all. For some years, from about the age
of fifteen, I was an enthusiastic follower of Professor Newman, even in
his most extreme ideas. I am afraid he never became aware of this,
however, for of course it was only with the older members of the family
that he would discuss such questions.

The most enjoyable visit we ever had from him was also the last of any
length that he paid us. I think it must have been in the summer of 1879 or
1880, when we were living in the country a few miles from Manchester. It
was then I first learnt what a delight a country walk might be. He joined
some of the younger members of the party who were taking the dogs out for
a run, and I do not think two hours were ever spent by us in a more
interesting and fascinating way. He had the rare and charming gift, in
talking to young people, of making them feel that he regarded them as
equals. And though he was imparting knowledge all the time, he had the air
of being really more interested in what they had to contribute. That walk
was a revelation to me, a kind of treasure trove of natural science.
Hitherto my love of nature had been almost entirely aesthetic and
poetical, and this walk with the Professor gave me a new pleasure and a
new interest in country life.

I should run into great length if I were to set down all the little traits
and incidents that go to make up the memory of that gentle and charming
personality. His eccentricities were entirely lovable, as we knew them,
and even when he meant to be severe his unconsciously humorous way of
putting things took away the sting, as when, one day at lunch, he pointed
at a jug of claret and asked, "What is that ugly black liquid? I say ugly
and black because I believe it to be some kind of wine."

He had kind and courteous ways with women, and he surprised one by his
thoughtfulness in domestic matters. There was no subject too small or too
remote for his consideration. I remember his showing us a new scientific
way to build a fire, lighting it from the top; and it is upon a lesson of
his on rural sanitation that I have based my own management of those
matters in our country home. I have a pleasant memory of his holding a
skein of wool for me to wind one wet afternoon, and of his telling me the
while of his observations of a family of _bugs_. He was travelling in the
East, and at some place where he stayed was much distressed by vermin. At
last he discovered that a procession of bugs came out nightly from a
certain crack in the plaster, and by removing the paper he could get a
very good view of the colony with the aid of a glass. He did not disturb
them, it is needless to say, but watched them during his stay, and learnt
many curious things about their habits and customs. He formed a very high
opinion of their intelligence, I remember.

One day he came in and found my mother and some of us sitting sewing; he
asked if he might read to us, and said that his mother and sister used to
like him to read to them when they had work to do. I do not remember in
the least what he read to us, though I am sure it was appropriate and
instructive; but I remember well that he stood while he read, and that his
delivery was as clear and as careful as if he had been reading to a large
audience.

After his second marriage we saw him but little, but my mother heard from
him now and then, and he often sent her articles he had written. In the
last years of his life he wrote but seldom. I give extracts from letters
over a period of about eighteen years.


FRANCIS NEWMAN IN PRIVATE LIFE
BY MRS. BAINSMITH, SCULPTOR

My father and mother were very great personal friends of Newman's,
consequently I saw a great deal of him during my early girlhood.

My father was the late George Bucknall, of Rockdene, Weston-super-Mare,
and for many years was a great invalid. He suffered from locomotor ataxy.
Professor Newman lived just across the road from our house: we could often
see him walking about his garden, or sitting at his library window, and
very often he came across to our house to discuss his books or letters
with my father.

As a young girl I remember the great fascination of his courtly, genial
manners. I shall never forget my first interview with him. It happened on
my return home from school for the holidays. Being much distressed at
having to change from the old pronunciation of Latin to the "new," it
occurred to my father that I should ask Professor Newman to help me. So I
went in to see him. He was sitting by the fire in large fur-lined boots
made of felt, and wearing two coats (for he always found it difficult to
keep sufficiently warm). When I stated my difficulty, he went to his
shelves with his wonderful smile (the room was lined from floor to ceiling
with books) and took out his translation of the _Iliad_, and read it to
me. Then he said quite casually, "Now I will read the same passage to you
in Latin." And he proceeded to read it aloud in a musical voice of
exquisite charm. I cannot express the pleasure which this gave me, nor how
it set me at my ease with him from that moment. He gave me a very warm
invitation to come again, and he would gladly help me in any holiday work
I wanted to do.

I was always specially struck with his way of talking about religion. He
was very reverent in what he said, and it was evident that he was at heart
deeply religious. I mention this because in later years it has been often
a shock to me to find him condemned by others for doubting revealed
religion.

The Professor's special views on foods were very strong, and he had a
great dislike for the custom of rearing cattle for food. Once he gave a
dinner party to show how many choice courses could be served with
vegetarian recipes only. As my mother was ill at the time, I was invited
to go with my father. I remember the delightful way in which he received
us. He presented the "youngest lady" (myself) to the "oldest gentleman"--
the late Professor Jarrett, who was an old college friend of his, and who
was staying with Newman. I remember the awe with which I gazed at him. Mr.
and Mrs. Dymond, Mr. and Mrs. Temperley Grey, and Mr. and Mrs. F. G.
Comfort were among the other guests.

Once, when he was talking to my mother, he said: "You are wearing a nice
coat" (a black fur one). "I suppose it is very dear? How much a yard do
you think it would cost?" As he spoke he looked down at his own coat (the
outside one of three), and said: "I have had this coat twenty years and
cannot match the cloth." This was not to be wondered at, for it was a long
hairy one--quite green with age. Another day I came into the room and
heard the Professor say to my mother quite seriously: "I never can
understand how it is that my hat always interests the idle little boys in
the street. They say as I pass them, 'Where did you get that hat?'
Everyone wears a hat of one shape or another, and I really fail to see why
_mine_ should be so very interesting."

He was wearing a soft felt hat with a very broad brim, set far back on his
head; and with his peculiar American-looking beard and thin grey locks
that came down over the high Gladstone collar which he always wore, and a
black and white shepherd's-plaid scarf wound round his neck and twisted
over in front with its ends tucked into his waistcoat, he looked
sufficiently odd.

I remember once running as fast as I could to catch the post, and as I
started I saw the Professor in front of me, evidently bent on attaining
the same object. Great was his glee when at last I did overtake him
(though I had some difficulty, for he ran well even at the age of
seventy), and he said, "I thought I would give you a good race, but you
have caught me up after all!"

One day he called just as I was going for a ride. He gave me quite a
lecture on the dangers of the side-saddle, and said very earnestly that
women ought to ride "astride" (at that time this was a thing _incompris_
in England). He declared that women in other countries were accustomed to
riding thus, and that it was the only safe method of riding.

At the time of his brother's being made Cardinal, some ardent admirers of
the Professor's in Australia sent him a very beautiful silver inkstand.
His delight and pleasure in receiving such a present was great. But that
people should think of him in that way was a great surprise, for his
humility as regarded his powers was a very noticeable fact about him
always. The design of the inkstand was one of great beauty and good
workmanship. It represented ostriches standing under a palm tree, and
beside them was an exquisitely made silver feather for a pen.

[Illustration: FRANCIS NEWMAN
EMERITUS PROFESSOR OF LONDON UNIVERSITY
Enlargement of photograph of the bronze bust done from life by Mrs.
Georgina Bainsmith, sculptor, of St. Ives, Cornwall, which is now in
University College, London.]

One afternoon my father, mother, and I were all sitting reading, when the
door opened and the Professor walked in. He held his hat in his hand, and
a large rug was fastened round his shoulders like a shawl (over his three
coats), and in his hands he held a small brown-paper parcel. As he came in
he said, "I don't know why your maid did not announce me--I see she is a
stranger"; and then turning to my mother, who had been ill, he said, "My
cook has made a new vegetarian dish for my lunch to-day, and I requested
her to make some for you, as I am quite sure it will suit you." The dish
turned out to be delicious--one of those which his wonderful vegetarian
cook was so constantly inventing. [Footnote: The parlourmaid, on being
reprimanded for not showing Newman into the drawing-room, said she thought
she was only to show "gentlemen" into the drawing-room!]

Newman had a theory that plants feel pain, and that we should treat all
vegetable life as if it were sentient, and care for it accordingly.

The Professor was always ready to respond to any appeals for the
advancement of the Woman's Suffrage movement. At that time it was very
unpopular, but whenever we had meetings in favour of it at our house he
was always the moving spirit.

At Weston-super-Mare Newman lived a life of great seclusion, and I believe
I was the only young girl who visited him constantly--indeed, ours was the
only house to which he came almost daily. Once when he was very ill, I
think I was the only visitor admitted; and as Hannah, his old servant,
ushered me in with a smile of pleasure, I heard a curious sound. On
looking back to the hall door I saw a huge netting hanging from where the
letter-box should be, trailing along the floor like a huge sausage,
crammed full of letters of enquiry for the Professor. Hannah told me "the
master had not been able to attend to them."

I had long possessed a great wish to devote my time to the study of
modelling, and my father's great wish was that I should devote myself to
Art. In 1885 I gained the distinction of a silver medal at Taunton
Exhibition for modelling some flowers in clay on vases, with low relief
panels. This pleased the Professor very much; and when, one day, I told
him how keenly I wanted to model a bust of his head and shoulders, he
smiled, and said, with an odd boyish, shy sort of pleasure, "Was he good-
looking enough to be immortalized?" and added he would be delighted to sit
to _me_ for his portrait, though he had always refused to sit to others to
be photographed.

So he used to come and talk to my mother, and thus I was able to work at
my modelling with ease. Great was my delight when I found I possessed
power over the clay, and was succeeding in making a portrait which
everyone considered a good one. The Professor insisted on my being very
particular over the collar and the scarf. (His collars always had to be
made for him, as he could not buy in shops the kind he wore.) In later
years of hard student life that followed, for me, with the added
distinction of other medals, nothing ever came up to the excitement caused
by my portrait of the Professor. The bust [Footnote: This bust is now
standing in the general library of London University, with this
inscription:--

                       "FRANCIS WILLIAM NEWMAN
                       (brother of the Cardinal),

             Emeritus Professor of University College, London.
                Natus June 27, 1805. Obiit October 4th, 1897.
   As an expression of the great esteem and affection in which he was held
         by all who knew him, this bust (modelled from life by the
               Sculptor) is presented to this University by

                                         GEORGINA BAINSMITH, Sculptor,
"St. Ives, Cornwall." Aug. 1907.] has always been one of my greatest
treasures; and after the lapse of years that have gone by since it was
first modelled, I still revere and reverence his memory and his truly
beautiful life. Whatever he wrote, _this_ is what his actual life and
deeds expressed strongly: "_he lived to do good_." This is what impressed
me most as a young girl, and my life has been richer and nobler for the
honour and privilege of knowing Francis Newman.

                                           Georgina Bainsmith,
_n�e_ Bucknall. St. Ives, Cornwall.

[Illustration: ANOTHER VIEW OF THE BUST IN UNIVERSITY COLLEGE (OF FRANCIS
NEWMAN), ON ITS PLINTH
BY MRS. GEORGINA BAINSMITH, SCULPTOR, OF ST. IVES, CORNWALL
The Reproduction is by Mr. J. C. Douglas, of Strives, Cornwall, and was
photographed from the clay before it was cast.]




CHAPTER VII

LETTERS TO ONE OF HIS GREATEST FRIENDS, DR. NICHOLSON


Dr. Nicholson, a native of Barbadoes, was only fourteen years old when his
father, Rev. Mark Nicholson, came to England. [Footnote: I am indebted for
these facts of Dr. Nicholson's life to some printed data kindly sent me by
his daughter.] He was sent to a private school at Bristol, and went on to
Oxford, where he took his B.A. degree. Later on he went to study Oriental
languages at G�ttingen; and there he became the pupil of the famous Dr.
Ewald, Professor of Oriental Languages. At the end of his work there Dr.
Nicholson obtained the Ph.D. degree. The Professor and he became close
friends, and a correspondence began between them, on Dr. Nicholson's
departure, which lasted unbroken till the Professor's death. He was
perfectly conversant with Latin and Greek, and also Arabic, while Hebrew
was almost as familiar a language; and as for his knowledge of Sanscrit,
Ethiopian, Gothic, Chaldean, Syriac, French, German, Spanish, Italian,
Danish, it was as perfect as could be. He had, in the truest sense, the
_gift_ of tongues. Sixteen languages, indeed, he had mastered besides his
own. He had, in very truth, a perfect genius for them. And it was no
slipshod attainment with him to learn any one of the sixteen; for by the
time he had mastered a language he practically knew it inside _and_ out.
He loved this study perhaps more than any other, because it gave him a
truer insight into Holy Scripture. Many articles on the Hebrew Scriptures
were contributed by him to _Kitto's Biblical Encyclopaedia_, and there are
many allusions to these in Newman's letters which follow. He translated
Dr. Ewald's _Hebrew Grammar_, and thus it became well known to Englishmen.

[Illustration: DR. JOHN NICHOLSON
FROM A PHOTO TAKEN AT G�TTINGEN BETWEEN 1855 AND 1860
BY KIND PERMISSION OF MISS NICHOLSON, PENRITH]

Dr. Nicholson lived for forty years at Penrith. He did not care to go much
in society; he was too true a student for that. For the two studies (and
social life _is_ certainly one) are so diametrically opposed regarded as
pursuits, that it is almost impossible to make the day long enough to
devote oneself to both. "Love to study" might very truly have been
recognized as his life motto, even as it was that of one of the greatest
students at Harrow a few years ago, Rev. Thomas Hancock, for both men
cared nothing for fame. Dr. Nicholson was a man of strong religious
tendencies, and though he was in no way narrow in his views of other
religious societies, yet he was decidedly most in touch with the Anglican
Church. As a politician he was a Liberal. Fifty years ago he married the
second daughter of Captain Waring, R.N., and had six children.

He died (in November, 1886), as Rev. E. W. Chapman, Vicar of Penrith,
said, "in perfect peace, with our Lord's Name and our Lord's last words on
his lips. His presence in the town, his loving sympathy with poor people,
his kindly greeting to all who knew him, we shall miss very much...." He
added that "his whole life was spent in the study of Holy Scriptures...."

Francis Newman was his lifelong friend, and the letters which follow will
plainly show that it was a friendship of kindred spirits: the friendship
of two who had a great many interests in common, and were therefore in
close touch with each other.


 _To Dr. Nicholson from Francis Newman._

"_17th Feb._, 1843.

"My dear Nicholson,

       *       *       *       *       *

"I hope you will not bother your little boy with any foreign language too
soon. _Soak_ him well and long in his native English, or he will never
come to any good, I fear. If he sees a father in love with German, he will
of himself quite early take to it. The great difficulty (I should expect)
will be to secure that it may not be too early. Of course you see about
the Anti-Corn Law doings? I think I shall before long be as fanatical as
anyone about it: I rage the more inwardly because I have no vent. I am
eager to sign a solemn league and covenant about total and immediate
repeal, which I suppose and hope they will get up...."


The next letter in order refers to "Berber," a language bearing some
relation to the Arabic, over which Newman was at work with his dictionary.
It also touches on his own ill-health and enforced idleness. It is dated
from Manchester, October, 1843:--

"I have been suffering indisposition which was aggravated in reality by
overrating its importance. My medical adviser said it was organic
affection of the heart; in spite of my great incredulity ... I took other
advice afterwards in Derby, where I went to see one of my sisters, and am
now assured that it was nothing but 'the great sympathetic' that
disordered the heart. I was nearly three weeks in the country and in
idleness, and gained much benefit from it. I spent much indoors time in
learning to use water-colours, and got a nice pony to ride, and was a
great deal in the air, and very early to go to bed; and took no medicines
but tonics and a colocynth pill on occasion. Myself and wife both return
much better. I believe I knocked myself up by excitement of mind over the
Berber and working at my dictionary, At Prichard's advice I have lately
written to Bunsen to ask his aid in getting the dictionary published. I
think it may be of use, as adding one more known language in North Africa
to those already accessible, which are, I believe, Arabic, Coptic, Gheez,
and Amharic."

In June of the same year he says, in respect of Kitto's _Encyclopaedia_:
"Your _Ahasuerus_ shows you to me as an invaluable contributor to him: I
could not have written that (if I had had the learning) without an attack
on Ezra and Esther about the word!... Mr. Jowett has sent me (at Bunsen's
and Prichard's request) the chief part of the transcript of the Berber MS.
in the possession of the Bible S----. I suppose I must do my best now to
get deeper into the language."

In May, 1845, Newman has been greatly interested in translating into
Greek, English verses "to test the _possibility_ of retaining any Greek
accent such as the books mark in singing." He has tried translating "Flow
on, thou shining river" in Greek, so that it might be sung to Moore's own
tune. One does not come across in his letters much reference to music, nor
does it seem as if he had any great taste for it--at any rate, not in the
same way as had Cardinal Newman, who had a real passion for it in earlier
years.

The later part of the letter has to do with the much-vexed question of the
"Maynooth Controversy."

Newman writes from "4, _Cavendish Place_, 12th _May_ 1845":--


"My dear Nicholson,

       *       *       *       *       *

"I venture to enclose two tunes for the Sapphic metre, Greek and Latin, to
which my sister, at my request, has added an accompaniment. Will you be so
kind as to get Mrs. Nicholson to play the piano while you sing it, and
tell me what is to be said to it? While dabbling in some of these tunes, I
have translated divers scraps of English poetry into Greek,
experimentally, especially to test the _possibility_ of retaining any
Greek accent, such as the books mark, in singing. It seems to me a clear
impossibility, whether emphasis or sharpness of note predominated in the
accent. I have translated 'Flow on, thou shining river' to Moore's own
tune, so as to retain Greek accent _as well as_ quantity in exact
agreement to the music ... the commonest metres puzzle me most....

"I wonder what you think of the Maynooth Controversy? To me it has been so
puzzling a one that I have been heartily glad that nothing obliged me to
express an opinion.

"Some things seem clear to me: (1) That a measure for cutting down the
Church of Ireland, as by Lord Morpeth's Bill, would have been, and would
now be, far better in every respect than this of Sir R. Peel; (2) that the
present is a mode of perpetuating the _sinecure_ Church of Ireland by
paying the Romish, and real Church, out of English and Scotch funds. Hence
it is popular with many Irish Protestants, of which Sir R. Peel _boasts!_"
[Francis Newman seems to forget, in his frequent allusions to
"Protestants", that there was a National Church in Ireland, as in England,
long before the word which sprang into being at the Reformation had found
its feet.]

"If they (the Government) were pleading that a Romanist people ought to be
allowed to support their own Romish clergy, they could justly claim that
we, as a Protestant people, would not interfere on the ground of our
dislike to Romish doctrine. But when they demand to support Romanism out
of common funds, they implicate _us_ in the question, whether (on the
whole) _that_ religion contains more truth or error; and I think they
_force_ those who see it in black colours to urge the No Popery cry. So
far, I am disposed to justify the Anti-Maynooth war. Sir R. Inglis may be
a bigot in his view of Romanism ... but I think he is _not_ 'out of order'
in intruding the religious demerit of Romanism into a parliamentary
discussion. If this measure had been thrown out, I fear Ireland would have
been awfully embittered. Yet I hope the fierce opposition will stop any
future scheme of keeping the sinecure church untouched and endowing the
priests with imperial money.... Thus I halt between two opinions."


In November, 1843, Newman touches briefly upon the Oxford movement thus:--

"You do not seem to know that the _Record_ has been making a fuss this
last month about the Bishop of Oxford's public declaration that he never
requested my brother to suppress Tract 90. All he did was to suggest that
'the publication of the Tracts be discontinued,' which meant that there
was to be no No. 91. The Bishop indignantly disclaims the idea that my
brother had been disobedient.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I am, for a week past, resting from Berber, having written to M. d'Av�zac
in Paris to ask whether a report I heard is true, that he is preparing a
dictionary of it. I have ordered an Amharic grammar, too, and want to
compare them, but I abhor the Ethiopic type!.... I cannot get Kitto to
tell me whether the sale of the _Cyclopaedia_ is satisfactory."

As regards Irish affairs:--

"I have lately spoken at a meeting of the Friends of Ireland, and have
sent to the _Guardian_ newspaper here, [Footnote: Manchester Guardian.] in
reply to their demand that I would specify some plan, a paper on _Fixity
of Tenure_ for the cottiers of Ireland. I feel no doubt that this must ere
long become the great Irish question, of even more interest than the
ecclesiastical one...."

And in March he gives more news of his "Berber":--

"I am again at work at the Berber MS., which I have not touched since the
1st October. The Royal Asiatic Society have accepted my offer to edit it.
At present their pages are occupied with the history of Darius Hystaspis
from the rocks at (I think) Besittoon, near Hemadon--the most curious
document which recent research has brought to light, and, I am told,
confirming in detail the accounts of Herodotus."

The two following letters to Dr. Nicholson deal chiefly with matters
connected with John Sterling (who had recently died) and with Newman's
arrangements for adopting one of his children.

Perhaps most people are familiar with Carlyle's biography of Sterling, but
it may be as well to say here that he was a brilliant writer, a Liberal in
politics, and interested himself keenly in General Torrijos and his group
of Spanish exiles. When at college, at the age of nineteen, he came under
the influence of Julius Hare, his tutor. When he was twenty-six he again
fell in with Hare at Bonn, and here came to pass one of the mistakes of
his life. Chiefly through Hare's influence he took deacon's orders, and he
worked under Hare at Hurstmonceaux for the best part of a year. Very soon
afterwards he began to feel the breach growing wider between his own
convictions and those taught by the Church. He never, consequently, took
priest's orders. Through grievous ill-health his winters were passed at
Bordeaux, in Italy, or at Madeira. He died at Ventnor 18th Sept., 1843.


"While riding to-day I was meditating on the continual strain which the
pulling of my horse made on the left arm, while the right was idle; and it
struck me that this might conduce to the size of the muscles on that side.
Also my wife always leans on the left, as being stronger in her right
arm.... The hardest work I am put to is holding an umbrella against a
fierce wind; and in this my right hand certainly beats my left.... I have
had no bad nights since I left Manchester, except two which I attribute to
an excitement on meeting my sister, whom I had not seen for eight
years.... I mean to return home next Saturday. Since I left you an
important change of prospect in my domestic economy has occurred. I have
accepted the responsible office of guardian to the eldest son (thirteen
years old) of my dear dying friend Sterling, whom I went to see at
Ventnor, Isle of Wight. The lad will come to Manchester next week, and in
future live in our house, and I trust I shall love him as a son. He seems
a very affectionate boy. His mother died about eighteen months ago. I
found my poor friend on the whole stronger than I had expected, yet
steadily declining: long since convinced that his case was hopeless (and
indeed expecting his end sooner than those around him), yet thoroughly
calm and resigned to the gracious will of Him Who had so ordained it. Not
to mourn over talents so high and a will so upright thus prematurely to be
lost to us were impossible, even did I not know how truly brotherly in
affection is his heart to us. He will leave six orphan children. Yet this
calamity is relieved by the tenderness of his brother to them, and by the
existence of adequate supplies for all reasonable wants.... Tell your
little boy that I have to-day been out with a nephew of mine (Johnny
Kennaway) nearly of _his_ age, and he rides a little white pony. It was
almost too spirited for him, and I was once afraid it would run away with
him; but I could not do anything to help him but pull up my own horse
short and call to him to do the same....

"Believe me, my dear Nicholson,

"Your affectionate friend,

"Francis W. Newman."


This letter was written from Escot, Ottery St. Mary, Devon, [Footnote: His
wife's old home.] in September, 1844.

In 1841 Ward of Balliol brought out a very strong pamphlet, and accused
the Reformation of many changes in the English Church; as Rev. J. B.
Mozley says in his _Letters_, it was "a kind of strong interpretation of
No. XC, just as Pusey's ... is a mollifying one, proving that No. XC says
nothing but what our divines have said before." As regards "the statute",
the Hebdomadal Board had early in this year "proposed a new statute" for
the conferring of B.D. degrees.


"_30th Dec._, 1844.

"... I suppose you are busy with _Ewald's_ [Footnote: Dr. Nicholson was
the pupil of Ewald, and the first translator of his _Hebrew Grammar_.]
_Grammar_.... I shall be more at rest whenever circumstances put me into
that direct conflict with current opinion, which I dare not go out of my
way to provoke, and yet feel it to be my natural element. My antagonism to
'things as they are'--politically, scientifically, and theologically--
grows with my growth; and I believe that every year that delays change
more and more endangers destruction to our social framework."


I cannot forbear quoting here from a letter recently received by me from a
distant cousin of mine, Mr. George Grey Butler. He says: "I remember once
at table Mr. Newman saying (when asked his attitude on various public
questions), 'Oh! I am anti-slavery, anti-alcohol, anti-tobacco, anti-
_everything!_' with a twinkle in his eye which caused an outburst of mirth
amongst his listeners."

Rev. J. B. Mozley goes on to say, "Pusey will not take the test," (or
statute) "that he has declared publicly ... Hussey the Professor, Eden,
Baden Powell, and several Liberals, Price of Rugby, are all strong against
it.... Gladstone is very strong, and thinks every exertion ought to be
made against it."

On 7th Oct., 1844, Newman is expecting the arrival of the son of his old
friend, John Sterling. "Edward Sterling will probably come to us to-day;
his trunk is here already. I do not think you know that his father's
earthly career is over.... Sterling's will is like himself. He has so
strong a feeling of the wrong and absurdity of laying responsibility on
people, and yet fettering their discretion, that he has left the fullest
powers possible both to his brother as executor to manage his property and
the other children, and to me over Edward. He has directed �300 a year to
be paid me for Edward.... He was indeed a noble soul, and few know what a
loss it is; but those few rate it high. As Captain Sterling (his brother)
said, he had been accumulating wisdom all his life, and could he have
lived twenty years more to pour it out he would indeed have left behind
him a precious legacy.... Thomas Carlyle wrote a beautiful letter over
him. His little son knows not at all what a father he has lost; and as for
me, I want to tell him, but feel how hard it is."

In 1845 the taxes upon corn had caused great distress in England. But far
worse was the trouble in Ireland; for practically, through the potato
famine, owing to the thousands of acres which were blighted, there were
literally thousands dying of starvation. Cheap food was far more difficult
to get at there than in England, and at length at the close of the year
Sir Robert Peel said he would repeal the Corn Laws altogether. In 1846 the
Bill with this end in view passed through the House of Commons and House
of Lords and became law. But the consequence of this measure was in effect
the signal for Peel's going out of office, and his place was taken by Lord
John Russell.

To return to Newman's letter.

"You perhaps know that the Liberals at Oxford are likely to side with Ward
against the Heads. I do not see what else they can do; and I devoutly hope
that the tangle will be irremovable except by abolishing subscriptions.
Price of Rugby is all in a bristle about it. I much admire his spirit.
Baden Powell protests _in toto_ against the statute."


"_6th Nov._, 1845.

"My dear Nicholson,

       *       *       *       *       *

"Your news about the potatoes unfortunately is no matter of private
information, but rings through our ears, and I am increasingly doubtful
whether we are to hope for open ports. I believe the League is right in
saying that Sir Robert's _next move_ will be for an absolutely free trade;
but _when_ that next move is to be must depend in part on his colleagues;
and the country must perhaps suffer much before they come over, or he
gains boldness to defy their opposition....

"If you have been reading the _New Prospective_, I dare say you will guess
that the article on 'Church Reform' is mine. I was not sorry to get it
printed, even in such a quarter--(though I know no other periodical that
is free enough to dare to print it. The _Westminster Review_ is not enough
in religious circles),--because I want to send it to Churches of various
grades, and get their opinion. I fear I have expressed myself too
sanguinely of Dissenting Co-operation. They seem to say they will support
_nothing_ that does not go to length of alienating the whole Church
property to secular uses."


On 16th April, 1846, politics are touched on again.


"_16th April_, 1846.

"My dear Nicholson,

"I have sent one or two 'Leagues' of late to my brother-in-law in
Devonshire, thinking that they had in them matter of instruction to
him.... Does not Peel appear of late to have made himself as little as of
old? Yet I rejoice in his obstructing a mere Whig ministry of the orthodox
kind; and although his course has heaped misery on Ireland, nothing less
severe, I imagine, would brace England up to the stringent remedies which
alone can save that country;--nor are we _yet_ screwed to the point!...

"I have finished the Berber MS. as far as the Arabic had been translated,
viz. twenty-eight folio pages: four more remain, of which I cannot
understand either the Berber or the Arabic. I suppose neither could Mr.
Hodgson understand them; for while he professes to have translated the
whole of the Arabic, he has quietly omitted these. I naturally turn myself
to your aid. I have quite ascertained that the Arabic and Berber _do
correspond_....

"I am trying to move my house, i.e. to get into a new shell, further from
the smoke. [Footnote: Newman had not yet left Manchester New College.]
Edward Sterling's little brother, aged five and a half, is now with us;
and especially for his sake I desire to have pure air.... I am sorry to
say she" (Newman's wife) "is becoming more and more afflicted with
rheumatism. I am about to send her to Malvern, where one of her sisters
now is, to try a hydropathist physician there--a regularly educated man.
As she must take little Johnny S. and her own maid, and another to help in
bathings, and look after the child, it is quite a nomad eruption and
waggon-load of Scythians.

"My sister's child, a boy of Johnny S.'s age, fell into the fire six or
seven weeks ago, and was almost burnt to death. The poor little fellow
endured agonies, but is at last nearly recovered.... It seems a wonderful
recovery."


The next letter notifies his election as Latin Professor in University
College.


"_London. 6th July_, 1846.

"My dear Nicholson,

"A few words just to say that on Saturday I was elected Latin Professor in
L. U. C., and to thank you once more for your valuable aid. Hoping Mrs. N.
continues well, and with kind regards to her, and the children,

"I am, ever yours affectionately,

"Francis W. Newman."




CHAPTER VIII

LETTERS TO DR. NICHOLSON FROM PROFESSOR NEWMAN DURING THE FOLLOWING YEARS:
1850 TO 1859


The first of special interest in this series of letters is dated March,
1850, and concerns Newman's Latin studies and also Indian and China
affairs.


"Sir Charles Trevelyan is doing his best to introduce the English alphabet
into Indian languages. He believes it, with me, to be of political,
educational, and religious importance; but he seems to be opposed by all
the English scholars. Edwin Norris says that even Sanscrit imported its
alphabet from a foreign tongue. The number of primitive alphabets is so
few, the diversity of languages so great, that nearly all tongues must
have adopted foreign alphabets. I cannot therefore understand the almost a
priori objections raised by the learned.... Do you attend to Indian
affairs? The disbanding of our Native Indian armies, the prospect of a
sure surplus in the Indian treasury, with the necessity of a conciliatory
policy to all the Indian princes as soon as we are disarmed, seem to me as
light pouring in through a dark cloud. But I am not easy (far from it)
until we get out of this Chinese scrape. I have for years maintained that
the more we fight against China the more we shall teach them the art of
war; and unless we tear the empire in pieces by aiding insurrections, they
must beat us at last, and become masters in the Indian seas. We cannot
contend against three hundred and eighty millions of ingenious,
industrious, homogeneous men under a single monarch with compact country,
splendid rivers and harbours, unsurpassed soil and climate--if once we
drive them to learn the art of war from America, as Peter the Great learnt
it from Europe. But I seem to be _insanus inter sobrios_, for nobody
accepts this thought from me.

"Hearty regards to you all.

"Ever yours,

"F. W. Newman."


It will be remembered that in 1851, though not until December, Louis
Napoleon, nephew of Napoleon Bonaparte, had been successful in his aim of
becoming President of the French Republic. But he had practically led his
army through a sea of blood to reach this autocratic position. Later, in
1852, he made the French people designate him "Emperor of the French"
under the title of Napoleon III.

Lord Russell had, with his ministers, brought their time of office to an
end; and Lord Derby came in as Prime Minister at the head of a
Conservative Party. He only remained in office a short time, however, and
his successor was Lord Aberdeen, and Mr. Gladstone was Chancellor of the
Exchequer.

In the letter which follows, Newman vindicates the honour of Kossuth,
whose friend and helper he was when Kossuth came to England for funds to
set going the new Hungarian revolution against Austria. With the views of
Charles Dickens, of course, Newman had not the slightest sympathy.


"7 P.V.E.,
"_19th Dec._, 1851.

"My dear Nicholson,

       *       *       *       *       *

"I never see Dickens' _Household Narrative_, and therefore cannot answer;
but I do not believe there is any 'alternative side' against Kossuth's
character. (Dickens is, in my judgment, a foolish man; he writes on
centralization and despotism like an Austrian: however, so does Carlyle
often.) But all that can be said against Kossuth is, that up to the age of
twenty-two or twenty-three he was a thoughtless young man, who liked
hunting and gambling. Since that age he is irreproachable, the proof of
which is, that the Austrian _Times_ has not a word to say against him.
Their libel about the Orphan Fund was at once refuted by Count Ladislaus
Vay, but they would not insert Count Vay's letter, or even acknowledge it.
I think, indeed, the Continental Republicans may be proud of their
leaders.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Lord Palmerston seems to me to be entangled in _routine_ and old creeds,
so that he does not do all the justice he might to his better wishes; but
I also think he loves _place_ better than to carry out those wishes....

"Ever yours heartily,

"F. W. Newman."


The letter in January, 1853, which is next in order, is largely concerned
with Mazzini. As is well known, Mazzini was an Italian patriot and
Republican, born in the same year as was Newman. When he was only sixteen,
seeing the refugees who fled from the unfortunate rising in Piedmont, he
determined then and there to rescue his country when he should be old
enough to do so. He made "the first great sacrifice of his life" in giving
up the study of literature (which he loved) for direct political action.
He joined the Carbonari in 1829, though he was not in sympathy with their
aims or organization.

In 1830 he was imprisoned by the Sardinian police. There, in his prison
cell, he thought out his plan of action for his country, and on being
released he went and organized the "Young Italy Association." The object
of it was to teach the mass of the people first to know their rights, and
then to obtain them. The end of all his efforts for his people as regarded
himself was this:--

In 1832 he was expelled from the country, but he managed to remain hidden
at Marseilles; and from that time for twenty years he led "a life of
voluntary imprisonment within the four walls of a little room." In 1844
Mazzini accused the English Government of having opened his letters and
told their contents to the authorities of Italy. This set the whole of
England against him, but Carlyle defended him in great measure, and
testified to the worthiness of his noble struggle for his country's
freedom. Later, in 1848, when the Lombard revolt broke out, he took the
part of the revolutionaries with vigour.

In 1852 he planned the revolt at Mantua, and in 1853 at Milan. Others were
set going later. He had started in London (with Kossuth) the European
Association, and issued in September, 1855, its "republican manifesto." He
strongly condemned the agreement made in 1859 between Napoleon III and
Piedmont, because he foresaw its inevitable consequences. Mazzini,
Garibaldi, and Cavour were a trio who largely influenced their country's
destiny. Garibaldi has been called the knight-errant; Mazzini, the prophet
of Italian unity; and Cavour was the hub which formed the centre of the
wheel of Italy's fortunes.

[Illustration: FACSIMILE OF LETTER FROM FRANCIS NEWMAN, DECEMBER, 1855]


"7 P.V.E.
"Friday night, _28th Jan._, 1853.

"My dear Nicholson,

       *       *       *       *       *

"As regards Mazzini, I am both glad and sorry. I cannot pretend to know
the _truth_, and fear to say what may unjustly disparage him; but he has
fallen a little in my secret judgment. I am _told_ (and I cannot test the
assertion) that Mazzini wrote to Italy to _implore_ his countrymen to be
patient, and not to make any attempts at resistance, even though the best
among them were slaughtered; and added: But if you will and must make your
attempt _now_, then by all means I shall come--not to conquer with you;
for of that I have no hope--but to die with you. Now I cannot learn
whether this was simultaneously with his writing to tell us that he was in
high hopes of success, and only wanted �3000 to turn probability into
something like certainty. If it was simultaneous, he is not the less
patriot; but he thinks 'the point of honour' requires he should tell a lie
to his English friends in order to get the wherewith to die a martyr's
death; and it makes it very hard to trust his simple truth in future. But
if (as one friend of his thinks) Mazzini's own opinion has changed, it
lowers one's notion of his discernment. In fact, it is scarcely credible
to _me_. There are those, I find, who have lately helped him to money,
expressly thinking it was a going to martyrdom, but believing he was bent
on it, and that possibly he may now do more good to Italy by his death
than ever he can do by his life. I cannot take this view. I believe the
tyrants would have the good sense to destroy him so secretly that no moral
effect should follow from his death; and if he utterly disapproved of an
outbreak, I do not understand the 'honour' which should make him go to
useless destruction when his life may be so valuable. It is not the same
thing to an exile as to a soldier in a rank, for the exile necessarily
comes too late. However, I do not know whether at this instant Mazzini may
be disguised in Italy: he is so retired and so stealthy. I expect he will
(be) betrayed sooner or later, if he plays so bold a game. Nevertheless I
am glad that (for whatever reason) the Italians are still quiet. Louis
Napoleon will certainly sooner or later get embroiled; and unless there
were new facts unknown to me ... I earnestly hope they will wait. The
Germans are a slow people; but they will move in time. Every German I see
believes this.... 'We without them cannot be made perfect,' seems to me
the clue to European oppressions. While stupid barbarism exists in masses,
it will be the tool of tyranny against the more educated and refined and
wealthy....

"Ever yours,
"F. W. Newman."


In November, 1855, he discusses public affairs, with relation to Louis
Napoleon, with Dr. Nicholson:--

"....I should indeed like to have the talk on public affairs which you
suggested; but things have moved on since then! Friends of mine dread that
the difficulties of French finance will precipitate Louis N. into a base
peace. I argue,--it will then be into one so base that the French will not
endure it. For the Russians _know_ the French difficulties; and if
proposals of peace come first from France, or if they see French action
become slacker, they will yield _nothing_, and make sure of a peace which
saves all their territory and reserves all their free action.... Only
yesterday came the news of Omar Pasha's 5th November victory. Even if it
be exaggerated, still the repulse at Kars and this new defeat make it
impossible for Russia to make peace _now_ without a humiliation such as L.
N. cannot attempt to remove. It _may_ so be that L. N. will be blown up by
his finance and by popular discontent; it may also be that his
difficulties will lead him to make popular concessions to the spirit of
freedom, as is usual when great sacrifices are demanded of a nation; or it
may be that he will get through with a struggle, putting French finance on
a healthier footing than has ever been yet. But I think, if he stands, he
_must_ carry on the war; and the more he feels his dangers, the more
vehemently will he resolve to stick at nothing necessary for success, and
will bid high to get Sweden to join us, which means to despoil Russia of
Finland and Poland.

"And if he is overthrown all Italy will rise, and after it Hungary, and
after it Germany and Poland....

"It grieves me much that Kossuth has united his name with Ledru Rollin's;
and altogether I think Kossuth is so _soured_ by the misconduct of the
Western Cabinets as to lose his soundness of judgment and fairness of
reasoning.... Through 1854 his tone became more demagogic, less dignified,
more defiant to authorities. He is now contemptuous to the British
_nation_ also, though I think it has throughout displayed precisely the
sound instinct which he so often ascribes to nations, and from which he
says a statesman must catch his inspiration. Our _nation_ did not know
what he knew--that Austria had given just ground of war to Turkey--that
Turkey was ready in October, 1853, to ally with Hungary against Austria;
nor could it know what were the military facilities for overthrowing
Austria, nor whether the stubborn resistance of Louis Napoleon was what
forced Aberdeen into his policy. But the nation since the Russian invasion
of Hungary has practically felt how dangerous to all foreign liberty is
the Russian power, and the absolute necessity of repressing and curtailing
it; and this determination of the people has made the war a reality, has
given power to that side of the Cabinet which alone was willing to go
forward, has displayed itself equally in our lowest distress and our chief
triumph, which Kossuth ought to honour....

"I doubt whether his union with Ledru Rollin is approved by any eminent
Hungarian in England.

"While I regret all this, I yet expect Kossuth to be great again whenever
action in Hungary recommences; but he cannot bear _in_action well; and,
alas! I make no doubt his private resources cannot bear delays. I almost
begin to fear that he _covets_ to be driven publicly to America by our
Government, as less ignominious than being starved into the same step. I
cannot understand ... how he fails to see that _if_ we weaken Russia we
strengthen the chances of liberty, though Aberdeen would not allow his
particular policy in 1853-4. We are doing _so very much_ more than he
asked of the Americans in 1852 that the tone he assumes is wonderful. And
then to scoff as he does, as though we had done _nothing_ in destroying
the Russian Black Sea Fleet and overthrowing the whole prestige of their
military superiority. To have been beaten by the Turks is still _more_
humiliating.... I wonder whether you have any alarm about America. I
_should_ have some alarm if Nicaragua and the Mosquito land were the topic
of quarrel; for I think the Americans would really fight us as a single
nation to hinder us establishing ourselves on American soil _south_ of
them. They sufficiently dislike our _northern_ position....

"Very cordially yours,

"F. W. Newman."

       *       *       *       *       *

We now pass to Newman's letters in the year 1856; and the first of this
series speaks of the "Harry" who is mentioned elsewhere in this volume, as
having been Professor Alleyne Nicholson, of Aberdeen. He was coming to
stay with Professor Newman during term time:--

"7 P.V.E. R.P.,
"_28th Oct._, 1856.

"The grammar used in University College School is _Key's Grammar_....
Hitherto, no particular Greek Grammar has been used in the school, but
Greek has been taught through _Robson's Constructive Greek Exercises_,
which, I presume, Harry ought at once to work at.... A Greek Grammar by
Mr. Greenwood is expected to be ready by Christmas, and is to be brought
into the school. It will be new _to all_; and Harry will be on a par with
the rest about it.

       *       *       *       *       *

"_Robson's Constructive Latin Exercises_ ... are used in the school....
Give him" (Harry) "my very kind regards, and say that his little bedroom
here looks to me desolate until he comes; but I cannot flatter him that I
have anything to fill up the emptiness of heart he will feel when he loses
not only papa and mamma, but also his faithful coadjutor in study--
_Annie!_ Seriously, you will have to consider about his evening
_amusements_, for it will not do to be studying morning and night. What
think you of giving a well defined time to _drawing_ every evening? He has
so much taste for drawing insects that he cannot fail in outline. We have
a little room which we call 'the boy's room,' where he can put any of his
Natural History collections which you think it well he should try, but we
have _no butterflies to catch,--few even in summer."

       *       *       *       *       *

At the end of July, Newman went to stay with Dr. Nicholson and his family
at Penrith, and there are one or two notes concerning his journey tither.
The next letter is dated 24th Aug., 1856. He wrote therefore when the
Crimean War was still going forward. That war which, amongst mistaken
policies, blundering Government tactics, and aimless ambitions, holds a
foremost place. It was not till the end of the year 1855 that it came to
an end. After the attack on Sebastopol, the French--whose army had
suffered quite as much from the terrible winter and from disease, etc., as
our own--succeeded in taking the Malakoff Tower. This made it impossible
for the Russians to defend Sebastopol any longer, and in March, 1856,
peace was proclaimed. Then followed Russian promises, which were made as
easily as they were broken.


"7 Park Village, East.
"_24th August_, 1856.

"My dear Nicholson,

       *       *       *       *       *

"Events have proved that Russia, too, painfully knew her own weakness.
Probably he" (Louis Napoleon) "already in December knew that she knew it,
and the war was far too unpopular with the French to be continued except
on a different policy, with new necessities and new prizes to be won. Our
policy from March, 1853, to March, 1855, was so hollow and so silly, that
no wisdom could afterwards bring things right, or make the results of the
war worthy of the cost; but the _comparative_ result in March, 1856, is so
vast a gain over what nine out of ten of our statesmen (so called) were
projecting to accept in March, 1855, that I cannot open my lips against
the peace in itself. I could not in any case wish the war continued,
except on new principles for worthier objects. However, Russia has really
had a terrible lesson, and a great humiliation. That she could not take
Silistria or Kars against Turkish troops, except by the accident of
famine, will never be forgotten by German armies or statesmen.... The
native Russian peasants and low persons do not _yet_ know that the Czar
was beaten; they suppose him to have conquered with immense cost; but the
nobility knew the truth, and it will leak through to the lowest people, I
expect, in the course of a few years. I think Europe has a respite of a
quarter of a century from the incubus of Russia; and _if_ in that interval
the Hapsburgs are overthrown, all will yet come right. I fear we are still
forced again (in spite of Mazzini and Kossuth) to regard the French as
having the initiative of revolutions. I have resolved to give up all extra
and needless effort of the brain, until I can really get rid of certain
morbid symptoms, quite chronic, which distress me, so that my projected
Latin analysis lies in embryo.

"... I have had satisfactory approval of my _Iliad_ from my brother, Dr.
Newman, a fastidious critic and practical poet, as also from other private
quarters which I count much on; but reviews as yet do not notice me.... I
have no high expectation of the very existence of the book becoming known,
except slowly to many who might perhaps be glad of it if they knew it....

"Ever your faithful friend,

"F. W. Newman."


In October of the same year he thus speaks of the School of University
College:--

"... The School of U.C. is remarkably full of pupils this season. My
junior class has unusually _old_ pupils; I do not yet know their quality.
One (a Mr. Sassoon, a Jew?) [Footnote: Probably this was the father of the
present Sir Edward Sassoon, second Baronet.] I mistook for a German, but
he told me he is an Arab of Hindoo birth, and talks a little Arab and
Hindostanee, but knows more of English than of any other language. His
English is good, though the pronunciation is a little foreign."

In another letter, written this same month, he speaks of Mazzini as
knowing that the "liberties of Italy cannot be safe without revolution
either in France or Austria." That he feels it must come sooner or later,
so that it would be better for Italy to act and suffer rather than to
become "stupefied." Newman declares that the Governments know, and is the
reason why they "hate Mazzini, since ... success in Italy will cause
explosions elsewhere."

Newman goes on to say: "For myself I look at it thus. The deliverance of
Italy _cannot_ come by Governments (unless these are first
revolutionized); it can only come by insurrection. No one from without can
ever know or judge what is the time for hopeful insurrection: it must be
done from within, and generally without plan. My sole question is, Is the
cause legitimate? I find that it is. I leave Italians to judge of the
time. Meanwhile every year I would give of my superfluity to the aid of
patriotic effort.... To fail ten times may be necessary for success in the
eleventh. If they were losing heart and becoming denationalized, the case
would be bad; but it is the contrary. The fusion with Austria is
impossible. The more they bleed the more they are united, and the more
resolved.... My wife is cheered to learn that Harry will go to Mr. Bruce's
on Sunday. A black spot had rested on her heart, I find, from fearing that
he would go _nowhere_ to church. I am sending you a corrected copy of my
translation of the first chorus in _Antigone_, since you honour it by
putting it into your _Sophocles_....

"Ever your affectionate friend,

"F. W. Newman.
"To Dr. J. Nicholson, etc."


Another mention of the translation I also insert here. He had been able to
give far more time to it than if he had been in London, for he had in
September been spending some time at Ventnor. "A youth introduced to me by
Mrs. Pulszky is zealous in the Greek tragedians, and I have been helping
him to a little _Sophocles_ which put me up to translating the 1st Chorus
after I had been reading it with him...."

Here is the translation to which allusion is made:--

  "SOPHOCLES, ANTIGONE"

  1ST CHORAL SONG

  _1st Strophe_

  "O ray of the Sun, the fairest
  That over the rills of Dirk�
  To Theb� the seven-gated
  Wast ever of yore unveil'd
  The eyelid of heaven gilding;
  At length thy splendour on us was shed,
  Urging to hasty reverse of rein
  The Argive warrior white of shield
  And laden in panoply all complete,
  Who sped in van of the routed.
  Stirr'd from afar against our land
  By Polyneikes' doubtful strife,
  He like an eagle soaring came,
  Screen'd by a wing of snow unstain'd,
  With many a stout accoutrement
    And horse-hair crested helmets.

  _1st Antistrophe_

  "At mouth of the portals seven
  Above our abodes he hover'd
  With lances that yawn'd for carnage;
  But vanish'd, afore his chaps
  With slaughter of Thebes were glutted;
  Afore the flicker of pitchy flame
  Might to the crown of turrets climb.
  So fierce the rattle of war around
  Was pour'd on his rear by the serpent-foe
  Hard match'd in deadly encounter.
  For Jove the over-vaunting tongue
  Supremely hates. Their full fed stream
  Of gold, of clatter, and of pride
  He saw, and smote with brandish'd flame
  Him, who at summit of his goal
  Would raise the peal of Conquest.

  _2nd Strophe._

    "Foil'd in his frantic rush,
    Though still with blasts of hate against us raving,
    Down dropt he, torch and all,
  And heavy struck the Earth, who upward spurn'd him.
    Such auspice of the war
  To us was fair; and elsewhere new successes
    Befel, whereon the right
    Great Ares routing wheel'd the chariot-battle.

  For, posted at the seven gates,
  Equals to equals, seven chiefs
  To trophy-bearing Jupiter
  Payments of solid brass bequeath'd.
  Save that the gloomy-hearted twain,
  Sprung from one mother and one sire,
  Planted with adverse dint the spear
  And earn'd a fate in common.

  _2nd Antistrophe_

  "But now, since Victory
  Mighty of name at length is come, delighted
    In car-borne Theb�'s joy;
  Henceforth forget we battle's past annoyance.
  But through the livelong night
  Let us in sacred band approach the temples,
    And Bacchus to the dance--
  The god who shakes the soil of Thebes--be leader.

  "But hither Creon, lo! proceeds,
  Son of Menoekeus, newly rais'd
  The sceptre of this land to sway.
  Now at new tokens of the gods,
   Methinks, some sage device he plies.
  Therefore to special parliament
  Hath he by general summons fetch'd
  This meeting of the elders."

The next letter largely concerns Persia. And it is necessary to remember
that, in the early part of the nineteenth century, she began, at the
suggestion of France, a most unfortunate war (as regards herself) with
Russia.

In 1826 there was another war, and this cost Persia all the rest of her
possessions in Armenia. The taxation of the people, which the rulers
enforced to enable them to pay the expenses of the war, caused the former
to rise in insurrection in 1829. The death of the Crown Prince in 1833
seemed the crowning blow to the fortunes of Persia, for he had been the
only man who had seriously tried to raise his country from the depths to
which she had fallen.

In 1848 the son of the Shah, who had, through the assistance of Britain
and Russia, obtained the throne, came into office, and he resolved to put
forward claims to Afghanistan and Beluchistan. When the ruler of Herat
agreed that the Shah had claims, the English Government made the Shah sign
an agreement in 1853 that he would give up pressing his claims as regarded
Herat. But in 1856 the Persians retook this city, because they declared
that the Ameer of Kabul was planning an advance on Herat. Thereupon a
British army, commanded by General Outram and Havelock, was sent to
Persia, and defeat after defeat for the Persians followed their arrival,
and in July, 1857, they were compelled to give up Herat. Since then Persia
has not ventured to lay her hand on the "key to India."


"7 P.V.E., London,
"_19th Dec._, 1856.

"Dr. Barth, the African traveller, has been re-seducing (me) into the
Lingua Amazighana, which I had forsworn. I am not sure that something will
not come of it--to me at least. I have already built a castle in the air,
that sometime hereafter I shall become 'Professor of Libyan' to U.C.

       *       *       *       *       *

"How dreadful is it that we should be able to get into a war with Persia,
proclaimed _at Bombay_ on November 1st, and nobody here knows why it is or
what it seeks after; and the country's honour is committed while
Parliament is not even sitting. And for this we throw up Italy and ...
Switzerland? Have you seen Cobden's recent letters on Maritime War? I
rejoice much in them, and think adversity has improved his tone. With
hearty regards to Mrs. N. and all,

"I am, ever yours,

"F. W. N."


The letters at which we have now arrived are those written during 1857.
The first is dated March, and I quote some passages from it to show the
Professor's own views as regards evening home preparation for boys who are
working at school during the day, because it seems to me that his opinion
in this matter should carry weight:--

"I much dislike a boy having _both_ his work at school and _then_ evening
work at home, when he is getting sleepy and ought to have relaxation. It
is the nuisance of day schools, and quite hurtful to study, if there is
nobody at home to answer questions. Besides, Harry" (this is Harry
Nicholson, mentioned two or three times in these letters as attending
University College School) "is so studious of himself that it is very much
to be desired that he should have time for _voluntary_ work. I regard this
as having been very beneficial to _me_ at school, where I never had work
enough set me to fill up half my time."

The letter which follows is dated April, and in it we find that "Harry"
had just returned home, and that his report had testified to his diligence
and progress. At the end of the letter comes this little touch as to some
of the schoolboy belongings which had been left behind in Professor
Newman's house. "Harry has left divers snail-shells fastened on
pasteboard. Perhaps he did not know how to carry them safely."

On 6th May mention of the owner of the snail-shells recurs again:--

"Mrs. Newman was rather disappointed at the unceremoniousness of my
parting with Harry. It seems like a dream his vanishing. I suppose she is
like Hecuba, grieved that she could not make the funeral of Hector. (I did
not even kiss Harry _by proxy_ for her!) Most gladly does she give him up
to Mrs. Nicholson; and yet, I fancy, she wanted a funeral ceremony on
losing him."

Throughout these letters belonging to the year 1857, there is no special
mention of the Indian Mutiny. Yet it is impossible to doubt that it
occupied a great place in Newman's thoughts. No one who has written on
India and our relations with her as he has done, could have failed to have
written his own strong views on the lamentable mismanagement which led to
the Mutiny. But most probably the letters concerning it were either not
kept by Dr. Nicholson, or else Newman asked for them back, as in so many
cases he was accustomed to do with regard to his own letters towards the
close of his life. He had a theory that letters should not be kept, and
many people have told me that he asked for his letters back in order to
destroy them. Happily, however, this is _not_ the theory which everyone
holds. Indeed, to many of us, the Past lies so near the written word, that
_almost_ it re-awakens between the folds of a letter; indeed, in many
instances, the Past and Present only meet across it. In this sense it is
the only thing that holds up the picture of the past before our tired
eyes. _Litera scripta manet_ is a living truth. The next letter from
Newman to Nicholson was written on 20th June, 1857. On 8th June of this
year died Douglas Jerrold, dramatist, satirist, and author. Mr. Walter
Jerrold tells us that, in 1852, he had accepted the editorship of _Lloyd's
Weekly Newspaper_. It was said of this that he "found it in the street and
annexed it to literature."

His fortune as a writer began when he was only sixteen. His capacity for
work and his perseverance in working were enormous. In 1825 he wrote great
numbers of plays and farces; but beside all these, he contributed, as is
well known, to _Punch_ (at its first commencement in 1841), as well as to
hosts of magazines and political tracts, etc. Newman alludes to Jerrold
being in receipt of �2000 a year from _Lloyd's Weekly News_.

I pass over the discussion as regards the Newmans' proposed visit to the
Lakes, and also his expressed delight in a book, many copies of which he
had just given away--_Intuitive Morals and Religious Duty_.

"In truth, dear friend, I get happier and happier, and only am pent up and
mourn to feel how I live for self alone. I sometimes think with a sort of
envy how your knowledge of medicine and tender heart for young children
puts you into near and kind contact with the poor. However, we have each
his own talent, if only one can find the mode of wisely disposing it.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I am sorry to see that Douglas Jerrold has not left sixpence to his
family, though he was in receipt of �2000 a year (they say!) from _Lloyd's
Weekly News_."

In November another letter alludes to his Latin translations. He says he
has been gradually inclining to the belief that Terence, Virgil, and
Horace had "damaged" the Latin language in very much the same way as Pope
did the English, as regards arbitrary style and method of writing
cadences.

It is universally conceded that Horace was not a great thinker. As one of
our modern English critics has said: "His philosophy is that of the
market-place rather than of the schools; he does not move among high
ideals or subtle emotions.... He carried on and perfected the native Roman
growth, satire, so as to make Roman life from day to day, in city and
country, live anew under his pen.... Before Horace, Latin lyric poetry is
represented almost wholly by the brilliant but technically immature poems
of Catullus; after him it ceases to exist."

As regards Pope, the critics of the end of the eighteenth century
considered his style eminently artificial and forced. But to-day,
according to Father Gasquet, we cannot but recognize his services to
English poetry as invaluable. "He was virtually the inventor and artificer
who added a new instrument of music to its majestic orchestra, a new
weapon of expression to its noble armoury.... But one must admit that to
the taste of the present age there occurs a certain coldness and
artificiality in his portrayals alike of the face of nature and of the
passions of man. He appeals rather to the brain than to the heart. Ideas
and not emotions are his province.... To the metric presentment of ideas
he imparts a charm of musical utterance unachieved before his time."


"_30th Nov._, 1857.

"My dear Nicholson,

       *       *       *       *       *

"I have of late been urged by a particular circumstance to make various
trials of translation into Latin (lyrical, etc.) verse--an exercise I
always used to dislike, and have never much practised. I now find my
dislike was largely caused by the unsuitable and over-stiff metres which
used to be imposed on me when I was under orders.... In English and Greek
versification I have long been aware of the essential importance of this;
but I have looked on Latin as too inflexible a tongue to be worth the
labour, since nearly all the translations I have seen, pall on me as mere
flat imitations of the ancients instead of having a smack of the original.
I have been inclining to the belief that Terence, Virgil, and Horace have
done damage to the Latin language, or at least to our taste; just as Pope
was the ruin of English poetry so long as he was allowed to dictate the
style and cadences. In Plautus, Lucretius, and Catullus the language has a
flexibility and the metres a freedom which (as I think) academicians and
schoolmasters have not duly appreciated, and which ought to impart to us
(when we _do_ do anything so absurd as to write foreign verses) a freedom
at which we have not generally aimed. As to metre, I think it really a
_folly_ to insist on Horace's restrictions, which are entirely his own,
being neither found in the Greek, which he copied, nor in Catullus; and
which made the problem of _translation_ so much harder (and he did not
translate), that one has to sacrifice too much. I think we ought to
construct our metres by selection from the Greek, just as Catullus or
Horace did, not imitate them slavishly. I send you one specimen of my
translation, to ask whether so many as seven lines together the same is
_too monotonous_. If there were only four or five it would be as one of
Catullus's. I dare say you have the original....

"With truest regards to you all,
"Your cordial friend,

"F. W. Newman."


Pulszky, the friend of Kossuth and also of Francis Newman, was a Hungarian
author, politician, and patriot. In 1848 he was serving under Esterhazy in
some Government post; but when he was suspected of revolutionizing in his
native country, he took refuge in England. Pulszky went with Kossuth later
to America. In 1852 he was condemned to death by the Austrian Government,
but his fourteen years spent in Italy seem to have influenced the
Ministers to pardon him in 1867. While in England (I do not know if he
suffered from it elsewhere) he became a martyr to _tic douleureux_, that
most trying form of facial neuralgia which attacks in such paroxysms of
severe pain--attacks which seem brought on by the most trivial reasons,
such as a knock at the door or by a sudden shake to the chair on which the
patient is sitting, and which, as a rule, give no warning of their
approach.


"My dear Nicholson,

"You remember that you kindly furnished me with your prescription for _tic
douleureux_ to give to my friend Pulszky. He told me a few days back that
he sent it (I think a year ago) to the poor girl at Ventnor who was a
horrible sufferer from it, and heard no more of it until this autumn when
he was at Ventnor again. He was delighted to find she had been immediately
cured by it, had had no returns, was made competent for work, and is in a
servant's place. On my naming this, I have two urgent applications for the
prescriptions. If you will a second time take the trouble to copy out the
prescription I will keep it myself, and give copies to my friends without
further coming upon you.... I have ventured to assert that the Nicholson
who is so talked of as promoting the ballot in Australia is _not_ your
brother Mark.

"Do you know, when I saw in the _Illustrated London News_ the face of the
late lamented Brigadier Nicholson of the Punjaub, I thought it _very_ like
you. Is he possibly a distant relative?

"Ever yours heartily,

"F. W. Newman,
"7 P.V.E."
"_20th December_, 1857.


This remark of Newman's that he saw a strong likeness in "the face of the
late lamented Brigadier Nicholson of the Punjaub" to his friend Dr.
Nicholson is one of those arresting suggestions which seem to strike
sudden light out of the flints of ancestry which whiten the road of life
along which we have come.

That there _is_ a distinct likeness in the two faces no one who had seen
the portraits in Captain Lionel Trotter's _Life of John Nicholson_, and
then looked at that of Dr. John Nicholson in this book, could have had a
doubt. But, as it seems to me, there is even more ground for the
likelihood of Newman's suggestion, if one tries to trace the lineage and
land of the families of Nicholson in years gone by. I quote the following
from Captain Trotter's _Life of John Nicholson_:--

"In the days of our Tudor sovereigns the family of which John Nicholson
was to be the bright particular star had made their home in the border
county of Cumberland." He goes on to say that the first to come over to
Ireland was Rev. William Nicholson (in 1589), and he married the Lady
Elizabeth Percy. Captain Trotter says there is a tradition that his two
brothers went over to Ireland with William Nicholson. One settled in
Derry, the other in Dublin. During McGuire's rebellion in 1641, his son's
wife and her baby boy "were the only two in Cran-na-gael" [now known as
Cranagill] "who escaped the common massacre by hiding behind some
brushwood. In their wanderings thence they fell in with a party of
loyalist soldiers, who escorted them safely to Dromore, whence they made
their way across sea to the widow's former home at Whitehaven...." What
became of this Mrs. Nicholson does not appear. "Her son William, during
his sojourn in Cumberland, had become a Quaker." This was very probably
due to his having been influenced by his intercourse with George Fox.
Later on the former went back to Cranagill. There were three sons born to
this William Nicholson, and Captain Trotter tells us that it was from the
eldest (also a "William") that the famous John Nicholson was descended.

Now, it seems to me that it is not at all unlikely that there may have
been some connection (as Francis Newman suggested) between the branch of
the Nicholson family to which John Nicholson, of Mutiny fame, was related,
who made their home in the "border county of Cumberland," and that to
which Dr. John Nicholson, the lifelong friend of Francis Newman, belonged.
The latter also belonged to a north country family who, I believe, settled
on the borders of England and Scotland. Dr. Nicholson himself lived for a
great number of years at Penrith, in Cumberland. So that, all things
considered, perhaps Newman's conjecture, after he had realized how strong
a resemblance there was in his friend's face to that of the hero of Delhi,
was correct.

The next letters belong to the year 1858. In August, 1858, Newman was
again devoting much time to Latin versification:--


"My chief time this summer has been employed in a new _furor_--Latin
versification. I find that by choosing and adapting metres from the Greek
fountain and not sticking to Horace, or even to Catullus, the language
admits of translation from English closer than I at all conceived. I think
I have done 1500 lines in all. I only translate short pieces and pleasing
ones. I have been led to it by a practical object. I used to hate Latin
versification, and indeed the extreme poverty and ambiguity of the
language is laid bare shockingly by the process. Perhaps not really worse
than in prose translation, but every metre (or almost every) deprives you
at once of a sensible fraction of the already scanty vocabulary. One
learns also how essentially clumsy and prosaic the language is in its
vocabulary, though so compact in its structure.

"The Atlantic Telegraph, no doubt, already excites wild and impatient
hopes in our Australians, of which you will hear an echo. It is indeed a
critical event, as determining an immense extension of the telegraphic
system....

"Ever yours heartily,

"F. W. Newman."


It will be remembered that the Crimean War broke up the Coalition Ministry
which Lord Aberdeen had formed. This was due to the fact that the motion
for enquiry into the state of our soldiers before Sebastopol was carried
by a great majority against the Government. Lord Aberdeen resigned when
this happened, and Lord Palmerston came into office, with Mr. Gladstone as
Chancellor of the Exchequer. Then, when Palmerston acceded to the demand
that a committee of enquiry should be appointed, Gladstone, who had
opposed it before, thought he ought not to remain in the Cabinet which had
now agreed to have the enquiry made. So he gave up office, but still
helped the Government generally until after Orsini's attempt in 1858, upon
Napoleon III's life. Perhaps it is necessary to recall here that Gladstone
had taken up the cause of the prisoners--especially political prisoners--
in the prisons of Naples in 1851. He spoke strongly on the terrible
cruelties which were perpetrated there. In _this_ effort to help forward
an enquiry Gladstone threw himself most heartily.

       *       *        *       *       *

"I send you to-day a Latin Grammar which I have found on my shelves. By
the _binder's_ ticket 'Penrith' I infer it to be Harry's. I hope I may
congratulate him.... I never met Gladstone. He was a hero of mine for
about a year. I hoped great things of him. After the letters on Naples and
his Chancellorship of the Exchequer, I thought he had worked clear of the
errors of his youth and was 'the coming man.' But in the Russian war his
intense party spirit and endless mistakes have lowered his ...
intellectual discernments.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I am, ever yours heartily,

"F. W. Newman."


In December of this year Newman writes word that he has been working hard
at Arabic for some time, because he has undertaken to teach a friend
modern Arabic. He is again staying at Hastings, where he had been so
constantly.


"20 White Rock Place, Hastings,
"_30th Dec._, 1858.

"My dear Nicholson,

       *       *       *       *       *

"I am strangely thrown anew into sympathy with _your_ studies. I have been
working really hard at Arabic for some time--and why, do you think?
Because I had the temerity to undertake (for philological reasons) to
teach a friend modern Arabic. I could not have been so rash or so foolish
as to undertake to teach ancient Arabic; yet I am almost driven on
learning the ancient by the number of questions which have kept
arising.... I have been looking up all my old MSS., and am surprised at
the extent of my former attainments, very much indeed of which I had
forgotten. But words come back to me with a pleasant rapidity, and I am
delighted to find how much I have exaggerated to myself the gap between
old and new Arabic."


With this letter those belonging to the year 1858 come to an end.

With 1859 begin Newman's criticisms on the policy and unscrupulous methods
of Louis Napoleon.

The latter had made himself absolute ruler of France in 1851. Later on he
annexed Savoy and Nice. In his campaign in Lombardy against Austria he was
assisted by Great Britain. In May, when this letter following was written,
Napoleon's Manifesto had just been published in the London papers of 4th
May:--


"10 Circus Road, S. John's Wood,
"_5th May_, 1859.

       *        *        *        *        *

"I dare say you read Louis Napoleon's Manifesto in yesterday's papers. I
wonder what you think of it. I find myself at variance with most of my
friends, and with nearly all the newspapers _that I see_; but the _Morning
Chronicle_ and the _Daily News_, of which I have only seen _one_ article
for a long time back, appeared to be maintaining what I hold. That we
ought to be strictly neutral (not armed and threatening neutrals) seems to
be an axiom; but at the same time I look at the crisis with much hope and
little or no fear. To declaim against L. N.'s treachery is only a way of
playing into the wrong hands, i.e. supporting Austria. He has pledged
himself to expel her from Italy and not to seek dominion in Italy for
France. If he fails he shatters his own power in Paris: so much the
better, I suppose. If he succeeds, Italy is a certain gainer, and Europe
through Italy. I say a certain gainer, because the existing oppression
(testified by Gladstone and Clarendon) rests upon the aid of Austria, and
is far worse than war, and worse than a transitory dictatorship of France;
and the mischief of Austria has been that her power has been confirmed by
European diplomacy; but if France proves treacherous, it will be against
the protest of Europe, and her rule _cannot_ be permanent. Besides, L. N.
must almost of necessity give some aggrandizement to Sardinia. Lombardy,
Tuscany, and Parma seem inevitably to rush into Victor Emmanuel's arms, if
not also Venice, if the Confederates are victorious. Hence a stout power
is interposed between France and Southern Italy. And is it not stupid to
think that because L. N. is a bad, unscrupulous man, therefore he covets
nothing but _territory_? He covets _stability_ and the glory of liberating
Italy; and acting with heroic moderation is the obvious way of winning to
his side republicans in France and the diplomatists of Europe. _If_ he
acts thus, I think his dynasty will be permanent; if not, not, or hardly.
The Papists already hate him, and he already distrusts them...."


It is impossible to read many letters of Newman's and not recognize the
unfailing unselfishness with which he constantly gives up his own plans of
seeing his friends, in order that his wife may go to those places for
which she has a special affection. Not infrequently he gives up a journey
much farther afield for the purpose of pursuing antiquarian researches
because he knows how great would be her ennui were she to accompany him,
and he is ever full of a tender concern that she shall suffer no
unnecessary discomfort or trouble.


"_13th July_, 1859.

"My dear Nicholson,

"I had really hoped we might spend a few days at Penrith and have a chance
of seeing you, for my wife talked seriously of Keswick and the
neighbourhood. But when she began to remember in detail the climate of the
Lakes, her courage broke down, and she said there was nothing did us good
but the seaside, and especially the coast of Wales. So now we are starting
for Carmarthen, Cardigan, Aberayron, Aberystwith, etc., a weary distance
from Penrith.

"I told you I had undertaken the daring task of teaching modern Arabic
(somehow) to a young lady. My lessons began in October (the second week),
and ended with the second week of March, being broken by Christmas. About
a fortnight ago she sent me a written exercise, in which I corrected a few
grammatical faults, and then copied it out to transmit it to you, with my
translation into English. I should like you to see a specimen of my
_Roman_ (?) character, and also to hear what you think of the capacity and
power of the modern language as compared with the ancient.... I hope you
are hitherto well satisfied with Italian affairs. The pamphlet of Napoleon
III on Italy shows that in 1857 he definitely proposed to Austria a scheme
for the total secularization of the Papacy. I now feel sure he will not
stop at that. It also advocates a federation of all Italy--a wonderful
proposal from a French ruler. No democrat would have proposed that."


In September he writes from Aberystwith, and relates how he is busy
translating _Robinson Crusoe_ from the Arabic.


"I am constantly reminded of you by the study which I have been rather
closely pursuing here for nearly eight weeks, viz. the reading of
_Robinson Crusoe_ in Arabic. It is to me often difficult from several
causes: (1) It is not pointed, nor even the _Teshdied_ added; (2) I could
not bring Golin's with me, and the dictionaries which I have are very
imperfect; (3) the writer has most arbitrarily changed the details of
Robinson's story, and makes it often incoherent and stupidly impossible;
so that neither does the original help me much, nor can I rest on internal
congruity to help me out."

It should perhaps be remembered here that the Arabs had a great contempt
for the Grecian and Roman languages. Their own language was only printed
in ancient classical form, of which the Kor�n is the most famous example,
and the characters and symbols proceeded from right to left. In its most
ancient form it is named "Kufic." There are only symbols for sixteen out
of its twenty-eight consonants. Certain of our own words own patronymity
from the Arabic languages--words such as algebra, alcohol, zenith, nadir,
etc. These show clearly that the language did influence early intellectual
European culture in no small degree.

To go on with the letter:--


"I am greatly encouraged by my success in understanding it" [the story of
_Robinson Crusoe_ in Arabic], "for it is a far more ambitious style and on
far more various topics than I have ever before encountered; and when I
get my Golin's I expect to get to the bottom of many words that puzzle me,
though others are probably modern developments, especially quadrilaterals
and words belonging to special arts. But there is a religious formula
which recurs many times, every word of which is easy, and yet the whole of
it is to me unintelligible. I suspect it is elliptical and allusive, and
it occurs to me that it may be familiar to you; if so, I know you will
have pleasure in explaining it to me. Whenever Robinson falls into
distress and betakes himself to prayer, I meet these words:--

[Arabic]

and then follows the matter of sorrow. I also three times meet [Arabic] at
the end of a sentence, where the meaning seems to be _et alia ejusdem
generis_. I suppose it is an abridgment by initial letters. Can you help
me to a solution? We have stuck here" [at Aberystwith] "longer than we
intended; in fact, we should have left nearly a week ago, only that Mrs.
N. caught a sharp cold, and the weather became suddenly so severe that I
have feared to let her travel.... Probably, like all the world and his
wife, you are yourself just now absent from home.... Do you not with me
see that the Italians already are showing how vast a benefit L. N. has
brought them? It is only the beginning of a vast revolution.

"I am, ever your true friend,

"F. W. Newman."




CHAPTER IX

LETTERS TO DR. NICHOLSON


In 1860 Sardinia, because it happened to possess the clever, far-seeing
Count Cavour, had "dreamed against a distant goal"--the goal when his king
should be made King of Italy, instead of only Sardinia. He only had to
wait one year before his wish was attained. Victor Emmanuel, son of
Charles Albert, King of Sardinia, was in 1861 proclaimed King of Italy,
and nine years later he was head of the whole united nation. This is
briefly touched on in Newman's first letter to Dr. Nicholson in January,
1860. He also spoke in strong praise of a book of Mrs. Beecher Stowe which
he and his wife (then staying at Hastings to see the new year in, as they
did the year before as well) were reading together. Mrs. Beecher Stowe
was, of course, best known by her _Uncle Tom's Cabin_, perhaps the most
popular American novel ever written. _The Minister's Wooing_ was published
in 1859.

[Illustrations: 20 WHITE ROCK PLACE, HASTINGS
1A CARLISLE PARADE, HASTINGS
WHERE FRANCIS NEWMAN OFTEN STAYED, IN 1860 AND EARLIER
From Photos taken in 1909 by Valentine Edgar Sieveking]


"1A Carlisle Parade, Hastings,
_4th Jan_., 1860.

"My dear Nicholson,

"A Happy New Year to you all! We are here, in the same lodgings as a year
ago, having begun and ended the year in them. We have begun this year with
hopes for the future brightly contrasted to anything for ten years back.
For this, among men, I thank, first of all, Cavour and Victor Emmanuel,
and secondly, Louis Napoleon. The hatred which the last incurs with the
Austrian party and the Ultramontanists is, I think, a fair measure of his
services and tendencies.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I cannot get any solution from any of my books of certain difficulties in
the Arabic phraseology of _Robinson Crusoe_, [Footnote: Hiawatha and
Robinson Crusoe were very much used for Latin translations at the college
by Newman.] and I want to ask your help; but I do not like to do so until
I learn that it would not encroach too much on your leisure.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We have been here reading aloud Mrs. Beecher Stowe's new tale, _The
Minister's Wooing_ with very great pleasure. I regard her as a real
'prophetess,' and am delighted at the enormous circulation of her works. I
have been stimulated to try my hand at translating into Latin five of the
most eloquent passages in the book, as a trial of the possibility of
putting such things into that language. I am pleased with the result,
although it is clear to me that without a development of the Latin
vocabulary far beyond Cicero, Livy, Tacitus, and Seneca no one could ever
be _fluent_ and free to speak on modern subjects. One has to paraphrase
and go round instead of speaking outright. I am thinking I ought to know
something more about Arnobius and Lactantius, and see what sort of
_development_ they effected; and the resolution rises in my mind that I
will look to this, being hitherto quite ignorant of them.... I suppose the
'Volunteer Rifles' are talked of at Penrith as elsewhere. I regard it as a
breach of faith to transform these Volunteers into Light Infantry, which
seems to be the darling idea of military men."


Later on, in February, there is another letter relating to Newman's Latin
_Robinson Crusoe_ and his own difficulties as to how to find out when are
the times of spring and autumn in an equinoctial climate.

"I have been (as many others) a sufferer by the weather from slight
bronchitis, exasperated by the coughs and noseblowings of the students,
and by an ill-arrangement of the class-rooms. I had nothing serious, but
enough to force me to spend my evenings in bed, from seven o'clock almost,
and keep me three entire days away from college. I have been ... busy ...
with a Latin _Robinson Crusoe_, rewritten quite freely (not a
translation), that I have not been able to get back just now to Arabic;
and have buried your letter in papers so deep that I lost much time the
other day in a vain search for it.... In writing on Robinson's island I
found my botany sadly at a loss, and have hunted the _Penny Cyclopaedia_
diligently and uselessly to learn the simplest things, such as: To an
equinoctial climate, when is the spring and when the autumn? Do the leaves
fall twice, or not at all? When is the chief cold? Is it when the sun is
lowest, or when the clouds are thickest? Or does it depend on hail and
electric phenomena, or on local relation to great mountains?"

It will be remembered that in 1859 the outbreak of the war of the Italian
liberation took place. Garibaldi--the Knight of the Red Shirt--though he
had settled down as a farmer on the island of Caprera, was summoned by
Cavour to fight for Victor Emmanuel. He and his _Chasseurs des Alpes_ went
into Central Italy as chief in command, and helped to complete the
annexation of the Sardinian territories. It was in August, 1860, that he
made his military promenade through Naples. During the next few years he
was longing to march on Rome, but he also wished to foment the rebellion
in Hungary, and not to let it come to nothing.


"10 Circus Road, St. John's Wood,
"London, N.W.
"_10th Nov._, 1860.

"My dear Nicholson,

"I believe I have never so much as written from Wales or Clifton to you,
to denote that I was not killed on the rail. In old days I suppose that
every distant journey demanded this kind of 'receipt' from a traveller;
but we now travel too much to make it natural. I am reading the Book of
Proverbs in Arabic, in order to work myself up in the vocabulary of
morals, and am pleased to find that I know nearly all the words, although
the exact _form_ of some is new to me.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We may now congratulate one another on the 'definitive' fact of a
constitutional King of United Italy. Louis Napoleon, in consenting to it,
appears to me to have surpassed the limits not only of ordinary kings, but
of ordinary statesmen. I find that even able and temperate French writers,
such as Eugene For�at, are shocked at it.... Louis Napoleon's ... enemies
outside have been Germany, Spain, Russia, Austria, Naples, and the Papacy,
and inside, all the Catholic clergy and the politicians.... Do you see
Garibaldi's renewed solemn promise that his flag shall be joined to the
Hungarian in effecting their liberation from Austria? What I hear and
_know_ of Lord Palmerston's intrigues against Hungary and _threats to
Sardinia_ if she dares to assist Hungary ... fills me with indignation and
no small alarm. No doubt all that intrigue can do is now employed to
induce Austria to _sell_ Venetia, not in order to benefit Italy (though to
this they have no objection), but in gratuitous enmity to Hungary, which
(Lord Palmerston says) the English Government _will not permit_ to be
separated from Austria. This I _know_ he avowed to the Sardinian
Ambassador, and sent the English fleet into the Adriatic as a
demonstration. Happily the war is now likely to be deferred till
Parliament meets, and our ministry may be severely checked in time. I
trust we are only at the beginning of magnificent results in Europe and in
North America....

"Your true friend,

"Francis W. Newman."


1861 was a great year for the fortunes of America. Then it was that the
Civil War between the North and South (United States) first began. The
question seemed to be, how far the United States might really interfere
with the doings of any particular State of the Union. The North determined
that they would not allow the Union to be broken up, and so they fought.
But really the true point at issue was a far bigger question than that,
for it turned out that the real dispute had to do with whether slavery was
to be allowed to continue, or whether it should be put an end to for good
and all.

The North said it must cease, and after a war lasting five-years, this was
the final decision upon which peace was made. England very nearly was
brought into this war against her colonies, but happily not quite. It was
probably due to Abraham Lincoln (who was most wise in his Presidentship)
that this war was averted.


"_14th June_, 1861.

"The interest of American affairs almost swallows up with me those of
Italy, Poland, Hungary; though I am on the whole in decided good heart as
to them all, i.e. as to everything but India. Everywhere else the tide
seems to me to have turned for the better; but in India that is by no
means clear to me. I hope our Government has discovered its error as
regards America.... The glorious patriotism and unanimity of the North
none could absolutely foresee; but that the attempt to break up the Union
would goad the pro-slavery faction of the North into intense hostility of
feeling to the South, appeared to me so clear and certain that I predicted
it in print. That their backers and merchants should so lavish their
private fortunes for the war was more than I dared to hope. I think the
Union gets a new heart from this time."


"10 Circus Road, London, N.W.

"My dear Nicholson,

"I hope that the capture of New Orleans, now fully attested, pretty well
tranquillizes your mind, and justifies us in believing that we see the
beginning of the end.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Events have not even yet taken the scale from the eyes of deluded people
here. I still hear on all sides the doleful lament that 'the successes of
the North are much to be regretted, since they _can only prolong the
war_.' Mr. Gladstone [Footnote: Then Chancellor of the Exchequer.] has
just printed his recent Manchester speech, in which he sympathizes with
the South, because he does not trust the soundness of the North in the
cause of freedom!... I am calmly told that it is not for the _interest of
England_ that America should be so strong, and it is better for herself,
and for us, that she break up! England may have all India, but the United
States may not have one Mississippi, or keep the mouth of her own river. I
have never felt so unutterably ashamed for my own country, for it affects
public men and the press of London _on all sides_, with exceptions which
may be easily counted. Are you not delighted with the progress of India
for the better? It appears in the public news in many ways; but besides, I
have papers from Oudh and Calcutta which interest me extremely, and give
me the most cheerful hopes of the future. The change introduced by the
extinction of the Company's rule is prodigiously beyond what I ever dared
to expect in so short a time. I am beginning to print (for very limited
circulation!) a Latin _Robinson Crusoe_--chiefly to please a lady-teacher,
my favourite pupil. It is not a translation, but an imitation. My wife is
just returned from Brighton, where I spent Easter--but did _not_ go to the
rifle review. I feel unable to take interest in it, until Secret Diplomacy
is abolished. At this moment there is no security that Lord Russell is not
intriguing against Hungary, while possessing liberal views for Italy."


It is necessary here, I think, to add that the Hon. East India Company
had, so long ago as 1833, been deprived of its commercial privileges; but
still its directors practically ruled India under the Board of Control,
which Pitt originated. Later, in 1858, Lord Palmerston brought in a bill
which was its death-blow. The Company was to be abolished, and the Home
Government reigned in its stead in India.

In July, 1863, Newman severed his long connection with University College,
and evidently looked forward with great pleasure to uninterrupted time for
writing and studying.

"I am finally severed from University College, but do not as yet know how
much difference that means, since this is my natural vacation. I suppose
that next October I shall begin to realize the greatness of the change for
good or evil. (The enclosed photogram makes my face dirty, and one eye too
dark; yet seen through a magnifier it is really good.) I seem to have an
Augean stable to cleanse in reducing my papers to simplicity, and burning
accumulations of thirty years. I am not likely to write less, but perhaps
more, in anonymous ways, which impedes one's concentrating oneself on one
subject, if that be desirable: as to which I cannot make up my mind. The
danger of overworking the brain I see to be extreme if one has one subject
and that all paper work and private work.

"I have now got my house, to keep on with right to leave at a quarter of a
year's notice."

As the following letters make much mention of the struggle through which
the United States was passing, it is perhaps as well to give, briefly, a
few details of the happenings which were then taking place.

In 1856, when the Republican army was first started to put an end to the
extension of slavery, Lincoln, who was the most prominent man against the
pro-slavery party, took the lead as the most active servant of the cause.
But there was another, working perhaps more quietly, but quite as
resolutely against slavery, whose name should never be forgotten. William
Lloyd Garrison--a man of the same age as Newman--started in 1831 a paper
called _The Liberator_, with no capital or subscriptions. This paper he
carried on for thirty-five years until slavery was abolished in the United
States, although he received constantly letters threatening his
assassination. He came to England in 1833, and on his return he started
the American Anti-Slavery Society. Before that was accomplished, however,
in every way possible he had spread over the whole of the States pamphlets
etc., urging on his people the pressing need of the abolition of the slave
trade. Then in 1863 (July) General Grant's success in capturing Vicksburg
gave back to the Union the full control of the Mississippi river. By 1864
Grant was in full command of the Union Army. But _the_ aim of the
Abolitionists had been triumphantly attained before then, for on 1st Jan.,
1863, President Lincoln declared that all slaves in the States then in a
state of rebellion should be free. Only two years later this man, who had
done so much to rid his country of a degrading trade, was assassinated.

The following letter is dated 4th Aug., 1863:--

"... I hope that you now, with me, believe that the era of Southern
'successes' (i.e. hard and HOPEFUL _resistance_) is finally past. I
believe nothing now remains but the resistance of despair, which cannot
long animate the masses. Hatred of the free negro may awhile move them.
But, the Mississippi once open, the N.W. has no longer a party favourable
to the South; and the exhaustion of the South is so marked and undeniable
that the real end may be much earlier than the people think.... General
Neal Dow (now a prisoner at Richmond) in his last letter to England
observed that the moral end served by the prolongation of the war had
notoriously been the immediate legal emancipation of the negroes in the
Gulf States; but the further prolongation of it is to determine the future
internal government and possession of landed property in these States as
the guarantee for the future. But it is a hard wrench on the politicians
of the North to consent to this. Lincoln and Blair evidently would still
much rather export the negroes _if they could_. Lincoln will not do
anything against the will of the blacks; but it is evidently his weak
point to deprecate them as equal citizens."

In September, 1863, Newman and his wife were spending their holiday at
Windermere. From there he writes:--

"I fear that the projects of Louis Napoleon in Mexico, and the consequent
sympathies of the United States with Russia against Poland and France,
make an imbroglio fatal to Poland. Now that, if the Russian Empire were
organized into States possessed of substantive interior nationality (as
the French plan is), this would seem to be a very lamentable result. The
two Western Cabinets have so acted as to ensure that Russia and the United
States shall each desire the aggrandizement of the other; and if Russia
take a lesson of imperial liberality from America, her empire may terrify
our grandchildren with excellent reason. But I believe that the interest
of the nations, of the true people everywhere, will prevail over Cabinet
ambitions as soon as slavery is effectually uprooted in America."

Never do the words "a" and "the" light up so vividly the significant gulf
which lies between the absence and the presence of Fame than when the
first qualifies in the first instance the name of some man at a time when
he is not specially distinguished; and then, much later on, the second
prefaces it as the mouthpiece of Fame. In 1863 Newman's mention of "_a_
Mr. Grace, the _recent_ celebrated victorious cricketer," proved that his
world-wide fame had but then been in its initial stage.

Newman's counsel to Dr. Nicholson in _re_ cigars as injurious to appetite
and inflaming to the eyes, reminds one that though, as I have shown by his
speech to Mr. Butler's family, he was "anti-everything," including smoke,
yet he mentions constantly in his _Personal Narrative_ that in Syria
during his missionary journey there in 1830-3, the fact was that he
himself smoked in the fashion of the country, and by no means disliked it
in his own young manhood. He begins on the Temperance and Teetotal
question thus:--


"Llandudno,
"_17th Sept._, 1863.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I am reminded of it, by seeing to-day a statement made concerning
cricketers, that no first-rate cricketer takes beer, ale, or spirits,
which (it is said by the enthusiastic narrator) inevitably 'jaundice the
eye,' nor tobacco in any form, (!) which induces a kind of stupefaction or
negligence. The recent celebrated victorious cricketer, a Mr. Grace, it is
said, will not take even _tea_; but prefers water. (I hope the water is
better than that of Windermere!) Two months ago I was reading from a
sporting newspaper about a rowing match on the Thames, and there learnt
that if a rower is known to take beer or ale, it lowers the bets in his
favour. In fact, no habitual drinker, though he drink _only_ for health
and strength (as he thinks), is regarded to have a chance of the highest
prize.

"I cannot help thinking that both wine and alcohol and tobacco lower the
vital powers, and that men are strong _in spite_ of them, not by reason of
them.

"Will you forgive me for suspecting that cigars lessen your appetite
(which is less keen surely than it ought to be), as well as inflame your
eye?"


Newman goes, in his next letter, to a much more intricate subject: i.e.
cuneiform inscriptions.

He had been studying them for two months. Emanuel Deutsch, one of the
great authorities on cuneiform inscriptions, gives us the following
information as regards them:--

The writing itself resembles a wedge, and it has been proved that it was
used by the ancient peoples of Babylonia, Assyria, Armenia, and Persia, as
well as by other nations. It was inscribed on stone, iron, bronze, glass,
or clay. The stylus which impressed the inscriptions on them was pointed,
and had three unequal facets, of which the smallest made the fine wedge of
the cuneiform signs. The first cuneiform writing of which we know dates
from about 3800 B.C.

It was used first in Mesopotamia, and then in Persia, and the districts
north of Nineveh. When it became extinct, for nearly sixteen hundred
years, its very existence was absolutely forgotten. It was not until the
year 1618 that Garcia de Sylva Figu�roa, ambassador of Philip III of
Spain, on seeing them, felt convinced that these inscriptions, in a
writing to which no one in the wide world possessed a key, must mean
something. Therefore he had a line of them copied. In 1693 they were
supposed to be "the ancient writings of the Gaures." Hyde, in 1700,
trifled with them, and gave them credit for being nothing more than the
architect's fancies. Witte saw in them nothing but the disfigurations of
many generations of worms. Others had their own speculations as to their
meaning. But Karsten Niebuhr took a big step higher and nearer to their
real meaning. He made out that there were three cuneiform alphabets,
because of the threefold inscriptions at Persepolis.

In 1802 Grotefend, of Hanover, put before the Academy of G�ttingen the
first cuneiform alphabet. Then, among other great investigators, followed
Rawlinson.

The first of these alphabets is Persian; the second the Median; the third
the Babylonian.

Deutsch tells us that, originally, the cuneiform signs were pictures of
objects drawn in outline on a vegetable substance, known by the native
name of _likhusi_. He thinks it probable that the supply of this was not
equal to the demand, for early in the Babylonish history clay was used
instead of _likhusi_.


(This letter is undated.)

"My dear Nicholson,

"I cannot remember the longitude or latitude of my hearing from you or
writing to you, and do not know whether I have to apologize for neglecting
you, so absorbed (it seems) have I been. I cannot even tell whether I told
you of my two months' devotion to Cuneiformism, and my study of the Medo-
Persian and Scythian inscriptions as _promeletemata_ of an article in the
November _Fraser's Magazine_.

"I found the Assyrian useless to dabble in: it is so vast, so fragmentary,
so embarrassed by dogmatic hypotheses and assertions, and deterring
complications, that one must give oneself _wholly_ to it for any chance of
getting to its foundations. But I feel on perfectly solid ground in Medo-
Persian or Scythian. Difficulties in them are like difficulties in Greek
or Sanscrit: that is all. In the Assyrian, I do not yet know whether to
believe at least half of the characters, and many fundamental alleged
principles; and I get no satisfaction in what I read....

"The eight millions in the U.S. who are to be educated, stimulate me. I am
dying to get into relations with some who will be practically engaged in
it.... I was very gloomy about American affairs four or six weeks ago. The
President seemed running fast to ruin. But his plans have happily broken
down so early and so decidedly, that he is probably himself ashamed of
them, and the people have rallied to oppose them. I now trust that all
will come right."


"Benner, Dolgelley,
"_20th Aug._, 1864.

"My dear Nicholson,

"I dare say you duly received a copy of my Iguvine Inscriptions [Footnote:
There is a town in Central Italy, Gubbio, which was anciently known as
Iguvium or Eugubium, which possessed many medieval palaces (the
Brancaleoni), and well-known Eugubine Tables.] which I directed to be sent
to you. For the first time in my life I have published with the secret
hope of what some call 'fame,' i.e. with the desire of gaining 'credit,'
because such 'credit' is of first importance to aid me in pushing on my
schemes in regard to modern Arabic literature in European type.... To put
forward an Easy Instructor in modern Arabic and an Anglo-Arabic
Dictionary, in European type, _with advantage_, I should greatly wish
another journey to Turkey, but as I have no children to leave with my
wife, and she would be killed with ennui if I took her, and would more
than double the expense, I have not seen how to do it. Besides, I want
money to publish my books.... General Grant's position between Petersburg
and Richmond is become terribly anxious (my last news was his loss of six
thousand men in attacking the fortresses behind the one which he blew up),
and unless ultimately successful, the longer he tarries, the more complete
will be his disaster.... I have always been despondent as to the Northern
scheme for forcing its way through Eastern Virginia; and am not the better
reconciled to it by Grant's campaign. There is no sound success for the
North now, unless they put the 'coloured' race politically on equal terms
with the 'whites,' and not to do so when 'colour' is legally undefinable,
and when the only loyal citizens in loyal provinces are 'coloured,' is an
alarming infatuation. I suppose they must suffer more and more, until they
resolve that the slave owners of Kentucky, and the colour bigots of
Illinois and Pennsylvania, shall be forced to yield to patriotic
necessities. Perhaps until they put down Slavery and serfdom within their
own limits, they are not to be allowed success against the rebels. Mr.
Lincoln's gratuitous establishment of serfdom in Louisiana, and
recognition of the pardoned rebels, as the only citizens worthy to hold
power, has filled me with despair of him. It is now clear from his own
avowals, that he will do no more justice to the coloured race than he is
_forced_ to do."


In a letter dated 24th November, 1864, he says:--

       *       *       *       *       *

"I much rejoice that the Americans have made the Presidential election a
trial of principles, not of persons. Such a victory as 213 to 21 seems to
imply that the old 'democratic' party is henceforth killed, while the
Abolitionists, who have voted for Lincoln and Johnson, are left quite free
not to attack the Government as severely as they pleased for any
shortcomings. I hope you have seen, or will see, the speech of Andrew
Johnson at Nashville, proclaiming liberty 'full, broad, and unconditional'
to every person in Tennessee. It is in so hearty and outspoken a tone as
to double its value. '_Loyal_ men alone, _whether white or black_, shall
rule the destiny of Tennessee.' 'All men who are _for equal rights_ are
his friends.' Now that he is Vice-President-elect I cannot but hope a
great change for the better in Mr. Lincoln's policy towards the free and
freed negroes, for Johnson and Lincoln have been in intimate relations
from the beginning.... Have you read details about the U.S. Sanitary
Commission? It is a magnificent development of high historical importance
to the future of wars, carrying out Florence Nightingale's ideas and
wishes on to the vastest scale, and adding to it the tending of sick and
wounded enemies."

Newman's next communication to his friend alludes to the Permissive Bill,
and assures him that there is no fear that it can ever "hinder _legal_
methods of getting liquor (for medicine, for chemistry, for art)." He
adds: "The sole question is, whether by an agent of the public authority,
who makes no gain by an increased sale (which we think the sound mode), or
by a trafficker who gains by pushing the sale."

As regards America: "I now understand that the darkest moment for the
North--the repulse of Burnside at Fredericsburgh--was the _only_ thing
that at last decided Mr. Lincoln to issue his proclamation of freedom....
He has been born and bred under a slave-owner's interpretation of the
Constitution and of the negro-temperament, and ... seems to persist in his
publicly avowed preference of _gradual_ abolition. Could he have had his
way, I predicted, and would still predict, twenty years of misery,
confusion, with probably new war unfavourable to the North. Garrison has
done his worst to aid the President, but Sumner and Wendell Phillips have
(as I now take courage to believe) checkmated him. He will NEVER get his
Louisiana and Arkansas reconstruction approved by Congress, and _colour-
legislation_ will be declared to be a violation of 'Republicanism.'... Yet
Mr. Lincoln is a better President every half-year, and I fully count will
at last give way to truth and necessity with a good grace.

"I have been actively working up my _Handbook_ of Arabic. I also design a
_skeleton_ dictionary of Arabic-English. I have got a valuable book from
Algiers (if it had but vowel points!). But I cannot publish until I have
money to spare. Meanwhile I work hard to mature and perfect."

Late in September, 1864, he is again writing on American turmoils:--

"_Next June_, 1865, the debt of the U.S. will be about 400 million
sterling, only half of what England had at the end of the great French
War, when her population was not two-thirds nor her means one-fifth of the
U.S., who (if once freedom and order is established over the whole Union)
will be a focus of immigration three times as attractive as ever, with
wealth multiplying twice as rapidly as ever.... I have no anxiety about
anything _but the policy which is to prevail in victory_.... It is
frightful to me to hear President Lincoln avow that (against the morality
of his heart) his official duty is to do nothing for the coloured race
except under compulsion and to save the whole Republic from foundering. He
knows they are subjects of the Union, and _owe allegiance_ to it, to the
point of laying down their lives for it; yet he does not know that those
who owe allegiance have an indefeasible right to protection. He is
conquering rebellious States, and does not know that the conqueror is
thenceforward RESPONSIBLE for the institutions which he permits in those
States, and believes it to be his official duty to respect the old
institutions however inhuman, however against Republican
Constitutionalism, and even when a violation of a treaty with France....
It is too clear that Lincoln will be a great drag upon everything decisive
in policy, and especially where decision is most necessary, i.e. in
vesting in the coloured race _power to defend their own rights_. When the
war ends, it will be very difficult to hinder the Northern enthusiasm from
collapsing and foolish statesmen from doing necessary work by halves."

In May, 1865, Newman writes these strong words: "President Lincoln was
dead against the confiscation of estates, and bent upon restoring a
powerful landed aristocracy, with a wretched dependent peasantry free in
name only.... A far sterner nature than his was wanted, which understands
that Justice to the oppressed must go before Mercy to the guilty; and I
believe they have got the right man in Andrew Johnson."

In February of the year 1866, a great trouble and anxiety fell upon Newman
while he and his wife were staying at Hastings. For nine or ten days she
seemed to be dying. "We got her through the acute crisis.... I resigned
her a full month ago, and have since not dared to hope that she can do
anything but linger. Nevertheless her life is less distressing and more
worth having than it was. She moves from her bed into an arm-chair; sits
at table for dinner.... She talks cheerfully, and can enjoy seeing her
sisters. When I look at her I fancy she is pretty well;... yet I feel that
she might be carried off very suddenly. Indeed, this was her mother's
case, who had the very same combination of disease, and retained much
muscular strength to the last. We had two physicians at Hastings, and here
she is under Dr. Garth Wilkinson. I have no complaint against any of the
physicians: they seem to me all to have done all they could; but nothing
that anyone has done has been of any use. It was by nursing, not by
medicine, that she was saved through critical days and nights. The
physician said she could not live forty-eight hours, and so we believed:
and at her request I sent him away.... I have written so many letters that
I forget to whom I have written: and it was indeed a tumultuous existence
at Hastings. I have now a good night nurse and cannot say that I want
anything; but a great shadow overspreads me."

The Doctor had evidently miscalculated Mrs. Newman's strength and
recuperative power, however, for in June of the same year:--

"I am happy to say that she" (Mrs. Newman) "now looks very like herself,
though feebler and liable (I fear) to relapse. But she is not only in
comparative health, but gives a hope of acquiring more soundness in the
next three months. I give up this house" (10 Circus Road, N.W.) "in a very
few days, and have taken a house in Clifton--1 Dover Place--but it will
not be ready for us until 1st August."

Nearly three months later, he writes:--

"I am at last in my new home, which is very pretty, very pleasant, with
delightful prospect, and _perhaps_ may suit me well; but I have sad
trouble with a drunken house owner, who kept me twenty-three days out
later than his contract,... and has given me roof and pipes either out of
repair or insufficient, rat holes very troublesome,... cisterns and taps
all in unsatisfactory state. Last night, for the third time in ten days, I
have been inundated through two floors." But he adds more hopefully than
the case seems to warrant," If I can get these matters right my house is
very promising. ... After a few weeks here my wife's strength has
increased notably, by no other doctor than a donkey chaise, and she now
seems just what she was last summer....

"I have had a letter from Pulszky (to whom I had not written on this
subject) telling me he is convinced that Bismarck put on a mask of
fanatical reactionarism in order to win the confidence of the _King of
Prussia!_ ... It seemed to me certain, that when new States had to be
incorporated with Prussia, despotic reaction would be _impossible_, much
more if a German Parliament were summoned. And now the King himself
proposes Universal Suffrage for all men above twenty-five and of
unblemished character! This seems to make any English Reform Bill
impossible, which is not far more democratic than any practical statesman
here has yet imagined. Nevertheless, I am increasingly gloomy as to the
near future of the English Empire. The Radicals seem perfectly blind as to
its centres of danger, and the amount of foreign sympathy which
insurrection in India or Ireland will now have. Andrew Johnson seems
destined to involve the U.S. in new civil war. I grieve deeply for it."

The next letter shows Newman settled in at "1 Dover Place, Clifton." His
Anglo-Arabic dictionary is finished, though revisions are to be added
later. At the end of the letter he gives the names of those who, he hopes,
may some day form a Ministry under Gladstone.


"_12th March_, 1867.

"My dear Nicholson,

"Our correspondence is so slack that I cannot tell what or on what I last
wrote, nor where to lay hands on your last.... We have had severe weather
all this month, and the snow continues all day since last night; but I am
happy to say my dear wife is not the worse.... I remember vividly the
spring of 1836, the first year of our marriage: the season from December
to May was the severest that I take note of since the great historical
winter of 1813 (1812?). This begins to remind me of 1836.... I had hoped
that continued work at Arabic would explain to me certain fixed
difficulties in the documents which I have studied; but a number of them,
even where the printed text is quite clear, remain unsolved. I venture to
trouble you with the only words which embarrass me in a rather long and
complete narrative of the burial of Abd el Mejied and the ceremonial of
installing his brother as his successor. If you can translate the line or
half-line I shall be benefited.

"I finished my Anglo-Arabic dictionary three or four weeks ago, but I hope
to enrich and revise it. Perhaps the course of public events surprises you
as much as me. As the Whigs cannot afford to be outrun by the Tories, it
appeared to me at first that I had been wrong in expecting a tough and
lingering struggle. Yet it seems to me, in revising details, morally
impossible for either Tories or a _Russell_ Ministry to do enough to stop
and satisfy the outdoors Reform movement. If _Russell_ would retire, or
were forced to retire, and Gladstone had courage and resolution to make a
Radical Ministry, including Bright and Mill, Stansfeld, Forster, Milnes,
Gibson, etc. (to which the Duke of Argyle would adhere), and were to
dissolve Parliament if necessary--even so it would be hard to pass through
the Lords a measure adequate to stop the clamour for more, and active
agitation. I begin to relapse into my belief that there _must_ be long
conflict. Nothing seems to me worth a national Convulsion which does not
give us new principles and new persons in the Executive Government. I
incline to believe that we shall live to see Radicalism (of a grade far
beyond what is popularly so named) in high office and carrying out its
principles with energy."


It will be remembered that Lord John Russell had long tried to reform
Parliament. In 1866 he had brought a bill for the purpose before the House
of Commons. It was rejected, and with it the Ministry went out. Then, when
Lord Derby became Prime Minister, with Disraeli as leader of the House, he
found he could do nothing but introduce in 1867 a Reform Bill of a far
more marked and definite character than the one which had "gone under"
during the last year. This bill, however, passed in August, 1867, showing
how the country in the meantime had become more and more ready for such a
measure. Its conditions were that borough franchise was given to all rate-
payers, and lodgers who used rooms of the annual value of ten pounds. But
perhaps a great deal of the driving power came from the large numbers of
the working-classes which were now added to the constituencies. In 1868
Disraeli, who had now become Prime Minister, retired when he found that
the Liberal majority reached to over a hundred through the new elections.
Then came the man of the hour, whom Newman had longed to see in that
place--Gladstone, who took the office vacated by Disraeli. At once it was
seen how far stronger was this new Ministry than the last, or, indeed, one
might perhaps say than many "lasts." One of its first measures was the
always-to-be-regretted one of the disendowment of the Irish Church.
Disestablishment, which of course preceded disendowment, was in many
respects a gain. The Land Bill followed in 1870, and the next year
abolition of religious tests for admission to degrees and offices in the
Universities.


"_15th April_, 1867.

"My dear Nicholson,

"I would not have you take any particular trouble about it, but if in your
Turkish Dictionary you find (this) to mean _tax_, at your entire leisure
(no hurry at all) I should be glad to learn how to pronounce the word.

"I received on Saturday from Washington a newspaper which contains very
interesting news from North Carolina and Alabama. N. C. comes out 'square'
for the Republican party, and Alabama avows Republican sentiments. Both
accept negro suffrage and absolute equality of the races. _Coloured
orators are prominent and acceptable_.

"I also have a very interesting letter from a coloured gentleman from New
Orleans, saying that the last acts of Congress have quite quelled the
reign of terror, and brought out the White Unionists, who did not dare to
speak before; and they are much more numerous than he had believed.
Although Congress has been pusillanimous in the extreme, and always
deficient, both as to time and substance, and although the danger of
reaction is not past, still everything is turning for the better since the
last act of the thirty-ninth Congress and first of the fortieth, and I
think we may now hope that the Unionists of the South, white and black,
will be able to fight their own battles. In England I do not think _our_
agitation can be appeased by the Reform Bill of this Parliament....

"Ever yours cordially,

"F. W. Newman."


The following letter concerns Vaccination almost entirely. Newman's views
with respect to vaccination were very clearly set forth in Vol. III of his
_Miscellanies_. They come under the heading of an article called
"Barbarisms of Civilisation." [Footnote: Published in the _Contemporary
Review_ of June, 1879.] Newman owns to having no medical knowledge of the
risks or non-risks of vaccination, but from what he considers to be the
rational point of view he objects to it most strongly. He protests that
Government Vaccinators have "for many years obtained a large part of what
they called _lymph_ ... (_pus_, or matter, is the only right word) by
inoculating calves or bullocks with small-pox. The result in the animals
they are pleased to call _cow-pox_, and when the poisonous matter is
transferred back to human infants they assume that it will not produce
small-pox! But while the doctrine is orthodox in London, the Local
Government in Dublin allows no such dealing."

He adds: "Unless the _causes_ of small-pox be removed (generally some
impurity in the air or in the food), those causes will work mischief
somehow. throw an eruptive disease back into the system is proverbially
dangerous.... Moreover, what right has any physician to neglect the cures
of small-pox, by which herbalists, hydropaths, and Turkish-bath keepers
find it a most tractable disease?"

In a letter called "Compulsory Vaccination," published in 1884, he says:
"To obviate it" (small-pox) "by extirpating its causes is good sense; to
infuse a new disease without caring to extirpate the causes of the
existing disease is a want of common sense." In the letter following, the
"Harry" (Dr. Henry) is the boy who boarded with the Newmans, and left
snail-shells stuck on a board when he left! He was well known in the world
of science as Professor H. Alleyne Nicholson, of Aberdeen.

There is no date or address on this letter.


"My dear Nicholson,

"I have been pressed to make some reply to Dr. Henry's Vaccination
pamphlet; but excused myself on the ground that it was not pleasant to me
to be in public opposition to him, for he was son of an intimate friend of
mine;... I have no special knowledge. I look on it from outside the
medical art....

"Now in the contents of the pamphlet I read: 'Small-pox--never produced at
present _de novo_.'...

"I make sure that it never _could_ have spread, unless the conditions had
in all the other places been highly congenial.... Predisposing causes
cannot long accumulate and fester, without curdling into vital action. The
_provisional assumption_ with me concerning smallpox, is, that wherever
its predisposing causes exist, there the disease will not long be absent.
In new foci it may meet new influences which modify its aspect, so that
medical men do not recognize it; but that signifies not....

"Now, what is Dr. Henry's proof?...

"Is there so much as one disease, the origin of which has been recorded
scientifically? What he calls 'the primitive origin' of small-pox has not
been recorded to us scientifically: yet he does not on that account doubt
that it did once arise 'spontaneously.' I judge just in the same way, when
it breaks out now in an English country village. What does the 'scientific
record' mean? We cannot have a medical man in every room of every house at
every moment examining what is under the shirt and shift, with microscope
in hand, to see the disease come of _itself_,... Dr. Henry goes on to say,
'and it APPEARS to have spread solely by infection or contagion.' It
_appears!_ This is so modest, that the reader fancies he may grant it. But
the next words are: 'TWO CONCLUSIONS FOLLOW from this,' etc. etc. In
short, he has forgotten that it is only 'it appears,' and fancies that it
was c indisputably certain and manifest.' ... After all; if unhealthy
conditions are among the prerequisites of small-pox, we have only to
remove the unhealthy conditions, and shall not need vaccination (if it
were ever so safe): and if you do not remove unhealthy conditions, you are
sure of other diseases quite as bad however you may modify the name."


_Letters from_ 1872 to 1882 (_to Dr Nicholson_).

The first letter of this series is dated 26th December, 1872, from Weston-
super-Mare, and is concerned chiefly with his wife's terrible fall, and
also with the movement of the peasants under the initiative of Joseph
Arch.

The name of Joseph Arch is too well known to need more than a few words in
explanation of the reason why he came to help forward this movement as he
did. He was born in Warwickshire in the year 1826, and was essentially one
of those who, having determined to rise from the ranks--_rose_. He
educated himself during the time while he was working as farm-labourer.
Those who have read Father Benson's _Sentimentalists_, and also Robert
Louis Stevenson's book on the same subject, will not fail to understand
how complete and full is the education which comes to a man through both
doors--that of physical labour, and that of mental as well. Joseph Arch
started in 1872 the National Agricultural Labourers' Union. Soon he had
freed the peasantry from many of their former disabilities. Later he went
to Canada to find out as much as he could about emigration and labour
questions. In 1885-6 he stood for the N.W. Division of Norfolk.


"_26th Dec_., 1872.

"My dear Nicholson,

       *       *       *       *       *

"Did I, or did I not, tell you of my wife's mishap from a terrible fall
downstairs? Her right hand will be for a long while stiff from having been
tied for nine weeks with a splint on the inside, no finger being allowed
to move. This, I am assured, is hospital practice; but it is vehemently
condemned by others, and in her case, at least, I believe it was wrong.
Whether she will ever recover her _thumb_, I am not sure; for I fear it is
still dislocated at the base. She necessarily gives us a great deal to do;
I have to act as her amanuensis, besides oiling, shampooing, etc.

"Knowing as I do how you sympathize with rustics and disapprove our
existing Land Laws, I make sure that with me you are delighted by the
movement of the peasants under the initiative of Joseph Arch to claim
access to freehold land by purchase or equivalent payments. I never dared
to hope such an initiative from the peasants themselves, but I always
foresaw that a destruction of slavery in the U.S. would give to the States
such a desire to people their territories and the South, with English
immigrants, that our peasants, as soon as they became more wideawake,
would have the game in their own hands, and neither farmers nor landlords
could resist.... I now should not wonder to live to see ... household
suffrage extended to the peasantry-and as results, coming some earlier,
all soon, overthrow of the existing Drink Traffic, of Contagious Diseases
Act, Army Reform on a vast scale, Female Equality with Men in the Eye of
the Law, overthrow of Landlords' predominance.... I wonder whether
abolition of Foreign Embassies must precede a serious grapple with the
National Debt. I doubt whether any nominally free State ever had such an
Augean Stable left to it by forty years' eminently active legislation. "In
corruptissima Republica plurimae leges," sounds like it. Without carving
England and Ireland into States, I do not think the work can be got
through: if indeed we are to avoid new wars with Ireland and India, which
may God avert!...

"Your constant friend,

"F. W. Newman."


I quote next from a note written three years later, which ascribes his
health to the Triple alliance of his three "Anti's"--anti-alcohol, anti-
tobacco, and anti-flesh food.

       *       *       *       *       *

"How many a pleasant year has run its course since I first visited you at
Penrith! It was the summer of 1842, I think, that we ascended High Street
together, a company of seventeen.

"It is my fancy that I could walk as well now: yet I believe it would make
me lazy for a week after. Moderate exertions are surely best when one is
past seventy, yet my spirits are inexhaustible, and my sense of health
perfect. Seriously I attribute this to the TRIPLE ABSTINENCE [from
alcohol, from narcotic (tobacco), and from flesh meat]....

"Your affectionate friend,

"F. W. Newman."


The same year he states in a letter to Dr. Nicholson that the Vegetarian
Society is that in which he feels most active interest, "though I am a
Good Templar and am earnest in nearly all the _Women's_ Questions." And in
another, written in August, "I here, as usual" (at Ventnor), "get the
luxury of fine fruit at this season (and the unusual luxury of mushrooms),
but I do protest that their demand of 4s. a pound for grapes is enough to
frighten Cato the elder. [Footnote: Marcus Portius Cato, born at Tusculum
234 B.C., passed his childhood on his father's farm. In later years he
wrote several works on husbandry, its rules, etc. When he was elected
Censor in 184 he made great efforts to check national luxury and to urge a
return to the simpler life of his Roman ancestors. He was very strict and
despotic as regards contract prices paid by the State, and constantly
altered those for food, carriages, slaves, dress, etc.] The price of
lodgings at Shanklin and here is much higher than two years back. It seems
to me that everything is going up, here, in America, on the Continent, and
in India; yet I do not see how to impute it to the increased supply of
gold. I think that the working classes are everywhere demanding and
getting a larger share of the total which is produced....

"Believe me your true friend,

"F. W. Newman."


Four years elapse between this letter and the next from which I shall
quote. During this interval Newman's wife died (16th July, 1876), and was
mourned long and sincerely. He was now seventy-one years of age, and had,
as his letters show, begun already to feel lack of power and health. It
was evident to himself towards the end of the eighteen months which
followed her death that he should not be able to live alone, and yet there
was no relation he could ask to come and be with him.

In December, 1879, the following letters were written by Newman to Dr.
Nicholson concerning his second marriage to Miss Williams, who had for
many years lived with his first wife, and been very devoted in her care
and attention to her.


"_29th Dec_., 1879.

"My dear Nicholson,

"I felt very warmly the kindness of your letter which congratulated me on
my remarriage, and I have often desired to write to you that you might
feel how unchanged is my regard for you, though circumstances do not at
all carry me so far north as your dwelling. I may briefly add, that a
year's experience quite justifies my expectation. The marriage was not in
my estimate an experiment, which might succeed or fail.... That my wife's
health is not robust, I certainly grieve, but she is nineteen years my
junior. Our love and trust has only increased month by month.... This
black edge" (of the note paper) "is for my only surviving sister, whose
death is just announced to me. She was my fondest object of boyish love,
and it is impossible not to grieve. On the other hand, I had long expected
it, and did not at all think she would survive _last_ winter.... I believe
she was loved and respected by _everyone_ who knew her, as truly she
deserved to be. I feel good consolation in this.... For three years our
public doings have been to me so mournful and dreadful--with no power
anywhere to stay the madness of the Court and Ministry,--that I have been
made unwilling to write about them. Retribution for such deeds seemed to
me certain, inevitable: it seems to be coming more speedily than I had
expected. Stormy controversies must in any case be here encountered. But
ever since 1856 (I might date from the day when Lord Dalhousie went to
India--1848?) we seem to have been storing up wrath and vengeance against
ourselves,--worse and worse at home as well as abroad, since the death of
Peel. I never admired Peel: he had to trim to the Tories: but I now see
how moderate Peel kept them, and in comparison how wise Peel was.

"So many are the eminently good men and women in England that I am certain
we must have a nobler future: but that may be separated from the present
time by a terrible struggle....

"I am your affectionate friend,

"F. W. Newman."


In briefly reviewing the year 1881 in its effects on nation and
Government, it is necessary to cast one's thoughts back to the time when
Lord Beaconsfield took office in 1874, in order to grasp the drift of
Newman's next letter. In 1874 the former became Prime Minister for the
second time. He had not been long in office before he made an end of
Church patronage in Scotland. The next year he was carrying forward his
design of procuring part ownership for England of the Suez Canal. He did
not attach sufficient importance to the Bulgarian atrocities to set going
any British interference. This in itself is an act which can find no
defence. He declared Turkey must be upheld as a stronghold against the
aggression of Russia. In the year 1878, Beaconsfield and Lord Salisbury
attended the Berlin Congress. This at once raised the former to the
highest political importance, but it undid all the splendid work done by
the English army, which had, at the order of a blundering, mistaken
Government, been sent to obtain for England, through means of the Crimean
War, a victory rendered completely null and void a short time later by the
doings of this Congress at Berlin.

Then followed the Afghan and Zulu Wars and subsequent troubles and
upheavals: trade depression in Ireland; and finally, in 1880, came the
General Election, which restored the Liberal party to power.


"_1st Oct_., 1881.

"My dear Nicholson,

"I was glad to get your letter, but frightened when I found it open (the
gum wholly fresh) and no photograph in it. [Footnote: I believe the photo
given in this volume, of Dr. Nicholson, to be the one referred to here.] I
feared it was taken out. But next day came the real thing. It is
excellent. The slight excess of black in the left eye is perhaps quite
natural. In a three-quarter face the light does not fall alike on both
eyes, and we do not in real life compare a friend's two eyes (they move
too quick); we see only one at a time. [Footnote: Francis Newman expressed
once his theory that in the case of a photograph being taken of a man,
unconsciously to himself, the expression of the portrait will in some
curious manner change as his character changes.] The photo pleasantly
renews my old memories....

"_Immediate_ politics sicken _me_ as well as you. I do not (with a zealous
friend) groan over 1881 as unrelieved gloom, completed by the murder of an
amiable and innocent President: but I deliberately conclude we are
launched in a season of TRANSITION that _must_ have its sadness just as
has a war: and it is wise to look on beyond the troubled years.... The
course of change may largely depend on events in India which not one
Englishman in a thousand dreams of. In 1881, thus far, I rejoice in the
incipient elevation of Greece, and the probable deliverance of Armenia. I
think the great Powers _will not_ quarrel over the carcase of Turkey: and
though Frenchmen may justly make outcry against French ambition in North
Africa, yet as an Englishman and a European I do not regret it. As _I_ see
no power but Russia who can impart improved rule to Armenia and Persia, so
no one but France can give it in North Africa. My _immediate_ interest in
the politics of the High Powers is to see them combine against the Slave
Trade, in Turkey, and _in the Pacific_. In domestic Politics I care _most_
for the social and moral questions, which are painful, pressing, and
disgracefully delayed. But all will come; and the great question of Landed
Tenure will aid the best influences....

"I am your affectionate old friend,

"F. W. Newman."


On 26th Nov., 1881, Newman caused some copies of the following letter to
be printed and sent round to his friends, etc.:--

"My dear ----,

"Friends are always greedy of details concerning sudden illness. This is
my excuse for sending a printed circular.

"In short, my general health continues as excellent as usual; but I have
received a sharp warning, which I would gladly be able to call a mere
fright. After many days of close and continuous writing, I found myself
suddenly disabled in my right hand. I could not interpret it as merely
muscular. There was no inability of motion or grasping, but want of
delicacy in feeling, which made my pen slip round in my fingers. I was
forced to conclude the _brain_ involved.

"Therefore it seemed possible that I was only at the beginning of real
paralysis. Prudence absolutely required me to back out of two engagements.
This illness, such as it is, has not come on in a day, and demands time
for cure. Some ten days of cessation have somewhat (but very imperfectly)
restored my power of writing; but I must not undertake any tasks at
present. My sole remedy has been to keep the arm warm. It is still
somewhat weak. I wished, if this affection were temporary, to say nothing
about it; but that has proved impossible.

"I am, yours as ever,

"Francis W. Newman."

       *       *       *       *       *

There are many allusions to this trouble of the arm in later letters.
Indeed, it is impossible not to see how very much it has crippled his
handwriting; he mentions once or twice that he finds it very difficult to
keep his hand steady.

In May, 1882, he writes to Dr. Nicholson concerning the news of the
moment--the murder of Lord Henry Cavendish and Mr. Burke, at Phoenix Park.
It will be remembered that it happened at the end of all the obstructive
tactics used by Parnell and his Home Rule Party, which was organized to
prevent coercion being used, and also to force on England the compulsion
of legislating promptly for Ireland the measures demanded by the
Nationalists. It was not until 1886 Gladstone brought before Parliament a
measure which would give a Statutory Parliament to Ireland. Later, after
the rejection of the bill on its second reading, Gladstone appealed to the
country, and when the General Election brought back a Conservative
majority, he was defeated.

Lord Frederick Cavendish became in 1882 Chief Secretary for Ireland, in
succession to Mr. Forster. On 6th May he and Mr. Burke (his unpopular
subordinate) were stabbed in Phoenix Park.

The allusion to Newman's study of the Libyan language occurs in the letter
following, as it has done in more than one of the others about this time.
The Numidians were descended from the race from which the modern Berbers
are drawn. Their name was drawn from the Greek word Nomades--Land of
Nomads; and was given to tribes in Northern Africa by the Romans.


"_8th May_, 1882.

       *       *       *       *       *

"To-day we have heard with horror of the murder of Lord Frederick
Cavendish, and with grief, if with once or twice that he finds it very
difficult to keep his hand steady.

In May, 1882, he writes to Dr. Nicholson concerning the news of the
moment--the murder of Lord Henry Cavendish and Mr. Burke, at Phoenix Park.
It will be remembered that it happened at the end of all the obstructive
tactics used by Parnell and his Home Rule Party, which was organized to
prevent coercion being used, and also to force on England the compulsion
of legislating promptly for Ireland the measures demanded by the
Nationalists. It was not until 1886 Gladstone brought before Parliament a
measure which would give a Statutory Parliament to Ireland. Later, after
the rejection of the bill on its second reading, Gladstone appealed to the
country, and when the General Election brought back a Conservative
majority, he was defeated.

Lord Frederick Cavendish became in 1882 Chief Secretary for Ireland, in
succession to Mr. Forster. On 6th May he and Mr. Burke (his unpopular
subordinate) were stabbed in Phoenix Park.

The allusion to Newman's study of the Libyan language occurs in the letter
following, as it has done in more than one of the others about this time.
The Numidians were descended from the race from which the modern Berbers
are drawn. Their name was drawn from the Greek word _Nomades_--Land of
Nomads; and was given to tribes in Northern Africa by the Romans.


"_8th May_, 1882.

       *       *       *       *       *

"To-day we have heard with horror of the murder of Lord Frederick
Cavendish, and with grief, if with less horror, of Mr. Burke's. I felt
persuaded from the first that the assassins would aim only at Mr. Burke,
who has long been regarded as the perverter of every Viceroy and
Secretary; but in mere self-defence they also killed his companion,
perhaps not even knowing who he was. Lord Frederick Cavendish was almost
unknown to the Irish, and cannot have been hated by them as Mr. Forster
was.

"My second thought on this grievous affair is, that it is likely to call
out so sincere a disavowal from collective Ireland, and from the most
extreme of Irish politicians, that it may help to reconcile Irish patriots
and the Liberal Ministry. To have a common grief is a moral cement. Also
it seems to compel Mr. Gladstone to send as Irish Secretary an _Irishman_,
and one publicly esteemed as Irish patriot, as well as a sincere friend to
the English connection; and from what I have heard before this event, Mr.
Shaw seems to be a very likely man.

"Meanwhile, sad to say, Mr. Gladstone entrenches himself, and _blocks up_
business by the Rules of Procedure.

"Well, Ireland is taking a leaf out of Nihilism. It is bad enough, yet not
so bad as with the poor Czar....

"Yours cordially in old esteem,

"F. W. Newman."


"On Saturday I corrected the last proofs of my essay towards a Numidian
dictionary. Yesterday a friend sent me a scrap from Paris, in which R�nan
avows that until a Numidian dictionary is compiled they cannot begin to
decipher inscriptions in the _Canaries!_ I fancy the Canary language is a
wide step off."

Each succeeding year after 1882 Newman complains from time to time, in his
letters to his friends, of increasing infirmities and physical
disabilities, which made travelling often exceedingly trying for his head,
and rendered him more and more dependent on his wife. He had for a long
time suffered a great deal from his eyes, and consequently during the last
few years of his life writing letters became a physical weariness. He was
also subject to a sudden loss of brain power, when he found himself
completely unable at times to speak consecutively.

[Illustration: ANNA SWANWICK
FROM A PORTRAIT PAINTED BY MISS V. BRUCE]




CHAPTER X

LETTERS WRITTEN TO MISS ANNA SWANWICK
(BETWEEN 1871 AND 1887)


Anna Swanwick was one of the most remarkable women of her age--one of the
most intellectual, one of the most thoughtful as regards the social
educational movements of her time, which was the early part of the last
century. Yet there is a passage in a lecture delivered by her at Bedford
College which reveals only too clearly the straitened and limited means at
the disposal of girls in those days who wished to climb the stairs of that
Higher Education so easy to men, but then so very difficult of access for
women. She says:--

"In my young days, though I attended what was considered the best girls'
school in Liverpool, the education there given was so meagre that I felt
like the Peri excluded from Paradise, and I often longed to assume the
costume of a boy in order to learn Latin, Greek, and mathematics, which
were then regarded as essential to a liberal education for boys, but were
not thought of for girls. To give some idea of the educational meagreness
alluded to above, I may mention the fact that during my schooldays I never
remember to have seen a map, while all my knowledge of geography was
derived from passages learnt by rote." I quote this from one of the most
delightful memoirs I have come across for a long time: _Anna Swanwick; a
Memoir and Recollections_, by Miss Mary Brace. [Footnote: Published by
Fisher Unwin.]

But no "educational meagreness" can keep the feet of some climbers off the
educational ladder. It may be with slow, "sad steps" they "climb the sky"
of the higher education. Nevertheless the effort is doggedly made. For in
all great men, as in all great women, there is something-call it genius,
call it what you like--which _forces_ its way through, be the impediments
what they may.

Anna Swanwick, to whom the following letters were written at various
intervals, was well known for her philanthropic and educational work among
the poorer classes, and also for her earnest endeavours for the larger
development of women's work and education. A large part of her own
education in Greek and Hebrew was carried forward at Berlin. In 1830
Bedford College was opened. Miss Bruce tells us that Francis Newman and
Augustus de Morgan, Dr. Carpenter, and other famous lecturers were among
the first to lecture there. I imagine it was here that the friendship of
forty years between Anna Swanwick and Francis Newman began. The former was
specially impressed with Newman's method of teaching mathematics. I quote
her words from Miss Bruce's _Memoir_:--

"I remember being particularly impressed by F. W. Newman's teaching of
mathematics, including geometry and algebra; he saw at a glance if one of
his pupils in algebra was not able to follow his calculations, which were
often very elaborate; on such occasions, instead of endeavouring to
explain the difficulty to a single pupil, thus keeping the entire class
waiting, he would interest them all by placing the subject in an entirely
new light, which was possible only to one who had a complete mastery of
his subject--one who, looking down from a mental height, could see the
various paths by which the higher eminence could be reached."

I cannot but mention here the supreme service Anna Swanwick was able to
render Newman at the end of his life. It was in the last letter which he
wrote to her, when he was ninety-two, that these words occur. After
stating that he wished "once again definitely to take the name of
Christian," he adds: "I close by my now sufficient definition of a
Christian, c one who in heart and steadily is a disciple of Jesus in
upholding the prayer called the Lord's Prayer as the highest and purest in
any known national religion.' I think J. M. will approve this. [Footnote:
James Martineau.] ... My new idea is perhaps with you very old.... Asked
what is a Christian, I reply, one who earnestly uses in word and substance
the traditional Prayer of Jesus, older than any Gospel--this supplants all
creeds." This letter was written shortly before his death.

Since I have been writing this memoir I had a letter from Mr. William
Tallack, who quoted these words of Mr. Garrett Horder with respect to
Francis Newman's final return to the Christian Faith. This fact had been
published in a paper in 1903.

"Not more than three or four years before Dr. Martineau's death I was
sitting in an omnibus at Oxford Circus, when Dr. Martineau, accompanied by
his daughter, got in, and took seats by my side. After I had expressed my
pleasure at seeing them, he said, c I think you ought to know that the
other day I had a letter from Frank Newman, saying that when he died he
wished it to be known, that he died in the Christian Faith.'"

To my mind no memoir would be complete with that knowledge left out--
Newman's return to his former Faith.

The first letter in the collection before me concerns one of Newman's
brothers. Perhaps most of us can count a "Charles Robert" in our
environment. Someone whose "worm i' the bud" of their character has so
completely spoilt its early flower on account of the "one ruinous vice" of
"censoriousness," of perpetual nagging, and fault-finding developed to
such a pitch that it has eaten out at last the fair heart of human
forbearance and kindness which is the birthright of everyone. Such a
person makes the true, free development of others in his proximity a
harder task than God intended it to be, for this reason: that the best
character cannot do itself justice if it is aware that all its sayings and
doings are capped promptly by wrong constructions placed there by "the
chiel amang" them "takin'" unfavourable "notes."

Such a one was Charles Robert Newman. At the date at which this letter was
written his own family had found him so "impossible" that for thirty or
forty years no intercourse had taken place between them.


_To Miss Anna Swanwick from Frank Newman._

"45 Bedford Gardens, W.

"_Tuesday, 4th July_, 1871.

"My dear Anna,

"... I look forward with hope that after my whole life has been a constant
preparation for doing--as yet very little--for the good of those who have
had fewer advantages than myself, I may perhaps be able in my very ripe
years to contribute something more; especially by aid of the noble women
who from all quarters spring up to the succour of their own sex and of the
public welfare: I trust I shall not permit _any_ literary tastes or
fancies to withdraw my energies from this and similar causes.... But every
one of us who is to do anything worthy must forget self, and, above all,
must not cast self-complacent glances on what he is, or does, or has done;
and, in truth, I have so deep a dissatisfaction with what I am and have
been, that my poor consolation is to think how much worse I might have
been.... I must add you evidently do not know that I have _two_ brothers.
The eldest, Dr. J. H. N.; the second, Charles Robert N., three years older
than myself, of whom we do not speak, because he is as unfit for society
as if insane. He is a Cynic Philosopher in modern dress, having many
virtues, but one ruinous vice, that of perpetual censoriousness, by which
he alienates every friend as soon as made, or in the making, by which he
ejected himself from all posts of usefulness. ... He has lived now more
than thirty years in retirement and idleness. His moral ruin was from
Robert Owen's _Socialism and Atheistic Philosophy_; but he presently began
his rebukes on Robert Owen himself. His sole pleasure in company seems to
be in noting down material for ingenious, impertinent, and insolent fault-
finding; hence no one can safely admit him. He formally renounced his
mother, brothers, and sisters about forty years ago, and wrote to other
persons requesting them not to count him a Newman ... because we were
religious and he was an Atheist. He had _all the same dear sweet
influences of home as all of us_; yet how unamiable and useless has he
become! still loving to snarl most at the hands that feed him. Is not this
an admonition not to attribute too much to the single cause of home
Influences, however precious? I shall be happy to attend to your
_Aeschylus_. Lovingly yours,

"F. W. Newman."


"Weston-super-Mare,
"_30th July_, 1880.

"My dear Anna,

"... I am made very melancholy these two days by the news from
Afghanistan, not that anything comes to me as new: I have dreaded it all
along, ever since I discerned that the Gladstone ministry would not_ act
on the moral principles which Mr. Grant Duff definitely professed, which,
indeed, Mr. Gladstone so emphatically avowed in his book on _Church and
State_, and in every grave utterance. Ever since Sir Stafford Northcote so
boldly taunted the (then) Opposition, in the words: 'You call our policy
_crime_; but will you dare to pledge yourselves to reverse it if you come
into power? No, you will not dare.' And none of the Opposition said
frankly, 'We _will_ reverse it'; it was clear to me that they had not the
moral courage. Accordingly I warned friends who asked my judgment, that it
is _in the Russo-Turkish affairs_ the Liberals (so called) would reverse
_the policy, but in Afghanistan and S. Africa_ they would act precisely as
Lord Beaconsfield would act; would accept the positions which they had
condemned; would appear to the natives as continuing the same course of
wicked aggression; would do justice only _so far as compelled_, and _no
sooner_; which is exactly what Lord Beaconsfield was sure to do.... We now
see that a new war opens upon us both in Afghanistan and, it is to be
feared, from the Basutos with the Liberal party in power, and their great
leader to bear the main responsibility!! It is a frightful outlook.... We
had only to say frankly to the Afghan chiefs: 'We always opposed the war
as unjust: we bitterly lament it: we cannot restore the dead or heal the
crippled, but _we will repay you whatever sum of money a Russian
arbitrator may award to you against us_. (!) We will withdraw from your
country in peace as fast as we can, and leave you masters in your own
land.'"


It will be remembered that so far back as 1838, Sir James Outram
[Footnote: Named by his great friend, George Giberne (later on Judge in
the Bombay Presidency), the "Bayard of India."] did great services in the
first Afghan War. It was thought by many that had he remained in the
Ghilzee country many of our disasters might not have occurred. But Lord
Ellenborough--one of the many mistakes placed by our Government in
authority in India during a critical time--never recognized in any way his
services.

"It is certain they would have seen this to be sincere, and would have
been delighted to get rid of us without more bloodshed.... It is pretended
that it would be _cruel_ to leave Afghanistan without first securing to it
a stable government, when obviously we are without moral power there to
add stability. Our presence makes enmity among them.... Alas! once more I
find Mr. Gladstone fail of daring to act according to his own moral
principles. He ought not to have accepted office.... It makes me very sad
for what must come upon England, and perhaps on all English settlers in S.
Africa, to say nothing of India and Anglo-Indians.

"I am, yours ever affectionately,

"F. W. N."


The next letter is dated 31st Dec., 1880, and treats mostly of agriculture
in the fens, in connection with a writer on the subject in some current
paper.

"He" (the writer) "says that if a general move were made in the fens to
stamp out the weeds (which would require an immense expenditure of money
in wages), 'very different results would be obtained from what we now
see.' No doubt they would. But what then? The landlord would raise the
rent, and the farmers would have spent their capital without remuneration.
_Nothing but a security against the rise of rent_ can encourage the
farmers to make sacrifices. He justly says ... that fruit might be more
profitable. But if a farmer plant a fruit tree, it becomes his landlord's
property at once, though it may need thirteen or thirty years to come to
its fullest value.... The writer treats a _lowering_ of rent as out of the
question. Yet from 1847 up to about 1876 it was constantly _rising_. Now,
forsooth! to go back is _impossible!!!_ And why, because _recent buyers
have bought at so high a price_ that they only get three per cent. They
are to be protected from losing, and that, though many have bought at a
fancy price to indulge other tastes than properly agricultural. Mr.
Pennington [Footnote: An old friend of Newman's.] told me he had farms
under his own management and despaired of not losing by them, unless he
could drive down the need of _paying wages_. This is what the farmers
find. Up to 1875 rents kept rising, and wages rose too, yet prices rising,
the peasants were not much better off. In 1873 the peasants claimed more
still, and the farmers could not give it. They are ground between two
millstones--higher rents and higher wages. This seems to me a fundamental
refutation of the peculiarly English system. _Fixity of rent is the first
necessity._ The landlord must not pocket the fruit of the tenants'
labour."

The following letter has to do almost entirely with politics, and with
English misrule of Ireland.

It will be remembered that from 1880, when Gladstone came into office,
until 1885, when his Prime Ministership ended, wars were the order of the
day constantly--wars in the Transvaal; war in Afghanistan; war in Egypt,
and General Gordon left to die in Khartoum. Besides all these, that which
came upon us constantly, the care of countries nearer at hand over which
we tried experiments.


"Weston-super-Mare.
"Sunday night, _20th Feb_., 1881.

"My dear Anna,

"Many thanks for your kind interest in the approval of my writings.

"I have come to a pause in another matter. My Libyan dictionary is as
complete as I can make it.... What next? I ask myself; for _to be idle is
soon to be miserable_. I do not quite say with Clough, '_Qui laborat,
orat_' No! An eminent vivisector may be immensely laborious. We must
choose our labour well, for then it may help us to pray _better_. But
Coleridge is surely nearer the truth: 'He prayeth well who _loveth_ well.'
I put it, Qui _inferiora_ recte diligit, Superiorem bene venerabitur.

"But I turn to your question, What do I think of the Coercion Bill? It is
hard to say little, and painful to speak plainly. I immensely admire _very
much_ in Mr. Gladstone; so do you: of possible leaders he is the best--at
present! and it is a bitter disappointment to find him a reed that pierces
the hand when one leans on it. I fear you will not like me to say, what I
say with pain, that only in European affairs do I find him commendable. In
regard to our unjust wars he has simply _betrayed and deluded_ the
electors who enthusiastically aided him to power.... He has gone wholly
wrong towards Ireland, equally as towards Afghanistan, India, and South
Africa.... He knows as well as John Bright that Ireland is not only
chronically injured by English institutions, but that Ireland has every
reason to distrust promises.

"Those of William III in the pacification were violated; so were those of
Mr. Pitt in 1801.... The very least that could soothe the Irish and give
them hope is a clear enunciation _what_ measures of relief Mr. Gladstone
is resolved _to propose_. But he is incurably averse to definite
statements, and seems as anxious as a Palmerston might be to reserve a
power of shuffling out.... He tells the Boers of the Transvaal that if
they will submit unconditionally, they shall meet 'generous' treatment. If
the injured Basutos submit, their case will be _carefully considered_....
Nothing was to me more obvious than that as soon as he saw a beginning of
unruly conduct in Ireland, he should have pledged himself to clearly
defined measures, and have insisted on the existing law against
lawlessness. But 'Boycotting' is _not_ lawlessness. Lynch-law against
oppressive landlords or their agents cannot be put down by intensifying
national hatred.... Has the Coercion been wisely directed and reasonably
guarded from abuse? I am sorry to say, flatly and plainly, No; and that
Mr. Gladstone himself, as well as Mr. Forster, seems to have gone more and
more to the wrong as the Bill moved on.... Mr. Forster's tone has been
simply ferocious, out of Parliament as well as in, and Mr. Gladstone has
borrowed a spice of ferocity.... To imprison (for instance) Mr. Parnell,
and _not tell him why_, may cause an exasperation in Ireland, followed by
much bloodshed.... Meanwhile, Ireland is made more and more hostile, and
foreign nations more and more condemn us.... It seems to be forgotten that
we have an army locked up at Candahar. _That a severe spring may be its
ruin_, deficient as it was known to be long ago in fodder and fuel, and
lately of provisions also. Cannon are of little use when horses are
starved. And what may not happen in India, injured and irritated as it is,
if that army were lost!... John Stuart Mill wrote that if we got into
civil war with Ireland about Landed Tenure, no Government would pity us,
and 'all the Garibaldis in the world' would be against us....

"Your affectionate friend,

"F. W. Newman."


The following letter concerns the Transvaal war, and is dated March 2nd,
1881:--

       *       *       *       *       *

"Since Mr. Gladstone cannot have _changed his judgment_ concerning the
Beaconsfield policy in Afghanistan, in India, or in South Africa, the only
inference is that (from one reason or other which I may or may not know)
_he is not strong enough to carry out his own convictions of right_. If he
was not strong enough to give back the Transvaal to the Boers, though he
pronounced the annexation all but insanity, when he entered office, and
_had a power of stipulating_ on what terms alone he would be Premier, much
less is he strong enough now. Not Tories only, but Whigs (to judge by
their past) and the whole mass of our honest fighters, and certainly the
Court, will find it an unendurable humiliation to do justice _by
compulsion of the Boers_. Their atrocious doctrine is, that before we
confess that we have done them wrong, we must first murder enough of them
to show that we are the stronger. It is awful to attribute sentiment so
wicked to the Premier, or to John Bright and the rising Radical element of
the Ministry; but the melancholy fact is that they act before the public
_as if_ this were their doctrine.... The Coercion Bill and its errors are
past and irrecoverable.... How will it now aid us to hold up to the public
Mr. Gladstone's irrecoverable mistakes? That is what I cannot make out. He
has destroyed public confidence in all possible successors to the
Premiership, if confidence could be placed in any. I know not one who
could be trusted to INSIST on stopping war and wasting no more blood. Yet
the longer this war lasts, the greater the danger (1) that all the Dutch
in Orange State, in Natal, in Cape Colony will unite against us; (2) that
an attack on us in retreat from Candahar, where Mr. Gladstone has
'insanely' continued war, if moderately successful, may make even yet new
'vengeance' of Afghans seem 'necessary to our prestige'--such are the
immoral principles dominant among Whigs as well as Tories; (3) any such
embroilments may animate Ireland to insurrectionary defiance; (4) further
Afghan fighting may lead to Indian revolt.... The nation has found that no
possible Ministry will make common justice its rule. Penny newspapers make
us widely different now from thirty or forty years ago. The masses _abhor
war_, and will only sanction it when we seem forced to it in defence of
public freedom. ... The internal quiet of France has stript Republicanism
of terrors to our moneyed classes. Not the thing, but the transition to it
is feared: with good reason, yet perhaps not rightly in an intelligent
people.

"Some sudden change of events may put off Republicanism yet for thirty
years; but great disasters may precipitate it.... We, the people, can do
nothing at present that I see except avow with Lord John Russell (1853-4),
'God prosper the Right' which now means 'May we be defeated whenever we
are in the wrong.' This is the only _patriotic_ prayer.

"F. W. N."


Again, in October, Newman is reviewing Gladstone's political character,
and regretting that it has not fulfilled its first high promise.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We must make the best we can of all our public men, and eminently of Mr.
Gladstone, and be thankful for all we get from him. Yet I cannot help,
when I remember his undoubtedly sincere religion and moral professions,
expecting from him _a higher morality_ than from Palmerston, Wellington,
or Peel. Peel was a valuable minister, and better every five years. I
counted and count his loss a great one. Yet his first question in
determining action or speech was, "How many votes will support me?" a
topic reasonable in _all minor questions_, but not where essentially Right
or Wrong are concerned. I grieve if you rightly attribute to Mr. Gladstone
that he would have arrested Mr. Parnell earlier, only that he did not
think the English public _ripe_ for approving it. The public is now
_irritated_ by Mr. P.'s conduct. If it is against law, he ought to be
prosecuted by law, informed of his offence, and allowed to defend
himself.... The whole idea of _lessening crime_ by passing an Act to take
away the cardinal liberty of speech enjoyed by Englishmen (and M.P.'s) and
deprive them not only of Jury, but of _Judge_ and _Accuser_, while
REFUSING to prohibit evictions in the interval between the passing of the
Violence Bill (coercive of guilt it is not) and the passing of the
Conciliation and Justice Bill, is to me amazing.... I rather believe the
fact is that he" (Gladstone) "carried his Coercion Bill against the
scruples and grave fears of all the most valuable part of his Cabinet.
Instead of earning gratitude from Ireland, he has intensely irritated both
the landlords and the opposite party, and certainly has not diminished
crime, nor aided towards punishing it.

"I attribute it all to the fact that he has not understood that when
pressed into the highest post by the enthusiasm of the country, he was
bound by _honour_ and common sense to carry out _his own avowed policy_,
not that of weak friends and bitter opponents. The attempt to _count votes
beforehand_ is fatal where great moral issues are involved."

And again, in November:--

"Have we yet the measure of what we are to suffer from the continuance of
the Afghan war? I believe a million and a half per month does not exceed
the cost--that is, about fourteen millions _since Mr. Gladstone came into
power_; but if the winter continue severe, the whole army may be lost, in
spite of our bravery and military science. We seem to forget how the
Russian winter ruined Napoleon, and in the case of the Transvaal how much
our armies suffered in the war against our American colonists from the
vastness of distances, and the skill of shooting almost universal to the
colonists.

"I regard Mr. Gladstone as the best Premier by far now possible to us....
There is no shadow of responsibility left in a cabinet if we do not impute
all its errors to its _Head_; and I regard it as a terrible fact, pregnant
with possible revolution, that _he has betrayed the Electors_. The country
hushed its many and various desires of domestic reform for one
overwhelming claim, PEACE. They bore him into power on that firm belief.
Instead of peace we have war--war which may spread like a conflagration.
His clear duty was (and John Bright's too) _to refuse to take office_
except on the condition of instantly reversing all the wickedness and
insanity which he denounced when out of office. He and he only could have
stayed these plagues. We are now hated for our acts, and despised for our
affectation of Justice and Philanthropy.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I am thoroughly aware that my judgment of Mr. Gladstone may be wrong, and
to myself it is so painful that I expect a majority of his supporters will
differ from it. But when I say he has increased--immensely increased--ALL
HIS DIFFICULTIES, I marvel how you can deduce from my judgment that I
_underrate_ his difficulties.... If Ireland be in chronic revolt, and
India seize the opportunity, few Englishmen are likely to suffer less from
it than I. Probably Mr. Gladstone, by the fear lest the Tories now seek to
ride back into power on the shoulders of Ireland, will resolutely make
_household suffrage for the counties_ his main effort.

"But there the Lords can checkmate him."

Before quoting from the next letter before me, written to Anna Swanwick in
February, 1884, which treats of the best method of teaching languages,
ancient and modern, that practice should precede the scientific study in
this matter; and that the "popular side should go first," I think a
quotation from Newman's article (_Miscellanies_, Vol. V) on Modern Latin
as a Basis of Instruction, would fitly come in here. The article makes a
great point of popularizing the study of Latin. That it should practically
be made an interesting subject not devoid of romance and imagination. He
condemns the old fashion (still, alas! in vogue in many schools) of
committing to memory an enormous amount of matter quite unworthy of being
retained in the mind. He urges the need of a "Latin novel"--a Latin
comedy; one that would set alight the imagination of young scholars.

In Miss Bruce's _Memoir and Recollections_ of Anna Swanwick, there is
mention of the fact that the latter often mentioned the insight she
herself obtained in the intricacies of the Greek language through help
given her by Frank Newman. She also quotes his words with regard to
geometry, showing that the same need in teaching it prevailed as with the
study of Greek. That the imagination must be stimulated. A sense of beauty
must be cultivated. That the whole secret lay in the _way_ a thing was
presented to the mind of the student. For unless the sense of beauty and
symmetry had been aroused in him, he would of necessity find far more
difficulty in retaining the, so to speak, statistical Blue-book of the
groundwork and rules of any science. Newman himself was an adept at
putting a subject in an entirely new light, when some pupil failed,
perhaps, to follow his calculations or explanations. In relation to the
teaching of Greek, the following words of Miss Swanwick's (in the _Memoir_
to which I have just referred) show how thoroughly she and Newman were in
accord.

"Deeply interested as I was in the study of Greek, and intense as was the
pleasure of its acquisition, I yet hesitate to recommend it as a part of
the curriculum of boys and girls, unless it can be taken later, and with
more concentrated determination to master the extremely difficult grammar,
than is usually given to school lessons.... It is to be remembered,
moreover, that in the literature of Greece and Rome there are no words
adapted expressly for the young. The ancient classics, written by adults
for adults, are beyond the intelligence of immature minds, whilst in
regard to the moral lessons to be drawn from them, the superiority, in my
opinion, is vastly in favour of more modern writers."

Anna Swanwick's original desire to learn Greek was (Miss Bruce tells us in
the former's own words) "to be able to read the New Testament in the
original."

I quote now from Newman's article:--

"Children can learn two languages, or even three at once; and this, if
these are spoken to them by different individuals, without confusion and
without being less able to learn other things. Memory is aided because
imagination connects the words with a person, a scene, or events; and,
little by little, the utility of speech calls forth active efforts in the
learner.... In general the old method was one of repetition: _it dealt
immensely in committing Latin to memory_.... Nothing is easier to boys
than such learning, even when the thing learned is uninteresting... yet...
means should be taken of making it interesting and instructive and
rhythmical.... It seems to me that we want what I may call a Latin novel
or romance; that is, a pleasing tale of fiction, which shall convey
numerous Latin words, which do not easily find a place in poetry, history,
or philosophy.... If anyone had genius to produce, in Terentian style,
Latin comedies worthy of engaging the minds and hearts of youth (for I can
never read a play of Terence to a young class without the heartache), I
should regard this as a valuable contribution." [Footnote: Mr. Darbishire
says in a letter to which I have had access: "One of his" (Newman's)
"special endeavours was to accustom his students to deal with Greek as a
spoken language, as he and we did in reading Greek plays."]

To return to the letter.


"Weston-super-Mare,
"_16th Feb._, 1884.

"My dear Friend,

"The late Professor George Long (my predecessor in University College),
editor of the _Penny Cyclopaedia_ was originally professor of Greek and a
student of Sanskrit. He maintained that German, studied as it ought to be,
prepared the mind for other work as effectively as could Greek, and, as
Dr. W. B. Hodgson (and I too) independently alleged, that the study of
_modern_ languages and learning to _talk_ them ought to _precede_ the
study of Greek. To make Greek the basis of an entire school and force it
on all is with me cruelty as well as folly. Five out of six women and men
would not learn it enough to _retain_ or _use_ it. If you place ancient
languages and all that cannot be learned by _talking_ at the END, only
those will study who have a special object, and these will duly _use_
them. I think that is the only wise and _just_ way. Further, I think it a
grave mistake to teach the scientific _side_ of any language first, and
try to proceed through science to practice. The popular side should go
first. Greeks talked rightly before Protagoras, but Protagoras first
taught that Greek had three genders.... _After_ a full acquaintance with
the substance of a language, its laws and relationships come naturally and
profitably. In a dead language we are _forced_ to bring on the science
earlier: that is the reason for deferring such study till a riper age; and
best if delayed until _after_ learning several _modern_ languages (by
talking, if possible), the more different from one another the _better_.
English, German or Russian or Latin, and Arabic would be three very
different in kind.

"Our English Professor Latham used to talk much error, in my judgment, of
the supreme value to the intellect of studying FORM. This word was to
include the 'accidence' of language with the fewest possible words;
algebra with the least possible arithmetic ... Logic without real
proposition.... Now, in my belief, and that of _De Morgan_ and the late
Professor Boole, nothing so ruins the mind as to accustom it to think that
it knows something when it can attach no definite ideas to the symbols
over which it chatters."


To-day, what educational strides should we not make if we could but bring
our present systems of teaching into line with these of Newman's!

It will be remembered that in March, 1886, Gladstone caused great
dissension in his own party by bringing in his measure for giving Ireland
a statutory parliament. The bill was rejected at its second reading, and
when Gladstone made his appeal to the country, the general election showed
he had lost its confidence. He had based his belief that Ireland was ripe
for some measure of Home Rule, on account of the fact that the election
under the new Reform Bill had proved that out of 103 Irish members 87 were
Nationalists.


"_5th May_, 1885

"My dear Anna,

       *       *       *       *       *

"The Irish question, as now presented, is in a very sad imbroglio. After
our monstrous errors of policy and the infliction on Ireland of miseries
and degradation unparalleled in Europe, to expect to bring things right
without humiliation and without risks of what cannot be foreseen, seems to
me conceit and ignorance. Evildoers _must_ have humiliation, _must_ have
risks, when they try to go right. Opponents will always be able to argue,
as did Alcibiades to the Athenians: 'We hold our supremacy as a despotism;
therefore it is no longer _safe_ for us to play the part of virtue.' In so
far, I may seem to favour Mr. Gladstone's move; and I think I do rejoice
_that it has been made_. Probably those are right who say, 'Henceforth it
becomes impossible to go back into the old groove.' I do not believe that
a Parliament elected on new lines will endure it.

"But neither would the Democratic Parliament in any case have endured it.
A new civil war against Ireland seems morally impossible. Therefore Mr.
Gladstone is _ruining_ a measure which might have been good, by his
preposterous dealing with it. Lord Hartington said (as indeed did John
Bright) the very truth, that the Liberal Party cannot so disown its own
traditions, and its wisest principles, as to allow an _individual_,
however justly honoured, to concoct _secretly from his old and trusted
comrades_, a vast, complicated, and far-reaching settlement and make
himself sole initiator of it (as _I_ have kept saying, reduce Parliament
to a _machine for saying only Yes and No_).... It is a vile degradation of
Parliament. But that is only a small part of the infinite blunder. He
pretends that everything has been tried and has failed, _except_ what he
now proposes.... In 1880 no one forced him to bring in an Irish measure:
he chose to do it, _and did it in the worst possible way,_ by treating the
Irish members as ENEMIES, and refusing to consult them. [The Scotch
members have _never_ been so treated on Scotch questions.]

"Down to last September Mr. Gladstone declared that the Irish members were
men, who, by a conspiracy of _rapine_, were seeking to _dismember_ the
empire. He carried '(?)' against Ireland during his unparalleled
supremacy, acts of despotism unequalled in this country, and that, though
they _had no tendency to lessen crime_; and he joined them with
_imprisonment against Mr. Parnell_. Only his monstrous incompetency to see
right and wrong, made his well-intentioned measure all but fruitless. Peel
and Wellington did mischief, long since deplored, in teaching the Irish
that England cared nothing for justice, but very much indeed for the
danger of a new civil war; but now Mr. Gladstone has been teaching them
still more effectually. In September last he denounced Parnell and his
friends as bent on dismembering the empire, deplored the danger of
consulting them, begged for votes to strengthen him _against_ them; but as
soon as the country, from various and very just discontent with his
WARLIKE POLICY, and his utter neglect of our moral needs, showed in many
of the boroughs their deep dissatisfaction, and he found Mr. Parnell
_twice as strong_ as in the Old Parliament ... he gave notice that he was
ready to capitulate to Mr. Parnell. And he _did_ virtually capitulate; Mr.
Parnell _understood_ him, and defeated Lord Salisbury, and Mr. Gladstone
in accepting the power _to which Mr. Parnell invited him,_ insulted all
his trusting comrades by keeping them in total ignorance of his scheme,
while he concocted it by consultation with the very men whom just before
he had _maligned_ as conspiring to _break up_ the empire.

"Such conduct from a Tory minister sounds to me more extreme than anything
I ever read of in English history; and from a pretended _Liberal_ leader
would have seemed incredible, if predicted. I suppose he was _predestined
(vir fatalis)_ to break up his Party.

"I shall indeed rejoice and praise God if Mr. Gladstone's wonderful folly
do_ break down this ... _system of legislation._--There's a long yarn for
you!!

"Ever your affectionate

"F. W. Newman."


In the next letter, in November of the same year, Newman complains of
temporary paralysis in his left-hand fingers and stiffness in that arm "as
though it had a muscular twist."

The actual putting on of an overcoat now becomes no slight undertaking,
and he finds that reading now tires his eyes much more than does writing.
He touches on the Burmese war, "which seems likely to be even worse than
the Egyptian and Sudanese iniquity in its results to us." And he adds, "We
have now without any just cause of war, or even the pretence of any,
invaded this province, which is subject and tributary to China, and
lawlessly act the marauder upon it, claiming it as ours, and treating the
patriots who oppose us as rebels and robbers. The Emperor of China now
finds our frontier, if we succeed, pushed up to his own, and, whenever
convenient to him, he can send in his armies against us, especially if
India were to revolt."

In October, 1886, matters in Bulgaria were at their highest tide. At last,
after all her efforts, since 1356, at independence from the hated power of
Greece, when "Almost" she and Servia were "persuaded" to form a great
Slavonic State together, she seemed near attainment of her constantly
prolonged efforts.

In 1872 the Bulgarian Church was again able to break her fetters, which
she abhorred, which bound her to Greece. Then, in 1876, the atrocities
committed by the Turkish inhabitants of Bulgaria took place. The Porte,
when besought by the Constantinople Conference to make concessions,
refused point-blank. Then Russia stepped in and declared war, and proposed
themselves to make a Bulgarian State. England and Austria promptly refused
to lend themselves to this scheme, and a Berlin Congress was summoned. The
Berlin Treaty in 1878 arranged the limits and administrative autonomy of
this State, and the Bulgarians chose Prince Alexander of Battenberg,
cousin of the Grand Duke of Hesse, and he became in 1879 Alexander I of
Bulgaria. Eventually the recognition of him by the Porte as Governor-
General of Eastern Roumelia followed. In 1886 Russia made herself felt
unexpectedly. Alexander was kidnapped by order of the Czar and carried to
Russia.

The upshot of it all was that, though he returned to Bulgaria, yet he felt
it was in vain to struggle against Russian animosities, and so abdicated.

The letter following shows Newman to be in failing health and under
doctor's treatment:--


"Weston-super-Mare,
"_7th October,_ 1886.

"My dear Anna,

"... My brief London visit which ought to have come off is forbidden
positively, and I doubt not wisely, by medical command, _not_ because I am
ill, _but_ because I had formidable threatening of illness, like a black
cloud which after all does not come down. The threat consisted in my left
hand losing all sense and power. This is now the sixth day. On the third I
regained power to button, though clumsily, and to use my fork. Of course I
am ordered to use my _brain_ as little as possible, and in future to
change my habits. I must leave off all letters and other writing much
earlier in the evening. But frequent short walks I hold salutary to my
brain; and my feet have not failed me.

"... You ask what I think of the Bulgarian outrage.... In the present
instance the one thing primarily to be desired, and eminently difficult to
attain, was cohesion of the little Powers. As of old, Sparta and Athens
could not coalesce, and therefore after weakening one another they ill-
resisted Philip, and were overpowered by Alexander armed from Macedonia
and Thrace, and under-propt by gold from Asia; so now the little States--
Servia, Bulgaria, Roumania, Greece--each envied the other, perhaps was
ready for hostility, but all looked up to Russia with more than fear.

"But this atrocious kidnapping of a reigning Prince has given just _the
external compression which was wanted_ to make the little States desire
union, and the greater Powers to think that such union is for European
benefit. Not only has it reconciled Servia and Bulgaria, late in actual
war, but it has elicited public outcry in Roumania for federation with
these two States. Whether Greece can lay aside her jealous enmity against
Bulgaria is not yet clear. Her ambition is to acquire Macedonia and
Constantinople ... perhaps ... Albania.

"... To me it seems a wonder that the Greek statesmen do not see that
Constantinople is too critical a spot for the European Powers to yield up
to any secondary State. If it is to be under European protection, Greece
would find her power in Constantinople merely nominal....

"The brutality of the Czar not only drives the little Powers to desire
union, but makes the great Powers ashamed of it, and it seems, though
reluctantly, they will oppose him.

"_This is the first time that a Hungarian statesman has initiated European
movement._ If in Europe they are forced to displease Russia, so much the
more will they wish to keep Russia in better humour by not thwarting her
projects in Armenia, which projects I believe to be just, philanthropic,
and necessary under the circumstances; since the inability of the Sultan
to rescue the Armenians from marauders has been proved, and _no_ Power but
Russia can do the needful work....

"It is to be feared that Germany cannot add any real strength to control
Russia, while Russia knows that the insane vanity of French politicians is
preparing a war of vengeance against Germany. Until the masses of the
people have a practical constitutional plebiscite to _veto_ war
_beforehand,_ it seems as though horrors which seem dead and obsolete must
rise anew. _Perhaps_ this is the lesson which the populations all have to
learn. The earliest great triumph which the old plebeians of Rome won was
the constitutional principle that wars could not be made without previous
sanction of the popular assembly. England, alas! has not yet even demanded
this obvious and just veto. The men whose trade is war, whose honours and
wealth can only be won by war, will make it by hook or by crook, while
their fatal and immoral trade is honoured.

"Affectionately yours,

"F. W. Newman."


In April, 1887, the Irish question was again to the fore, and part of the
letter from which I quote shows clearly that Newman was in favour of some
form of Local Government for Ireland, though not of the same kind as was
being pressed forward by Mr. Parnell, who had urged on his countrymen
agrarian agitation and boycotting as the screw which was to force the hand
of the Home Government.


"My opinion is unchanged (1) that Grattan's Parliament was foolishly,
mischievously, and immorally subverted by English double-dealing; (2) that
in one hundred years things are so changed in Ireland and _in Rome_ that
we cannot go back to that crisis and heal old wounds by reinstating
Grattan's work without making new wounds; (3) I deeply blame Orangemen in
Belfast as (apparently) bent on promoting animosity, and on convincing us
that they will rather rush into civil war than endure a Parliament in
Dublin supreme over all Ireland: but however much this may be suspected as
the bluster and cunning of a minority in Ulster, to ignore it totally may
be unjust as well as unwise. And besides, I think that Ireland needs the
practice of Local Government, varying locally, before that of a Central
Irish Parliament. This forbids my desiring a complete triumph to Mr.
Parnell.

"You are aware that I have long desired Provincial Chambers for all three
kingdoms, and can see nothing to forbid them now for Ireland if Mr.
Gladstone were to take that side. If he did it would be carried against
Mr. Parnell by a vast majority of votes. No mere political measure can
cure famine and rackrent or insecure tenure; but if the agrarian evil be
appeased, no hatred of England on the part of Irish leaders will suffice
to make Ireland discontented. If Mr. Gladstone fixedly opposes, if he says
'Honour compels me'--his Midlothian defence of the Egyptian war!--I should
not the less say he had made a wrongful treaty. But 'a fac is a fac':
_someone_ hitherto makes this settlement impossible. If now the Tories
miscarry, apparently Gladstone will come in again, and not Oedipus can
tell us whether he will dissolve Parliament.

"It is supposed that he will; and Mr. W. S. Caine, whose prediction in
this matter I cannot underrate, warns Mr. Gladstone that to dissolve
_again_ will bring on him redoubled failure,--an immense lessening of
supporters.

"The new voters, at the last election, had not had time to learn a
thousand things. After such a transformation of the constituencies, I not
only _expect_--I _desire_--the break-up of the Liberal Party. Little by
little they have adopted the Tory idea of 'follow your leader': never
think for yourself. In the Parliament, in the Newspapers, in Arguments of
Foreign War, at the Hustings, they treat it as 'Treason to the Party' not
to do whatever the Premier says they _must_ do, or he will resign and
wreck the party.... I see only one sunbeam through the clouds ever since
the fatal Egyptian war; and that is the recent Peace-Union of _Germany,
Austria-Hungary and Italy_. I look on it as the inauguration of the future
European Confederacy which is to forbid European wars, and become a
forcible mediator. Under its shelter Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria seem
likely to consolidate a union of defence; and as soon as all the Powers
understand that the Triple Alliance is based on permanent interests, the
Alliance will not need to keep their armaments on foot; to _train_ them,
as the generations grow up, will suffice. The royalties everywhere will
struggle for actual armies: the burdened peoples will murmur.

"Meanwhile we need long patience, I suppose, while Irish rent wastes to
smaller and smaller worth; and one new election will suddenly precipitate
the struggle. _I_ do not fear that any Irish success will make Irishmen
desire the burden of undertaking their own military and naval defence.

"Affectionately yours,

"F. W. Newman."

       *       *       *       *       *

As regards Newman's opinions on one of the national questions which so
closely concern us to-day--the Drink Traffic--they are very clearly and
definitely stated in an article he wrote in the year 1877, and which
appeared in _Fraser's Magazine, in re_ Sir Wilfrid Lawson's Bill.

Here again decentralization was the key-note, as he firmly believed, of
the remedy.

"The palace-like jails which now disgrace our civilization, and cause
expenses so vast, are chiefly the fruit of this pernicious trade.... What
shadow of reason is there for doubting that such sales as are necessary...
will be far more sagaciously managed by a Local Board which the ratepayers
elect _for this sole purpose_, than either by magistrates... or by an
_irresponsible_ and _multitudinous_ Committee of Parliament? Finally, a
Board elected for this one duty is immeasurably better than the Town
Councils, who are distracted by an immensity of other business....

"Such a Board should have full power to frame its own restrictions, so as
to prevent the fraud of wine merchants or chemists degenerating into
spirit shops....

"To secure sufficient responsibility, no Board should be numerous: _five_
or _seven_ persons may be a full maximum, and no Board should have a vast
constituency. Therefore our greatest towns ought to be divided into areas
with suitable numbers, and have Boards separately independent. With a few
such precautions, the system of elective Licensing Boards, which can
impose despotically their own conditions on the licences, but without
power to bind their successors in the next year, appears to be a complete
solution of the problem...."

He adds, that to Sir Wilfrid Lawson "is due more largely than to any other
public man the arousing of the nation" in the matter of the Drink Traffic,
"To him our thanks and our honour will be equally paid, though the name of
another mover be on the victorious Bill"--whatever it may be.

"Noble efforts for a good cause are never thrown away, are never
ineffectual, even when the success does not come in the exact form for
which its champion was contending. It may hereafter be said: 'Other men
sowed--we reap the fruit of their labours.'"

I quote now from the letter to Anna Swanwick, in which he refers to this
question in 1887:--

"Unless at a very early day the causes of Un-Employ be removed, we must
calculate on frightful disorder. Evidently two measures are indispensable.

"1. To stop our land from going out of cultivation.

"2. To stop the demoralizing waste of 135 millions per annum on pernicious
drink.

"Only a most stringent change of law, perhaps very difficult to pass, can
effect the _former_ and when passed, the good effect cannot be
instantaneous. The _second_ topic has been before the nation for thirty-
four years; could be passed, if there were a _will_ in _either_ ministry,
in a single fortnight, and when passed, the benefit would be sensible in a
single year. Yet these topics are indefinitely postponed. The Tories do
not even talk of them. _Some_ 'Liberals' round Mr. Gladstone are eager for
the stopping of Drink Bars, but the eloquent leader _talks_ (in general)
rightly, but never _acts_.

"Alas! He showed his heart in bringing a Bill to enact that every Railway
Train should have (at least?) one travelling carriage with a Drink Bar.
When it is told, people will not believe it."

The final letter from Francis Newman to Anna Swanwick, from the collection
so kindly lent me by Miss Bruce, is dated 17th April, 1897, "15 Arundel
Crescent, Weston-super-Mare."

It is not written by himself. By that time he was too feeble to be able to
write, and of course it was only a few months before his death. This
letter was written in response to one from Anna Swanwick. To me, I must
frankly own, it breathes of the past tragedy, of those doubts and fears by
which Newman's religious life had been beset. Even now, notwithstanding
his statements to his two lifelong friends, Martineau and Anna Swanwick,
that he wished it to be known that he died in the Christian faith, the
uncertainty by which, according to the following letter, he was very
evidently governed as regards the question of immortality, suggests a
submissive mind indeed, but one devoid of the splendid force of conviction
as regards his faith in "the life of the world to come."

Anna Swanwick always declared, we are told, that his was a "deeply
religious nature," yet throughout the greater part of his life he was
unable to take hold of the dogmas of Holy Scriptures. He was always trying
to make a "new" religion, compounded of all the best parts of the faiths
professed in various parts of the world. Yet even were this done it might
interest, but could never become, like the Christian Religion, once for
all delivered--a faith to be _sure_ of, a faith Divinely inspired, not
man-made.


"My dear Friend,

"I have read your letter this morning with deep interest and thanks. I do
not intend to oppose it at all, but to add what it now seems to need.
First, that I have always dreaded to involve another mind in my own doubts
and uncertainties; only when I saw death not far off I thought it cowardly
towards one who has shown me so much love to leave you ignorant of my last
creed. For this reason alone did I send you my inability to maintain
popular immortality.

"Next, it is not amiss to let you know the talk which passed between me
and the Rev. James Taylor--Martineau's co-partner. He asked me my own
belief concerning known immortality, and I replied that the Most High
never asked my consent for bringing me into this world, yet I thanked Him
for it, and tried to glorify Him. In like manner He never asked my leave
to put me after my death in this world into any new world, and if He
thought fit to do it I am not likely to murmur at His will. But not
knowing His will, nor what power of resistance He allows me, I do not
attempt to foresee the future. I seem to remember J. J. Taylor's remark,
that he thought I went as far as anyone could be expected to go. And now,
my dear Anna, I still wait to know how far I am straying from the man whom
you and I are expecting something from--Dr. Martineau.

"Accept this kind remark, and be sure that I can use, and do use,
concerning you, what a certain Psalmist says of the Most High: 'I will
praise Him as long as I have any power to praise in my soul.'

"Yours while I exist
"(You will not ask more of my weakness),

"F. W. Newman."


One wonders--but that wonder remains unsatisfied--what "that something"
was which he and Anna Swanwick were then "expecting" from Martineau.
Probably it was some statement as regards religion which Newman longed for
from the man who had been permitted to help him now in his old age (when
he distrusted more and more his own old judgments and former convictions)
once more on to the old paths, led by that "kindly Light amid the
encircling gloom," which now was fast closing in upon him.




CHAPTER XI

THE STORY OF TWO PATRIOTS


England possesses, as a rule, a memory of decidedly insular proportions
and proclivities. On the tablets of our country's memory are chalked up
many names which have figured in the history of her own concerns, or at
any rate in concerns with which she has some connection. Perhaps it will
be said that this is inevitable. Perhaps it will be said that this way
Patriotism lies. Perhaps it will be said that our interests as English
citizens and citizenesses are bound to be local, or we could not impress
the seal of our empire upon other nations' memories.

And if it _is_ said, it is no doubt in great measure true. It is
inevitable that we remember, in sharp unblurred outlines, the names and
deeds of our own great men. It is this way that the soil of Patriotism is
kept well manured for fresh crops of doughty deeds. We _are_ bound to
impress our individuality, as a nation, upon other countries; for if we
did not, we could never exist for any length of time as an empire at all.

But when all this is owned up to, there still remains another great
necessity which can never with safety be disregarded. And this is the
cultivation of our--so to speak--_foreign_ memory. We cannot afford to
pamper our insularity. It is true it must exist, but it is equally true
that English interests can never be--at least, _ought_ never to be--the
sum total of our mental investments. Patriotism is a fine thing. It is an
eminently inspiring thing. But it is also a thing that needs to take walks
abroad to keep itself in good mental health. There is a certain sort of
cosmopolitanism without which no nation's life can be complete--nay,
without which it cannot go on at all.

It is the cosmopolitanism of recognizing greatness outside our own
borders. The cosmopolitanism of owning that there are as good fish in
foreign seas as ever there were in the English Channel. The
cosmopolitanism of a human brotherhood, whether it hails from the Sandwich
Islands, from France, from Finland, or from Hungary; which recognizes as a
salient truth, big with vital issues, that, after all is said and done, it
is not the soil which matters, but the man whose feet are upon it now, at
this present day, though by birth he may own natal allegiance to a far
distant shore.

There are two names to-day which are practically forgotten by modern
England. Yet it is only half a century ago that the men who owned them
were making a gallant stir for patriotism's sake.

How many Englishmen to-day remember the story of Kossuth and Pulszky? Yet
fifty years ago their names sounded loudly enough in the political arena.
Fifty years ago they had struck the drum of fame with a boom which
reverberated through many a European country.

Yet here is a curious instance of the uncertainty which attends a nation's
memory in regard to foreign heroes. Some quite unaccountable factor seems
to rule their choice of whose achievements shall be nailed to the door of
their memories, like British trophies of old, and which shall be
completely forgotten. Garibaldi and Kossuth were patriots of the same
decade--one of Italy, the other of Hungary. Yet to-day in England the "red
shirt" of the Italian patriot still casts a flaming glow on the English
memory, while the struggle of Kossuth for his country is almost dead to
us, as far as our remembrance of it is concerned.

Nevertheless in the history of his country, what Kossuth achieved for her
of independence and freedom was in no way less fine than Garibaldi's
exploits.

In Francis Newman's _Reminiscences of Two Wars and Two Exiles_, the story
of the Hungarian reformer and _patriot_ stands out clearly before us. He
gives as his reason for writing it that when, in 1851, Kossuth and
Pulszky, his brother agitator, came to England, he himself became their
close friend. He says: "When ... Kossuth and Pulszky quitted England in
1860, Pulszky told me they were glad to leave behind in _me_ one
Englishman who knew all their secrets and could be trusted to expound
them." He goes on, however, to say that he was never able to be of so much
service to them as Mr. Toulmin Smith, "a constitutional lawyer ... and a
zealot for Hungary."

1848 was the year when the affairs of Hungary were at their most crucial
point. For long the situation had been growing more and more strained
between Austria and Hungary. Austria had been trying her hardest to force
Hungary into entire subservience to herself--to force her to give up her
separate individuality as a nation and become fused into the Austrian
empire. But Hungary made a gallant stand against all these attempts which
aimed at destroying her independence. She had always been a constitutional
monarchy, with power of electing her own kings. Austria had always
practically been considered to be a "foreigner" as far as Hungarian laws
and offices were concerned.

The London Hungarian Committee in 1849 quoted Article X, by Leopold II, of
the House of Hapsburg, in 1790, which definitely stated that "Hungary with
her appanages is a free kingdom, and in regard to her whole legal form of
government (including all the tribunals) independent; that is, entangled
with no other kingdom or people, but having her own peculiar consistence
and constitution; accordingly to be governed by her legitimately crowned
king after her peculiar laws and customs."

This statute, however, was no sooner made than fresh attempts were made to
nullify it. Hungary's needs, as a country, were many. Her taxation
required alteration; her peasants had still feudal burdens to bear,
instead of being freehold proprietors of land. Religious toleration was
not enforced, and free trade was an unknown quantity, for Austria insisted
on the produce of Hungary being sent only to her market. Fresh roads and
bridges and agricultural improvements were imperatively necessary, but the
need was passed by, by Austria.

To every nation, as to every individual, when the hour of worst need
strikes, the hand of the man or woman who brings rescue is upon the latch
of the door. In the present instance Kossuth was in readiness to redeem
his country from the yoke of Austria.

In March, 1848, the Opposition in the Hungarian Diet, with Kossuth at
their head, carried a vote "that the Constitution of Hungary could never
be free from the machinations of the Austrian Cabinet until Constitutional
Government was established in the foreign possessions of the Crown, so as
to restore the legal status of the period at which the Diet freely
conferred the royalty on the House of Hapsburg." This vote paralysed the
Austrian authorities.... The Hungarian Diet immediately claimed for itself
also a responsible ministry.

Prompt measures were now taken by the Hungarians to restore the old status
of the country, and laws were made which conferred upon the peasants
freeholds of land and all other reforms for which they had for so long
been agitating.

The London Hungarian Committee, to whose paper I have before referred,
tells us that before the French Revolution had broken out this Bill had
passed both Houses. "The Austrian Cabinet, seeing their overwhelming
unanimity, felt that resistance was impossible"; consequently this Reform
Bill of April, 1848, was considered by all Hungarian patriots as their
Magna Charta.

Nevertheless it was their fate very shortly after to appreciate the truth
of this hard fact, that it is one thing to make a Charter and another
thing to keep it. Austria had many ways up her sleeve of breaking the
spirit of the letter. First she saw to it that Hungary had no properly
equipped home regiments for her defence, and next she dissolved the
Hungarian Diet, and again tried to fuse Hungary into the Austrian Empire.
Then at last the Hungarians determined at once, by force, to end the
contemptible, practical joke which Austria was engaged in playing off upon
their country. They gathered an army together, but their utmost efforts
could only raise one not half the size of that of their opponents, and
consequently the result of the battle was defeat for themselves. Later on,
when Kossuth had managed to collect more arms and men, battles on a much
larger scale were fought; and after the Austrians had been defeated more
than a dozen times, the whole of their armies were driven ignominiously
out of Hungary. It was after this series of victories that Kossuth was
made his country's governor, and the whole nation declared as one man that
the House of Hapsburg had for ever forfeited any claim to the Crown.

It was now that, had England attempted mediation for Hungary (according to
Francis Newman), "we should have saved Austria from the yoke of Russia,
and have at least _put off_ the Crimean war," because, when Russia had
come to the assistance of Austria in her final difficulties with Hungary,
after she had been driven out of that country, "if England and France had
not fought it, nothing short of an equivalent war must have been fought
against Russia by other Powers ... because the security of _all Europe_ is
endangered by the virtual vassalage of Austria to Russia... for Austria is
now so abhorred in Hungary that she cannot keep her conquest except by
Russian aid." [Footnote: _Reminiscences of Two Wars and Two Exiles._]

In 1848 Kossuth's envoy, Pulszky, was sent to England, and, quite ignorant
of the wheels within wheels which hampered the political movements of Lord
Palmerston, was amazed that he himself found a repulse awaiting him at the
English Minister's hands. Lord Palmerston asserted that the rights or
wrongs of Hungary were practically a dead letter to England, who had never
thought of that country as existing apart from Austria. He considered "a
strong Austria was a European necessity"; but notwithstanding all he said
then and later, the impression made itself felt on men's minds that there
was a "power behind the throne" in all his speeches, and none knew what
that hidden power was. To-day we all know that it was the foreign
counsellorhood of Baron Stockm�r, who advised Prince Albert in those days.
As Newman says: "It is now open to believe that Stockm�r and his Austrian
policy ... sometimes drove Palmerston to despair, and our diplomacy into
heartlessness."

[Illustration: LOUIS KOSSUTH]

This elucidation of the whole puzzle throws fresh light on that attitude
of Lord Palmerston which so completely mystified Kossuth.

"I cannot understand," he said, "what is the policy of Palmerston's
_heart_. He talks one way, yet acts another way--always against the
interests and just rights of Hungary."

Kossuth's next step was to take refuge in Turkey, and here he at once set
to work to learn the language, and succeeded so well that he wrote a
grammar, which was afterwards used in the Turkish schools. It was said to
have been due to Lord Palmerston, by the way, that the Sultan refused to
give him up to Austria and Russia. But at any rate the Sultan seemed to
owe the decision which guided this refusal in large measure to his own
loyalty to those who had sought shelter with him during civil war. At any
rate, Kossuth reported that he certainly said, "I will accept war rather
than give up the Hungarian fugitives." Eventually an American ship
conveyed Kossuth out of Turkey, and he landed at Marseilles. Of course, by
then the monarchy had been overthrown in France, and Louis Napoleon-with
whom Kossuth was later on to be closely connected--was President.

In October, 1851, Kossuth crossed to England. Newman tells us that though
"he was enthusiastically received by the whole nation," yet that "he was
slandered, feared, despised, and disliked by those esteemed highest and
noblest in England." But, at any rate, he was given a hearty welcome in
America, for he did not stay long in England when he saw that those in
authority did not warmly espouse his cause.

It is necessary here to remember that in 1851 Louis Napoleon had stepped
on to the top of the Republic, whom he had previously served as its
President, and had made himself Emperor of the French. It is necessary
also to remember that there was a very general sense of alarm throughout
England as to his plans regarding an invasion. He was thought to be
collecting a fleet destined to attack us. But, later, it was proved that
we had been exciting and disturbing ourselves quite unnecessarily. Louis
Napoleon wanted something of us, it is true. But that something was
alliance.

By this time Kossuth was back in England. One day, Francis Newman says,
"Kossuth called suddenly on me with an English Blue-book in his hand, and
abruptly said: 'We foreigners look to you to explain your own Blue-books.
Please to tell me what does this strange sentence mean?' I read carefully
these words from the despatches of the Western Powers to the admirals of
their fleets in Constantinople: c You must clearly understand that you are
not sent to fight against the Emperor of Russia, but to save the Sultan
from _religious enthusiasm and fatal auxiliaries_'! He pointed out these
last words.... '_Religious enthusiasm_ is the diplomatic phrase for
Turkish patriotism; _fatal auxiliaries_ mean Hungarians.... Because
Austria dreads lest exiled Hungarians fight in the Turkish ranks, and the
object of the Western Powers is to please Austria and not to aid
Turkey.... They are angry with the Turks for defending themselves against
Russia.'" [Footnote: Reminiscences of Two Wars and Two Exiles.]

[Illustration: This certificate is dated the year after Kossuth's first
visit to England, and is in possession of Edward G. Sieveking, Esq. of the
firm of Sieveking, Podmore, and Wright, Gracechurch Street, E.C.]

In 1848-9 the Whigs and Tories in England mistook the whole meaning of the
disturbances which were going forward abroad. Macaulay (whom Newman
quotes) distinctly asserts that in Hungary and Italy "kings were fighting
in the cause of civilization, and nationalities were rising to destroy it
in the cause of anarchy."

Comment on this is, of course, quite needless when one remembers how
misinformed were the English ministers as to the nature of the struggle
for liberty which was then going forward in both countries, and how
treacherously and cruelly the people had been treated by those in
authority over them: and what efforts had been made constantly against
their rights as citizens. In 1854 Kossuth was again doing his best to
rouse interest on behalf of his country in England. He called on Newman to
enquire what would be the best and quickest way of collecting
subscriptions. He wanted for immediate national use �5000. Newman referred
him to a printer who "was a Zealot for Hungary," and who would supply him
with the names of the richest men who had "spoken vigorously for Hungary."

Kossuth proceeded to write out a circular to be sent to these Englishmen,
asking for subscriptions. A little later Newman found out that the result
of this fishing in English waters was �400, and he had wanted �5000 to
enable him to carry out his projects for Hungary!

The following letter from Francis Newman to Professor Martineau (about
whose friendship with him I shall have more to say later) is dated
November, 1854, and concerns his opinions _in re_ the Crimean War:--

"As to the war, while it is always thought rash to have any strong
military convictions, I have always believed that if they would go
straight to Sebastopol early in the season they would take it with little
difficulty. We have been juggled partly by Austria, partly by the too
great age of our military men, partly by clashing counsels of allies. The
fortification of Gallipoli I regarded as stupid infatuation: our old
military men said it was necessary for _safety!_ We lost all our time
while Russia had her hands full on the Danube, we let in Austria to hinder
the Turks pursuing the retreat, we delayed ten weeks longer to make
preparation, and landed, leaving all our preparations behind. This _delay_
has been the mischief.... The climate is now my fear, not the enemy. But I
look on all this as a part of the providential or fatal necessity which
determines that war shall not be decided by regular armies. If we _will_
do things in a 'slow and sure' way, Russia will beat us, for she cares
nothing for the lives of her men; to us it is agony. But to yield is to
make her omnipotent. I expect, therefore, that the harder we fight, and
the poorer our success, the more will Austria show Russian sympathies, and
the more will the Western Powers be forced to call up Poland and
Hungary.... I suppose nothing but severe suffering and vain effort will
reconcile Louis Napoleon or the English aristocracy to the revolution in
Europe, which alone can permanently cripple Russia.

"Ever yours affectionately,

"F. W. Newman."


And in August, 1855, he wrote again:--

"I do not think you see truly the _treachery_ of our Government (I cannot
use a weaker word), nor know truly what Kossuth has always demanded. To my
first question, 'Do you expect us to drive Austria into hostility?' he
replied (probably in November, 1853), 'Certainly not; but I claim that you
shall not _try to hinder_ our fighting our just and necessary battle
against Austria.' This is the turning point. We did try to hinder it,
hoping thereby to seduce Austria to our side. To whisper to Austria the
words 'H. P. I.' would not have been to stir up those countries to
insurrection, but to _compel Austria not to threaten Turkey with her
armies_. Our Government encouraged her in it, and aided her to occupy the
Principalities, forcing the Sultan to take pliable Ministers.... We reap
the bitter fruit, as Kossuth from the beginning told us we should. I,
however, still hope that we shall regain a morally right position, and
that if we fare the worse Hungary may be the better; for _then_ Austria
might have been neutral, now she will be our enemy."

Kossuth suffered greatly in his political aims and endeavours from lack of
funds. Indeed, from his first journey to England until he finally gave up
coming over here, he was terribly hampered by want of money. Newman, too,
was out of pocket owing to his efforts to push forward the Hungarian
cause. I have before me now a letter from Kossuth written in January,
1854, from 21 Alpha Road, Regent's Park, to E. Sieveking and Son, members
of my family, who were keenly interested in Hungarian politics, and who
transacted many business arrangements for Kossuth from time to time while
he was in England. The letter is on behalf of a friend of his, a Mr.
Ernest Poenisch, and is written in German:--


"Honoured Sir,

"Would you not do me the kindness to give a favourable reference about the
honourability [_sic_] of Mr. Ernest G. Poenisch if anyone should happen to
make enquiries of you about him?

"Mr. Ernest Poenisch is a merchant in the city, a German by birth, and was
a merchant of importance, and as he often has commercial business of
importance to look after for me, you will be doing to me myself, a
kindness if you would give him a good reference in a general way, should
opportunity occur.

"Renewing my request to you, I sign myself,
"Respectfully yours,

"L. Kossuth.
"To E. Sieveking and Son."


In June, 1855, Francis Newman writes to Dr. Martineau, in answer to a
letter from him:--


"I do not write in support of the oppressed nations _because_ 'I have
confidence in the stability and morality of a continental democracy,' but
because the _foreign_ kings who now trample nations down _neither have nor
pretend to have_ any right but that of armies; it is a pure avowed robber-
rule, essentially in morals, and all will extol the nations as patriotic
whenever they throw it off. ... Certainly I maintain that Hungary and
Poland are nations; so in fact is Italy: but Austria is only a Court and
Army, not a nation. We have had public relations with Hungary as a nation;
we violated our duty to Hungary in 1848-9; and complain we are still
allowing Austria to get the benefit of our wrong. So also to Poland, I
feel we have grossly neglected our duty, and still neglect it.... We know
that Hungary (Poland, Italy) is in the right; but though called on to say
so, we will not say it; nor even mediate, _for_ it will lead to
republicanism. Again, I call it immoral to argue: 'We know that Austria is
giving Turkey just cause of war; but we must _not allow_ the Sultan to
resent it by declaring war; _for_ it will give the nationalities an
opportunity of throwing off the Austrian yoke.'... Then, my dear friend,
do you forget that I approved of the _French_, and disapproved of the
_Austrian_ alliance?... Not to ally with Louis Napoleon is not to join him
_against the French nation_; while to ally with Francis Joseph was to join
him _against the French nation_, which his armies are trampling down.
Again, we did not catch Louis Napoleon engaged in a scheme with Nicholas
(Emperor of Russia) to dismember Turkey, and bribe Louis Napoleon to join
us by the promise or hint that he should still get his slice of Turkey. We
_have_ done this to Austria, and have used our severe pressure on the
Turkish Government to get Austria admitted into the Principalities.... I
fear this summer will be as deadly to our army as the winter was; my only
comfort will be, that I shall make sure that Austria will the clearer show
her true colours.

"Hoping you are all well, I am,

"Ever yours affectionately,

"F. W. Newman."


[Illustration: FACSIMILE OF LETTER FROM KOSSUTH TO MESSRS. SIEVEKING
JANUARY, 1854]

"Hungary and Poland are nations; so in fact is Italy: but Austria is only
a Court and Army, not a nation." Here is practically the gist of the whole
matter, as far as Francis Newman is concerned. Throughout all his writings
one comes again and again upon this note. "The People! The People!" is his
ever-recurring thought. What are "the People" suffering; what are _their_
needs, their wrongs which call for justice? The People is the living
nation; the Court and the Army may be inevitable adjuncts of a nation's
being, as things at present are constituted; but they are artificial
adjuncts; the People are the very life essence of the Nation, its real
motive power. Let their voice be heard, and the soul of empire at once
springs into being.

In the next letter from Newman to Martineau, 9th June, 1856, from which I
shall quote, it is shown that our Colonial Office was enraged against
Kossuth because he had "mischievously _hindered_ the Austrian Government
from getting troops to put down Italian insurrection." Newman goes on to
show how the treachery of Austria in her dealing with other nations was a
potent fact, and he adds, "Hungary was bound" (according to Kossuth's
views) "to assist Austria against foreign attack, and therefore against the
_King of Sardinia_; but in the interval, before this could come to any
practical result, the intrigues of the Austrian Court with the Serbs were
brought to light; Austrian officers with the Emperor-King's commission in
their pockets were made prisoners from among the Serb ranks, and the
internal danger of Hungary, as well as the treachery of the Court, made it
simply impossible to carry out, or wish to carry out, the Protocol. But
Kossuth was still the King's Minister, and could not say this openly.
Unless he would have taken the first step to civil war, he was bound to
throw a thin veil over it in public speech and action. The measure which
he then promoted was ... that no Hungarian soldier should leave the
country until the internal rebellion was thoroughly subdued. That no
Hungarian regiments should fight against Italians until the Italians had
had from Austria the offer of national institutions and freedom under the
Austrian Crown, putting them on a par with the Hungarians."

Nothing could have been fairer than these conditions, and this was very
shortly recognized when it became known that Latour and the Court were
employing all their energies for long after this date in stirring up the
Serb rebellion. Yet they were shameless enough to complain of Kossuth
having incited the Hungarians to revolt. Writing the next day to Dr.
Martineau, Newman openly avows his belief that "every nation in the world
is grasping and unjust in its foreign policy in exact proportion to its
power, _England not being at all an exception_." The italics are my own.
Have we not proof positive of this before our very eyes to-day? We cannot
look at India and say "no," for by our charter of 1833 we bound ourselves
over to hold India only until the education, which we had made possible
for them, should enable the Indians to take a share in the government of
their own country. But when we look at the India of to-day, we cannot but
plead guilty to not having kept that charter honestly before our eyes.
There is but _one_ office to which natives are admitted on equal terms
with Englishmen to-day!

To go back to the letter:--

"England has no great European army, and cannot _covet_ and subdue any
portion of the European continent. That is no great credit; but in Asia,
where she is strong and her neighbours weak, she is as grasping and unjust
as Russia, Austria, France, or the U.S.... Lord Palmerston had never heard
(or pretended never to have heard) of the peace of Satmar, and that
England was mediator of it between Austria and Hungary. I think it is not
mere knowledge, but higher morality, which is the first need of policy on
_both_ sides the Atlantic."

It is now that Louis Napoleon comes on the scene as regards the beginnings
of his connection with Kossuth. Newman says that it was in 1856 that the
closer friendship between Napoleon and Cavour (Sardinian Minister) had
begun. Not very long after it was borne in on the mind of Cavour that
Kossuth would be an invaluable ally in the plans of future conquest which
they were then preparing.

Louis knowing that Kossuth was in sore need of funds for his political
enterprises, sent a messenger to him to intimate that he would join forces
with him; that _he_ would supply him financially with all he would require
in the way of ready cash. Kossuth was not averse from receiving in good
part Napoleon's advances, though he offered temporary resistance. He saw
clearly that if France were to help Italy, Austria would be weakened,
Newman tells us that when Napoleon announced in 1858 that he was about to
marry Clotilde, daughter of the King of Sardinia, Kossuth at once said to
him: "I have always resisted Napoleon's overtures, but I expect now that I
shall be forced to visit him in Paris, because I now see that he is
resolved upon war against Austria. This Piedmontese marriage is evidently
his pledge also to Italians that he means to drive Austria out of Italy."

Then, in 1859, a few inimical words which Napoleon spoke to the Austrian
ambassador showed very clearly to what quarter the political wind in
France had veered. "War was felt to be intended, and Russia was no longer
a support to Austria behind."

In March, or a little later, Kossuth and Pulszky were invited to Paris,
and were met, very cordially, at the station by Prince Napoleon, cousin to
the Emperor. Later, Louis Napoleon himself spoke with them, and said very
frankly that he had never had any special idea of assisting Hungary, but
that in case he could not settle affairs in Italy, as regarded his war
with Austria, and he should find himself obliged to send his army into
Croatia, he wanted advice with respect to many details regarding this
province, which he knew that Kossuth could give him. Newman was the
recipient of Kossuth's communications concerning this secret interview
with Napoleon. And he told him that besides needing his advice about
Croatia, he wanted him (knowing he had influence in England) "to drive
Lord Derby out of office." I quote Napoleon's words as recorded by Newman.

"The French army is very formidable; but I cannot pretend that in it I
have such superiority to Austria that I may expect easy or certain
success. My only clear superiority is on the sea. As Louis Philippe
before, so have I from the first carefully nursed my fleet. Hereby I
override Austria in the Adriatic--a most critical advantage.... I cannot
be sure but that without declaring war, or giving warning, he (Lord Derby)
may all at once strike a blow which will annihilate my fleet, and then
what could compensate me? If you can find any way of moving discontent
against this ministry, I want you to cripple or eject him."

Newman adds that Kossuth did not tell him what reply he himself gave to
all this.

Everyone knows the sequel to this. After Lord Derby had resigned in March,
Lord Palmerston took office. In May the Austrians were defeated; and this
defeat was followed by more disaster for them, and the end of the whole
matter resolved itself into a peace between Francis Joseph and Louis
Napoleon.

Then it was that the latter proclaimed freedom from Austrian supremacy to
all Italy; and _now_ came the end for which Kossuth had struggled, and
longed, and waited. Napoleon despatched a messenger to him asking what
demands Kossuth wished now to make. His prompt answer was delivered thus
to the envoy:--

"Sir, I have two demands on your master: _First_, he must extract from the
Emperor Francis Joseph an amnesty for every Hungarian or Croatian soldier
who has taken military service under the King of Sardinia. _Secondly_, no
man thus amnestied shall ever be pressed into the Austrian army."

A fortnight went by, and Kossuth heard nothing from the Emperor. Then,
when at last the news came, it was almost too good to be true. Francis
Joseph had agreed to both stipulations.

In August, 1860, Francis Newman, writing from Keswick, touches on the
progress in success made by the Italian patriot, Garibaldi.

"I do not think you can be dissatisfied with Garibaldi's progress. Louis
N. _could_ have stopt [sic] him, and ruined his hopes for ever, by one
word to Austria as soon as Garibaldi landed in Sicily. On the contrary, he
has sternly forbidden Austria to meddle at all in Italy, and has allowed
Cavour to proclaim in Parliament that L. N.'s greatest merit to Italy is
_not_ the great battle of Solferino, _but_ his having avowed in his letter
to the Pope _that priests shall no longer rule in Italy_.... When Hungary
is free, all views will change, and perhaps France also."

Kossuth and Pulszky, who had visited England constantly between the years
1851 and 1860, finally left our shores for good in the latter year,
Kossuth for Italy, for he took no further share in politics, and Pulszky
for Hungary, where he became Finance Minister to Francis Joseph's new
constitutional monarchy.

Before finally leaving England, Kossuth gave to Newman his own "reading"
of the real character of Louis Napoleon. He said: "Louis Napoleon is a man
at whom, on account of his _coup d'�tat_, [Footnote: Louis Napoleon's raid
on the French citizens, in violation of his promises, in order to make
himself supreme.] I shudder, and it may seem a duty to hate him. Yet I am
bound to say, not only has he been wholly faithful to us, but every time I
have been closeted with him I have come away with a higher opinion, not
only of his talents and sagacity, _but also of his morals_." The italics
are mine. It seems difficult for the outsider to-day quite to sign to this
point of view, when one remembers Louis Napoleon's deception and his
broken honour and cruelty. There is a very enlightening and suggestive
passage in one of Robert Louis Stevenson's books, "To travel happily is
better than to arrive." In Kossuth's case the reverse was true. He
travelled towards his goal unhappily, but he "arrived," and that was a
reward which is not given to every patriot who gives his life to win his
country's freedom.

In _Hungary in 1851_, by Charles Loring Brace, there are many keenly
interesting details about Kossuth. Mr. Brace made a tour in Europe,
chiefly on foot, during the spring of 1851, and met Kossuth in Pesth; his
mother was then living there. "To say that Kossuth is beloved here seems
hardly necessary after what I have seen. He is idolized. Every word and
trait of his character is remembered with an indescribable affection ...";
but they all acknowledged, he added, that he did not possess the necessary
gifts for a revolutionary leader. Still, he moved his countrymen in so
stirring a manner that they would have followed him anywhere. "He
'agitated' the whole land, and there is not a Bauer in the villages or a
Csikos (wild cattle driver) on the prairies, they say, who does not
remember as the day of days the time when he listened to those thrilling
tones ... as they spoke ... of the wrongs of their beloved Fatherland."

This is a short account by a journalist who knew him personally, and was
present at the time, of the manner in which Kossuth was received in
Scotland during his visit to Britain:--

"In travelling from Edinburgh to Perth, Kossuth was received at every
station by vast crowds of people, including many ladies, with vociferous
cheers and waving of hats and handkerchiefs. This was particularly the
case at Stirling, where hundreds crowded up to the carriage in which he
sat to grasp his hand."

One day it was suggested that Kossuth, Colonel Ibaz his aide-de-camp, and
the journalist should go for a drive up Kinnoul Hill, near Perth. "We soon
got into a rough country road winding among the farms. At one place the
carriage came to a stand while a gate had to be opened to allow it to pass
through. At this gate stood a tall, venerable-looking farmer, with long
white hair and beard ... who might have served as a painter's model for an
old Scottish Covenanter. He stood ready to open the gate.... He had, of
course, heard of Kossuth's invitation to lecture in Perth, and at once
divined that the carriage might contain his hero, as all visitors to Perth
ascend the Hill of Kinnoul.... In a very deep and solemn voice he said ...
'I reckon that Loois Koshoot is in this carriage. Am I richt? Whuch is
him?' Kossuth leaned forward and said in a very gracious manner, 'Yes, he
is, good man. I am Louis Kossuth.' Whereupon the venerable man reverently
took off his bonnet, came close up, grasped Kossuth's hand in both his
own, and said, 'God bless you, sir, an' may He prosper you in your great
waurk to free yer kintra frae the rod o' the oppressor. May He strengthen
ye and croon ye wi' victory....'

"Colonel Ihaz was a bronzed, stern-looking officer, perhaps ten years
older than his chief; yet with all his military stiffness and sternness he
was quite capable of relaxing into ordinary human feelings and becoming
quite a facetious old fellow under favourable conditions. He could speak
very little English. He enjoyed the humour of some Scottish stories and
anecdotes I told, and which Kossuth translated for him. He was greatly
pleased and amused when I initiated him into the art and mystery of
concocting a tumbler of whisky toddy as a proper and orthodox finish to
the evening.... He thoroughly appreciated the beverage, smacking his lips
... and exclaiming with gusto, 'Toddo is goot. Toddo _very_ goot.'" He
mentions that Kossuth was keenly interested in Scottish ballads and
stories, etc., and he actually learnt _one_ ballad by heart, "which for
thrilling passion, and power, and sweetness ... were never equalled by
human voice. His appeals ... were addressed exceedingly often to the
religious feelings of his hearers. In fact, this tendency of his is
perhaps one great secret of his power over the people of Hungary--for the
peasantry of that land, beyond that of almost any other, are remarkable
for a simple, reverent piety."

When, after the deliverance of Hungary from the yoke of Austria, Kossuth
was made Governor, Brace says that he considers he belonged, by reason of
his talent for organization and finance, to the highest rank of statesmen.
He had not "the unrelenting, tremendous force of a Cromwell or Napoleon,
or the iron will of a Jackson...." But he has shown that a man "could be a
military Dictator without staining his hands either in the blood of his
rivals or of his friends."

"One of the privates in an Austrian regiment stationed in Vienna, himself
a Hungarian, was overheard by his officer to say 'Eljen Kossuth!' He was
ordered 'five-and-twenty' at once. It appears when a man is flogged in the
Austrian army he is obliged by law to thank the officer. This the
Hungarian refused to do. Another 'five-and-twenty' were given him. Still
he refused. Again another flogging; and the Hungarian, as he rose,
muttered his thanks with the words, 'My back belongs to the Emperor, but
my heart to Kossuth.'"

In regard to Kossuth's manner of delivery in his great public speeches,
Mr. Brace says: "His opening words, they say, were like Hungarian national
airs, always low and plaintive in the utterance.... But gradually his face
lighted up, his voice deepened and swelled with his feeling," and there
came forth tones which thrilled his hearers with a strange rousing power.




CHAPTER XII

FOUR BARBARISMS OF CIVILIZATION


In every civilization there will always be found, sheltering under its
wall, evil things not yet brought to book--not yet revealed in their true
nature, but still dragging back the wheel of true progress and the
betterment of humanity. Yet though they come "in such a questionable
shape," it is often not until someone ahead of his or her age, pulls them
into the open glare of another point of view, and thus shows up all their
hidden moral leprosy, that the arrow of condemnation is driven full-tilt
at them from the stretched bow of a Higher Criticism.

In Francis Newman's _Miscellanies_, Vol. III, four of these evil things
are dragged by him into the open daylight of a mind far ahead of its age,
and these four are: Cruelty to Animals; Degradation of Man, as brought
about by the drink traffic; War, as the great throw-back to Civilization;
Punishment as understood in England, and our own methods of reform as
regards the treatment of misdemeanants.

To take the first of these--Cruelty to Animals. Of course there are three
kinds: Legalized cruelty, cruelty caused by thoughtlessness, and cruelty
caused in order to give pleasure to men and women. Of the first--well, of
course this has to do with vivisection, said to be carried on for the
advancement of science and for the sake of alleviating the sufferings of
humanity.

As regards the first reason, men who know what they are talking about are
pretty generally agreed that science has _not_ largely benefited by
vivisection. As regards the second, it is by no means sure that anything
can be proved of direct use to mankind from discoveries made by doctors
and scientists after operating on animals. "What sort of tenderness for
man can we expect from surgeons who can thus teach by torture, or from
students who can endure to listen?" Here Francis Newman puts his finger on
a very significant factor in the case--that of the barbarizing, the
deteriorating of the mind that cannot touch the black pitch of torture and
not be defiled.

Everyone will remember the words of Lord Shaftesbury, one of the greatest
men of his day: "I would rather be, before God, the poor victim in the
torture-trough than the vivisector beside him." And it is this point also
which is of importance in the vivisection question--not the point of view
alone of the animal tortured, but as well the inevitable effect on the
vivisector. For there are some things undeniably which, when done, do not
leave the man who does them where he was before in the moral scale.

As Archdeacon Wilberforce says: "If all that is claimed by vivisectors
were true--and I absolutely disbelieve it--the noblest attitude would be
to refuse physical benefit obtained at the cost of secrets stolen from
other lives by hideous torture." These words exactly express the attitude
of all thoughtful men and women who feel the impossibility of accepting
help at the cost of such torture to the lower creation by what the
Archdeacon very aptly calls the "barbarities of science."

Well may Francis Newman say: "When we ask by what _right_ a man tortures
these innocent creatures, the only reply that can be given is, because we
are more intelligent. If in the eye of God this is justifiable, then a
just God might permit a devil to torture us in the cause of diabolic
science.... To cut up a living horse day after day in order to practise
students in dissection is a crime and abomination hardly less monstrous
from his not having an immortal soul. An inevitable logic would in a
couple of generations unteach all tenderness towards human suffering if
such horrors are endured, and carry us back into greater heartlessness
than that of the worst barbarians." The bill in 1876, of which the chief
aim was to amend the law, to regulate better the doings of vivisectors,
insisted on the fact that a licence from the Home Secretary was to be a
_sine qu� non_ in the case of all who practised these experiments upon
animals. But experience of the way in which this law works shows quite
clearly that very inadequate inspection takes place, because in so many
cases inspectors and vivisectors play into each other's hands.

Of the other kinds of cruelty, those caused by thoughtlessness and in
order to minister to the pleasure of men and women are very many and very
present to us. I use the word "thoughtlessness," but perhaps it would be
nearer the truth to say lack of power to realize, for thoughtlessness can
no longer be pleaded by those women who persist in wearing aigrettes, and
other plumage of birds. The barbarous method has been too often described
to them by which these aigrettes are procured: how the plumes are torn
from the males of the small white heron; how, this appalling cruelty
perpetrated, the birds are left to die on the shore. Women of fashion
cannot but be aware how wholesale this savage slaughter of the innocents
is; that each bird only contributes one-sixth of an ounce of aigrette
plumes; that we are told that thousands of ounces of plumes are sold by
one firm during the course of one season alone. It is not too much to say
that each woman's bonnet in which these plumes (so barbarously procured)
figure, is a veritable juggernaut car. It is not alone for fashion's sake
that we perpetrate these barbarisms, however, for what can be said in
defence of cruelties practised upon animals for the sake of man's stomach?
Of the method in vogue now of stuffing capons by means of an instrument
which forces food down their throats relentlessly in order to make them of
great size and of tender flesh? or of calves being slowly bled to death
that their flesh may be white? What of the horrors which precede the
making of _p�t� de foie gras_? The name of these atrocities is legion,
however, and it is useless to enumerate them here. Fashion loves to have
it so, and the ordinary diner does not trouble his head about the terrible
ordeal of the animal which has preceded the delicacy for himself. But,
putting his dinner aside, the Englishman's sport is often not far removed
from barbaric.

Look at coursing! What can be the nature that can take _pleasure_ in
seeing an absolutely defenceles animal let out in a confined space, with
no chance of escape, no fair play at all, nothing in front of it but
certain death whichever way it turns? What can be the nature which can
_enjoy_ the death-scream of the agonized hare as the dogs' fangs dig into
the quivering flesh? Coursing is nothing more nor less than an absolutely
degrading sport to the beholders.

There is no _sport_, in the right acceptation of the word, in it at all.
At any rate, there is far more of the element of real sport in fox-hunting
or in stag-hunting, especially in those districts where one is told that
the stag practically enters into the spirit of the game, when, after a
good run, it pauses, and is helped into the cart which is to take it into
"home cover" again! Be that as it may, at least there is some fair play to
the quarry. In coursing that is an unknown quantity.

"The accomplished Englishman shoots for sport. Sport, being a mental
impulse or appetite, is insatiable, and therefore far more deadly than
hunger.... A boast is made that ninety millions of rabbits are reared for
the consumption of our nation. Ninety million rabbits sent out at large to
nibble the young shoots of the growing crops--each of whom destroys and
wastes ten times what a tame rabbit would eat in a hutch--are boasted of
as an increase of our supplies! If twenty million of these reach the town
markets, it is much; how many beside are cruelly massacred with no profit
to man! and how many beside, with unhappy hares, foxes, rats, stoats, and
weasels, are held for days and nights in lingering torture by horrible
steel traps? All this goes on in the midst of refinement, without
prohibition from men or remonstrance from women. It is a fruit of the
modern English system of game preserving;... and the artificial love of
sport which cruel Norman tradition has fostered in the stolid Anglo-Saxon
race." [Footnote: "On Cruelty" (_Miscellanies_, III, by Francis W.
Newman).] It is an unassailable truth that if you look for the last
remains of barbarity in a civilized nation you will find them in their
sports. But I confess that to me it is difficult to justify a _woman's_
love of sport when it is combined--before her very eyes--with the
suffering of an animal. Yet I heard only the other day of a woman who
boasted that she had been among the few "in at the death" one day in fox-
hunting, and that when the brush was given to her, her face was _spattered
with the blood of the fox_.

To turn to another "barbarism of civilization"--the subject of the Drink
Traffic.

Newman's words about this come with startling appositeness to-day, when we
are all eager as regards the pros and cons of the new Licensing Act, and
when all the publicans in the country are watching anxiously in fear of
the ruin it may spell for themselves. Thirty years ago Francis Newman
flung these words broadcast into the country:--

"Parliament ignominiously sits on the beer barrel. The thirty-three
millions a year" (which was the revenue in 1877 derived from "complicity
with distillers and brewers"), "are to every Ministry like the proverbial
wolf which the woodsman holds by the ears. To keep him is difficult, to
let him go is dangerous. Their position is becoming worse than
embarrassing when the best _men_ of every class, and _all the women_ who
see the public miseries, condemn the deadly policy of bartering national
morality for payments to the exchequer.... The mode in which those in
power fight to retain the public immoralities proclaims the quality of
their motives. As one example out of several, see with what tenacity the
Sunday sale of intoxicating drink in Ireland is kept up, after it is
visible that Ireland disapproves, and after the English Parliament has
voted with Ireland. _Trickery_ is here the only right word; but _trickery_
cannot in the long run support any cause. In this matter, as in several
others, national indignation is ripening. Many old ways will have to be
reversed, among which the treatment of the drink traffic has quite a
leading place."

He then goes on to treat in detail of the pros and cons of Sir Wilfrid
Lawson's Bill, and its principle of Popular Local Control; also of those
of Mr. Joseph Cowen's Bill on the same subject, both belonging to the year
in which he wrote his article on "Local Control of the Drink Traffic." And
he proceeds to consider the two alternatives: the Permissive Popular Veto,
and the Popular Control by an unfettered Licensing Board.

Later on Newman propounds his own opinion as to where the true remedy lies
for the shocking state of public morality in connection with the drink
traffic. Almost invariably his remedies for social evils are based on
specialization. In this case he advises Licensing Boards in large towns.
He urges that each Board should have full power to frame its own
restrictions, that "no Board should be numerous: _five_ or _seven_ persons
may be a full maximum"; that each Board should be elective, "without power
to bind their successors in the next year." "What shadow of reason," he
asks, "is there for doubting that such sales as are necessary and
inevitable will be far more sagaciously managed by a Local Board, which
the ratepayers elect _for this sole purpose_, than either by magistrates
who are irresponsible and do not suffer sensibly from the public vice, or
by an _irresponsible_ or _multitudinous_ Committee of Parliament? Finally,
a Board elected for this one duty is immeasurably better than the Town
Councils, who are distracted by an immensity of other business."

It is not difficult to see that his suggestion for a local Licensing Board
has a great deal that might be said for it. His idea as regards a Ward-
Mote to settle difficulties in local self-government in the same way would
deal first hand with difficulties. In both cases these local boards would
obviate the necessity for the despatching of endless little Private Bills
to a Parliament which really has not time to deal effectually with them.
Francis Newman certainly taught a truth which only gets more insistent as
year succeeds year, that specialization is indeed the word of all others
which holds within its letters in great measure "the healing of the
nations," the simplifying of their puzzles.

As regards the rights and wrongs of making war, Newman asks, "Why does
one murder make a villain, but the murder of thousands a hero?" And again,
"Why do princes and statesmen, who would scorn to steal a shilling, make
no difficulty in stealing a kingdom?"

Before calling this, as many an Englishman would not hesitate to do, a
topsy-turvy morality, let us realize that sayings such as these really
give us the true values of things as nothing else could. For there are
more sins "in heaven and earth than are dreamt of" in a nation's
classified immoralities. Stealing a shilling is a recognized immorality,
and as such the law of the land punishes the thief. Stealing a kingdom,
however, is one of those national achievements which men justify to
themselves as a patriotic feat, or, it may be, a necessity of empire, and
it is not classified among punishable offences at all. And then it is
necessary to remember that many things that are indefensible when only a
few do them, seem to become, by an extraordinary method of reasoning,
regarded as allowable when so many people do them that a spurious public
opinion and a decadent fashion is born, which shelters them and prevents
the light of an unbiassed judgment from showing up their shortcomings in
morality. One has only to read up old records of the eighteenth century to
see how slavery flourished in England among otherwise honourable men, and
how public opinion condoned, nay, justified it to realize that public
opinion regarded as _vox populi_, is often many spiritual leagues away
from being _vox Dei_.

Newman's point of view regarding war and extension of territory was not
the popular one:--

"There are many who believe that the time will come when no weapons of war
shall be forged, and universal peace shall reign.... We also believe that
a time will come when men will look back in wonder and pity on our present
barbarism; a time at which to begin a war--unless previously justified by
the verdict of an impartial tribunal, bound in honour to overlook what is
partially expedient to their own nation or party--will be esteemed a high
and dreadful crime.

"The 'Governments' will never initiate such institutions until compelled
by public opinion and by the inevitable pressure of circumstances, nor is
any nation in the world yet ripe to put forth such pressure; otherwise it
would not be difficult to devise a supreme court, or rather jury, which
would put a totally new moral aspect on war." [Footnote: _Ethics of War_,
Francis W. Newman.]

He goes on to say that a great many wars might have been avoided by us if
we had been willing, which we are not, to submit to arbitration; and he
urges that war should be "declared _in the Capital... with the formal
assent of Lords and Commons_."

Under the present system, as he points out, when war is declared against
any country, it is not a necessity, as it was in the fourteenth century,
that Parliament should be applied to for consent and approval when the
King of England wished to make war. Later, Henry V asked Parliament what
it would advise in "matters of foreign embroilment"; and when the King of
France wanted to make peace with him, he would do nothing in the matter
until his _Parliament_ had told him "what will be most profitable and
honourable to do in the matter."

But to-day, in arranging to make war or to make peace, it is the Cabinet--
the two or three in the inner Chamber--who take all responsibility upon
themselves. As often as not their decision is largely influenced by party
questions--and the questions do _not_ depend on the morality of the war,
whether the reason for it is a just one or no. "It is the singular
disgrace of modern England, [Footnote: _Deliberations before War_, Francis
Newman, 1859.] to have allowed the solemn responsibility of war to be
tampered with by the arbitrary judgment of executive officers; ... the
nation permits war to be made, lives by the twenty thousand or fifty
thousand to be sacrificed, provinces to be confiscated, and permanent
empire over foreign subjects established, at the secret advice of a
Cabinet, _all of one party, acting collectively for party objects_, no one
outside knowing how each has voted." Yet "the whole nation is implicated
in a war, when once it is undertaken, inasmuch as we all have the same
national disgrace, if it is unjust; the same suffering, if it is tedious;
the same loss, if it is expensive"; and all the time, "according to the
current morality of Christendom, two nations may be engaged in deadly
struggle, and _neither be in the wrong_."

Newman attributes this present method of deciding war or peace by means of
the Cabinet, rather than the voice of the people as expressed by their
representatives in assembled Parliament, to the "anomaly of the East
Indian Empire." Then, when the Board of Control was formed in 1784, "the
orders to make, or not to make war, went out direct from the Board of
Control; that is, really, from the ministry in Downing Street. Two, or
even one, resolute man had power to make war without check." The fatal war
with Afghanistan in the eighteen-thirties which cost us so dear in the
matter of men and fame, was settled in England by "secret orders of two or
three _executive_ officers of the Queen, without previous debate in
Parliament." It is necessary to remember, when thinking of the barbarisms
which war brought in its train, not a hundred years ago, that what Newman
calls, very justly, "the atrocious system" of paying our soldiers and
sailors _head-money_ for the numbers killed by them, was only done away
with about sixty years ago.

But it is impossible even to touch here upon the unthinkable miseries
which are inevitably suffered by thousands of innocent men, women, and
children whenever that Barbarism of Civilization, War, marches through a
land. Apart from all the devastation that marks its advent, no one can
know how indescribably far the real moral and industrial progress of
civilization is retarded by even what we consider a _small_ war. As Newman
says: "No one can wonder at the rise and progress of an opinion that war
is essentially an immoral state."

In connection with Punishments as understood in England, and Penal
Reformation, [Footnote: _Corporal Punishments and Penal Reformation_,
Francis Newman, 1865.] he owns that "it has hitherto been most difficult
to discover what due punishment of felony will not demoralize the felon."
And of course, undoubtedly, that _is_ the crux of the whole matter. But
there is no one in England to-day but will agree that some change in our
prison system is imperatively needed. Only the other day a woman,
thoroughly qualified to judge, declared that the inevitable effect of
prison life on women was to make them lose their self-respect. It was a
degradation and nothing else. Now a punishment practically loses its whole
point if it is simply a lowering, without any building up; while apart
from any other considerations, to herd, without due specialization, a
number of criminals and misdemeanants (for that last is the true
description of very many who are punished by this system of incarceration)
tends, in many instances, to increase, by "evil communications," the
numbers of those who are in for a first offence only, and would not, but
for the enforced bad influence of others in prison, offend again. Newman's
conclusion of the whole matter as regards prisons is irrefragable: "In
order to _prevent_ crime, the institutions which generate crime must be
remodelled." He urges upon the nation's consideration that for a great
many cases which now fill our prisons (thereby adding enormously to the
national expenses) there is a very simple punishment, which has been
condemned from many modern points of view as being degrading to the
sufferers and brutalizing to the inflictors.

"The infliction of flogging," he argues, undeniably answers in these
cases, both as a sharp and effectual punishment, and also as a deterrent
from future misdoing. "To us it appears an obvious certainty, that
whatever punishment is believed to be righteous--whether the whipping of a
child, the shooting of a soldier, the constraint of the treadmill, or
whatever else--is wholly free from the least tendency to brutalize the
officers who inflict it." As to the wisdom of this statement, one would
think, there could be no question. He quotes our old laws as regards the
practising of public floggings, and adds, "We cannot hesitate to believe
that all outrages on women ought to be punished by the severest
whippings.... Dastardly offences against the weak and the weaker sex
eminently call for this punishment; and in such offences may be included
the seduction of a woman." That offences against the body should be
visited by punishment _on_ the body is beyond all doubt just. Had we been
in the past, or were we at the present moment, as eager as we ought to be
for defence, for justice, to be given to the citizeness as equally as to
the citizen, there would not be so many wrongs done to the weaker sex as
now is the case in England. Newman strongly condemns long sentences and
transportation, not so much on account of the prisoner, (though for him
the long term of "doing time" with other criminals exercises in most cases
a distinct low moral tone upon himself) as on account of his wife and
family, if he is married. These people are left without news of him, and
without their legal means of subsistence during his absence. His wife
often indeed, practically becomes a pauper.

"It is vain to talk of the evil of 'degrading' a criminal by flogging him,
if we degrade him by penal labour, subjecting him to a very ignominious
and tedious slavery. It is vain to say that whipping demoralizes, until we
have a system of effective and severe punishment, clearly free from this
danger.... A felon destined to long penal servitude cannot fulfil a
father's duties, and no one is so weak as to imagine that his commands
concerning his children deserve respect.

       *       *       *       *       *

Legislation must deliberately study this problem, not wink at it."
[Footnote: _Corporal Punishments and Penal Reformation_.]

Perhaps when it does, something more stringent will be determined on
concerning our regulations as regards the marriage of criminals: those
with insanity or inherited disease strongly marked on their family
records; and those who have shown the tendency to the latter in their own
persons.




CHAPTER XIII

SOME LEGISLATIVE REFORMS SUGGESTED BY LECTURE AND ARTICLE


Fifty years ago Newman was cutting and polishing his diamond scheme of
legislative decentralization till its facets flashed to the lighted
intellects of the world a thousand messages--a thousand clear-cut
suggestions for the welfare of his country and the betterment of its
legislation, as he firmly believed. He was never tired of urging it on the
notice of his fellow men, never tired of pleading for it as a solution of
many social difficulties, as a setting of many dislocations of our local
systems. Perhaps there was no more earnest apostle of decentralization
than was Francis Newman. But at the same time, to be fair to him, it
should be said that, first, he threw light upon the old paths, and,
secondly, showed where modern obstructions lay which seemed to him to
hinder true progress. At all costs the fact must be kept well in view, he
believed, that the paths were made for the men, not the men for the paths
--a fact which is not always so well remembered as it should be to-day.
Fifty years ago he published an article in _Fraser's Magazine_ on
"Functions of an Upper House of Parliament." Eight years later he gave a
brilliant lecture [Footnote: In the Athenaeum, Manchester.] on
"Reorganizations of English Institutions." In this last he touched only
briefly upon the former subject because of a notice by the metaphysical
railings of his lecture that he was "to keep to the path," and not speak
trenchantly on the question of the Upper House, because it would not have
found an appreciative audience there!

To begin, however, first upon the article which came out in 1867. He
affirmed that the House of Lords does, by its veto, exercise a very
powerful, though unseen, influence over the administration of the country.
He insisted on the urgent need of its becoming "a real, supreme, judicial
court for maintaining the rights of the princes of India, and an
authoritative expounder of the treaties which have passed between us and
them." It will be seen why this step is called for when we recall the fact
that in 1833 the Home Government signed a treaty in which it was
definitely agreed that the professions in India should be open to the
natives--a promise which has never been kept.

Newman goes on to say, "Until India can have its own Parliament, it needs
to find in England such protection as only our own Upper House can give
it." He places before us the possibility of economizing the time--to-day
so terribly overcrowded--of the House of Commons by letting domestic
legislation, "which is in no immediate relation to executive necessities,"
proceed from the Upper House. That in that House it could be so adapted
and so regulated, that when it came back finally to the House of Commons
no otherwise inevitable delay need occur. Thus "the Commons would have for
their chief business Bills connected with immediate administrative
exigencies, _and private Bills would be cast upon local legislatures_" (a
measure for which he was, as we know, constantly pleading). He reminds us
that the Roman executive was successful and prompt in the methods at which
they aimed, _because_ "the Senate guided and controlled it, _prescribed
the policy and required the execution_."

In his "Reorganization of English Institutions" he insists very strongly
on the great need of such a scheme of decentralization as the formation of
Provincial Chambers--in other words, the dividing the country into local
government centres which should send delegates, chosen delegates of tried
men, "virtually its ambassadors to Parliament, with instructions and a
proper salary, for a three years' term; but reserving the power to recall
any delegate earlier by a two-thirds vote, and to replace him, like an
ambassador, by a successor." Now, here comes in Newman's proposed drastic
change--a change which, in the opinion of those of us who have seen at
close focus the evils of our present system of canvassing for votes, could
not be condemned as a change for the worse.

For each delegate sent up to Parliament "would be elected without
candidacy and without expense ... confusion and intrigue would be
lessened.... There would be no convulsive interruptions of public
business." Many questions very naturally rise in our minds when we fairly
face this plan. Newman feels so confident, besides, that it would "settle
our harassing Irish difficulties."

The "old institutions of the shires are known only to students of ancient
law," says Mr. Toulmin Smith, one of the greatest authorities of his
country's old records, documents, etc. "They have been overridden by
justices of the peace, county lieutenants, and other functionaries....
From this general decay of local institutions centralization has grown
up."

From this "decay of local institutions," Newman points to what he
designates as the "Trades' Union"--the Cabinet (the "Secret Diplomacy"),
which has, he declares, superseded the old Privy Council.

"Since William III became king, parliaments of Scotland and Ireland have
been annihilated, and no subsidiary organs have replaced them.... Our
population is four times as great as William III knew it; yet the people
are more than ever divorced from the soil and cramped into town...." Now,
"Parliament is too busy for domestic local reforms; it has to control the
action of the whole Executive Government, Central and Local.... It has
sole right to direct public taxation.... It has to control the action of
the ministry towards foreign Powers.... It has a similar function towards
colonies ... and the Army and the Navy.... It is responsible for all
India" (population then two hundred and forty millions).... "It is the
only court of appeal to Indian princes who believe themselves wronged" (by
the king's representatives).... "No other authority can repeal bad laws,
or enact new laws for the general public." But were we to _return_ to the
"legislative courts of our shires," Newman protests, which existed before
our present systems of Parliament, all the inevitable delays and
congestions which now occur to prevent the dealing with and passing of
imperatively necessary reforms would be done away with _in toto_.

Long ago Lord Russell said that for any great measure a ministry needs "a
popular gale to carry the ship of State over the bar." "Hence all our
reforms, working against a stiff current, sail over the bar fifty or one
hundred years too late."

This, then, briefly stated, was Francis Newman's plan of dealing with the
accumulation of business, etc., which beset the House of Commons as
matters stand at present.

The whole of Great Britain, he urged, should be divided in provincial
chambers for local legislation. He proposed ten for England, four for
Ireland, two for Scotland, and one for Wales.

These local powers "must be to the central like planets round a sun....
All unforeseen business would fall to the central power, which in all
cases would undertake: public defence, communications with foreign Powers,
principal highways, shores and harbours, Crown lands, national money and
weights, and national taxes.... Our impending Church and State question
will be solved in this island, with least convulsion, if local variety of
sentiment be allowed free play." [Footnote: Perhaps then we should be rid
of the anomaly which allows a Prime Minister, of whatever religious
denomination, to choose Bishops for the Anglican Church.] Newman proceeds
thus to describe further his suggestions with regard to the working of the
provincial courts: "Each electoral district to send one member to the
Provincial Chamber; household franchise, of course, would be the rule, and
I trust women householders would not be arbitrarily excluded." They would
deal directly, and on the spot, with local pauperism in the provincial
courts. That, in itself, would be one great gain. For pauperism cannot
effectively be dealt with except by local legislation. Some system such as
Ruskin's, with powerful local legislation, could not fail to end the
trouble which is at the present moment making a tremendous drain on the
pockets of the law-abiding citizen of this country, in that system of
workhouses, which besides being subversive of the very idea of home-life
amongst our poor, degrades the non-worker, and rankles as a lasting shame
in the hearts of those whom misfortune alone has driven to that last
resource of the unfortunate. Were one able to follow the example set us,
among cities, by Leipsic (where the word pauperism is absolutely non-
existent), we should have effectually turned the corner out of the ill-
kept vagrant road into which Henry VIII first led us, when "pauperism"
began to be a sore in the midst of England's healthy body of citizens.
Now, it is a self-evident fact that "pauperism," which is a living drag on
our social wheel, can _not_ be dealt with other than by rigorous local
government. Cases could then be dealt with personally; the whole area
would not be too gigantic for this; but, of course, it is a moral
impossibility to generalize in dealing with this subject.

After all, this is not, as Francis Newman insists, a new departure in any
way. He points to other countries to show that as a fact, centralization
has been gradually establishing itself in England, though in other times
decentralization was a very potent force in our midst, and a success.

In 1875, Newman quotes the following countries as regards their local
legislatures: "Look ... at Switzerland. Environed by ambitious neighbours
far superior in power, her institutions have well stood the severe trial
of time. She has her Central Diet and Ministry, vigorous enough; but also
in her several cantons she has local legislatures, each with well-trained
soldiers, simply because every man is bound to learn the use of arms, as
Englishmen used to be; therefore they need no standing army.... Italy also
has local legislatures which belonged to independent States--Sicily,
Naples, Piedmont, Tuscany, and so on--besides her National Parliament....
In Hungary notoriously the national spirit has been maintained for three
centuries and a half ... solely by the independent energy of the local
institutions.... The seven united provinces of Holland similarly prove the
vitality of freedom and good order when free local power is combined with
a strong centre.... And on a far greater scale we have... an illustrious
example in the United States--a mighty monarchy and a mighty republic....
The American Union started in that advanced stage. It is a cluster of some
thirty-seven States, each with its own legislature, for all which, and for
the outlying territories, the Federal Parliament also legislates. Contrast
their condition with ours. Only of late has their population outrun ours.
They have thirty-eight legislative systems: we have one only. Surely our
system is a barbarous simplicity. France ... goes beyond us. Nay, our
Indian centralization is worse still. No virtue, no wisdom in rulers can
make up when the defect of organs lays on them enormous duties."

Finally, Newman urges for provincial chambers that they should be on the
"scale of petty kingdoms," and not of mere town populations. "All parts
and ranks of the local community are then forced to take interest in local
concerns. Each province becomes a normal school for Parliament, and a
ladder by which all high talent of poor men may rise."


SHOULD NOT THE CONSENT OF THE NATION BE OBTAINED BEFORE MAKING WAR?

This was a question constantly in Newman's mind. That, and the answer.

Everyone is doubtless aware that he wrote a very great deal upon the
subject, and spoke a great deal also. In the third volume of the
_Miscellanies_ he has four or five articles on this great question. The
first was printed in 1859, the second in 1860, the third 1871, and the
fourth 1877. Then in "Europe of the Near Future" (1871) he treats it at
greater scope, chiefly in regard to the Franco-German War. In
"Deliberations before War" (1859) Newman takes the two points of view from
which the question of war is as a rule regarded--the Moral and the
International. The first considers if a war is a just one or no, and
considers the prosecutor of an unjust war as neither more nor less than a
robber. The International (or second) "looks only to the ostensible marks
which make a war 'lawful'--that is to say, 'regular.'" As Newman very
rightly says, however, there is a third point of view, which he calls the
"National." I shall quote his words regarding this third view. "Inasmuch
as the whole nation is implicated in a war, when once it is undertaken--
inasmuch as we all have the same national disgrace if it is unjust, the
same suffering if it is tedious, the same loss if it is expensive--it is
an obvious principle of justice ... that every side of the nation should
be heard to plead against it by its legitimate representatives."

I cannot forbear saying that at the present moment of writing this last is
impossible, for those who often suffer most from a war--at any rate
longest--are the women, and there is no legitimate representation for this
large body of the community. Thus, even if the men of the nation could
"plead against" a war, the women would have no voice.

Newman urges that there are many among us who firmly believe that a time
is coming when no destructive weapons will be made, and "universal peace
shall reign." He believes himself, he says, that "a time will come when
men will look back in wonder and pity on our present barbarism, a time at
which to begin a war--unless previously justified by the verdict of an
impartial tribunal, bound in honour to overlook what is partially
expedient to their own nation or party--will be esteemed a high and
dreadful crime." These are strong words, but they are not too strong, for,
looked at by any thoughtful man or woman, war is an anomaly. It proves
nothing by reason; it simply acts by brute force, and by sheer superior
strength the victor, at the sword's point, drives defeat down the throat
of the defeated. But the arbitrary destruction of thousands of men on each
side who slay each other at the word of command (often for no reason that
concerns their own welfare, but only on account of some political
quarrel), is, from the point of view of civilization, of morality, of
humanity, without reasonable defence. It throws civilization, land
development, education back incalculably. Indeed, when one regards the
matter _au fond_, one sees that nothing could hinder the _true_
civilization, the _true_ humanity, more than does war. It _is_ barbaric;
there is no other word for it. It _is_ the great flaw that runs throughout
the whole garment of humanity.

Newman reminds us that it is only within very recent years "that the
atrocious system of paying _head money_ to soldiers and sailors for the
numbers they kill, was abolished by us."

John Stuart Mill very rightly said "that our force ought to be as strong
as possible for defence and as weak as might be for offence," only that it
is so very difficult sometimes to tell which is which.

In the _Ethics of War_, Newman argues that "there is nothing more
fundamental to civilized warfare than that no war shall be commenced
without a previous statement of grievances, and demand of redress--a
demand made to the Sovereign himself; and that _only after_ he has refused
redress, and when in consequence war has been solemnly declared, with its
motives and aim, shall hostilities be begun. In dealing with great Powers
we anxiously observe these forms.... But it is our Asiatic wars which have
brought out the formidable fact that the Cabinets claim to discard the
authority of Parliament altogether.... There is no more fundamental
principle of freedom ... than that no nation shall be dragged into a war
by its executive, against its will and judgment.... Nay, if even a
majority of every class in the nation desired war, yet they have no right
to enter into it without first hearing what the minority has to say on the
other side. This is the essential meaning of deliberative institutions."

Mr. Toulmin Smith, whose weighty words bring to bear on the subject the
witness of an England of medieval days, says that in the fourteenth
century it was a positive rule that "_consent_ of the Great Council, and
afterwards _of the Parliament_, _was necessary_ to a war or to a treaty."
In his _Parliamentary Remembrances_ he gives many precedents, both from
the histories of England and Scotland, showing that no peace was made, no
war was made, without Parliament being summoned. Henry V, he says, would
not enter "matters of foreign embroilment" (war with France, for instance)
without the consent of Parliament; and when the French king wished for
peace, Henry replied that peace needed to "be allowed, accepted, and
approved by the three Estates of each kingdom." The same process was gone
through with regard to the French king and his Estates of France. Newman
quotes Rome, whose citizens went through a long formality before making
any war, the King and Senate "consulting the College of Heralds for
erudite instructions as to minute ceremonies. For perhaps four centuries
the discipline of the army was admirable; its decline began from the day
when a general (Gen. Manlius) first took upon himself to make war at his
own judgment, trusting to obtain a bill of indemnity."

Livy tries to force on us the belief that the Romans were never
aggressive; that they only conquered the world in self-defence. And it is
true that here would come in difficulties in the way of carrying out John
Stuart Mill's _obiter dictum_ as regards wars of defence and of offence,
for many plausible reasons have been constantly brought forward for
aggressive wars: to take one only, it is not always easy to say what is
"defence" and what "offence." One may see some other country assuming a
warlike attitude towards ourselves, and it might very possibly be allowed
to come within the bounds of the word "defence" if we were prepared to
strike the initial blow before our enemy--to all intents and purposes,
save for the actual throwing of the glove--were fully prepared as to
armaments, etc. It is well known how earnestly Richard Cobden, the
Manchester Apostle of Free Trade, was one of the most prominent champions
of peace; he who, for championing the cause of the Abolition of corn
duties for the sake of his poorer countrymen, when he and others pushed
forward the "Anti-Corn Law League" (which was passed in 1846), lost all
his own private funds, and his business was ruined, simply because his
time was _all_ given not to his own affairs, but to the service of his
country. Mr. Cobden, as Newman reminds us, "was entirely convinced that
European wars could be stopped by a general agreement to abide by
arbitration." Indeed, he prevailed on the Ministers of his day so far
that, when the Russian War ended in 1856, "Lord Clarendon, in the name of
England, initiated some important clauses, of which one avowed that the
Powers who signed the treaty would never thenceforward undertake war
without first attempting to stay and supersede it by arbitration. England,
France, Russia, Sardinia, and Turkey all signed this treaty, yet in a very
few years the solemn promise proved itself to be mere wind." He goes on
say, "When passions are at work, superior might, not unarmed arbitration,
is needed to control them."

Cobden always declared that no one need fear Russia's strength because of
her climate, her vast wildernesses, her frozen seas, her great
unwieldiness. It is seen, therefore, that the sort of arbitration planned
out by Cobden did not work. It must, according to Newman, be an armed one.
It is clear that it is not possible to agree _in toto_ with the Quaker
method of opposing war, and the most thoughtful Quakers will hardly urge
it perhaps to-day. War, for defence of one's country, is a present
necessity. What, then, are Francis Newman's proposed remedies? For in the
beginning of this chapter I stated that he, very definitely, had his
answer to the great question as regards the nation: its veto or agreement,
whenever war is proposed. First of all, before giving these however, let
us look for a moment at the plan pursued in such case in modern England.
This plan he always set himself against with all the force of personal
conviction: "It is the singular disgrace of modern England to have allowed
the solemn responsibility of war to be tampered with by the arbitrary
judgment of executive officers: ... this same nation permits war to be
made; lives by the twenty thousand or fifty thousand to be sacrificed ...
at the secret advice of a Cabinet, _all of one party, acting collectively
for party objects_, no one outside knowing how each has voted.... The
orders to make or not to make war went out direct from the Board of
Control--that is, really from the Ministry in Downing Street. Two, or even
one resolute man had power to make war without check.... If Earl Grey is
right, and a Cabinet must be a _party_, this is a decisive, irrefragable
reason why a Cabinet must _never_ exercise the function of deciding on
Peace or War. The recent [Footnote: He is writing in 1859.] overthrow of
the East India Company has swept away all the shams which have hidden from
England that the Ministry in Downing Street worked the Indian puppet....
Parliament should claim that public debate shall precede all voluntary
hostilities, small or great ... to protest in the most solemn way that
henceforth no blow in war shall be struck until the voice of Parliament
has permitted and commanded it."

Then, in Newman's article "On the War Power," he goes on to say: "In
regard to the difficulties as regards arbitration, and also as regards the
voice of the people being made a _sine qu� non_, whenever a proposal for
war emanates from the powers that be: When an evil is undeniable, serious,
unjust in principle ... (referring to secret diplomacy), a remedy must
exist. Where there is a will there is a way: nay, many ways."

Then he declares that these (following) measures have commended themselves
to him. The full discussion in Parliament by representatives of the
people; the determination that nothing shall be settled by secret
diplomacy as regards war until the whole matter has been thoroughly
threshed out. In more than a few ways, _Vox populi, vox Dei_ is still
true.

Next he puts before us the advisability of an _armed_ arbitration.

"If we look to a great central European Power as having for one of its
functions to repress wars and enforce arbitration, it is evident that a
large increase of force is necessary beyond all that is at present in
prospect. If wars voluntarily taken up for noble objects must be sustained
out of spare energy, much more does the place of that Power which is to
forbid wars require a great superfluity of energy. To be able to do this
within the limits of a great federation is in itself a mighty
achievement." [Footnote: Europe in the Near Future, F. W. Newman.] And
again: "Apparently the only way in which European wars can be suppressed
is by the successive agglomeration of free men, living under and retaining
their separate institutions, into powers which have no interest in war,
but much interest in peace; until unions reach such a magnitude as to be
able to forbid wars of cupidity, and offer a high tribunal for the redress
of international grievances.... If all parts of a mighty union have their
proportionate weight in questions of war and peace, no partial and vicious
expediency can actuate them in common. Justice alone is the universal good
which can unite their desires and efforts, or make them collectively
willing to undergo sacrifice.... The wider the federation, the more benign
its aspect on the whole world without, especially if the populations
absorbed into it are heterogeneous in character, in pursuit, and in
cultivation.... A federation resting on strict justice, conceding local
freedom, but suppressing local wars and uniting its military force for
national defence, is economic of military expenditure in time of peace in
proportion to the magnitude of the populations federated."




CHAPTER XIV

DECENTRALIZATION AND LAND REFORM


"If law be centralized, it always lingers far behind men's needs." This
_obiter dictum_ of Francis Newman's, spoken nearly sixty years ago,
strikes one as more true to-day even than when he originally gave voice to
it. For if there is one thing truer than another, it is that half the
wrongs to which we are heir to-day, are due to centralization. This may be
due in part, no doubt, to the enormous increase of population; but
certainly one overwhelming reason is that class with class has lost in
very great measure all sense of cooperation, all sense of sympathy, all
sense of their real intimate connection and relationship with each other.
Instead of provincial legislature, we have our one parliamentary centre,
instead of treating our own local matters ourselves, we hale them up
before a central bureaucracy--a bureaucracy already so overcrowded with
business that it is absolutely and practically unable to deal with all the
questions which come up for settlement. So that instead of imperative
local matters being dealt with first hand, private bill after private bill
swarms through the doors of Parliament, and it becomes a veritable
impossibility to go into detail with respect to the pros and cons which
they bear upon their pages, much less grasp the whole drift of the
question with justice in its entirety.

Far wiser was the old system of provincial legislature, in which the
people were really represented, a system in which personality counted for
much and men were brought into familiar and friendly relations with each
other, not kept apart by the rubicon of red-tapeism, and liable to have
the door of the Closure slammed in their faces at some critical juncture
of discussion, and the subject shelved. It is true that since Francis
Newman's day we may have made some effort after local councils, but it is
also true that these local councils do not really bring class and class
together. Each class is by no means adequately represented in them, nor is
it the council's object that this should be the case. To compare the
England of to-day--the agricultural England, at any rate--with the England
of the past, brings all true thinkers to the same conclusion, that class
demarcations are as insistent, as absolute as ever they were, even in the
culminating early Victorian days. [Footnote: "We must mainly refer our
practical evils to the _demoralization_ of the State which the restoration
of the Stuarts caused.... Then began the estrangement of the Commonalty
from the Church of the aristocracy."--Francis Newman.] One has but to go
abroad to be convinced how "classy" we are as a nation, for class
prejudices and insularity are produced by provincial England, and
indigenous to the soil, and alas! this crop never fails. There are,
unfortunately, no lean years. There are, it is true, plenty of
organizations in which the more fortunate class tries to ameliorate the
lot of the less fortunate one, plenty of organizations in which the more
cultured class tries--often devotes its whole life to this trying--to make
better conditions for the less cultured one, and all honour and praise is
due to self-denying work of the kind, but it is not enough. The truest,
purest Christian socialism [Footnote: I use the word in its truest ancient
sense.] requires that helper and helped meet on absolutely equal ground;
that there is banished that indescribable stalking figure which follows
close in the wake of most meetings between rich and poor in England, the
Gentleman-hood (or Lady-hood, for I have seen that often quite as
insistently in evidence) of the class which, so to speak, "_stoops_ to
conquer," the limitations of the less fortunate classes, in its work for
the people.

I remember coming across the word "gentleman" interpreted in a far
different sense in an old fifteenth-century book. Many words change their
meaning with time, but this word has changed from its fifteenth-century
interpretation more than any. The sentence ran thus: "Jesus Christ was the
first Gentleman." Anything further from the original conception of its
meaning as set forward in this sentence than our English idea of what is
meant to-day by "gentleman" it would be difficult to find. For He went
among the people as one of themselves, was born among them, and was
educated as they were. There was no hint of patronage, no suggestion of
any social demarcation. He Who was the world's Redeemer was yet a
Socialist [Footnote: I cannot but add here that, in my opinion, the much-
abused word "Socialist" has changed in character in the same way as the
word "gentleman," and the modern interpretation is very far from being the
true, admirable, original thing signified.] in the highest and best sense
of the term.

We have come far since those days, but we have not come beyond the need to
deprive birth and riches of some of that arbitrary power by which they
have assumed more authority than is their due in the matter of
legislation, influence, disposal of land, and economic local conditions in
the provinces.

As regards decentralized government and the "immense importance of local
liberties," I cannot do better than quote first from the preface written
by Francis Newman to his lectures on _Political Economy_, when he issued
them in a printed form in 1851:--

"Of the immense importance of local liberties, and their actual
deficiencies among us, I became fully convinced during six years'
residence in Manchester; but it is only from Mr. Toulmin Smith's works
(the most important political work, as to me appears, which the nineteenth
century has produced in England) that I have learnt the immense resources
of the Common Law of England, and that nothing but the arbitrary
encroachments of Parliament at this moment hinders a vigorous local
legislation and local government under the fullest local freedom which can
be desired."

The lectures themselves, notably the twelfth, are in my opinion a counsel
of perfection which we should do well to follow to-day in very many
respects. For instance, he urges very strongly that "every town in
England, and every county, ought to have the feelings of a little State,
_as in fact it once had_" [the italics are my own]. "Our own history for
many centuries shows that this is quite consistent with the existence of a
central power--a Crown Parliament--_for all purposes truly national_; and
if the action of the central power were strictly limited to such things,
the provinces would, now more than ever, have abundant room for high
ambition." He shows how all organization has been lost in large provincial
towns, even though meetings are held from time to time, and men _seem_ to
come together for counsel and combination of ideas; the only really fixed
"moral union" being that narrow tie of family life which does but make a
number of separate entities in the big whole of citizenship. There is no
corporate union which makes each citizen the charge, to all intents and
purposes, of his neighbour. Each family holds together. It rises and falls
by itself. It holds to its heart no innate real sense of responsibility of
a wider citizenship. That is lost--undeniably lost.

[Illustration: TOULMIN SMITH
ENLARGEMENT FROM A PHOTO. BY KIND PERMISSION OF MISS TOULMIN SMITH]

The question arises naturally: When was this splendid link of "Each for
All" broken and mislaid? For nothing is more imperatively necessary among
the ranks of workers to-day.

Mr. Toulmin Smith tells us: "The link which has been broken and mislaid was
the "English Guild" (or "gild," as seems the more correct spelling). He
tells us--and it is generally conceded that he is our great authority on
this subject--that as a system of practical and universal institutions, a
English Guilds are older than any kings of England." [Footnote: "They were
associations of those living in the same neighbourhood, who remembered
that they had, as neighbours, common obligations."] And as another
authority on medieval life--Dom Gasquet--says: "The oldest of our ancient
laws--those, for example, of Alfred, of Athelstan, and Ina--assume the
existence of guilds to some one of which, as a matter of course, everyone
was supposed to belong."

There were of course trade (or handicraft) associations and social guilds.
Dom Gasquet describes thus their object: "Broadly speaking, they were the
benefit societies and the provident associations of the Middle Ages. They
undertook towards their members the duties now frequently performed by
burial clubs, by hospitals, by almshouses, and by guardians of the poor."
[Footnote: "Poor laws had no existence in medieval England, yet the
peasants did not fear and die of starvation in old age. The Romans had no
poor laws ... until the destruction of small freehold."--Francis Newman.]
"Not infrequently they are found acting for the public good of the
community in the mending of roads and in the repair of bridges.... The
very reason of their existence was to afford mutual aid." [Footnote:
Parish Life of Medieval England.] They were in very deed, as Mr. Toulmin
Smith describes them, institutions of "local self-help." And everyone who
knows anything of the subject is aware that they "obviated pauperism,
assisted in steadying the price of labour, and formed a permanent centre."
Also it has been proved that they acted as the lever which effectually
made citizenship more together as a whole, bound together by common need
and common responsibilities.

This sense of oneness of interest of "Each for All," then, we have
unfortunately as a nation lost. And with the loss have gone many of the
people's rights and privileges both with regard to local self-government,
local liberties, and co-operation.

Now the question arises how are we to recover what was so necessary to the
public well-being? And Francis Newman is ready with an answer.

"To recognize little states in our towns and countries would be the first
step of organization; I believe it would be an easy one.... If each town
had full power to tax itself for public purposes, a thousand civilizing
ameliorations would be introduced.... If local institutions had been kept
up in energy, the unhealthy buildings which now exist could never have
arisen; there is at present an Augean stable to cleanse.... Look at the
sellers in the street, look at the cab-drivers and their horses on a rainy
day; what can be more barbarous than their exposure?... Nothing surely is
more obvious than that in a city where thirty or forty thousand persons
live all day under the sky, having no power to shelter themselves, there
ought to be numerous covered piazzas, market-places, and sheds for
cabriolets. By such means, to save the poor from rheumatism and
inflammations, would be cheaper than to raise their wages, if that were
possible, and would confer far more direct benefit on them than the
removing of taxes."

Here is indeed the mind of a modern Hercules in its strong, rational
suggestions as to how this particular "stable" must be swept out. It is a
striking illustration of how far we have come since the days of the
medieval guilds, this lack of grasp on our part of the particular needs of
particular sections of the community. For were our local self-government
in working order and thoroughly representative, it is not to be thought of
for a moment that such a lack of shelters and proper appliances for the
labouring man and woman would be in such evidence amongst us as now is the
case. For look at England as she is, in respect of unsettled, rainy and
stormy weather: her spells of wintry weather, her spring changes: one day
warm, and the next, constant spells of snow, sleet, and bitter driving
gusts of wind. Where do the loafers of our streets go? Where do the
unemployed, hanging about at the street corner in search of a job, go
during some pelting shower which drenches whoever remains to face it in
less than three minutes? The centre of the street, and the streaming
pavements clear almost at once, but where does the "man in the street"--
the woman--the child go? Certainly they do not go into a shelter put up by
Government for their protection, as a rule. There are, in provincial
towns, no shelters sufficiently large to accommodate them.

I have often talked to the inspectors--to take a case in point--of
provincial trams. These men have to wait, to stand about at corners of
streets or cross roads great part of the day. Many of them suffer in no
small degree from this constant standing about in all weathers.

Then again, there is no provision made for the drivers of the trams. It
would be quite possible to provide seats for them, as is often done in
motor buses, but the same reason holds good for this not having been
thought of, as is in evidence with regard to the lack of street shelters.

There is not sufficient co-operation in the local government. When the
guilds died out, no local arrangements took their place. In other words,
the local government, of whatever nature it is, is not sufficiently
representative. The men who work upon the road, day in day out, have not
sufficient opportunity of saying, in open meeting of their fellow
citizens, where their particular trade shoe pinches. It is, as old Sir
Thomas More said very truly, the matter of the rich legislating for the
poor, which is at fault.

Here, then, is the remedy suggested by Francis Newman: "The stated meeting
of a number of people in a _Ward-mote_ would make their faces familiar to
one another, and give to the richer orders a distinct acquaintance with a
definite portion of the vast community. Out of this ... meeting for
discussion of practical business in a _Ward-mote_ ... would rise numerous
other relations."

Here men would meet--men drawn from every class--and could voice their
complaints, their difficulties, their desire for improved conditions of
work. Only in this way could local government become really a help to its
neighbourhood. Only in this way could men consult on the best way of
improving economic conditions, frame their own amelioration of existing
laws, and send them up to the Imperial Parliament for consent or veto.

Then it would probably follow that some measure of land reform would be
the natural result of such local government. Perhaps it is over the land
that the Plough of Reform needs most urgently to be driven. More than
eight centuries ago the first idea of parks began in this country. Then it
was that in the selfish desire for private property the dwellings of the
people were swept away to make room for those of game for royal sport.
Later this method was adopted by Henry VIII's baronial retainers, who
ejected the tenants from their estates for the sake of trade profit--
profit to be gained by exporting wool from the large sheep farms into
which they made their private estates.

But the system of large tracts of land in a small country, such as our
own, being bought up for private property, and made into parks or game
preserves, is of course at the root of very many economic evils which have
largely helped to cause pauperism and unhealthy conditions of life for the
agricultural labourer. If rich men may add, without the law stepping in to
limit amount, land to land as their pocket makes it possible, it follows,
as a matter of course, that more of the rustic population must move into
the towns: and that more and more crowding and over-competition are the
result later on.

Newman--the man who was always boldest where there was a cause that needed
fighting for, or fellow citizens who were powerless to right their own
wrongs, and who required someone to voice them--spoke out his views on
this subject, unhesitatingly. "That a man should be able to buy up large
tracts of land, and make himself the owner of them--to keep them in or out
of culture as he pleases--to close or open roads, and dictate where houses
should be built ... this is no natural right, but is an artificial
creation of arbitrary law; law made by legislation for personal
convenience ... certainly not for the benefit of the nation.... I find it
stated that in 1845 the Royal Commission estimated that, since 1710, above
seven millions of acres had been appropriated by Private Acts of
Parliament." (This was because of the enormous extension of claims made by
lords of the manors.) "It is certain that wild land was not imagined to be
a property in old days. The moors and bogs, and hillsides and seacoast
imposed on the baron the duty of maintaining the King's peace against
marauders, but yielded to him no revenue.... Supplies open to all ought
never to have been made private property.... Vast private estates are
pernicious in every country which permits them. It was notorious to the
Romans under the early emperors how ruinous they had been to Italy....
There they wrought out, among other evils, emptiness of population, and
extinction of agriculture." He represents that it was really due to the
break-up of the feudal system in the Tudor times which was responsible for
the "chronic pauperism" and multitude of "sturdy beggars" of later
centuries. And the reason is a very patent one. If more and more land is
swamped in private enterprise, private revenue, it is a _sine qu� non_
that peasant proprietorship must get less and less. There is not, in
effect, enough land to go round. Newman points out that, as regards land
cultivation, we are behind France, Spain, Italy, Germany, and Hungary;
that a hundred years ago there were far more small freeholds in England
than is now the case; that England is a "marked exception in Europe in the
land tenure." "We know not whither beside England to look for a nation of
peasants living by wages, and divorced from all rights in the crops which
they raise."

As Henry Fawcett said long ago, these wages of English labourers will not
allow of the least provision to be made either for the sickness or the
feebleness of old age. They have, at the close of a life of hard toil,
nothing but the workhouse to live in, the road to beg in or sell in that
out-at-elbow, trade, the modern "chapman's."

Look at the average labourer of our own day. He has, as Newman clearly
points out, "more than enough to do in rearing a family, and has no better
prospect in his declining years than rheumatism and the poorhouse, perhaps
with separation from his wife, or at least a miserable dole of out-door
relief." [Footnote: We have gone some way since these words were written
in our Old Age Pensions.] Here he puts his finger on the very spot where
one thoughtless cruelty of bureaucratic legislation is most shown. For
many faithful servants of the State come in their last extremity to this
destiny. This irony of legislation shone out lately in its true colours
when it was discovered that, of over a thousand survivors of the Indian
Mutiny, a large proportion, who were invited to the demi-centenary
celebration dinner, came out of workhouses where they, who had served
their country so well in the days of their youth, had been forced to spend
their old age.

There is no doubt that Francis Newman's remedy for the economic evils of
the people is the right one. To develop rural industry, to come back to
the land, is the hope for England's future. "It is essential to the public
welfare to multiply to the utmost the proportion of actual cultivators or
farmers who have a firm tenure of the soil by paying a quit-rent to the
State.... The soil of England ought to be the very best investment for
rich and poor, pouring out wealth to incessant industry, and securing to
every labourer the fruit of his own toils."

And in this way, he urges, can this suggestion be carried to its definite
conclusion. The revival of small freeholds, the re-institution of peasant
proprietorships, are the ways out of the block at the end of the way where
there is at present a deadlock in regard to the peasants' individual
advancement. It is well known how admirably this system has worked in
France, where millions of peasants have profited by the law in favour of
small freeholds, and its regulation that such land shall always be divided
equally among the children of the landholder. It is well known how largely
Indian revenue was drawn from the rent paid by small cultivators in the
Dekkan. It may be taken as an invariable consequence that the measure
which really profits the citizen profits the State too.

I remember seeing among some old papers dating back to the early quarter
of the nineteenth century, an account showing that tobacco planting was
really started somewhere in the Midlands by two or three Englishmen, and
it was found that the soil was thoroughly adapted to the culture of
tobacco. Indeed, the venture proved a complete success. Then the
Government of that day, fearing later consequences to the import trade,
promptly intervened and put a stop to the home cultivation. But the fact
remains that it had been proved, by a definite experience, that there
_was_ an opening for this industry in England.

It was suggested to me only the other day how many more cider-growing
districts, for instance, might be with advantage started in the provinces.
For the truth of the matter, when we look at it fairly and squarely, is
that the home country can give rural work to many more of her inhabitants
than she is allowed to do at present; that, as Newman was always
suggesting in his lectures, the labourer should be given an interest in
the land; that he should be encouraged in trying to make a crop as good as
possible by adopting some modification of the M�tayer Culture; that he
should have _rights_ in the land; be associated in the profit accruing to
his overlord; that if the wages of a farm labourer were small, yet that he
should be given, perhaps, one-twentieth of the produce; and that he should
be encouraged to invest what saving might be possible to him in the farm
or trade. Newman was not in favour of the Savings Bank, as we understand
it in this country. He thought that associated profit and investment of
savings in the employer's land or trade would work far better in the long
run, and lead to keener fellowship between labourer and master.

To-day his plan, as it seems to many, stands very good chance of success,
if given a fair trial among the right sort of Englishmen. I am aware that
these last four words sound vague, but I have a very clear idea of what
they mean myself! Newman thought that if a co-operative society began by
buying a moderate-sized farm, and divided it into "portions of six to ten
acres, they might find either among their own members or among other
tradesmen known and trusted among them, persons rich enough to provide
seed and stock, and thus to live through the first year on such holdings,
and willing (later) to occupy them for themselves or for their sons. The
beginning is the great difficulty.... The first thing of all is to show,
on however small a scale, that such a cultivation can succeed.... If once
peasants see peasant proprietors they will have new motive for saving."




CHAPTER XV

VEGETARIANISM


The London Vegetarian Society was founded in 1847. When Newman joined it,
therefore, it was, so to speak, in its childhood. It will easily be
understood, therefore, that much amazement was excited (as is shown by the
following letters), by his fellow guests at some large dinner parties at
which he was present, when Newman withstood valiantly the long siege of
savoury dishes at his elbow; and it seemed as if, though present in body,
he was absent in appetite. This amazement was scarcely lessened when,
after passing seventeen dishes, at length he threw the gates of his
personal fortress open before some small omelet (prepared specially for
him by the cook), and that, practically, formed his entire dinner!

To Newman's mind the theory of Vegetarianism was proved. He published some
_Essays on Diet_; and was always an exponent of its rational claims on
mankind.

Since the days when he wrote up the subject, many people have come over to
his way of thinking, and the way is made easy for those who wish to follow
its _obiter dicta_ for health.

But it is quite as keenly a subject for debate now as formerly among a
large proportion of men, though perhaps few among anti-vegetarians would
dispute the point that there are, and must be, certain conditions involved
by anti-vegetarianism which can hardly be evaded, or defended. One of
these conditions, of course, is that it is not always possible to detect
some diseases in flesh sold for food: and that these diseases are
communicable to man; another, the degrading spectacle of the slaughter-
house; another, the presence in our midst of the butcher's shop, with all
its revolting display: [Footnote: I have not forgotten that M. Zola
contended that the atmosphere of a butcher's shop conduced to the best and
most healthy complexions of those who served in it!] another, as Mr.
Josiah Oldfield points out to us, that "horticulture ... would employ an
enormously greater amount of labour than does stock-raising, and so tend
to afford a counter current to the present downward drift, and to
congested labour centres." Mr. Oldfield urges also that "all elements for
perfect nutrition in assimilable forms are found in a proper vegetarian
dietary."

I have not opportunity for finding out in what years Newman took up this
practical dietary of vegetarianism for himself, but I think it must have
been towards the latter end of his life. Mention will be found in the
Reminiscences contributed by Mrs. Bainsmith, the sculptor, relating to his
bringing across occasionally, when she and her father and mother lived
just opposite the Professor's house at Weston-super-Mare, some
particularly delicious vegetarian dish (concocted by his own cook), which
he had thought his friends could not fail to appreciate.

The following letters have been kindly sent me for reproduction by Mr. F.
P. Doremus in connection with Newman's views on Vegetarianism:--


_To Mr. F. P. Doremus from Professor Newman._

"_21st Sept._, 1883.

"Dear Sir,

       *       *       *       *       *

"I _deliberately prefer_ the rule of our Society and by preference adhere
to it. But I have never interpreted it as severely as I find some to do.
On some occasions, in early years, when I could get no proper vegetarian
food, I have eaten some small bit of ham fat (as I remember on _one_
occasion) to aid dry potato from sticking in my throat. I do not interpret
our rule as forbidding _exceptional_ action _under stress of difficulty_.
But when I found what a fuss was made about this, and saw that many people
took the opportunity of _inferring_ that a simple act implied a habit, I
saw that it was unwise to give anyone a handle of attack....

"I can only say that I interpret our rules conscientiously, and obey them
according to my interpretation faithfully. I do not see in our profession
any vow or engagement comparable to that about _never tasting_
intoxicating drink. If my wife, who is not a professed vegetarian (though
in practice she is all but one), asks me to taste a bit of flesh and
see... whether it is good, I find nothing in our rules to forbid my
gratifying her _curiosity_. In that case I do not take it _as diet_ to
nourish me nor to gratify me. My words of adhesion simply declared that I
had abstained from such _food_ for half a year, and _I intended to abstain
in the future_. Of course this forbids my _habit_ or any _intention_ to
the contrary; but I deprecate interpreting this as a vow or as a trap and
a superstition. One who feels and believes as I do the vast superiority of
our vegetarian food, never can desire, unless perhaps in some abnormal
state of illness, the inferior food....

"Faithfully yours,

"F. W. Newman."


"_1st Oct._, 1883.

"Dear Sir,

"... On reading yours anew after some ten days or less, I think I ought to
notice what you say of an unknown publisher.

"I cannot remember that for twenty years I have ever eaten in the company
of any well-known publisher (anyone known to _me_ as a publisher) except
Mr. Nicolas Tr�bner _before_ I joined the Vegetarians, and _one other_
more recently. The latter was in the house of a lady friend who always
anxiously humoured me by providing a _special dish_ for me.

"Her cook was not skilful in _our_ cookery, but did her best. I remember
distinctly who was present on this occasion with this respected publisher.
It was a luncheon with meats. I ate at the same table, and it may very
easily have escaped his notice that a different dish was handed to me.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I have several times sat at this friend's table with a large number of
guests. I remember once counting that seventeen dishes were handed to me.
I dined on my own food to the great marvel of those near me....

"I have always maintained that the main reason for proclaiming any _rule_
of diet is, that the outsiders may be afforded facts to aid their own
judgment; and that our engagement has no other element of obligation than
that we shall not vitiate the materials of such judgment.

"Therefore also I have advocated several grades--for instance, an
engagement allowing of _fish_ as food (which many will take who will not
go our length), and another in which absence from home (where one cannot
arrange the cookery) is an exemption. I rejoice also in the Daniclete
rule. Provided that it is KNOWN what is the diet, we give valuable
information."


"_14th Oct._, 1883.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I knew that the publisher to whom you referred could only be Mr. Kegan
Paul, who met me some few years back at luncheon in the house of my
friends the Miss Swanwicks: that until _you told_ me his name, I thought
it better not to write to him. But thereupon I wrote and explained to him
that my friend Miss Anna Swanwick knew perfectly that I could not accept
their hospitality (as I have habitually done for a week or more at a time)
if they expected me to partake of any food inconsistent with the rules of
our Society. I long ago furnished her with some of our recipes, and she
_showed her cook_ always to make a _special_ dish for me. At one of their
dinner parties I remember the amazement of guests at my passing _all_ the
dishes, as at first it seemed, until my own little dish came. I told Mr.
Kegan Paul that _he must have mistaken_ what was in my plate (perhaps
crumb omelette _browned over_--which I remember the cook was apt to give
me) for some fish of which he and others were partaking. I have no doubt
that this was the whole matter....

"I am sincerely yours,

"F. W. Newman."


The closing letter in this series is evidently an answer to some questions
from Mr. Doremus as regards Newman's portrait, and as regards the
incidents of his life.

"My life has been eminently uneventful." When one remembers in how many
questions of social reform, of theology, of written matter, Newman had
been concerned, this short sentence strikes one's eyes strangely enough.
For what is an "event"? Surely it does not mean only something which is a
carnal happening: a material outbreak in some form or other which occurs
before our eyes? Surely there are far greater spiritual "events" than
physical ones? And of _this_ kind of event Newman's life had been full.
Originality of thought, of conception, of aim, is the Event which takes
precedence of all other. And these events were strewn like Millet's
"Sower" from side to side of his path: to take the true Latin significance
of the word, they _came out_ from him.


"_31st July_, 1884.

"Dear Sir,

"Your letter has been forwarded to me from home to this place
[Keswick].... Messrs. Elliot and Fry (Baker Street, Portman Square),
recently by pressure induced me to let them take my photograph. In fact
they took four, in different positions, all judged excellent, all of
cabinet size. Each, I believe, costs 2/-. I have none at my disposal. With
or without my leave, anyone can publish them in any magazine. Now, as to
my biography--my life has been eminently uneventful. There is nothing to
tell but my studies, my successive posts as a teacher, and the list of
books, etc., from my pen, _unless one add_ the effects of study on my
CREED, which more than one among you might desire _not_ to make prominent
in the _Food Reformer_.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Can I assent to the request that I will myself write something? Others
might wish to know in how many _Antis_ I have been and am engaged!!
Certainly more than you will care to make known will go into two pages of
your magazine.

"I am, sincerely yours,

"F. W. Newman."


Two letters to Dr. Nicholson from Newman I think may be given here: one in
April, 1875, and one in June, 1881, as both bear strongly on the
vegetarian question:--


"25 _April_, 1875.

"My dear Nicholson,

"How time flies! Bearded men, active in moral and political questions,
tell me they know nothing of the Austro-Hungarian events, because they
happened when they were children.

"One of them asked me to give a lecture on Austria and Hungary of the
Past, as he was curious and totally ignorant.... We are overrun with every
kind of meeting, and the public are sated....

       *       *       *       *       *

"Happily every day is too short for me, and I cannot have time on my
hands.... I do not know whether you have attended the movement against
vivisection, which is becoming lively. It has long been a dire horror to
me. I rejoice to see that Sir W. Thomson, [Footnote: Sir William Thomson,
born 1843, was late President of the Royal College of Surgeons, Ireland;
Exam. in Surgery, Queen's University and Royal College of Surgeons,
Ireland.] and other scientific men, desire a severe restriction to be put
on it. I agree heartily with those who say we have no more RIGHT to
torture a dog than to torture a man; but I fear that to move at present
with Mr. Jesse for the total prohibition will only give to the worst
practices a longer lease of life.

"Our vegetarianism is becoming more active with the pressure from the high
price of butcher's meat. Not that we make many entire conversions, but
plentiful well-wishers and half-converts, and a great increase in the
belief that _too much_ flesh meat is eaten, and that the doctors are much
to blame for having pressed it as they press wine and ale, calling it
'generous' food. At the same time it is remarkable that the argument
against slaughter-houses and for tenderness to tame animals plays a more
decisive part, especially with women, than economic and sanitary
arguments.... I am ever in experiment on something. At present it is on
cacao butter and vegetable oils. We esteem the cacao butter for _savoury
dishes_ very highly. Messrs. Cadbury sell it 'to me and my friends' for
1s. a lb. In pastry and sweets the chocolate smell offends most people;
but my wife likes it. It is too hard to spread on cold meat.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The gardens are becoming sprightly. I have not had success with new
vegetables, viz. German peas, celery, turnips, Belgian red dwarf beans.
The drought last summer was bad. No _warm rain_ in spring last year.

"Ever yours heartily,

"F. W. Newman."


The following is quoted from the second letter I mentioned:--

"I send to you a Penny Vegetarian Cookery Book herewith. Surely I was a
Vegetarian when I last was with you? I began the practice in 1867. But let
me recite: (1) At breakfast and the third meal I need nothing but what all
fleshmeaters provide. (2) At dinner the utmost that I need is _one_
Vegetarian dish, which may be a soup. (3) If it so happen that you have
any _really solid_ sweet puddings that alone will suffice. (4) For the
_one_ Vegetarian dish good _brown_ bread and butter is an acceptable
substitute, or rather fulfilment. But I confess I am desirous of
propagating everywhere a knowledge of our peculiar dishes, which teach how
to turn to best account the manifold and abundant store of leaves, roots,
and grains, besides pulse.

"My wife is fully able to impart practical knowledge: to please me, and
see that others please me, she has given great attention to Vegetarian
cookery for many years back...."




CHAPTER XVI

NATIVE REPRESENTATION IN INDIAN GOVERNMENT


It is rare indeed that an Englishman looks at India as Francis Newman
looked at it. Fifty years ago--probably longer--he put his finger on
exactly the spot which to-day is the crux which most puzzles and baffles
politicians. In social and intellectual questions his were the clear-
sighted, far-focussed eyes that reached beyond the measures of most men's
minds. He saw clearly, fifty years ago, that India was drawing ever closer
and closer to an inevitable terminus. That she was beginning to recognize
--every year more definitely--her ultimate destination: was beginning to
realize, too, that her foreign rulers were aware also of that terminus,
but were not very anxious that she should reach it. Nay, were practically
rather jogging her elbow to prevent her becoming so conscious of the
direction in which the tide of affairs was drifting.

Nevertheless it is becoming more and more patent to everyone who really
studies the question impartially that things are not what they were fifty
or sixty years ago; that a critical juncture is drawing ever nearer and
nearer--a juncture which inevitably will mean great changes for the
governed and the governors.

Even the slow-moving East does move appreciably in half a century, when
centres of education are doing their best to train Indians in European
ideas of civilization, in European ideas of government, and of the
authority which learning gives. We cannot expect to educate and yet leave
those we educate exactly where we find them; for with education comes
invariably, inevitably, the growth of ideas planted by it--their growth,
and no less invariable fruition. To show someone all that is to be gained
by reaching forward, and then to expect him not to reach, but to remain
quiescent, is the act of a fool.

We have, as a nation, so taken it for granted that India is our own to do
as we like with, that it is perhaps not a pleasant reminder which faces us
as we cast our thoughts back to the initial steps taken by ourselves in
the days which preceded the formation of the Honourable East India
Company. It bids us realize that at first, as Francis Newman says in his
_Dangerous Glory of India_, "neither king, statesmen, nor people ever
deliberately planned from the beginning or desired such an empire. It
began as a set of mercantile establishments which took up private arms for
mere self-defence.... The Honourable East India Company was glad to
legitimate its position by accepting from the Grand Mogul the subordinate
position of a rent-collector; indeed, from the beginning to the end of its
political career it was animated by a consistent and unswerving
disapproval of aggression and fresh conquest."

Since that time, however, the English dominion spread rapidly. Since that
time we became more and more aware of what a splendid field lay ready for
occupation by our surplus population. Since that time we have moved
forward through a vast country that formerly, through lack of European
ways of civilization and co-operation, practically lay at our feet. It is
true that we have done much--very much for India. It is impossible for
anyone to deny that. We have brought to her doors European civilization;
modern points of view; the miracles of new discoveries in science;
inventions for making the wheels of life move easier; opportunities for
cultivating and selling her land's produce, and for its quick transport.
We have lifted her up--yes, but here is where the mental shoe pinches--we
have insisted on preventing her from reaching her full stature. We have
trained her sons to be able to work side by side with ourselves in various
official duties; and then when they are desirous--as is indeed only the
inevitable consequence of their education--of entering the lists side by
side with Englishmen, they find there is no crossing the rubicon which
officially divides the two nations.

It is true that many Anglo-Indians stand aghast at this idea that they
should cross it, but it is only those who are unaware that, as a general
rule, education and environment combined come out as top dog over heredity
in most instances in which it plays a part. It is only those who, when
they go out to India, take, as it were, England with them, and fail to
recognize how far Indian points of view and power of dealing with things
have progressed. It is only those who have forgotten--if indeed they ever
truly realized it--that it is a point of honour that such a proceeding
should be carried out, if we, as Englishmen, remember all that the notable
charter of 1833 bound us to do.

For the charter of 1833 [Footnote: During Lord Grey's ministry.]
definitely promised that native Indian subjects of the English Government
were to be admitted on equal terms with English subjects _to every office
of State_, except that of governor-general or commander-in-chief. Not only
that, but the solemn proclamation of the late Queen was issued in 1858,
pledging the word of Sovereign and Parliament that the "sole aim of
British rule in India was the welfare of the Indian people, and that no
distinction would be made between Indians and Europeans in the government
of the country, on the grounds of race, or creed, or colour."

As Francis Newman says very clearly, it is a "task which we have
voluntarily assumed-to rule India, which means" (the italics are his) "_to
defend it from itself in infancy, to train it into manhood_.... It
presupposes that the people gradually get more and more power until, like
a son who comes of age, the parental control is discontinued.... We cannot
take the last steps first, nor can we abruptly and recklessly resign our
post...."

The Hon. M. G. K. Gokhale, in a keenly interesting paper read before the
East India Association in the summer of 1906, states very definitely the
point of view of educated Indians as regards our unfulfilled pledges of
nearly eighty years since. He says: "Until a few years ago, whatever might
have been thought of the pace at which we were going, there was no general
disposition to doubt the intention of the rulers to redeem their plighted
word. To-day, however, the position is no longer the same.... There is no
doubt that the old faith of the people in the character and ideals of
British rule has been more than shaken.... Half a century of Western
education, and a century of common laws, common administration, common
grievances, common disabilities, have not failed to produce their natural
effect even in India.... Whatever a certain school of officials in India
may say, the bulk of educated Indians have never in the past desired a
severance of the British connection.... "But, he adds: "It is a critical
juncture in the relations between England and India.... The educated
classes in India ... want their country to be a prosperous, self-
governing, integral part of the Empire, like the colonies, and not a mere
poverty-stricken bureaucratically-held possession of that Empire."

Fifty years ago Francis Newman was urging with all the force in his power
--and no one in his day was more farsighted in detecting just that social
reform which would make more and more insistent demand for a hearing, as
decade followed decade--that it was to our own interest as a nation, as
well as the only honourable course open to us, to open up public offices
in India to the educated native. It need not, he showed, be done otherwise
than with caution, and gradually "many variations" were "imaginable; many
different ways might succeed, if only the _right end in view_" was
"steadily held up, namely, to introduce, fully and frankly, _into true
equality with ourselves_" [Footnote: To "exclude natives from all high
office," Sir Charles Napier said once emphatically, "is what debases a
nation."] (again the italics are his) "as quickly as possible, and as many
as possible, of the native Indians whose loyalty could be counted on....
Lord Grey and his coadjutors, in renewing the charter of 1833, understood
most clearly that nothing but an abundance of black faces in the highest
judicature, and intelligent Indians of good station in the high police,
could administer India uprightly.... Every year that we delay evils become
more inveterate and hatred accumulates. To train India into governing
herself, until English advice is superfluous, would be to both countries a
lasting benefit, to us a lasting glory."

Now, what are the "evils" which "every year become more inveterate" in our
method of government in India? Perhaps one of the most palpable is the
strongly centralized bureaucracy. Another, is the constant change of men
in chief office every five years. Another, is that all competitive
examinations are held in London. Mr. Gokhale very rightly urges that it is
a great deal to require of an Indian that he should have to come all the
way to England for these examinations _on the chance_ of passing, and
suggests their being held simultaneously in India and in England. Another,
is that the field of law is the only officialdom open to the Indian, yet
that there he is found capable of rising to the highest post. Another,
that we have not pushed forward the education of the masses as far as we
reasonably might if we had worked hand in hand with the educated classes.
Mr. Gokhale tells us that to-day seven children out of eight are growing
up in ignorance, and four villages out of five are as yet without a
school-house.

There are other drawbacks to this system of foreign bureaucracy, which can
only be briefly touched on here, but certainly Newman was right when he
condemned that mistaken, high-handed measure of the autocratic East India
Company--their destruction of all the local treasuries, and the manner in
which these funds were diverted into the central treasury. Thus, as he
pointed out very clearly, no moneys were left for the repair of roads,
bridges, and tanks, etc. As he remarks, "In comparison with this monster
evil, all other delinquencies seem to fade away."

As everyone probably is aware, Newman lost no opportunity in pressing home
on the minds of his countrymen that it is decentralization that is so
urgently needed; and that not alone in India, but in our own country as
well. Repeatedly he urged that if Government is administered from one
central bureaucracy, it follows inevitably that the business to be dealt
with bulks so enormously that it is literally impossible to deal, in
detail and with complete understanding, with the rights and wrongs of
citizens at a distance in the provinces and remote parts of a big empire.
Consequently, he was always trying to show how far more successfully local
self-government--a local ward-mote, for instance--would deal with
provincial matters in England. That every town should be, as it were, a
little State, with all classes represented in it, and matters dealt with
locally should only come up to the Central Parliament for veto or for
sanction. In the same way he recommended strongly that in India every
facility should be given to "voluntary (limited liability) companies to
execute roads, works of irrigation, etc...." That country districts should
be given local treasuries, as well as towns.

In "English institutions and their most necessary reforms," Newman
declares and reiterates that this lack of local treasuries is a "hideous
blunder," and adds, "every coin in every province is liable to be spent in
some war." He urges other changes, which have come to pass in some
measure, such as a Viceroy, a "prince of the blood royal," sent out to
"receive their occasional homage." But there again lack of cooperation
with the natives, lack of real understanding between us and them, have, as
everyone is aware, worked havoc when a man [Footnote: It is impossible to
forget in this connection what the _Tribune_ called our "Curzonian
statescraft" in the recent past.] without the necessary insight and
sympathy into the people's points of view and ways of thought has been
sent to posts of supreme authority.

There have been men of splendid capabilities for understanding and
sympathizing with these points of view, men such as Sir James Outram, the
Bayard of India; Sir John Malcolm, Lord Elphinstone, Sir George Russell
Clerk, Lord Lawrence, Ovans, and many others, who helped forward the
better understanding between England and India very greatly; and of these,
Outram suffered grievous misrepresentations at the hands of his
Government, Clerk was put aside, and Ovans had to stand his trial in
England for an absolutely unjustifiable charge.

Whenever the question of co-operation and sympathy comes up, as from time
to time it does, between Englishmen and Indians, whether it is fifty or
sixty years ago, in Newman's day or now in the year of grace 1909, with a
few honourable exceptions, the answer is identically the same. It is
practically an unknown quantity. The East and West have not really met.
Still the ranks of the service are absorbed by Englishmen; still, as all
educated Indians protest, the "true centre of gravity for India is in
London"; still India is unrepresented in the Viceroy's Executive Councils,
and in Customs, Post, Survey, Telegraph, Excise, etc., and also in the
Commissioned ranks of the Army; still, because district administration is
to all intents and purposes not in existence, there is no compulsory
education for boys _and_ girls, though most educated Indians are very
strongly in favour of it.

It is not, it cannot be, because our eyes, as a nation, have been shut to
the fact of what the faults of our own administration have been in years
gone by. If no one else had trumpeted them abroad, at least one man spoke
out the whole truth and nothing but the truth about it in the last
century: Francis, the great Social Reformer--Francis Newman, who was no
time-server, no prophesier of smooth things; but, as much as in him lay,
desired more than anything else to lay the whole unvarnished truth before
his fellow men, things that concerned the weaker members of the community.
In lecture after lecture he turned things to the "rightabout-face" which
had hitherto been done _sub ros�_ in India. He did in effect pull down the
very rose tree which had acted as such an efficient shelter. His bull's-
eye lantern always cast an uncompromising glare upon those sometimes very
"shady" doings of our countrymen which characterized their treatment of
natives in the early Victorian era, and--occasionally perhaps, even since.

No one has forgotten, for instance, the words of Mr. Halliday, Lieutenant-
Governor of Bengal, when he described our police as a curse to India in
1854.

Newman reminded his countrymen that in 1852 a petition had been sent to
the House of Commons from Lower Bengal, "among other grievous complaints,"
which "stated that by reason of the hardships inflicted on witnesses, the
population" were averse from testifying to the ill-doings and tyranny of
these police.

Again, as regarded the courts of law in India, Newman reminded us of the
revelations contained in that volume by the Hon. Mr. Shore concerning our
Government (the book which was withdrawn 1844).

It was there stated definitely that, until the days of Lord William
Bentinck, Persian was the only language used in these courts.
Consequently, as neither judge, nor clerk, nor litigating party, nor
person accused, nor his witnesses understood it, it constantly happened
that the case was a veritable _reductio ad absurdum_. No one knew what was
happening until at last the man--if it was a case of murder--was shown
that the case had gone against him by being shown the gallows!

It is true _nous avons chang� tout cela_, in these days, and the
vernacular tongue is used instead, but now it is the judge who doesn't
always know accurately what is going on, for he cannot always understand
what the witnesses are saying! As Newman says very shrewdly: "If self-
confident, he trusts his own impressions; if timid, he leans on the
judgment of his native clerk; if formal and pedantic, he believes all
clear and coherent statements. His weaknesses are watched, and it is soon
understood whether he is to be better managed by fees to the clerk, or by
the forging of critical evidence, in cases for which it is worth while.
Very scandalous accounts have been printed in great detail ... and one
thing is clear, that those Englishmen who have looked keenly into the
matter and dare to speak freely, believe justice to have a far worse
chance in such tribunals than before native judges."

Francis Newman tells us that his own eyes were opened to the prevailing
state of things in those days, by "a very intelligent, and widely informed
indigo-planter." He told him that when he first began indigo-planting, his
partner had given this emphatic rule of conduct: "Never enter the
Company's Courts!" And to his own amazed question as to what course of
action was to be pursued when a difficulty arose, he clearly and openly
explained. "If a native failed to pay us our dues, we never sued him, but
simply publicly seized some of his goods, sold them by auction, deducted
our claim from the proceeds, and handed over to him the balance." There is
something almost humorous in this travesty of an _amende honorable_ for so
highhanded a measure!

One may in very deed be thankful that since the day of all these
happenings, Indians _have_, as Mr. Gokhale tells us, "climbed in the field
of law, to the very top of the tree," and can now deal out first-hand
justice to their fellow countrymen.

I think I cannot give a fitter close to this chapter than by quoting
Newman's suggestions as to measures of urgent importance with regard to
our Indian Empire, which were made a little over forty years ago.

"The establishment of an Imperial Court in India to judge all causes....
The mark of a 'tyrant' (according to the Old Greeks) was his defence by a
foreign body-guard: _we_ bear that mark of illegitimate sway at present.

"To make India loyal, to save the yearly sacrifice of health or life to
10,000 young men, now the miserable victims of our army system, is so
urgent an interest, that I put this topic foremost. Too much importance
can hardly be given to it. Each soldier is said to cost us �100; hence the
pecuniary expense also is vast. But until we restrain ourselves from
aggression, all attempts permanently to improve our millions at home must
be fruitless.... Our task is to rear India into political manhood, train
it to English institutions, and rejoice when it can govern itself without
our aid."




CHAPTER XVII

VOTES FOR WOMEN


There is always a large percentage of people who range themselves on the
side of the majority in regard to any question of the day. They range
themselves there not because of any principle involved, but simply and
solely because they consider this mode of action expedient. And they feel
far safer, far happier, taking the flabby, muscleless arm of Expediency
than in venturing into unknown difficulties behind the uncompromisingly
stiff figure of Principle. But there are others-thank God for them!--who
hate the shifty, cunning eye of Expediency far too much to have anything
to do with him. These others would far rather be in the minority in
championing some good cause than with the "expedient" majority.

These others are the pioneers of civilization. Sometimes--to-day we have
many cases in point as regards the social crusade of brave women against
taxation without representation--they are martyrs as well as pioneers. But
the splendid spirit of knight-errantry, which shone so vividly with the
fire of enthusiasm in medieval days, is still abroad in our midst to-day.
A few militant personalities fight for a great cause, a great principle--
the raising of a better moral tone amongst us, the betterment of the lives
of their fellows. Newman was one of these. His sword was always in the
thickest of the fight when it was a fight against some social injustice to
his fellow citizens. Forty years ago and more he spoke out in championship
of woman's rights. So long ago as 1867 he led the movement which tilted at
social wrongs, social injustices dealt out to the sex. It is a movement
which has taken, as I said, more than half a century to make its way to
the position it holds to-day. It has been opposed bitterly almost every
inch of the way by men who love expediency, and turn their backs on the
principle of the thing; which is fair play for women. Nevertheless,
England is a country which prides herself on her keen sense of justice and
freedom.

If Newman had done nothing else, his work for this movement would be
unforgettable; his words were so outspoken, his way of dealing with the
subject so broad-minded. In one of his articles he urged the following on
his fellow men:--"Readers of History, and Lawyers, are aware that women's
wrongs are an ancient and terribly persistent fact.... Why has our law
been so unjust to women?--Because women never had a voice in the making of
it, and men as a class _have not realized the oppression of women as a
class_" (the italics are my own). "Men have deep in their hearts the idea
that women _ought_ to be their legal inferiors; that neither the persons
of women nor their property ought to remain their own; that marriage is
not a free union on equal terms; and that the law ought to favour the
stronger sex against the weaker. It is remarkable that our law is more
unjust to women than that of the great historically despotic nations, and
in some important respects less favourable than that of the Turks. All
these things point out that _equality of the sexes in respect to the
Parliamentary Franchise_ is essential to justice. The conscience of men is
opening to the truth...." "Readers of newspapers cannot be ignorant of the
miseries endured by wives from brutal husbands. In ordinary decorous
families, sons at lavish expense are trained to self-support. The
_daughters_ in one class have nothing spent on their education; in
another, are educated as elegant ornaments of a drawing-room, where they
live in luxury for a parent's delight; yet when he dies, and their youth
is spent, they are often turned adrift into comparative poverty,
incompetent for self-help. When complaint is made of this, the ascendant
sex graciously tells them, 'they ought to marry,' and this in a country
where women are counted by the hundred thousand more numerous than men;
where also men do not universally accept the state of marriage. Meanwhile,
the law is made as if to dissuade the woman from such a remedy. If she
dare to adopt it, it instantly strips her of all her property, great or
little; [Footnote: Since then some amendment of the wrong has been done by
the "Married Women's Property Act."] and if she earn anything, authorizes
her husband to seize it by force. In the Marriage Service, the husband, as
if in mockery, says, 'With all my worldly goods I thee endow': while the
law allows him to gamble away her whole fortune the day after the
marriage, or to live in riotous indulgence on _her_ money, and give to her
the barest necessaries of life.... He may maliciously refuse her the sight
of her own children.... And if to gain one sight of them she return to his
house for two days, the law holds her to have 'condoned' all his offences
however flagrant."

Mr. Haweis many years ago said a very significant thing. He said that the
best--if the rarest--men had always a good share of the woman nature in
themselves. Francis Newman was one of these men. He understood the woman's
point of view without any telling. He knew instinctively, intuitively, the
mental cramp, the moral inability to rise to her full stature, which is
induced by man's perpetual effort to fit her into a measured mould
prepared by himself. He knew that if "a man's reach must exceed his grasp,
or what's a heaven for?" what a hell faced the woman who could not even
_reach_ forward to fulfil all the many aims which she was conscious were
stirring within her, longing for attainment. He had seen women, his
countrywomen, shake the bars behind which they faced their world for the
very passion of revolt against these man-set limits, which kept them in on
every side. He knew that, of all hard fates, perhaps few are more bitter
than to feel the power and ability within you to do some work as well as
another does it, and yet to have no freedom to use that power. To be
forced, by man-made laws, to wrap up your talent in the napkin of legal
red-tapeism, when everything within you, perhaps, urges you to turn it to
good account.

Let us look for one moment at some of the legal disabilities of women to-
day. Perhaps some of us are hardly aware to what an almost incredible
distance they reach.

Mr. Henry Schloesser, barrister-at-law of the Inner Temple, [Footnote: In
his pamphlet published by the Women's Social and Political Union.] very
explicitly explains how they affect women. "At Common Law the father is
entitled against the mother to the custody of the children, and this right
he could only forfeit by gross misconduct; so also he was entitled to
prescribe their mode of education.... He remains _prima facie_ the
guardian of his children, _to the exclusion of the mother_" [the italics
are my own]. "Alone of the learned professions, the medical is open to
women...." (She constantly proves her aptitude to take the same honours as
man as regards the others, but he still growls over his share and keeps
_her_ out.) "A husband is not bound at Common Law to cohabit with or
maintain his wife."

These facts show luridly against the sky of woman's world, but perhaps few
men know what purgatorial fires they light in many a woman's heart to-day.
They show that man's injustice to her does not only concern her in public
life, but even in the home life (to which he would fain limit her
energies); she has practically no legal status at all. She has not even a
right to her own children in the eye of the law. Quite recently a judge
decided that "a woman is not a parent in the eye of the law," and
therefore powerless in things relating to her children. She is excluded
from the guardianship of them. Yet so curiously irrational is this same
English law that, should any woman wronged by a man become mother to an
illegitimate child, upon her falls the whole onus of its maintenance until
it is sixteen years old. The man gets off scot-free; for the world which
condones an offence (which is shared by both) in the case of the man,
condemns it in the _woman_.

Thus, as Mr. Thomas Johnston [Footnote: _The Case for Woman's Suffrage_,
by Thomas Johnston. Published by the Women's Social and Political Union.]
very clearly puts it: "Where there is any stigma or blame, the woman bears
it alone.... Under the law of England to-day a man can secure divorce by
simply proving the unfaithfulness of his wife. But the wife, in order to
obtain a divorce from her husband for the same unfaithfulness, must, in
addition, prove cruelty or desertion." This in itself is very one-sided
law, and certainly indefensible.

Francis Newman describes this law in no measured terms. He declares in his
article on "Marriage Laws" (1867) that what undeniably needs reform in our
country's government is "the extravagant power given by our law to a
husband.... The exclusive right attributed to him over the children is
unjust and pernicious. His rights over his wife's person [Footnote:
According to English law, as evidenced in a recent case, the wife is _not_
"a person" at all; presumably, therefore, she is simply his chattel!] are
extreme and monstrous.... We need a single short, sweeping enactment that,
_notwithstanding anything to the contrary in past statutes, no woman
henceforth shall by marriage change her legal status or lose any part of
her rights over property_....

       *       *       *       *       *

"We implore all true and genuine Conservatives not to delay and use half-
measures, but to do justice to the sex in good time. He who tries to
uphold injustice is the true and efficient revolutionist, while he thinks
he is Conservative."

He goes on to touch thus on what is perhaps the most cruel injustice of
all--that the law permits a man to deprive his wife of the children, who,
before God, are as equally hers as his:--

"Not only with regard to _property_, also in regard to _children_, the law
is unjust to women. The mother has to undergo much in bringing a child to
maturity--the agony of childbirth... the countless cares of tending and
watching by night and day. The child becomes the darling of her heart, the
image of her dreams, the great centre of her thoughts and hopes; and after
all her toils, the law permits a husband to take the child permanently out
of her sight, and (if he choose) to put it under the charge of an enemy
... who will fill its mind with falsehoods and teach it to hate and
despise its mother. Such things are not possibilities merely and dreams;
they are stern realities, and the law gives her no redress."

When one thinks of all that these words mean, one is face to face with the
almost unthinkable fact that the case of the woman in England is unjust
beyond description, and for this reason, that, as Newman says, "Men, who
alone make the laws, make them with but little account of woman." At home
with her children she is defenceless. She has no power over them, and her
husband is not bound to "maintain" her, notwithstanding the sentence,
which English law has made absolutely meaningless, of his marriage vow to
her: "With all my worldly goods I thee endow."

In the world, if she have no husband or be unmarried, she is not a
"person" in a legal sense; and during election time her house is
described, in canvassing for votes, as having "no occupier"! In the world,
too, she is unable to obtain a fair wage for her work. She may do the work
as well as man, but nevertheless, in most cases, her pay is less. Mr.
Johnston tells us that the average male worker's wage has been calculated
to be about 18s., but the average woman worker's wage is only about 7s.
And when women find out these many injustices suffered at home and in the
world by their sex, as Miss Christabel Pankhurst says, they are absolutely
unable to right these wrongs, for "women have no political power."

Here is the pivot round which the wrongs of women revolve--her lack of
legal status, her voicelessness as regards the laws of her country, the
country which is so openly irrational as to count her a "person" when it
wants to get a tax out of her, but refuses to do so at any other time when
she has something to ask of it in return!

Once the parliamentary vote is given to women, the same results would
follow in England as have followed elsewhere. Wages and hours of labour
are made just for women, as in many respects they have been now made for
men. The laws of divorce are the same. Mothers are made joint guardians of
their children with their fathers. The age of protection for girls is
raised to 18. [Footnote: At the present moment, by the English law, a girl
can contract a valid marriage at twelve years of age; a boy at fourteen.
(See _Legal Status of Women_, by H. H. Schloesser.)] In New South Wales,
after the women were given the vote, Dr. Mackellar brought in a bill to
deal with the protection of illegitimate children, which has answered
admirably; while in New Zealand and Australia the Wages Board, which the
women's vote helped to pass, has raised in both countries the wages of
women from 5s. to l6s. per week for the same amount of work done. And in
other respects it has abolished sweating--that crucial question of crucial
questions in England to-day.

There is another point, too, amongst many others, in which the vote helped
the national life in Australia in the giving of old age pensions. Perhaps
had women the vote here in England, the shameful system in which old men
and women are separated in the last years of their life, as the workhouses
ordain, would be altered. And this is a question which demands immediate
attention--_immediate_ attention; for more than �26,000,000 are paid by
taxpayers each year to be spent in great part on our wretched system of
poor laws.

Francis Newman was strongly against poor laws administered as they are in
England to-day, as, indeed, is every thoughtful man. He was also strongly
of opinion that there should be women on juries in some cases. And indeed
it is a fact that women magistrates, as well as women jurors, are most
certainly a _sine qu� non_ in those cases where, at the present moment,
owing to juries being composed of men only, common justice for the
unrepresented Englishwoman in relation with the other sex is not, in a
great proportion of cases, rendered her. But even were women made eligible
for these offices, it would be no new thing, for in Mary Tudor's reign
there were two women appointed justices of the peace; and, of course,
always there has been a provision in law for "a jury of matrons" in
certain cases.

Indeed, when one goes far enough back in research into most questions, the
invariable lesson, is taught us, which we are always so reluctant, in our
cocksureness of the "antiquity" of our present-day conditions of life, to
learn, and we find that our arrangements very often are _not_ "as it was
in the beginning," but only mushroom growths of a decade or two. As Mrs.
Wolstenholme Elmy very justly says in her recent pamphlet on "Woman's
Franchise," women possessed voting rights from time immemorial, and the
year 1832 was the year when they were dispossessed of many ancient rights
by the Reform Act passed in that year.

As regards other disabilities of women, Francis Newman wrote very fully
and very strongly upon them, and it is impossible to leave them
unmentioned here. In 1869 he wrote: "There is one important matter which
young men need specially to be taught, viz. that at no time of life is any
man ... exempt from the essential duty of curbing animal impulses....
Nothing so paralyzes his force of Will as to be told that some men have
from God the gift of continence, and _others have it not_. This doctrine
is disastrously prominent in the Anglican marriage service, and is
borrowed from St. Paul. But that great and deep-hearted apostle was
unmarried and without personal experience. He writes, not as one revealing
supernatural communications, _but as imparting his best wisdom_.... A
general and just inference is, that a firm self-restraint is necessary and
salutary for every man."

It is impossible to write more strongly and clearly of the wickedness of
women's ancestral personal rights being swept away than does Newman in
articles published in the fourth volume of his _Miscellanies_. He does not
disguise the shameful state of the law as it affects woman to-day, and as
it is carried out by Government--that law which makes wrongdoing so easy
and unpunishable for man, and so hard and unjust to woman. The
unjustifiableness of certain laws was shown up with no uncertain pen by
him. He was himself convinced of their iniquity; and once convinced, he
stood forward as a modern John the Baptist, spared no one, and
passionately accused his countrymen of the injustice, immorality, and
cruelty of their making one law for men and another for women. He
inveighed against the world's point of view of this subject: and this not
once, nor twice, but constantly; and urged with all his might that these
wrongs to his countrywomen should be righted. Nevertheless his articles,
many of them, are forgotten. The dust of neglect is lying thick upon them
on many an unused shelf to-day. His voice has long been silent; and no
doubt it has been said of him (as it was by a Church dignitary of Father
Dolling at his death): "We shan't be worried any more by _him_ now about
the righting of social abuses." Laws against which Newman declaimed are
not altered yet, and we are a long way from those far-reaching reforms he
advocated. But the words he wrote are not dead. They are in our midst to-
day, and they stir depths to-day in the hearts of his countrymen in
suggestions towards social reformation; towards the righting of wrongs
just as glaring to-day as they were a century ago. Questions which can
never be put superficially aside, by men who, like Newman, cannot endure
to leave a social wrong unredressed, if they can by any searching find the
remedy.




CHAPTER XVIII

FRANCIS NEWMAN AND HIS RELIGION


More than one person has said to me in connection with this memoir: "If
the whole of Frank Newman's heterodox religious opinions be not given, the
book will lose half its point."

To my mind there are quite two, if not more, sides to this question. My
strongest argument, however, in favour of only dealing briefly with them
is this: It is quite true that Agnosticism more or less held its sway over
him during the years between 1834 and 1879. I am quite aware of how
tremendous a slice that is of a man's life. But it is not an overwhelming
testimony when one comes to look at it not from the worldly point of view.

There are periods in which Time--as Time--seems almost beside the mark. "A
thousand years in Thy sight are but as yesterday." When the Israelites had
once achieved their journey through the wilderness--nay, even through the
earlier time of tyranny amongst the Egyptians-I suppose the actual years
seemed as a dream _when one awaketh_.

I myself have known forty years pass, for someone afflicted with a
terrible mental disability, as a watch in the night, once light pierced
through the clouds of the long-darkened mental vision. Time, as sex, is
purely temporary. In this present world we cannot do without either, but
when Time itself passes for good, the old implements which were necessary
to make the clock go round will pass likewise.

So, in Newman's case, when that tremendous slice in a man's life--forty-
five years--was overpast, he sloughed off the old garments of Agnosticism,
and came back to the Christian faith professed by him in early childhood
so conscientiously--and, indeed, up to the year after his missionary
journey, 1834.

This fact influences me largely in the matter of dealing only briefly with
the time-as regards his religious professions--which lies between these
two dates, and for these reasons, which I hope to prove, carry
considerable weight.

The first is that people are mistaken in considering that it was his
religious opinions which made Newman great. The real valour of his life
was shown in the splendid aspects of Social Reform which he showed to the
world; the way of the New Citizenship, of the New Patriotism, which he was
for ever preaching and writing about. He was the Perseus of To-day whose
wholehearted efforts were spent in freeing the Andromedas from their
antiquated bonds and fetters; whose good sword was ever pointed at the
throats of the dragons which lift their ugly heads against freedom--
against reforms of all sorts; the dragons who take so long in dying.

But there are many who will regret bitterly that a man who served his
generation so splendidly as he did in these matters should ever have
written a book such as the _Phases of Faith_; for though it is undeniably
clever, yet it is not convincing; and very much of it is very painful
reading for those who do not care to wander out of the way in the
wilderness of religious speculation and doubt.

Newman declares in this book that he did not give up Christianity; yet he
gave up all that made Christianity Christianity. He said in it that he was
looking for a "religion which shall combine the tenderness, humility, and
disinterestedness that are the glories of the purest Christianity, with
that activity of intellect and untiring pursuit of truth." [Footnote: He
said once he wished for a religion which should combine the best out of
all religions in the world.]

When he mentions that, in his time, "of young men at Oxford not one in
five seemed to have any convictions at all," he seems to imply that it was
on account of the desire for a new religion; whereas it was far more
traceable to the after-effects of Calvinism and Puritanism, which have
stuck, as spiritual limpets, to England's religious rocks ever since they
first reached them. They are certainly looser in their hold than was the
case formerly, but they are there still.

_Phases of Faith_ was published in 1850. But the year before a book of far
more religious suggestiveness had come out, though that too was a book of
opposition to the accepted forms of religion, _The Soul: its Sorrows and
Aspirations_.

Regarded as a work postulating a new spiritual point of view, it was vague
and unsatisfying. It was without form and void. It desired that most
unsatisfying thing, a religion with no dogmas:--those stakes which
preserve the ground on which grow the flowers of religious truth, from
those who come but to spoil and destroy.

Yet, with all its lack of convincing power, and those parts of it which
are, like _Phases of Faith_, painful reading and profitless--to
Christians--there are here and again striking passages such as this, whose
beauty cannot fail to appeal to us: "None can enter the kingdom of Heaven
without becoming a little child. But behind and after this there is a
mystery revealed to but few; namely, if the Soul is to go on into higher
spiritual blessedness, it must become a _woman_. Yes, however manly thou
be among men, it must learn to love being dependent; must lean on God, not
solely from distress and alarm, but because it does not like independence
or loneliness.... God is _not_ a stern Judge; exacting every tittle of
some law from us.... He does not act towards us (spiritually) by
generalities ... but His perfection consists in dealing with each case by
itself as if there were no other...." And again: "The Bible is a blessed
book if we do not stifle the Holy Spirit within us."

The second reason why I touch on these religious opinions (before
mentioned) but briefly, is because of my own _strong impression_ since I
have been writing this memoir, that in that next chapter of existence upon
which Newman has now entered, he may not impossibly be nearer the Light,
the religious truth, which here he so earnestly sought, but mistakenly;
and in his regret for his own phases of religious unfaith, now cast aside,
may not wish them to be recapitulated anew. There is a certain pathetic
sentence of his, in a letter in later life, which seems to give a certain
amount of confirmation to this idea: "It is a sad thing to have printed
erroneous fact. I have three or four times contradicted and renounced the
passage ... _but I cannot reach those whom I have misled_."

I have mentioned before that Francis Newman returned to his earlier faith
in Christianity a few years before his death.

It remains, therefore, to give the proofs which have been put into my
hands regarding this fact.

Two of his very greatest friends, Anna Swanwick and Dr. Martineau,
received from his own hands the knowledge that he wished it to be known
that he died a Christian. I shall give a quotation from one of Newman's
last letters to the former, from Miss Bruce's _Memoir of Recollections of
Anna Swanwick_. In almost illegible writing, he says:--

"If I live through this year, I hope to effect, by aid of a friend's eyes,
a third ... edition of my _Paul of Tarsus_, with grateful acknowledgment
that, in spite of a few details, I more and more come round to the
substance of the views of my honoured friend, James Martineau. Also I
close by my now sufficient definition of a Christian--'one, who in heart,
and steadily, is a disciple of Jesus in upholding the prayer called the
Lord's Prayer as the highest and purest in any known national religion.' I
think J. M. will approve this."

I should also like to add Miss Bruce's own words in this connection:--

"He" (Newman) "was drawn back at the end of his long life by the sweet
reasonableness and loving sympathy of his friend Anna Swanwick, and the
teaching of Dr. Martineau."

Also these words from a letter written by Anna Swanwick: "It is delightful
to me to think how, when the veil shall have fallen from the eyes of our
friend" (F. W. Newman), "he will love and venerate Him in Whose footsteps
he is unconsciously treading." Yet I must add here that in a letter from
Newman to Anna Swanwick (to which I had access) in 1897, there is no
definite statement of his belief in Immortality. "If God gives me
immortality, I am content. If it pleases Him to annihilate me, it is well.
Let Him do with me as seemeth to Him good."

As regards Dr. Martineau's statement, I quote now from a letter received
by me from Mr. William Tallack, who gave me particulars of a letter
written in 1903, by Mr. W. Garrett Horder, on a meeting he had with Dr.
Martineau:--

"Not more than three or four years before his death I was sitting in an
omnibus at Oxford Circus, when Dr. Martineau, accompanied by his daughter,
got in and took seats by my side. After I had confessed my pleasure at
seeing him, he said, 'I think you ought to know that the other day I had a
letter from Frank Newman saying that, when he died, he wished it to be
known that he died in the Christian faith.'"

To my mind these strong assertions that Newman wished it known that he
"died a Christian," which he wrote to two of his closest friends, speak
for themselves.

There was also another, Rev. J. Temperley Grey, who visited Newman
constantly in his last illness, and who said of his final conversion these
words, in the "In Memoriam" address he gave at Newman's funeral:--

"Of late his" (Newman's) "attitude towards Christ had undergone a great
change. He confessed to me only very recently that for years he had held
on to Christianity by the skirts of S. Paul; 'but now,' he said, 'Paul is
less and less, and Christ is more and more.' He made this statement with
an emphasis and an emotion which conveyed the impression that he wished it
to be regarded as a final testimony."

To those of us who are Christians these are strong words, showing clearly
where, in his last illness and failing strength, he had turned for final
help.

Some have called Francis Newman an atheist. But he was no atheist. A
theist for many years he was: but it was because he was unable to
reconcile certain historical difficulties, or to get rid of certain
earlier Calvinistic tendencies, or to accept certain dogmas which seemed
to him impossible of acceptation, and in this last respect he is certainly
not alone.

Mr. Temperley Grey's testimony to Newman as a fellow townsman, during his
last days at Weston-super-Mare (he died 6th Oct., 1897), shows him to us
as a man who _acted_ to his fellow men, and women, as a Christian should,
although he did not, till near the end, _believe_ as one.

"Without depreciating in the least his illustrious brother, it may truly
be said that while the one was a saint in the cloister, the other was a
saint in the very thick of life's battle. [Footnote: "Henry Newman...
stood for a spiritual Tory; while Francis Newman was a spiritual Radical"
(_Morning Leader_, October, 1897).] ... I would speak of him rather as the
neighbour and townsman who moved to and fro among us ... and whom,
distrusting at first, we ultimately reverenced and loved for his nobility
of character, his simplicity of life, his tenderness of conscience, his
devoutness of spirit, and his generosity of heart.

"Theologically we were far apart, but we were entirely with him in his
enthusiasm for righteousness, his sympathy with downtrodden and oppressed
peoples.... We were with him also in his untiring efforts to secure for
women their rightful place in the shaping of our national life, and in his
splendid protests against the tortures inflicted in the name of science on
the poor, helpless animals, our dumb brothers. To hear the old man
eloquently discourse upon these themes was to be morally uplifted....
Those of us who were admitted into the inner circle of his friends were
profoundly impressed by his devoutness. He lived as in the Presence of
God, and his prayers in the home, so simple, so trustful, so reverential,
were always a means of grace, a real refreshment.

       *       *       *       *       *

"He was a true philanthropist. He championed the cause of the oppressed
everywhere.... A room in his house was set apart as a guest-chamber for
persons needing a change to the seaside, but whose circumstances barred
the way; and not a few were fresh equipped for the work and battle of
life, as a result of his thoughtful hospitality.... Francis Newman stood
by himself in his greatness, his goodness, his simplicity, and we shall
not find his like again.... Above all, our friend was a truth seeker. This
was the ruling passion of his life."

Mrs. Temperley Grey tells me that it was always Newman's first wife's
great hope that her husband should be the means, through his ministrations
during the last part of Newman's life, of leading him back to his original
faith. Mrs. Newman used deeply to regret Newman's lack of definite belief,
but always said when the subject was raised, "Cannot they understand that
my husband is under a cloud--a mist, as it were?" Both the brothers, the
Cardinal and Francis Newman, through the greater part of their lives had
been restlessly searching for truth--for certainty--in their faith.
Calvinism had been the black cloud under which they had both been brought
up. If the _obiter dictum_ of a celebrated Cardinal in the Roman Church be
correct: "Give _me_ the child till he is seven years old, and he will be a
Jesuit all his life," then indeed it shows the tremendous power of habit,
for it was only through much tribulation, through passionate inward
wrestlings with those terrible tenets, and through many searchings of
heart, that either brother made his way out of its toils at length. The
Cardinal sought above all things Truth, through authority; no one will
forget those soul-stirring words of his in his _Apologia pro Vit� Su�_ in
which he speaks of the great peace that at last quieted his doubts and
fears when he was received into the Roman Church. To many of us Authority
_is_ the life-buoy which supports us "o'er crag and torrent till the night
is gone"; but Francis Newman could not believe in it. "Authority is the
bane," he would say, "of religion." He must see with his intellectual
eyes, to be saved. He must see and touch Truth for himself; his
intellectual self must be convinced, or he must stand outside the creeds
he knew--a questioner still.

But he was honest and open in his aloofness. Did it mean loss of a
distinguished brilliant worldly career (as it did at Oxford in 1830)?
Well, then the career _must_ be lost, for he could not bring himself to
sign to doctrines which he did not believe. Did it mean unpopularity, that
he held certain views on Social Reform? Well, rather than compromise,
rather than temporize, he _would_ stand out alone rather than yield an
iota of what he held to be the true Progressive Aims for People and Land.
Only--and this was a flaw, and no small one either--he often wrote his
religious opinions so openly as to pain his readers. In many of his
letters which I have read there are expressions relating to the religious
dogmas held by his correspondents which are bluntly, unrestrainedly,
bitterly used. It is true that often, at the close of a letter, there
follows a hope that he had not hurt his friends' feelings; but that he
must, at all costs, be open as to his own beliefs. But that apology only
came as an after-thought, as it were as an attempt to dress the wound
which he himself had made, and is quite unable to do away with the
impression produced by the written word. _Litera scripta manet_.

In writing on "The National Church" thirty-three years after he had
refused to sign the Thirty-nine Articles, he said, with emphasis,
"Truthfulness of the _individual_ man is essential to moral worth; but for
this very reason the _system_ of the Church must be lax in order to allow
truthfulness to individuals." This is curious reasoning, and subversive of
the idea of Unity. Still, as no one can deny that as Life implies
Progression, so as regards the Churches, the inspired words that they
should be "led into all truth" surely allow for progression also into
higher regions of knowledge and methods of teaching. To allow for this
spirit of progression Newman held that a State Church should not be tied
down to fixed conditions. "No general Church system will go so far as the
foremost minds.... All the moderate and wisest historians of the Anglican
Church have extolled its foundations. They have judged that, take it as a
whole, the Reformation went as far as the collective nation was then able
to go." That it "was necessary to reform it in the sixteenth century in
order to harmonize it with the higher intelligence of the best minds, so
far as could be done without making it useless to the inferior minds." All
this has a certain truth, but when all is said, the fact forces itself
upon one that after all it is a matter for debate whether the Reformation
was a "progressive" movement at all: whether it did not in reality delay
progression. For it is well known to-day that it was really managed by the
machinations of one of the most selfish and unprincipled of kings
[Footnote: Whose conduct at this time largely hinged on the refusal of the
Pope to grant him his wished-for divorce from Katherine.]--who was only
progressive in the matter of wives--and by his ministers, who were, many
of them, men of vile characters and greed. As to motive, it is very patent
to-day what _that_ was. It was that of the man who covets his neighbour's
goods, i.e. the lands and moneys of the monasteries and churches, and who
whitewashes his sin when his desire is satisfied. There is besides
sufficient proof to-day that the great bulk of the unrepresented nation
did _not_ regard this act of wholesale robbery as "lawful and necessary,"
nor that it "harmonized" the Church "with the higher intelligence of the
best minds."

To the end of his life (from his Oxford days to his death), of course,
Newman was never greatly in sympathy with the Anglican Church. He did not,
even at the end, own himself bound by her dogmas or obedient to her
conditions. To go further into the question is, I think, not desirable
here. It is enough to say that though _he was outside the visible Church_,
yet he was, in life and spirit, "not far off". As was said of Stanley, "he
believed more than he knew." His "life was in the right," though his
doubts and rationalism led him into unbeliefs, which only at the close of
his long life he renounced. And he had a far deeper longing for religious
truth than have many conventional Churchmen.




CHAPTER XIX

LAST YEARS, CHARACTERISTICS, AND SOME LETTERS RELATING TO THE _EARLY LIFE
OF THE CARDINAL_


It will be remembered that Francis Newman retired from his official duties
at University College in 1863, with the title Emeritus Professor. As most
of us are aware, this word "Emeritus" was originally given to Roman
soldiers who had served out their term and been discharged, on the
understanding of being given a settled sum of money which was practically
the equivalent of our English half-pay. The term is now used to designate
a professor who has been "honourably relieved" of his office, either
because of physical disability or on account of a term of long service
fulfilled. It is, in effect, a retiring pension.

As will have been seen by letters from Newman which precede this chapter,
he retired from the office of Professor, but in no sense from his work of
writing, studying, and lecturing. The enormous number of books published
will testify to this. His five volumes of _Miscellanies_, his
_Reminiscences of Two Exiles, Europe of the Near Future_, translation of
the _Odes of Horace_, [Footnote: Which did not meet with the approval of
Matthew Arnold.] _Handbook and Dictionary of Modern Arabic, Kabail
Vocabulary, Libyan Vocabulary, Text of the Iguvine Inscriptions, Christian
Commonwealth, History of the Hebrew Monarchy, Hebrew Theism, Early Life of
Cardinal Newman, Anglo-Saxon Abolition of Negro Slavery_, not to mention
many others, alone show how writing largely filled his days and occupied
his mind.

Besides all this work, however, he was for ever interesting himself in any
cause or society which applied to him for help, or seemed in any way to
need a champion. Indeed, as Mr. Hornblower Gill says of him, "Scholar,
translator, mathematician, historian, political economist, political
philosopher, moralist, theologian, philanthropist, he was the most copious
and various writer of his time."

For a great many years before he died Newman lived at Weston-super-Mare.
But two years before his death, in October, 1897, when he was ninety-two
years of age, he found himself, partly owing to senile decay and partly
owing to a bad fall he had had in the spring of the year, and also to loss
of eyesight, unable to take part in public affairs any longer, nor yet to
write as he had been used to do.

The unpublished article on "Land Nationalization" (which is printed in
this volume) came into the hands of Mr. William Jameson (to whose kindness
I am indebted for it) in 1886, at which time he was Hon. Secretary of the
Land Nationalization Society, and Francis Newman, Vice-President.

Mr. Jameson, at the time of sending me the article, wrote me a letter from
which I shall here quote those parts relating to his friendship with
Newman. He says, speaking of their first meeting: "There was an instant
fellowship that endears his memory to me. I was then about thirty-five,
and he past eighty. There was a quiet dignity in his manner, but no
suggestion of _old age_."

One little anecdote may be of interest.

"We left a rather stormy committee meeting together, over which Professor
Newman had presided. The _storm_ was due to one member who had a grievance
against some others. Speaking of the pity of this, Professor Newman said
to me, 'You know how very strongly my brother and myself differ in
opinion; yet this has never created the _slightest personal discord_....'"

Several years later. Professor Newman wrote Mr. Jameson a letter (on
finding out that he was suffering from overwork and the fear of subsequent
breakdown), saying these strong words of sympathy: "I charge you to give
it up. Save yourself for the years to come." He went on to say that a
friend of his own had kept working on for some cherished cause at the cost
of much mental pressure, and had ended his days in a lunatic asylum. Mr.
Jameson adds that Newman's words of counsel have often and often rung in
his ears since they were first said to him, and he attributes to the fact
that he obeyed them, his having been saved from a physical breakdown.

"Save yourself for the years to come" is a counsel which we, who are
workers, are so often in danger of forgetting. Except in extreme youth,
most men and women live far more in the present and in the past than they
do in the future which lies before them, so largely to be carved into
shape by their Present.

In April, 1887, Sir Samuel Walker Griffith, G.C.M.G., Chief Justice of
Queensland since 1893, Secretary for Public Instruction, Attorney-General
from 1874-8, 1890-3, Premier of Queensland from 1883-8, and 1890-3, was
over in England, and Francis Newman was to have been introduced by Mrs.
Bucknall (mother of Mrs. Bainsmith, the distinguished sculptor [Footnote:
Mrs. Georgina Bainsmith, F.N.B.A., member of the Royal Society of Arts,
and of the Honorary Council of the North British Academy.] to whom I am
indebted for the photo in this book of her bust of Francis Newman, which
now stands in University College, London) to Sir Samuel, at the latter's
own special desire. Unfortunately, Newman was unable to go with Mrs.
Bucknall to Sir Samuel Griffith's house, and this is his letter (kindly
lent me, with Sir Samuel Griffith's reply, by Mrs. Bucknall).


"Dear Mrs. Bucknall,

"Since you tell me that time presses, I have no way but to give up to you
my private copy of (_my_) Christian Commonwealth, which I now send you.
Very sorry I am that I could not accompany you on Sunday to Sir Samuel
Griffith's, but learning from you how graciously such a visitor from the
Antipodes expressed his desire to meet me, I am really sorry that I was
not able in person to attest my deep reverence and admiration as well as
affection for Mrs. Butler, and my conviction that only moral and spiritual
influences can quell the demon of impurity, while the _despair_ which
tries to keep it within limits by moderation and indulging it, is a folly
and an infatuation, especially when coupled with police licenses and
police espionage. Our ladies since 1869 have learned to detest the
despotic police and the despotic doctor with an intensity which time ever
increases.

"They must conquer at last: the sole question is,--after how much more
moral damage to young men and women, and how much mental agony to our
Christian martyrs.

"Our young men happily are joining this crusade. Alas, for those who mean
to be Christian, and do not know the elements of Christian sentiment.
[Footnote: See "Marriage Laws" (1867), "State Provision for Vice" (1869),
and "Remedies for the Great Social Evil" (1869), in Vol. III of F. W.
Newman's _Miscellanies_.]

"I look to you to apologize for me to Sir S. G, for offering to him a book
written by me... one which my pen has defaced....

"Most truly yours,

"F. W. Newman.
"Weston-s.-M., _19th April_, 1887."


This is Sir Samuel Griffith's answer:--


"Brown's Hotel,
"Dover Street, W.,
"_21st April_, 1887.

"Dear Mrs. Bucknall,

"Accept my best thanks for Professor Newman's writings on the _Christian
Commonwealth_ and the _New Crusade_. I really feel ashamed to deprive you
of the latter, and Professor Newman of the former, but it would be most
ungracious of me to refuse to accept them.

"Pray assure him that the value of the copy of the _Christian
Commonwealth_ is to be much enhanced by the fact that it bears his
autograph notes, and that I feel deeply honoured by the terms in which he
has been good enough to express himself in his note to you, which I have
read with great interest and which I enclose. I shall always regret that I
had not the honour and pleasure of meeting him at Weston, but my time was
too short....

"Believe me,
"Yours very faithfully,

"S. W. Griffith."


Mr. and Mrs. Frederick Pennington were great friends of Newman's, and he
often stayed with them from time to time. By the kindness of Mrs.
Pennington I am able to quote from some letters written by him in 1881-90,
and one much earlier, in 1875, in which he laments the death of Mrs.
Blackburn. Mrs. Blackburn was a sister of Mr. Pennington's, and one of the
most munificent of contributors to the United Kingdom Alliance in its
early days, who (I am told by Mrs. Pennington) often denied herself many
luxuries in order to be able to make her contributions larger. She
describes her as one of the best women she had ever known.

Newman, in his letter to Mr. Pennington in 1875, says of Mrs. Blackburn:--

"I have known her ever since Michaelmas 1869, when the revelation was
first made to us of the Contagious Diseases Act; and at the Congress of
Social Science at Bristol she was pleased to receive my hospitality. My
esteem for her was great and ever increasing...."

He goes on to say that his dread of cold and chills makes him fear a long
journey, "though it is mortifying to me not to meet you and Mrs.
Pennington, and many other earnest friends of this very important cause."

In 1881 Gladstone was Prime Minister, and stayed in office for five years.
For almost the whole of this time the country was hardly ever at peace.
The Transvaal rebellion was started in 1880 and later our own troops were
defeated by the insurrectionists; whereupon the Government promptly
surrendered the Transvaal.

About this time Newman writes to Mrs. Pennington:

"_I am not a member of Cambridge University, nor indeed of Oxford
University since 1830. If I had kept my name on the book, I should have
paid �6 a year, if I remember; that is, �300 in these fifty years; and as
I never took my M.A. degree (because of the 39 Articles), I should even
then have no vote.

"I now act on the fixed rule _not to take any long journey in the winter
months_, except from real duty. Experience guides me, and I refuse even
pressure from very friendly quarters.... I am melancholy about this
Cabinet and Mr. Gladstone, and ashamed to be an Englishman. All comes to
me like a domestic calamity. And Parliament is so overworked that
_English_ misrule cannot be corrected. I look on _Ministers in the House_
as nearly our worst nuisance. But I must not begin on our defective and
evil institutions...."

Then in 1890 the letters begin more and more to show a change in his
handwriting. He no longer wrote in his original firm, clear style, but in
a crabbed, cramped manner. His words now were often difficult to decipher,
and the letters of the words very shaky and undecided, bearing witness
very plainly of the trembling hand of Age. After mentioning the immense
number of letters which he had to answer, and how the trouble of replying
was almost beyond his strength, he says, "The sister-like affection of my
honoured friend Anna Swanwick has ... again and again won me to London;...
but the place seems never to agree with me. Partly the whirl by night and
day, I suppose, is my bane; still more, the endless meeting of fresh and
fresh small talk, with the fatigue of _listening_, and the impression on
my brain of miscellaneous memories when I ought to sleep. In Oxford, from
like causes, I became as it were 'daft,' and from forgetfulness of the
right words could not complete an English sentence. A like affection came
on me in London last summer, and I had to break away suddenly, to the
disappointment of friends, because my own sense of _idiotcy_ was
unbearable. Rest and sleep sufficed to restore me when I reached home. The
inability to get out the right word, if (for instance) _suddenly_ asked
'to what station I am going,' is enough to make me seem insane or half
asleep.... I am increasingly aware that my _brain_ is my weakest part....
On the whole I am healthy, and agile in all movement as are few men of my
age (two doctors fancy that _all_ men of eighty-five have pulses as
_disorderly_ as mine!)...."

[Illustration: CARDINAL NEWMAN
FROM AN OIL PAINTING BY MISS DEANE, OF BATH.
PHOTO BY MESSRS. WEBSTER, CLAPHAM COMMON]

As regards the work on the _Early Life of the Cardinal_, which was
published at this time, he says:--

"I am (_under a sense of duty_) writing concerning the late Cardinal quite
a different side of his character from that which for fifty years the
public have heard. I knew him as eminently generous as to money, but so
fanatical as to embarrass judgment of his character. Another weakness I
confess and _lament_. I can write large. I begin everything with
resolution so to write. But as soon as I think only of the substance, and
forget the manner, my writing so dwindles that I can hardly read it
myself. I suppose that weakness of the fingers is the cause. I see how
deficient they are of flesh."

In September, 1890, he wrote the following letters to Rev. J. K. Tucker,
Rector of Pettaugh, Suffolk, who was an old friend of Newman's, and to Mr.
John Henry Tucker, [Footnote: Which have been kindly lent me by Mr. John
Warren.] from which I make quotations:--

"Ever since my brother's death (Cardinal J. H. N.) I am overwhelmed with
letters, and now am writing more and longer every day than my fingers can
well manage, for publishers eager for my MS."

And again in October of the same year:--

"I am about to send to my publishers my _painful_ contribution to the life
of the late Cardinal, my brother. I am conscientiously bound to write it,
because in his _fifty_ years' absence from the sight of the public a new
generation has grown up ignorant of the facts, and the attempt is already
begun to puff them off for their beauty of style..,. My age being eighty-
five, I know the truths, and must tell them. I shall be howled at as
_unbrotherly_. My immediate business now is to write to numbers of
correspondents of whom you are one, whom I have necessarily neglected
while engaged in the most anxious work I have ever undertaken...."

As regards this book to which he alludes, his _Early Life of Cardinal
Newman_, everyone feels that in some sense it belittles the writer. For
there was no real need of any sort that he should have written it. From
one brother to another, such an "early history" was, from some points of
view, a disloyalty--and a disloyalty not altogether free from embittered
personal feeling.

Was there no personal feeling roused in the lives of the two men? For the
younger was practically overshadowed by the elder. It was the elder one to
whom the world kotow-ed. It was the elder who---though the younger was so
strikingly intellectual, and so strong a social reformer in many ways--
carried the world's laurels, and who was finally given the "splendid
funeral" to which Francis Newman takes exception. And there was another
reason too, which I believe exercised a strong sway over his feelings to
his brother in early youth, and brought into play, though perhaps
unrecognized by himself, the quality of emulation, followed by keen
disappointment, when failure, as regarded that incident, fell to his
share. Be that as it may, it is impossible to justify Francis Newman's
writing thus of his brother, in the "early history" to which I refer. Not
even his keen desire for truth, which some declare to have been his motive
power in the matter, accounted for it.

"I should vastly have preferred entire oblivion of him" (of the Cardinal),
"and his writings of the first forty years, but that is impossible. In the
cause of Protestants and Protestantism, I feel bound to write, however
painful to myself, as simply as if my topic were an old Greek or Latin
one." Later on he says, "I have _tried_ to cherish for him a sort of
_filial_ sentiment," but "we seemed never to have an interest nor a wish
in common." [Footnote: J. H. Newman once in speaking of his brother, said,
"Much as we love each other, neither would like to be mistaken for the
other." A sentence which seems to contain more meanings than one!] Perhaps
no words could more absolutely convey the lack of sympathy between the
brothers, than do these. "I have _tried_ to cherish for him a sort of
filial sentiment!" showing as it does, only too evidently, that there was
no spontaneity of affection between them. The only voice that called each
to each was that of old childish association and duty. Francis Newman
could not be accused of seeking personal distinction or fame for itself;
witness his giving up a very promising career at home in order to go on
his missionary journey to Syria. Witness also his open denunciation of
many existing State abuses. Witness his unceasing crusades against the
stronger party (whatever it might be), which, in his opinion, oppressed
and wronged the weaker section of the community, unable of themselves to
obtain justice and a hearing at the court of English public opinion.

All the more, then, is it difficult to explain away sentences such as
these, which seem to proceed from such an absolutely different personality
than was Frank Newman's; and yet the man who reads his memoirs of his
brother finds them almost on every page, and cannot understand their
presence there.

"The existing generation has seen him" (he is alluding to the Cardinal),
"through a mist; and if my simple statement anywhere clears away that
mist, they may almost resent my truth-speaking as an impiety." As indeed
they did--and do. Some of his own friends, indeed, urged him not to
publish the book, but he was obdurate.

"In my rising manhood I received inestimable benefits from this (my
eldest) brother.... He supported me, not out of his abundance, but when he
knew not whence weekly and daily funds were to come.... Yet a most painful
breach ... broke in on me in my nineteenth year and _was unhealable_."
This was, of course, when Francis had been at college two years, for in
those days men very often went at the age of sixteen, as he did.

But the entries of 1822 and 1823, which last would be for Francis his
"nineteenth year," give no clue to the "painful breach" which "was
_unhealable_"

Yet the fact that religious differences did begin between the two brothers
very early in life has been proved beyond all question. Proved also is it
that religious discussions were of constant occurrence between them, and
that while J. H. Newman had always a strange leaning to Churchmanship,
Frank Newman's religious tendencies drew him strongly towards dissent and
Unitarianism.

I think the latter mentions in his _Phases of Faith_ that when he first
came to college he found his brother had hung up a picture of Our Lady in
his younger brother's room, which he at once removed, and refused to have
on the walls.

The following letter is to Rev. J. K. Tucker; in it he describes himself
as a "Conscious Christian" "at the age of fourteen." But he has often
described himself as holding Christianity _without_ Christ:--

"I hold firmly in memory, that in Easter of 1836 I wished to conduct my
_bride_ to Oxford, and introduce her there to my mother and two sisters--
in those Coaching days we came from Bristol and Cheltenham en route to
Oxford. _I_ did not plan the thought of staying a night at your father's
house, in which I suppose _you and your wife_ were living. No doubt the
scheme was planned _by my wife_ to meet _her friend_. The winter of our
marriage had been one of wild snow; and the following Easter was alike
untimely. I just remember the fact of your kind hospitality fifty-four and
a half years ago, and the snow around us. In that visit to my mother (the
last time I saw her), my young wife caught inflammation of the lungs,
which I did not perceive or understand--she was so cruelly bled and
cupped, that I think she never recovered it.

"It is very kind of you to keep alive in your heart the friendship of the
two ladies. I perhaps ought to state that about two and a half years after
the death of that wife in 1876 I married her ... friend.... Else I must
have given up housekeeping, and know not into what family I could have
gone. My second wife is nineteen years my junior, yet in walking, not at
all my equal, but in affectionate care of me inestimable."

In June, 1892, he writes to J. H. Tucker, Esq.:--"I have not heard whether
your father, like me, is favoured by life continued, but I venture to send
a copy of my hymns.... To-day I have received a letter and book in
_Bengali_ from a believer in _Theosophy_, supposing me to be one of them!
Hence, I was not too early in telling my friends that since _at the age of
fourteen_ I became a Conscious Christian, no unbelief has made my hymns
less precious, _mutato saltem nomine_.... My change more than fifty years
ago was on Historical arguments mainly."

To return to the subject of Newman's last years at Weston-super-Mare.
Perhaps the most graphic descriptions of him as an old man are those
contributed as "Reminiscences" by Mrs. Kingsley-Tarpey and Mrs. Bainsmith.
We know him there as a man who, though hardly ever free from some
discomfort or pain in those days, yet never failed in that old-world
courtesy of which, alas! there is so poor a supply in the world at the
present day.

We know him as a man who was always eager to help those who came to him in
trouble or in any difficulty; nay, perhaps almost _too_ ready to believe a
cock-and-bull story of those who did not mind, for their own ends,
practising on his credulity.

A lady, a relation of the Newmans', said that once on coming to stay with
him and Mrs. Newman, she found a secretary in his study smelling strongly
of brandy. When the secretary went out of the room, Frank Newman drew
their guest aside and said, "Ah, yes, it's a sad case, poor fellow! He's
getting away from the temptation of the public-houses."

But when later the secretary's rooms were searched, there were found
numbers of brandy bottles hidden away, to prove that he evidently had
_not_ "escaped from temptation"! This lady said also that when Newman was
old people not infrequently deceived him thus, and traded on his
temperance views, and that he had had _two_ secretaries who obtained their
post on false pretences.

To conclude this chapter I should like to give one striking instance of
his tender sympathy and respect for the poor and lonely. A poor charwoman
had died at Weston-super-Mare who had, I believe, often worked in Newman's
house. He found that she had no friends to follow her body to the grave,
and so he himself, his wife and servants, walked to the funeral as
mourners to show her a last respect. It is the Idea represented by his act
which makes it serve as an unforgettable and very uncommon illustration of
a championship of those unlucky ones who have few or none to champion
them.

Could any act speak clearer of the unfailing respect and reverence for
women which distinguished Francis Newman through life? Though all others
should see the lonely funeral, there should be but the one Good Samaritan
who crossed over the road of ordinary, usual, Conventionalities to show by
his act that he recognized that class and position count for nothing
before the fact of the Universal Brotherhood of Humanity and Religion.




CHAPTER XX

TOULMIN SMITH: AUTHOR, ANTIQUARIAN STUDENT, AND POLITICAL REFORMER


Among the names of those who have done most, by untiring, laborious search
among old parish registers, etc., and dusty old records, to bring to light
interesting social ordinances, details of ancient parish government, and
gems of Norse literature and archaeological research, there have been none
in the last century who have by patient work attained more knowledge of
their country's inner history than Mr. Toulmin Smith.

His name is indeed familiar to everyone as the greatest living authority
on "English Gilds." That book alone, by itself, is an invaluable gift to
the nation. By that alone has he done so signal a service to his
countrymen that no gratitude could repay it.

It is true that, owing to ill-health, Mr. Toulmin Smith unavoidably left
it unfinished at his death, but there is sufficient fulness of information
in it as it is, to make it worth more than an infinity of other finished
books of to-day.

As Father Gasquet says in his _Parish Life in Medieval England_, of the
universality of these "gilds" in this country: "Every account of a
medieval parish must necessarily include some description of the work of
fraternities and guilds.... Their existence dates from the earliest
times." Mr. Toulmin Smith, indeed, says, "English Guilds are older than
any kings of England.... They were associations of those living in the
same neighbourhood, who remembered that they had, as neighbours, common
obligations." But it was not only because of his _English Gilds_ that he
is remembered. In 1854, when he was thirty-eight years of age, he
published another very important volume, _The Parish: its Obligations and
Powers, its Officers and their Duties_. This was also a book towards the
making of which had gone many long years of the most incessant, careful
research in old documents. It was one of those rare literary buildings,
each stone of which was laid with infinite exactitude and care. There is
too much "jerry-building" to-day, both in houses and books.

To Mr. Toulmin Smith some of the shallow books of to-day would represent
literary "pariahs." He would bar the very superficial method in which they
were put together.

In _The Parish_ and in many a pamphlet he set his face steadily against
centralization. "The ruling passion, the guide of his life, the dream of
his youth, the glory of his manhood and his later years, was the
intelligent freedom of the people, based on 'the ancient ways.'"
[Footnote: _Toulmin Smith, 1816 to 1869_, by the late Samuel Timmins,
Esq., of Birmingham. From this pamphlet I have gained much information of
his life.]

It is not difficult to understand how the friendship between Toulmin Smith
and Frank Newman began. For the decentralization of the nation, better
forms of local self-government, were also, each of them, a dream of the
latter's, which he longed eagerly to see realized. There was another keen
common interest between them. Both ardently desired the freedom of
Hungary. Both wrote strongly in favour of it. Both warmly welcomed the
exiled patriot, Louis Kossuth, when he came to England to collect funds
for the revolutionary movement of his country. But long before Englishmen
had made themselves _au fait_ with the subject of the Hungarian revolt,
Toulmin Smith had, in his literary studies, understood the why and
wherefore of the quarrel, and had, by his words, roused his country to the
true recognition of how urgent was the whole question between Austria and
Hungary. It must not be forgotten, too, that all his labours amongst the
tangled undergrowths of the literary land were undertaken in the leisure
time he could spare from his profession. For he was barrister-at-law of
Lincoln's Inn, and he was also a landowner in Birmingham (his native
city), of property which had belonged to his ancestors in succession for
five hundred years. He had made himself a proficient in the Icelandic,
Danish, Norse languages, and was learned in the ancient history and
politics of Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Iceland, and Scandinavia. [Footnote:
I quote from the pamphlet on _Toulmin Smith_, referred to before.]

Mr. Timmins tells us that "while he maintained his own convictions with
energy and power, he had a kindly regard for all who differed from him, a
large appreciation of genuine humour, and he was in private life one of
the most courteous, kindly, and genial of men. While he honoured the past
and the memory of his fathers, he was no blind adherent of a falling
cause, no obstinate opponent of the needful changes of the age.... Amid
all the worry of a London lawyer's life, when far away in the United
States and stricken down by 'grievous illness,' almost his last written
words, 'I _long_ to return to Birmingham,' express the passion of his
life."

The friendship between Toulmin Smith and Newman probably began in 1849, in
connection with the formation of the Hungarian Committee. This I am told
by Miss Toulmin Smith, to whose kindness I am indebted for permission to
use the following letters.

She believes that her father was introduced to Newman by Mr. John Edward
Taylor (of Norwich). She says she has a keen memory of Francis Newman
coming to her father's house at Highgate at that time, with Pulszky and
other Hungarians, all eager in the "efforts for reform and constitutional
freedom and local government." But later on, she adds, many difficulties
arose, and "about 1852 something connected with Louis Kossuth" (and the
Hungarian movement) "caused a coolness" between the friends, and their
correspondence seems to have come to an end after September in that year.
Newman, owing to his University College engagements probably, I think
retired from his position on the Committee in October, 1849.


_Francis Newman to Toulmin Smith._

"University College, Gower Street,
"_8th Jan._, 1850.

"My dear Sir,

"I rejoice in your ward-mote exertions, and I beg you will not think that
I am indifferent to them."

[This refers to "a series of meetings during the winter of 1849-50 in one
of the Wards of the City of London; part of a movement endeavouring to
rouse the citizens to a sense of civic local duties."] [Footnote: I am
quoting from notes _re_ these letters, kindly supplied by Miss Toulmin
Smith.]

"On Wednesday I have to attend a meeting of our Professors here which will
interfere with the Wardmote.... I exceedingly want presence of mind, if
there is any tumult, so as to remember quickly enough what is to be said.
Against a mob I could _act_ with firmness, but I could not speak with
promptitude. Moreover, I suffer physically from the air of a crowded room,
and never go to _hear_ a speech when there is a chance of my being able to
_read_ it."


The next letter I quote from is dated from Church Street, Old Eastbourne,
August, 1850. It begins with questions of canvassing at University
College, and goes on to touch on the subject about which he and his
correspondent were at one: local land reform:--


"I have been here less than a week, but was at first unsettled, and my
servant did not know whither to send my letters. It is fine air, rather
bleak downs" (this is an unappreciative criticism of those exquisitely
rounded outlines), "but with sunny days very pleasant and healthy.

"I am glad to hear of your Bristol excursion. If one could convert some
sheriff of a county, I should like to see the thing tested in some
practical form, i.e. to assemble every month a Parliament of County
Freeholders to do some real work--as, if roads, or public lands, or docks,
etc., were to be dealt with; or to protest against a Private Bill in
Parliament, and claim to have the settling of it.

"I wish you knew Tom Taylor. He is an able man, desiring Reform, and is on
the Public Health Board in some legal capacity. He heartily wishes to
develop the local powers, and will not admit that they are practically
undermining them. He fully assented to all I said in theory, but thought I
misconceived what they were actually doing.

"Believe me, sincerely yours,

"F. W. Newman."


Tom Taylor, journalist and playwriter, was born 1817 in Sunderland. For
two years he was Professor of the English language and literature at
University College. He was called to the Bar of Inner Temple in 1845. He
acted as Secretary to the Board of Health and Local Government Act Office.
After the year 1846 he devoted himself chiefly to playwriting, and in 1874
was editing _Punch_.

The following letter is dated September, 1850:--

       *       *       *       *       *

"It is not Tom Taylor only who honestly believes the Sanitary Board to be
engaged in teaching Central and Local Powers to _co-operate_, and to be
anxious to leave _bon� fide_ power of the most important kind to the
localities. Only a few days ago a friend of mine (a physician) was proving
to me this very point in them. We who are not lawyers do not understand
points rapidly enough (or cannot remember them) to see where a great
principle is violated.

"I do not care about the Sanitary Board _per se_ ... but what I think you
are most wanted to do is to show that, however much the Parliamentary
franchise needs reform, yet a _greater_ need is that of limiting the
functions of Parliament, and giving them to County Assemblies or Town
Motes.

"That word _Mote_ is almost obsolete! May not the fact itself be a text to
you? The modern substitute, 'meeting,' has no taxing powers, no legal
officers, no constitutional power any more than a mob.... The sands of the
Whigs run fast out, and it is high time for the Radicals to have a creed.
Do you find any Chartists listen to you? If you cannot convert a Sheriff,
I should be as well pleased with a hundred Chartists, for they learn from
one another by contagion."


In this year there was put forward a project for a society to make more
local government possible. This was later carried out under the name of
the "Anti-Centralization Union."

In November, 1850, decentralization was again to the fore in the minds of
Newman and Toulmin Smith, as is shown here; and what the former says he
puts very trenchantly, forcibly:--


"7 Park Village East,
"R.P., _Oct. 16th_, 1850.

"My dear Smith,

       *       *       *       *       *

"I can speak with much freedom and energy (but no _wit_) on a subject on
which I have information and feel interested: but I cannot make an after-
dinner speech of compliment, nor talk on a subject which I do not feel I
have very maturely considered.... In regard to _local government_, I think
you would disarm the fears or scruples of many excellent and wise persons
if you made prominent that you do not wish to return to the Middle Ages,
or disown that progress of society which has knit England into a single
State. I think it high time to make an outcry against a system of infinite
legislation, in which we are subjected to laws too numerous for anyone to
be acquainted with; yet I doubt whether we shall get a hearing with the
most influential minds unless we make it clear that we fully understand
that the progress of society forbids our returning to the simplicity of
law which the good Saxons had under Alfred and his successors. The gap is
vast, and there is _no danger whatever_ of our becoming too simple; yet
this fanatical aim will be so surely imputed to us (in days when such men
as Lord John Manners in Politics and the Puseyites in Church are afloat)
that it is not needless to disown it even to candid and strong-headed
hearers.

"I am asking Froude to dine with me on Tuesday, the 29th instant, at 6
o'clock, to meet you and _some other friends_ whom I want to bring
together: as I believe he will then be in London....

"_Thursday, 6 o'clock_.--I have just got Froude's reply, _Yes_: so please
to say Yes, too.

"In haste, sincerely yours,

"F. W. Newman."


As to the real meaning of the word "Democracy" Newman deals with it
thus:--

"_What is_ Democracy?... Show that if one town governs itself by universal
suffrage, that _is_ Democracy, so long as the people really exercise
interest in their public concerns; but that if a whole country, as France,
elects an Assembly, that is _not_ Democracy, but Empire delegated to an
Oligarchy, because the people at large cannot understand, follow, and
control public measures.

"I do not mean to dictate this, or any one mode; but I feel strongly that
you must put a sharp curb on all invective _until_ you have fully
developed the difference between the common Radicalism and your own views.
Pulszky says he is satisfied you were not _understood_ at the Radley Hotel
dinner. Radicals are almost as slow as Tories to admit a new thought.

"I should also like to have the question brought out: 'What has been,
historically, the Service performed by Monarchy and Centralization?' The
answer is: 'It has formed nations into larger masses, and lessened or
destroyed _border war_.' The inference is, that the great and peculiar
function of the Central Government is, in fact, what the American Congress
does, viz. to maintain peace at home between the several States, and make
the country _One_ in resisting hostile attack. To do more than this,
should be rather exceptive, and confined to subordinate matters, else
Centralization becomes mischievous...."

And again, later in the year, in answer to a letter from Mr. Toulmin
Smith:--

"What I said of 'Democracy' was meant as _argumentum ad hominem_ to that
side, not as intending to identify myself with it, but I see the danger
you speak of. Query: Would 'popular government' do? Even Conservatives
wish for a Commonwealth and for _Constitutional_ Government. No doubt
_Unity_ is the true word, not Centralization; but I think this Unity
without Centralization would never have been coveted by kings, so that in
fact we have bought the advantage of Unity at the expense of submitting to
(more or less of) Centralization."

Twelve years later, John Ruskin put forth a method which cannot fail to
commend itself to every reasonable mind; a method which, if treated from
the decentralization point of view, seems to offer good solution to the
crux of English pauperism, at any rate, if dealt with under the aegis of
_Local_ government. That "_bona fide power of the most important kind to
the localities" as Newman said, should be conceded; that the "Government
schools" of which Ruskin speaks should, in each place, be directly under
Local Control.

The passage to which I am alluding is from _Unto this Last_:--

"Any man, or woman, or boy, or girl out of employment should be at once
received at the nearest Government School" (training schools, at which
trades, etc., should be taught) "and set to such work as it appeared, on
trial, they were fit for, at a fixed rate of wages determinable every
year; that being found incapable of work through ignorance, they should be
taught; or being found incapable of work through sickness, should be
tended; but that being found objecting to work, they should be set, under
compulsion of the strictest nature, to the more painful and degrading (?)
forms of necessary toil; especially to that in mines, and other places of
danger (such danger being, however, diminished to the utmost by careful
regulation and discipline), and the due wages of such work retained, cost
of compulsion first abstracted, to be at the workman's command so soon as
he has come to sounder mind respecting the laws of employment."


LETTERS TO MRS. KINGSLEY

"Weston-super-Mare,
"_4th Nov._, 1877.

"Dear Mrs. Kingsley,

"I hurried home from Manchester to meet an expected widow friend here, who
has just left me. Somehow or other she and her little girl engrossed me
much, and made me neglect my intended warm thanks for your very kind
letters, and for your phrases even of affection, to which, be assured, I
am not inattentive or apathetic, though I imperfectly know how to respond
to that which I do not seem to have duly earned.

"Your children were as kind and attentive to me as you could have been
yourself; but I much regret not to have met you and Mr. Kingsley, to whom
I beg you to give my kind regards, and believe that it is always a
pleasure to meet you, and that I am necessarily proud of having made so
_fruitful_ a convert ... though our severe ones will remind me that you do
not wholly abstain from fish!

"Believe me, yours heartily,

"Francis W. Newman.

"I am bringing out a _dreadful_ pamphlet!"


"28 Cumberland Terrace,
"Regent's Park, London,
"_25th May_, 1878.

"Dear Mrs. Kingsley,

"Concerning the controversy about increase of population, I forgot to add
what I think has moral weight, that the theory which makes men bewail
every increase on the ground that _at length_ the earth will be overfilled
would be in argument just as powerful if the size of the earth were
increased to that of Jupiter, or to that of the sun. It simply deduces
from the axiom / _fact_ that any finite area whatsoever will at length be
overfilled by a constant unchecked increase--a reason why we should
actively check the increase NOW and HERE--a deduction wholly void of good
sense.

"Again, I did not mention what reduces John Mill's school to something
worse than negative error, the certainty that their doctrine will not be
obeyed by any but those whom we would desire to have the peopling of the
earth, viz. the people of most intellect. If the highly intelligent and
conscientious obey John Mill, we evidently must look forward to the
peopling of every land by the most backward and least intelligent part of
the nation.... Malthus was shocked by the system of encouraging very early
marriage and large families for the mere sake of getting men as food for
gunpowder: but if people marry (say young men at 27 or 28, not at 17 or
18) he denounces as unnatural and unimaginable that society or law should
frown upon a family as being too numerous. In every moral aspect of the
case, John Mill is opposed to Malthus, and his followers have no right to
call themselves Malthusians. I feel confident that human population would
waste _if_ every man adopted the doctrine _either_ of John Mill _or_ of
certain American theorists....

"With best regards to all yours,
"I am, yours most sincerely,

"F. W. Newman."


"15 Arundel Crescent,
"Weston-super-Mare,
"_12th Feb_., 1880.

"Dear Mrs. Kingsley,

"Your kind letter, yesterday received, gives me great concern. I never
wept through simple grief, but once in my life through grief at
ingratitude; and I think I never felt so painful a pang in my heart. I can
well imagine that a sense of another's ingratitude may terribly overthrow
anyone's health. I believe my dear sister, whose death you so kindly
mention, suffered _in part_ from excess of anxiety through being made
executrix to her husband's will, involving great perplexity, but _also_
from the fraud of an old and trusted clerk. Her husband had several small
strokes of paralysis, and for two and a half years before his death
probably had not his mind always perfect. He delegated many confidential
writings and documents to the clerk, who with his wife was much respected
by the whole family. After his death his accounts were inexplicable. Three
of his sons worked hard at them for weeks together, and at last discovered
frauds, by which the clerk had not only embezzled money-how much they know
not, but counted above the thousand-and had depreciated the property in
selling it by representing it as having been for years a declining
business: this was to hide his pilferings. When charged with it, the man
_became raving mad_. Lawyers knew not how to recover property from a
maniac who could not defend himself: and my sister was in such grief for
the man's wife, that she knew not whether to wish to recover a farthing.
How the matter stood she either did not know or did not like to tell me-to
the last; but the mysterious disease which ate away her strength, I in my
private mind ascribe to anxiety from this affair and her sudden and
strange responsibility as trustee for ladies.

"This dear sister was the fondest object of my boyish affections; and
through life she was the self-sacrificing, devoted character which from
earliest years she displayed. Five sons, one daughter, and two daughters-
in-law were present at her death, all fervent in love and duty. Her
husband was one of ten children, and all that family were singularly
united. Her only daughter will now live with two of her aunts, who have
been almost at her side since birth. My sister was so long in a very
precarious state that I did not expect her to survive the winter of 1878-
9, and at last death came as a relief and release.

"It has always troubled me that I have so little power to promote the
industrial interests of friends. When I was a professor in London I used
to be entreated to find pupils for tutors (when I had not half as many
pupils as I desired for myself) and to recommend others to publishers and
editors, when I could neither get a publisher to risk a shilling on what I
wrote, nor more than one editor to accept an article from me. Now, I would
most gladly recommend ---- ----; but it is well to say frankly that no one
ever asks me, nor do I _at all_ know who wants anything, nor can I guess
in what direction to inquire. But be sure I shall not forget, if the
occasion opens.

"I yesterday heard awful tidings of widespread murrain in the sheep of
these parts (Somerset and Monmouth and all between) ascribed to last
summer's wet. One farmer (as a specimen) has lost 1000 sheep; the hotel-
keepers are bidden to _beware of mutton._ This I have from an associate of
our society.

"Indoors I am happy; but I am so gloomy for the prospects of the country
that I do not like to talk about them. Kind regards to Mr. Kingsley.

"I am, most truly yours,

"F. W. Newman."


"Weston-s.-M.,
_19th Oct._, 1880.

"Dear Mrs. Kingsley,

"Behold me (in imagination, as I really am) still at home on our great
vegetarian day.

"I warmly thank you for your kind letter, and was purposing to write, but
in heaps of letters could not find yours with the new address, which I
have now entered in my book.

"I have finally resolved not to bustle about so late in the year, and have
resigned my place as President in consequence. But it is reported to me
that the Executive will prefer to exempt me from attendance in this
month....

"Public affairs make me very melancholy. Mr. Gladstone is not to blame for
the state of Ireland; but both in Afghanistan with India and in South
Africa, I think he has allowed his colleagues to neutralize his public
professions, and has made compromises most calamitous.

"The ministry seems to me not worthy of the Parliament. I do not doubt
that the plutocracy in the next ten or even five years will have a heavy
and deserved fall, but with how much convulsion and suffering in Ireland,
in India, and in South Africa, all inflicting miseries on us--you will
live to see: I fear it cannot be small, and that our institutions, called
Fundamental, will be very gravely shaken.

"I honour your Piscarian position, and with our society would recognize
it; but the discovery that you all eat fish forbids me to glory that I
have converted a family to our Rules! With kind regards to Mr. Kingsley
and the rest, I am,

"Your sincere friend,

"F. W. Newman."

"Weston,
"_26th April_, 1883.

"Dear Mrs. Kingsley,

"... I am apparently assuming the position of one who (like the Pope)
makes an ALLOCUTION to all _who will listen._ Each of us may imitate him.
I have given away eighty copies to make my allocution known. I suppose I
ought to have sent one to you, but circulation is hard work. Alas, it
costs a shilling! Can you get it put into any Manchester Library? (Tr�bner
my publisher.) It is called _A Christian Commonwealth_ and is as much
against our unjust wars as a Quaker could desire.

"In haste, ever yours,

"F. W. Newman."
"Kind regards to all yours."


"Weston-super-Mare,
_9th April_, 1884.

"My dear Friend,

"... My dismay and disgust at the proceedings of a ministry, of which Mr.
Gladstone must bear the _full responsibility_--which indeed he accepts by
defending all its atrocious proceedings--have disinclined me to write,
more than I must, on any but private or literary topics....

"A new struggle is made by this unscrupulous ministry to retain the
execrable C.D. Acts.

"I am sorry that the Bishops have again turned the scale in the
unrighteous retention of the law against a man's marriage to his deceased
wife's sister. When do the Bishops rally against sanguinary injustice and
dire oppression?  "I have just had two hundred and fifty copies struck off
of the enclosed leaflet, which aims to suggest to the haters of unjust
war, especially Quakers, in what direction they ought to work, viz. to lay
the foundation of an _entirely new_ political party. No candidate for a
vote could complain that he was humiliated by being required to profess
himself a VOTARY OF JUSTICE.

"I throw these leaflets in this and that direction as _feelers._ Of course
more can be printed when wanted....

"With best regards,
"I am, yours,

"F. W. Newman."


"15 Arundel Crescent,
Weston-super-Mare,
"_3rd Jan. _, 1887.

"Dear Friend,

"You need not think me dead yet; but you easily might, so estranged am I
to Manchester.

"Yet I at least have life enough to be able to wish all welfare and
blessing to you and yours in this New Year. The accumulation of letters
has always thwarted me when I have tried to find your last letter.... I
seem to remember that you then told me of the marriage of your eldest
daughter and of the literary efforts of another. Since then we have had
the overthrow in the W.K. of the Safe-Harlot-Providing Law, and indeed it
must have been as early as 1885; and the episode of Mr. Stead and his
prosecution was later! A great moral change has been wrought (for the
better, I say) in our ladies by that wickedness of our ruling classes with
the aid of wicked medical theories provoking indignant protest. To drag
printed matter into daylight is no doubt very offensive; but without
sweeping it away no sound health is to be expected. The ladies, I fancy,
will now, more _perseveringly_ than men, keep in activity the Purity
Society. And if some of them seem a little _too_ active--I ask, how _can_
this odious system of sin, crime, and cruelty be crushed without hot
enthusiasm? And where was enthusiasm hot without partial error? Fire
burns!

"This reminds me of my sending you (at your request) a load of anti-
vaccination literature, and I am wondering whether you were able to turn
it to service. THAT monstrous iniquity _must_ come down; but the medical
schools and _your Irishmen_ block out our movement.

"I wonder how you and Mr. Kingsley look on Mr. Gladstone. I never
condemned his _measure_, though I have always (for years back) declined to
aid a Parliament for all Ireland and _still more_ the expulsion of Irish
deputies from the English Parliament.... But I did not intend here to
enter Irish politics further than to indicate that while I am anti-
Gladstonian, I cry 'Ireland for the Irish,' 'India for the Indians,'
'Egypt for the Egyptians,"--_come what may_ to the English 'Empire'! [But
I have never read in history of any empire being ruined or harmed by
Justice, Mercy, or Purity.]

"I suppose I must say, 'Alas!' that the older I become [81 last June] the
more painfully my creed outgrows the limits of that which the mass of my
nation, and those whose co-operation I most covet, account _sacred_. I
dare not (unasked) send to friends what I print, yet I uphold the _sacred
moralities_ of Jew and Christian [Hindoo and Moslem] with all my heart.
Two mottos, or say _three_, suffice me:--

    "The Lord reigneth.

    "The righteous Lord loveth righteousness.

    "The Lord requireth Justice, Mercy, and Sobriety of thought, not
    ceremony or creed.

"Accept for all of you my warm wishes.
"Your Vegetarian friend of old,

"F. W. Newman."


[No date. Probably _1st March_, 1888.]

"My dear Friend,

"What a violent winter it has been in very many places! Nor is it all
over. After the awful 'blizzard' in New York, and its minor horrors
elsewhere, and the many fatal avalanches, I see this morning fresh
inundations in Hungary from sudden melting of snow. The sudden chill which
smote your husband was but a mild type, it seems, of the death fatal to so
many. Other deaths from cold, reported to us, have reminded us of your
great and sudden loss; yet what had I to say to you? I have thought that
the echo from your son in Calcutta may have made your grief break out
afresh.... I trust that time, which has not yet at all had softening
powers, has not added any fresh bitterness on a fuller realization....

"Affectionately yours,

"F. W. Newman."


 "Alas! my dear friend, that your generous son Leonard had not more
experience how vain is a man's swimming power against the current of an
_ordinary_ river. I have known this in the Tigris, in the Nile, and even
in the Thames, though the bathing men in several places called me a first-
rate swimmer. Longfellow in 'Hiawatha' has touching and powerful lines on
_disasters never coming singly_, but as vultures accumulating round a huge
carcass.

"Wisdom comes too late for the individual; yet it is not useless for
_others_ to inquire after causes. Did your husband pride himself on not
wearing a specially thick coat in winter and _roughing_ it as do some
vegetarians?... I rather believe that man is a tropical animal, hairless,
made for a climate warmer than ours, and needing much aid from clothing.

"Ever yours,

"F. W. Newman.
"Herewith I return your interesting scraps.
"_21st March_, 1888."


_Extract from a letter, 7th Jan_., 1889.

"More and more I believe, that as our clearest DUTY is in _this_ world, it
is wholesome that our most eager interest (_if unselfish_) should be in
this world and not (with Count Tolstoi) so full of eagerness for
immortality, that it is an effort with him to refrain from suicide! I
_accept with grateful_ submission whatever of after-life the Supreme Lord
gives--or does not give. My desire cannot affect His actions, and in fact
I _never_ have been able to work myself into _any_ desire for a future so
undefined and unimaginable. This will show how ill I deserve a little of
(shall I say) praise or compliment in your last.

"With kind salutes to your daughters,
"I am, your sincere friend,

"F. W. Newman."


"The Firs, West Cliff Gardens, "Bournemouth,
"_17th Aug_., 1889.

"My dear Friend,

"How extraordinary you must have thought my silence, after your kind
letter from this place. Perhaps you imputed it to illness. That is not
true. Yet it may be called half true: for illness of my wife is one topic,
and increased _weakness_ makes me slower in the smallest matters--such as
handling a book, or duly buttoning a shirt or coat: while I have been
dealing with proof-sheets from always two printers, sometimes four. My day
is cut short at each end--for in the colder months I cannot sit at my desk
until my fire is lighted, and my eyes are wearied before evening
candlelight. Meanwhile my unwilling correspondence has rather increased
than lessened....

"I am achieving a long hoped for work, in which of course I have to pay
the printers--i.e. to leave in some connective available form whatever
miscellaneous important printing I have ever published, ethico-political,
theological, economical, historical, aesthetic, critical, mathematical:
indeed, the mathematical is all new, not reprint.

"I take as vivid an interest in all that concerns public welfare, of
England, Ireland, and foreign countries, and hope I ever shall. More than
ever I see that our best work for God is to work for God's creatures, not
excluding gentle brutes.

"Is it possible that you are even now _here_? That would be very good
news.

"Your lazy friend, with much apology,

"F. W. Newman."


"Northam, near Bideford,
"_19th May_, 1890.

"My dear Friend,

"Your two letters were indeed doubly welcome, and brought me virtual
pardon for two neglects, of which the worst was, the keeping locked up
(and still in prison!) the letters which you bade me to return...

"The _chief_ want of Cornwall, I was told by an old resident, is _soil_;
the rock is too near the surface. Herein art will do much in a few
generations. Attica and Palestine--stony soils--bore plentiful pine fruit.
Our Channel Islands utter the same thing. In England the _landlord_ is the
effectual starver of the soil. Bishop Stubbs, a first-rate authority on
agriculture, explains the immense excess of crops raised acre by acre
under _peasant_ culture, 'because the farmers' land is labour-starved.'"

       *       *       *       *       *

"_15th July_, 1891.

"... The state of Ireland under existing factions would much have
discomposed your patriotic husband. As for me, who cannot pretend Irish
patriotism, things now look better.... But the aspect on the whole is to
me far more encouraging than alarming. The reign of false aristocracy is
fast declining; the rising powers everywhere ask for _justice_ between
orders and (as never before) between the two sexes, and the power of women
is about to signalize itself in most valuable directions--for the benefit
of _both_ sexes, and for the first time to claim nationally that moral and
Christian Right shall be the aim of Law.

"But I confess if we wish to attract ancient nations to Christianity, we
have first to reconsider our creed fundamentally, a terrible summons to
Protestants as well as Catholics....

"I have not with me _your last_, and I hope I do not evade any question.

"With best wishes to you and all yours,
"I am, your earnest friend,

"F. W. Newman."


"_27th Nov._, 1891.

"My dear Mrs. Kingsley,

"So many of my juniors die, that my friends when they do not hear of me
may well fancy that I am decrepit and declining. That is not true; only my
muscular strength is less. I cannot walk so far nor work so much, but no
vital organ seems to fail; nor can I write so much or so long....

"The longer I live, the more hopeful and more interesting I find the whole
world. In spite of crime, folly, and misery, the massive nations seem to
improve. The good--i.e. our sounder party--become wiser and stronger, as
well as in proportion more numerous. Our worst misrule has been in Ireland
and in India. The crisis in Ireland seems to me turned for the better.
Misrule in India is met not by insurrection, but by constitutional and
loyal, widely demanded Reform, such as, I feel convinced, the enlarged
franchise in England will support too warmly for the old routine to
resist. All the churches are seeking _moral_ reform.... Reforms lately too
great to think of, we now calmly contemplate as certainties of a near
future. Lord Herschell, an ex-Chancellor, pronounces that the legislative
power of the House of Lords is an evil unbearable. Scotland and Wales are
ready to demand abolition of the State Church. The English party called
Liberal (I think miscalled) desire the same, and within the last ten years
I come to think, rightly. Other reforms, too numerous to detail, cannot be
trifled with or the nation be blinded. While I wonder at all this, I see
that Scandinavia and Germany, even Belgium and France, are moving for
_moral_ objects, and also against war.

"Is there not plenty in all this to draw forth hope, joy, and
thankfulness, and in every conviction, that amidst all our tumult the Lord
reigneth? I rejoice that I have lived to see this day, and expect to
rejoice more while I live.

"How you have fared this year I seem not to know, but believe that you
have my earnest good wishes for you and yours.

"I am, yours most truly,

"F. W. Newman."


"Bournemouth (undated).

"My dear Friend,

"Your letter of July 12th from Margate has reached me here, to which place
I came because my wife five years ago gained such health here, and all the
year and past autumn she has never felt sure of health at home. I cannot
think she manages herself rightly, yet she believes, with no small reason,
that I am not a safe traveller without her; yet of the two _I_ seem the
stronger. She is better here, perhaps, because she is more in the outer
air. I must add, I too have recovered from my fall, and am fairly well,
though I do not pretend to be strong yet (as the French would say), _Que
voulez vous?_ when I am past 88.... I am glad to learn about your
children. I have good hope concerning the coming future, though the foes
of progress call us faddists because we think _national morality_
paramount to vicious routine. May but the Good prevail!

"... I now argue _for_ Fish-food as not to be forbidden or frowned on, but
do not lessen my esteem of our Manchester V. E. M. Society, nor lessen my
contribution to it, though they can only receive me as an outsider.

"I turn a vegetarian argument against them on the Fish question, but I
have no time now for it.

"I am bringing out another volume on Paul of Tarsus, which, when complete,
I hope to send you.

"With warm salutes, I am yours,

"Francis Wm. Newman.
"My wife desires her kind thought to be named."


"_1st Nov._, 1892.

"My dear Madam,

"I have not time nor strength to search out your last kind letter, which
perhaps informed me when your two sons from India were expected and when
they were to leave you....

"I do fairly well, if I potter on in my old solid routine. My 88th year
makes pretension to _strength_; but when so many moans are heard about
_neuralgia_, not to say influenza, I feel myself much favoured by the
total absence of pain, except merely what is incidental to a thin body
with some sharp bones. In rising from bed I am aware of small discomforts,
which I shake off on standing upright, and similarly after sitting in one
posture. I have not enough suffering to claim pity. I can wish the same to
all my friends, especially to my wife.

"To my judgment the world ... is in an entirely novel state, which
forebodes a wholly new future, and requires new thoughts, new policy in
our rulers, _with much higher_ MORALITY if grave overthrow is to be
averted.

"The United States of America _ought_ to be our leader in chief, but
mainly through ... the dreadful colour war that is year by year waxing
worse. The only thing clear to me is, that their _home_ calamity must for
a long while hinder their giving aid to the world. The policy in Russia is
so fatal, and its result presages an overturn of the scale of the France
of 1793. This makes all foresight impossible, except that every State is
safest which least violates the laws of universal morality. That England
can avoid great retribution seems to me scarcely probable. But as soon as
morality is allowed to speak loud in high places, I believe our main
dangers will quickly disappear. The prospect cannot be defined, but is to
me of intense interest. Britain seems to me immensely superior to its own
ruling classes in goodness, and the good is sure _at length to prevail_,
to the benefit also of your Ireland.

"With kindest best wishes, I am,
"Most truly yours,

"F. W. Newman."




CHAPTER XXI

LANDOWNERS AND WAGE RECEIVERS
BY FRANCIS W. NEWMAN
CONTRIBUTED BY MR. WILLIAM JAMIESON

[Presumably written in 1886, when Newman was Vice-President of the "Land
Nationalization Society." It was kindly sent me by Mr. William Jamieson,
who was Hon. Sec. to the above Society at the time. I wish to express here
my sense of gratitude to him for much help and information regarding his
own work with Newman in 1886.]


The tendency of English industry for a long time back has been to exalt
the land_lord_, or chief man in any locality, into land _owner_ (a phrase
implying that no one but he has legal right in the land), and to convert a
larger and larger fraction of the nation into wage receivers, liable to be
cast out of work either at the simple will, or by the imprudence or
misfortune of their paymaster. In order to analyse the natural results of
this juncture, we must follow the method received in Political Economy, of
taking an imaginary case, far simpler than any which is actually met in
human life, so as to make all the conditions of the problem known to us by
hypotheses. Let us suppose an island, secluded commercially from the rest
of the world, and peopled by a vast working lower class under three small
ruling castes. The island is physically divisible into three parts:
_first_, marshy coast land, abounding with shrubs, canes, rushes of many
kinds, from which human garments of various sorts can be made; _secondly_
rolling land, eminently suitable for the cultivation of grain, and of
certain fruit trees and roots on which the whole population live;
_thirdly_, the mountain land, on which are timber trees and copses
affording firewood; also quarries of stone, gravel pits, lime rocks, and
mines of copper and iron. Of the marshy coast land, the _second_ lordly
caste is acknowledged to be absolute owner; the first or highest caste
owns the rolling land, which is the arable and cultivated portion; and the
_third_ caste owns the mountain land and its products. From the first
comes the food of the native, from the second comes the clothing, from the
third the houses. It is possible that gravel, lime, and stone can be found
in rolling land, and that fruit trees either exist or if planted would
bear fruit in the marsh land, some even in the mountains; but the ruling
castes follow ancient custom, and the working caste has no right to
innovate. They work _under_ and _for_ their masters, and receive wages _in
kind_--that is, as an equivalent for their work, a definite but liberal
supply of the three necessary articles--food, clothes, and house
accommodation. Money does not exist, nor tame animals in our island. To
add sharpness to our imaginary case, and to make argument intelligible, we
must assign definite numbers to the working population; but from whatever
numbers we start, the argument and the practical result will be the same.
Let us suppose the first caste to employ _ten thousand_ cultivators; the
second caste to employ _three thousand_ knitters and plaiters; the third
caste _one thousand_ masons, miners, and carpenters. Each of these castes
furnishes to the workman such rude tools as are necessary, but these
remain the property of the masters, not of the workmen.

The soil and climate being favourable, and the habits of the people
simple, a few hours of work suffice; and like many barbarians, they have
been accustomed to much idle time, which they employ in sport; moreover,
by the connivance or good of the superior caste, they have been accustomed
to pick or steal largely the leaves of an intoxicating grass, and the
masters to whom the whole produce of their labour belongs, have large
superfluity after paying their wages; hereby the lordlings easily feed
domestic servants and exhibit themselves in gay clothing with superior
dwellings.

But the tendency of the workers to drunkenness shocks a certain religious
preacher, who traces the vice to idleness and sport. He goes about the
island urging upon them a higher morality. They widely receive him as a
divine messenger, and under his exhortation they become more industrious
and more conscientious in their work; not only working more hours, and
curtailing their sport, but in every hour using more diligence. In
consequence, the masters are enriched by stores somewhat embarrassing.
Grain comes in, more than they want: their barns begin to overflow.
Garments are too many for the warehouses. Huge piles of timber block up
the yards, besides masses of stones, and heaps of other superfluous
material. Before long, the masters conclude that their simplest course for
checking supply is by lessening the number of the workmen. The increased
diligence of the people (we may suppose) has made the work of three men on
an average as efficient in all tasks as were _five_ men previously. Thus
sixty do the work of a hundred; and the masters discover that what had
been the normal average produce will be maintained, if they dismiss forty
out of every hundred dependents. Not only so; but retaining their usual
surplus, which we may call their rent, at the old level, they will be able
to raise the wages to these workmen whom they still keep, since instead of
a hundred they will have only sixty now to feed and clothe; and only for
these do they feel morally responsible. Forthwith they actually dismiss
forty out of every hundred. Each landowner cares for his own workmen as by
a sort of social duty; but for those who are discharged he feels no
responsibility. In the average result the landowners who had had a hundred
workmen, but now only sixty, take as increased rent the food and clothes
of ten, and use it to add ten servants to their domestic retinue, but add
to the wage of the sixty whom they keep at work, the food and clothes
previously received by thirty of the forty whom they have dismissed. Thus
they raise wages by one half--that is, they pay in the proportion of one
hundred and fifty instead of one hundred.

The labourers, clothworkers, and builders who are dismissed (the remaining
thirty out of every hundred) being without work and without houses, are at
once in a state of beggary. Only by betaking themselves to some _new
industry_ will they be able to get a livelihood, and it rests with them to
devise their new industries. Meanwhile they can only subsist on charity,
which is doled out to them chiefly by the fellow feeling of those of their
class who are still in work. The increased wages of these enable them to
be liberal; in fact, the increase has on an average been just what the
discarded men previously earned.

A parliament of the higher classes is in due course assembled, and a
member came (?) to the distress of so many men out of work. But a
distinguished literary writer, member of a Politico-Economical Club ...
eases the consciences of the higher castes by pointing out that in fact
the island is much increased in prosperity. Rents had, no doubt, risen,
but only as one mark of prosperity, for their increase was in a much
smaller percentage than that of the rise of wages. These had increased by
the very remarkable ratio of 50 per cent. It was true that many men were
out of work. That was to be regretted; but it was a _passing phenomenon_.
They would before long find work somewhere or somehow.

The discarded workmen hitherto had had no great variety in their tasks,
and were always set to work by others without exercise of their own
inventive powers. Yet out of a large number of men there are always many
of good talents, some of original genius. The idea of many new forms of
industry springs up. Oil for food has been hitherto raised from the olive
tree; now an ingenious man would extract oil from several shrubs or trees,
and make candles, or else oil for lamps. A second wishes to plait carpet
socks, sandals, and umbrellas. A third would make boats, with ropes, and
oars, and sails. A fourth would add wheelbarrows and casks to the baskets
already in use. A fifth has noticed wild ponies on the mountains, and
desires to catch them and make needful harness. A sixth would plant fruit
trees in gardens, and not take the chance of wild fruit. But on every such
plan they are at once checkmated: first, because all these natural
products are accounted the absolute property of the upper castes, and must
be bought; next, most of their new schemes need a yard or a garden and
right of access by a road, and workshops, beside a dwelling-house. But the
land, as well as the raw produce, is inaccessible to them; yet on them,
hungry and destitute, is laid the task of originating the new trades. Can
this seizure of the land and its natural products as the private property
of a limited number of families be morally justified? In its origin was it
attained by violence and robbery? Else, has it grown up by gradual and
cunning perversion of law? These three questions point at the principle of
landowning. Another question rises: Is it good for a nation for _the great
majority_ to retain life only on condition that there is someone ready to
pay wages for their work and able to discard them? In the imaginary case
thus drawn the increased industry of the workers which produced
superfluity is the beginning (to them) of change for the worse. Their
spontaneous industry causes overproduction, and leads to the dismissal of
many workmen. Our economists treat every increase of productiveness as an
unalloyed good. It is good, provided that men are not kept idle by it.
Evidently there is no national gain from sixty men doing the work of a
hundred, if thereby forty men are tossed into unwilling idleness, and must
live on charity, some of the forty losing all habits of industry, and
perhaps becoming criminal. This is a national loss.

Further, our hypothesis that the men voluntarily become more industrious
may be called an extreme and unlikely case. For that very reason it has
been here adopted. The ordinary causes give us _a fortiori_ argument,
because they are ever in action. _Skill_ naturally increases among men
employed continuously on any work. In a settled, industrious nation small
improvements accumulate. In modern Europe the cultivation of mechanics and
chemistry conduces to a steady improvement in tools, a cheapening also of
tools, and introduction of such more complex tools as we call "machines,"
by dint of all which human work constantly becomes more effective, so that
fewer and fewer workmen are needed for _the same amount_ of produce. Thus
the normal and natural order of things, wherever _the wage-system exists_
tends to dispense with some, or many, of the workmen. This is a clear gain
if the men thus displaced _are instantly taken up for some other service_.
But this seldom can happen; often their old skill is made useless, and
before they can learn a new trade they become demoralized, and many
perish. The loss of their industrial position is a grievance and a
national mischief which our "Economists" are prone to undervalue, and pass
unnoticed.

Let us contrast the case of men who work not for a master, not for wages,
but for themselves; holding their own little homestead, from which they
cannot be driven out. Such is the case of back-settlers in the Far West of
the United States. Each perhaps carries out with him a box of stout
clothes, some agricultural tools and important seeds, and either _squats_
on a bit of wild land, or by a very easy payment buys possession of the
Federal Government. This bit of land the settler counts _his own_. With
the aid of friendly neighbours he builds the rude log-hut. The felling of
the trees needed to construct it makes an opening for small culture. In a
very few years he raises more food than his family needs. If the season
and the roads favour, he sends his superfluous barrels of corn and fruit
eastward, and recovers an equivalent. But what happens if wide distance
part him from civilized towns, if the roads are swampy and not made by
art, and the conveyance of food be too onerous to remunerate him? All his
neighbours being in like case, there is a local Overproduction of food;
yet not one of the little community is thereby made a pauper. No one is
able to expel them from their rude homes, or forbid their cultivation.
They are not made outcasts or idlers. Simply they are kept poorer, than
with access to a market they would have been; but they lessen their
production of food, and either with the females of the family work at
clothing, or execute carpentering. In many ways they can use their time to
produce articles which they could have bought in a better finished state
had the market of the East been open to them. The present writer was
informed by an Englishman who in the American Civil War had penetrated
very far West, that he had seen with his own eyes a colonist _burning
wheat as fuel_, because he had it in so great excess. Probably he had
plenty of green maize for his horses and pigs.

Whenever a man retains a house of his own, and has neither rent to pay nor
any excessive taxation, if only he have a moderate plot of land for
workshop and garden, he is not made destitute, though he do not directly
raise food for his household, but works at some domestic manufacture. Our
"Spitalfields" poor who fought a long battle with the hand-loom against
the loom driven by steam power, might not have been at length utterly
ruined if they had had freehold houses and some small garden in a healthy
country. If the system of huge factories had had to compete with domestic
manufacture conducted by private families living in small freeholds, it is
possible that the battle might simply have driven the independent workers
either to buy small steam engines for their aid, or what now is more
obvious, to hire power from some company, as from a Gas Company or Water
Company, which had it in superfluity. Such, in the opinion of some far-
sighted men, may very possibly be even now the solution of our difficulty.

At present the Trade Unions gravely mistake the end for which they ought
to strive. They mischievously unite two objects. First, they are Benefit
Societies. The funds of a Benefit Society ought to be forbidden by law to
be spent in warring against capitalists; this enables the directors, or a
majority of them, to confiscate the whole contributions of any member who
disapproves of the war.

Next, the main effort to raise the status of the workmen is ill-directed
towards raising or sustaining the _rate_ of wages, else towards dictating
concerning the management. This effort is ill-directed, first, because it
is liable to aim at an impossibility--i.e. to extort from a master a wage
so high that he prefers not to light his engine fires; next, because to
raise the _rate_ of wages does not secure continuous work, and idle days
neither tend to sobriety nor give pay. Strikes which inflict vast loss
upon the workers cause loss to the masters also, and make them less able
to pay high wages. But beyond all these, if the Unions were wise, they
would struggle against the system of wage-earning, wherever it is new and
needless; that is, as far as possible, strive to recover the system of
domestic manufacture. For certain new and peculiar industries undoubtedly
combine, and large capital is essential; even in them the effort ought to
be towards uniting, _as far as possible_, the interests of each workman,
and of the company, the opposite of which is in general the Union policy.
But for every old trade independent work is physically possible, under the
condition that the workman have a fixed homestead. To effect this ought to
be the main effort of the Unions.

In the thirty-two years between the battle of Waterloo and the Irish
famine, the farmers and manufacturers were like two buckets of a well;
when one was up, the other was down. But now, both at once are down. The
causes are clearly separate.

Our manufacturers when allowed to accept payments from abroad In wheat and
sugar and foods and all raw produce, Immensely increased their foreign
sales; and during the Cotton Famine, capital was largely invested in
building new cotton mills, as if we were to supply all the world.

But the European Continent more and more chooses to compete with us, and
from more causes than one deprive our merchants of their customers.
Between us and our rivals more of the _same sort_ is produced than the
existing markets can take: this is again Overproduction. Hence stagnation
in our manufacturing districts. Meanwhile, in near thirty years of
manufacturing prosperity after 1847, the increased riches of these towns
enriched the farmers and enabled the landlords to raise rents in England,
and in consequence, by dint of landlord power, rent rose in the whole
United Kingdom. At the same time, Englishmen found too little
encouragement to invest their savings on English soil, and preferred to
invest many millions on foreign railways and on foreign loans; and the
payment of their dividends is made largely by imported foreign food. Their
investments at first were an advantage to our manufacturers, while they
sent out railway plant and carriages and locomotives. Now foreigners
compete with us even as to these, and the imported food competes with the
farmers. Thus a double failure convulses us.

How much better, if instead of quarrelling for distant markets (and _it is
said_ conquering Burmah in the hope of advantage to our merchants) we had
_a native population of small cultivators_, prosperous enough to be
valuable as well as steady customers to our manufacturing towns, and
gradually (in the course of several generations) another population of
country folk, substituting domestic manufactures for those of factories
with wage earners!




CHAPTER XXII

THE RIGHT AND DUTY OF EVERY STATE TO ENFORCE SOBRIETY ON ITS CITIZENS
BY F. W. NEWMAN, M.R.A.S.
PUBLISHED IN 1882 IN PAMPHLET FORM


No human community can be so small as not to involve duties from each
member to the rest; duties to which a sound human mind is requisite.
Neither an idiot nor a madman can be a normal citizen. The former ranks as
in permanent childhood; the latter, being generally dangerous, must be
classed with criminals. A dehumanized brain impairs a citizen's rights
because it unmans him,--disabling him from duty, even making him
dangerous. In India, such a one now and then runs amuck, stabbing every
one whom he meets: in England, he beats and tramples down those nearest to
him,--those whom he is most bound to protect. A human community cannot be
constituted out of men and brutes, nor ought civilized men to be forced to
carry arms or armour for self-defence. For all these reasons, to be drunk
is in itself an offence against the community, prior to any statute
forbidding it, prior to any misdemeanour superinduced by it. In the State
it is both a right and a duty to enforce (as far as its means reach)
sobriety on every citizen, rich or poor, in private or in public; and with
a view to this, to use such methods as will best prevent, discourage, or
deter from intoxication.

When a national religion totally forbids the use of intoxicating drugs,
vigilance in the State is less needful: public opinion, or even public
show of disgust and violence, effectively stifles the evil. But if the
national religion does not forbid the use, but solely enjoins moderation
(a word which everyone interprets for himself), a far heavier task falls
on the State, whose right and duty nevertheless in this matter several
causes have concurred to obscure, not least in England and Scotland. Out
of the teachings of Rome, our forefathers very ill learned the rights of
the State or the distinction of Morals from Religion. Although even men
not highly educated must have known that Moral truth is far older than any
special system of Religious beliefs, yet in the popular idea morals have
no other basis than religion. Hence, the demand for freedom of conscience
against any oppressive State policy (besides the vices of Courts and
Courtiers) led to a vehement jealousy of State power even in moral
concerns. Many generous minds feared, that to concede to the State a right
of enforcing morality, covertly allowed religious persecution. _Who_ first
uttered the formula--"The only duty of the State is, to protect persons
and property"--is unknown to the present writer; but certainly fifty,
forty, even thirty years ago, this principle was widely accepted by
radical politicians and active-minded dissenters. The late Dr. Arnold of
Rugby regarded this denial of the State's moral character as a widespread,
untractable and mischievous delusion.

After long torpor the prohibition of Lotteries showed that Parliament was
waking to its moral duties. Little by little, the mass of the middle-
classes and the gentry imbibed nobler views of human life, and have
discovered, that of all the powers which make a nation immoral the State
is the most influential. One day of licensed debauch undoes the work of
the Clergy on fifty-two Sundays. No wonder that in the past the State
collectively has been our worst corrupter: but to open this whole question
space does not here allow. A long struggle has gone on, to implore public
men not to connive at drunkenness--a national pest which for more than a
century was greeted with merriment though politically avowed to be
criminal. None dare now to laugh at it, except the depraved men who laugh
at bribery, and use drunkenness as a trump-card at elections, and, if in
office, rejoice on the vast revenue sucked by the Exchequer out of the
vice and misery of the people. Earnest religionists of every creed have
happily rallied to a common conviction, that the State has grievously
failed of its duty and must now turn over a new leaf. Our worst opponents
are men who cannot be reckoned in any religious body, men who find nothing
so sacred as Liberty to buy and sell and indulge appetite; generally
eccentric "Liberals," who are in many respects too good not to esteem, and
too intellectual to despise.

One of these some years ago opened attack on me in a private letter, which
summed up the arguments decisive with this class of "advanced Liberals";
in whose hatred of _Over Legislation_ I heartily share. He taunted me for
thinking that the State ought to concern itself about the drinks of
citizens more than about their dress; saying that I could not hold the
State to have a control of public morals without, in logical consistency,
admitting the right of Parliament to forbid dancing and card-playing; or
to command my attendance at any Church worship, or to fine and imprison me
for heresy. The double confusion here involved is wonderful from an
educated man, and lowers his reputation for good sense. Religion is a
topic on which eminent persons and foremost nations widely differ:
concerning Moral Duty there is more agreement in mankind than perhaps on
anything that is beyond the five senses. To argue that in claiming of the
State an enforcement of duties cardinal to citizenship, we admit its right
to dictate in religion, is a pestilent anachronism; it confounds Morals
with Religion just as did the ancient world, Pagan and Hebrew. Again, the
test of soundness in Morals is found in the agreement of the human race.
There is no nation, no elementary tribe of men, so ignorant or so
besotted, as not to condemn drunkenness as immoral and utterly evil. In
justifying penalties against a vice condemned by all mankind, we justify
(forsooth!) the punishing of amusements thought harmless by a great
majority everywhere. Such an assertion is not the less silly, even in the
mouth of a disciple of John Stuart Mill. Of course we all know that Law
cannot be made against every misuse of time, or of energy, or of money.
There is certainly no danger whatever that a modern Parliament, elected
from very different circles and representing widely different elements,
will ever adopt as its measure of sound morals the special opinions of any
historical sect, however virtuous and wise.

Neither of an individual nor of a community does _the highest interest_
consist in Liberty, but in soundness of morals; without which Liberty only
means licence to be vicious; licence to ruin oneself, and diffuse misery
to others. To a man not proof against the omnipresent drinkshop, high
wages are a curse; days called holy and short hours of work do but more
quickly engulf him in ruin. But he pulls others too down in his fall. That
nearly every Vice tends to waste, and preeminently intoxication by liquors
or drugs, certain Economists are strangely slow to learn. Moreover, nearly
every widespread vice makes wealth and life less enjoyable to the whole
community. Confining remark to the vice of drunkards, it suffices to point
in brief to the enormous extension which it gives to Violent Crime, to
Orphanhood, to Pauperism, to Prostitution, to disease in Children, and to
Insanity. Hence comes an enormous expense for Police and Criminal Courts,
for Jails and Jail-officers, for Magistrates and Judges, for Insane
Asylums, and Poor Rates. Hence also endless suffering to the victims of
crime and to the families of criminals, and a grave lessening of happiness
to innocent persons by the ribaldry of drunkards planted at their side,
with fear lest their children be corrupted; fear also of personal outrage.
Our daily comfort largely depends on homely virtue in our neighbours. In
every great organization of industry the drunkenness of workmen is a
first-rate mischief to others, crippling enterprise by increased expense
and risk. From sailors fond of grog and tobacco, proceed fire in ships out
at sea; and on foreign coasts, broils that disgrace England and
Christendom, and lay a train which sometimes explodes in war. The
drunkenness of a captain has before now stranded a noble ship. On a
railroad, access of the engine driver to drink is a prime danger; and
shall we say that there is no danger in Parliament legislating when half
asleep with wine, and hereby open to the intrigue of any scheming clique,
who may wish to fasten suddenly on the nation fraudulent or wicked law?
Wisely does the American Congress forbid to its members wine in its own
dining-room, because those who have to make sacred law are bound to
deliberate and vote with clear heads. Evil law is of all tyrannies the
most hateful, and makes a State contemptible to its own citizens--thus
preparing Revolution.

English Statesmen have yet to learn Yankee wisdom; but no one who is, or
hopes to be, in high office dares to speak lightly of drunkenness. The
celebrated Committee of 1834 advised Parliament to reverse its course,
with a view to the ultimate _extinction_ of the trade in ardent spirits.
The advice was disgracefully spurned; yet neither the legislature nor the
executive has ever dared to deny that drunkenness is a civil offence. Our
opponents plead only for the _use_, not for the _abuse_ of intoxicating
drink.

No doubt, teetotallers maintain that all use of such liquors for drink is
an abuse. The avowals of Dr. William Gull, who calls our view extreme,
beside those of Sir Henry Thompson and Dr. Benjamin Richardson, seem to
justify the extreme view: so do the Parisian experiments of 1860-1. Yet it
is not necessary to go so far _in a political argument_. I desire to
obtain common ground with such men as my friend Mr. P. A. Taylor, M.P. for
Leicester, and waive our difference with him as to _moderate use_. Let us
admit (that is, temporarily) that as Prussic Acid is fatal in ever so
small a draught, yet is safe as well as delicious in extract of almonds
and in custard flavoured by bay-leaf, so alcohol is harmless, not only in
Plum Pudding and Tipsy Cake, but also in one tumbler of Table Beer and one
wineglass of pure Claret. Let us further concede that the propensity of
very many to excess makes out no case for State-interference against the
man whose use of the dangerous drink is so sparing, that no one can
discover any ill effect of it on _him_. Nevertheless, irrefutable reasons
remain, why we should claim new legislation, and a transference of control
over the trade from the magistrates who do not suffer from it to the local
public who do.

First of all, let me speak of undeniable excess. At one time perhaps it
was punished by exposure in the pillory or stocks; but for a long time
past, the penalty (when not aggravated by other offences) has been at most
a pecuniary fine: five shillings used often to be inflicted. A "gentleman"
who could pay, was let off: a more destitute man might fare worse.
Inevitably, the vices of the eighteenth century affected national opinion.
The wealthier classes were so addicted to wine, that to be "as drunk as a
lord" became a current phrase. From highest to lowest the drunkard was an
object more of merriment than of pity, and scarcely at all of censure,
unless he were a soldier or sailor on duty. When a host intoxicated his
guests, it was called hospitality; to refuse the proffered glass was in
many a club an offence to good company. Peers and Members of Parliament,
officers of Army and Navy, Clergymen and Fellows of Colleges--nay, some
Royal Princes--loved wine, often too much. Who then could be earnest and
eager to punish poorer men for love of strong beer? The preaching of
Whitefield and Wesley began the awakening of the nation. A very able
Spaniard despondingly said of his country: "A profligate individual may be
converted, but a debased nation never"; and the recovery no doubt is
arduous, when the national taste has been depraved and vicious customs
have fixed themselves in society. Even now, few indeed are able to rejoice
in the punishment of mere drunkenness; for, the only penalty imagined is a
pecuniary fine, which never can prevent repetition nor deter others; when
most severe, it does but aggravate suffering to an innocent wife and
children. To be "drunk _and disorderly_" is now the general imputation
before a magistrate. Unless molestation of others can be charged, the
drunkard is very seldom made to feel the hand of the law. Hereby many
persons seem to believe (as apparently does one bishop) that, as a part of
English _liberty_, every one has a _right_ to be drunk. While we complain
that authorities are negligent and connive at vice, after accepting and
assuming the duty to prevent it; the _sellers_ of the drink are open to a
severer charge. A man too poor to keep a servant is glad to get a wife to
serve him. She is to him housemaid and cook and nurse of his children. For
all these functions she has a clear right to full wages, besides careful
nurture during motherly weakness. The husband manifestly is bound to
supply to his wife _more_ than all she might have earned in serving
others, before he spends a sixpence on his own needless indulgences: and
the publican knows it; knows, sometimes in definite certainty, always in
broad suspicion, that he is receiving money which does not in right belong
to his customer. Of course he cannot be convicted by law; but in a moral
estimate he is comparable to a lottery-keeper who accepts from shopmen
money which he suspects is taken from their master's till, or to a
receiver of goods which he ought to suspect to be stolen. Such is the
immoral aspect of traders, who now claim "compensation," if the twelve-
month licences granted to them as privilege, for no merit of their own,
be, _in the interest of public morality_, terminated at the end of the
twelve months. _In the interest and at the will of landlord magistrates_
such traders have borne extinction meekly, over a very wide rural area.
What made them _then_ so meek and unpretending? Apparently because against
powerful Peers and Squires impudence was not elicited in them by the
encouragement of a John Bright and a Gladstone.

How then ought the State to deal with a drunkard? Obviously by the most
merciful, kind, and effective of all punishments--by forbidding to him the
fatal liquor. How much better than asylums for drunkards! asylums which
make a job for medical men, take the drunkard away from his family and
business, without anything to guarantee that on his release from prison he
will have a Will strong enough to resist the old temptation. Such asylums
please medical philanthropy; nor is any animosity displayed against them
in Parliament. How can we account for the fact, that M.P.'s who strongly
oppose interference with the existing shops, and avow as much distress and
grief at drunkenness as is possible to any teetotaller, have never
proposed to withhold the baneful drink from a convicted drunkard? Did it
never come into their heads? Had they never heard of it? This would
convict them of ignorance disgraceful in an M.P., still more so in a
Minister. Perhaps someone charitably suggests: "They think the prohibition
never could be enforced." To this pretence General Neal Dow makes reply:
"What we Yankees have done, you English certainly can do, WHENEVER YOU
HAVE THE WILL." Nothing is easier, when anyone has been convicted of
drunkenness, than to send official notice to all licensed shops (say,
within five miles) forbidding them to supply him, under penalty of
forfeiting their licences. At the same time it should be a misdemeanour in
anyone else to supply him gratuitously. (It would be pedantic here to
suggest after how long probation, and under what conditions, this stigma
should be effaceable.)

The misery which husband can inflict on wife, or wife on husband, by
drunkenness, has led many Yankees further, and--to our shame--we have as
yet refused to learn from them. If a wife (with certain legal formalities)
forbid the drinkshops to supply her husband, this should be of the same
avail, as if the husband were convicted of drunkenness before a
magistrate. Of course a husband ought to have the same right against a
wife, and either parent against a son or daughter under age. Such an
enactment, as it seems to me, ought to be _at once_ passed, as a law for
all the Queen's realms, not as matter for local option. Passed over the
heads of existing magistrates, it would remain valid over whatever
authority may succeed them.

This is no place to dwell on any details of horrors inflicted on the
country by the present imbecile control. Of course, it is far better than
the _free trade_ in drink, towards which Liverpool twenty years back took
a long stride, with results most wretched and justly repented of. How
deadly is now the propensity of the country, will sufficiently appear from
an experience of the late Sir Titus Salt in his little kingdom of
Saltaire.

For a single year he made trial of granting to four select shops a licence
to supply _table beer_ in bottles, delivered at the houses in quantity
proportioned to the number of inmates;--a more severe limitation than any
previously heard of. Yet in the course of some months evil grew up and
multiplied. Something stronger than table beer (apparently) had been
substituted. The liquor was smuggled into the works. Disobedience and
disorders arose; and at length a deputation of his own men complained to
him that their _women_ at home were getting too much of the drink. At the
year's end he cancelled the licences, and to the general content and
benefit restored absolute prohibition. Nothing short of this extinguishes
the unnatural taste. Female drunkenness is a new vice, at least in any but
the most debased of the sex: yet alas! courtly physicians now tell us that
it has invaded the boudoirs of great ladies. Such has been the mischief of
Confectioners' and Grocers' Licences.

Unsatisfactory as has been the control of the drink trade by the
magistrates, their neglect has never been resented in higher quarters,
ever since, by gift of the Excise, Parliament made the Exchequer a
sleeping partner in the gains of the Drink Trade. The Queen's Exchequer
has hence a revenue of about thirty-three millions a year, of which
probably two-thirds, say twenty-two millions, is from excess: a formidable
sum as hush-money. No earnest reformer expects the leopard to change his
spots. A transference of power is claimed, chiefly under the title of
Local Option. To give the power to town councils has been proved wholly
insufficient in Scotland; though the Right Hon. John Bright seems
obstinately to shut eyes and ears to the fact.

Again and again in crowded meetings the Resolution has been affirmed: "The
people who suffer by the trade ought to have a veto against it."--Those
who seem resolved to oppose every scheme which seeks to break down and
restrict this horrible vice, tauntingly reply, that this measure would
ensure its continuance in its worst centres. They do but show their own
unwisdom herein. The Publicans know far better, and they avow, there is
nothing they so much dread as local option. In Maine itself, a State
frightfully drunken in the first half of the century, the opponents of
Neal Dow in the State Legislature scornfully allowed him to carry a Bill
which gave to each parish _Permission_ to accept his measure as law. They
expected that the drunkards would outvote it: but to their discomfiture
found that the drunkards were glad of his law, and nailed it firm. Let all
sound-hearted Englishmen trust our suffering population to use their own
remedy. Under Local Option we now embrace two systems which have been
already discussed in Parliament--that of Sir Wilfrid Lawson, and that upon
the outlines of Mr. Joseph Cowen's Bill.

Personally I yield to Sir Wilfrid Lawson the highest honour. Beyond all
other men he is the hero in this long battle. If I account his Bill
defective, he will not blame me: for in its original form, which he would
be glad to carry, it closely resembled the Maine Law, and superseded the
Magistrates. He has simplified it by making it only a half-measure. After
Parliament has been teazed by the drink question for more than twenty-five
years (one might almost say, ever since 1834), after candidates at every
election have been made anxious by it, we must calculate that all public
men will desire to make a _final_ settlement and get rid of the topic in
Parliament. But Sir Wilfrid's Bill, whatever its other merits (and I think
them great), will not set Parliament free. For so soon as any district
adopts his permission to stop the Drink Trade, an outcry must arise from
local medical men and chemists and varnishers, demanding new shops for
their needs: and intense jealousy will follow, lest the new sellers,
though called chemists or grocers or oilmen, presently become purveyors of
drink; hence a fresh struggle must continue in our overworked Legislature
concerning the new and necessary regulations. Sir Wilfrid's half-measure
supersedes neither the Magistrates nor the Parliament, though for two
hundred years the Nation has suffered through the laxity of both. Surely
we chiefly need real Provincial Legislatures, and, until we get _them_,
Local Folk Motes and _Local Elective Boards_ are our best substitutes.

This is the other and the complete measure: yet something remains to be
said on it. The great evil is, that by reason of competition, a trade
cannot live, except by pushing its sales. The Americans have wisely seen
that the necessary _sales_ must be effected by Agents publicly appointed,
with a fixed salary and nothing to gain by an increase of sales. Such
Agents must receive public instructions. This was, in fact, Sir Wilfrid's
original scheme, only that it forbad absolutely the selling wine or beer
for drink, _unless by medical order_; and the last condition would involve
in Parliament endless contention. It is simpler, and I think far better,
to give to an Elective Board a general free discretion. Parliament _might_
indeed dictate that sales should go on through a public officer only.

I, for one, should rejoice in this. But the most eager teetotaller will
not hope that in the present generation any English Parliament will be
_more_ severe against a wine-loving gentry, and more dictatorial to
medical men, than is the law of Maine. If therefore it did command that
sales should be _without gain_, it certainly would not allow an entire
prohibition of selling alcohol as beverage to be imposed on the Agent for
sale. It is not so in Maine; and this fact occasioned Mr. Plimsoll's
stupendous blunder, who declared in Parliament that the Maine Law was a
dead letter in Maine itself. The fact on which he built this outrageously
false assertion was that when Mr. Plimsoll asked for Whiskey, the Agent
instantly sold it to him without a moment's hesitation. But why? "Because
he knew that Mr. Plimsoll was an English M.P. and a teetotaller."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Memoir and Letters of Francis W. Newman
by Giberne Sieveking

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LETTERS FRANCIS NEWMAN ***

This file should be named 7305-8.txt or 7305-8.zip

Produced by Anne Soulard, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

