The Project Gutenberg eBook of Psyche, by Moli�re, Translated by Charles
Heron Wall


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Psyche


Author: Moli�re



Release Date: April 30, 2003  [eBook #7444]
Most recently updated: January 9, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PSYCHE***


E-text prepared by Charles Franks, Delphine Lettau, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



PSYCHE.

by

MOLI�RE

Translated into English Prose.

With Short Introductions and Explanatory Notes.

by

CHARLES HERON WALL







'Psyche' is a _trag�die-ballet_. Moli�re had sketched the plan,
written the prologue, the first act, and the first scenes of the
second and third acts, when the King asked him to have the play
finished before Lent. Pierre Corneille, then sixty years old, helped
him, and wrote the other scenes in a fortnight. Quinault wrote the
words of the songs.

Moli�re acted the part of Zephyr.



PERSONS REPRESENTED.

JUPITER.
VENUS.
LOVE.
ZEPHYR.
AEGIALE _and_ PHA�NE, _two Graces_.
THE KING.
PSYCHE.
AGLAURA.
CIDIPPE.
CLEOMENES _and_ AGENOR, _two princes_, PSYCHE'S _lovers_.
LYCAS, _captain of the guards_.
A RIVER GOD
TWO CUPIDS.




PROLOGUE.

_The front of the stage represents a rustic spot, while at the back the
sea can be seen in the distance._


SCENE I.

FLORA _appears in the centre of the stage, attended by_ VERTUMNUS,
_god of trees and fruit, and by_ PALEMON, _god of the streams. Each of
these gods conducts a troup of divinities; one leads in his train_
DRYADS _and_ SYLVANS, _and the other_ RIVER GODS _and_ NAIADS.

FLORA _sings the following lines, to invite_ VENUS _to descend
upon earth_:--

FLORA.

  The din of battle is stayed;
    The mightiest king of earth
  His arms aside has laid;
    Of peace 'tis now the birth!
  Descend thou, lovely Venus,
  And blissful hours grant us!

VERTUMNUS _and_ PALEMON, _and the divinities who attend them, join
their voices to that of_ FLORA, _and sing the following words_.--

CHORUS OF DIVINITIES _of the earth and streams, composed of_
FLORA, NYMPHS, PALEMON, VERTUMNUS, SYLVANS, FAUNS, DRYADS, _and_
NAIADS.

  A peace profound we now enjoy,
  And games and bliss without alloy;
  Earth's mightiest king has giv'n us rest;
  To him be praise and thanks addrest.
    Descend thou, lovely Venus,
    And happy hours grant us!

_Then is formed an entry of the ballet, composed of two_ DRYADS,
_four_ SYLVANS, _two_ RIVER GODS, _and two_ NAIADS, _after which_
VERTUMNUS _and_ PALEMON _sing the following dialogue_:--

VERTUMNUS.
  Yield, yield, ye beauties stern,
  To sigh 'tis now your turn!

PALEMON.
  See you, the queen above,
  She comes to breathe soft love!

VERTUMNUS.
  A fair one stern for aye
  Ne'er wins a faithful sigh!

PALEMON.
  To woo has beauty arms,
  But gentleness has greater charms.

BOTH (_together_).
  To woo has beauty arms;
  But gentleness has greater charms.

VERTUMNUS.
  Seek not your hearts to shield;
  To pine is law, and ye must yield.

PALEMON.
  Is aught more worthless born
  Than hearts that love will scorn?

VERTUMNUS.
  A fair one stern, for aye
  Ne'er wins a faithful sigh!

PALEMON.
  To woo has beauty arms,
  But gentleness has greater charms.

BOTH (_together_).
  To woo has beauty arms,
  But gentleness has greater charms.

FLORA _answers the dialogue of_ VERTUMNUS _and_ PALEMON _by the
following minuet, and the other divinities join their dances to the
song._


  Does wisdom say,
  In youth's heyday,
  Sweet love forego?
  Be up, in haste
  These pleasures taste
  Of earth below.

  Youth's wisdom too
  Is love to woo,
  And love to know.
  If love disarms,
  It is by charms;
  So yield your arms.

  'Twere madness 'gainst his darts
  To seek to shield your hearts.
  Whate'er the bond
  Of lover fond,
  'Tis sweeter chain
  Than freedom's gain.

VENUS _descends from heaven, attended by_ CUPID, _her son, and two
Graces, called_ AEGIALE _and_ PHA�NE; _and the divinities of the earth
and the streams once more unite their songs, and continue by their
dances to show their joy at her approach._

CHORUS _of all the Divinities of the earth and the streams._

  A peace profound we now enjoy,
  And games and bliss without alloy;
  Earth's mightiest king has giv'n us rest;
  To him be praise and thanks addrest.
  Descend thou, lovely Venus,
  And happy hours grant us.

VEN. (_in her chariot_). Cease, cease, all your songs of joy. Such
rare honours do not belong to me, and the homage which in your
consideration you now pay me ought to be reserved for lovelier charms.
To pay your court to me is a custom indeed too old; everything has its
turn, and Venus is no longer the fashion. There are rising charms to
which now all carry their incense. Psyche, the beauteous Psyche,
to-day has taken my place. Already now the whole world hastens to
worship her, and it is too great a boon that, in the midst of my
disgrace, I still find some one who stoops to honour me. Our deserts
are not even fairly weighed together, but all are ready to abandon me;
while of the numerous train of privileged graces, whose care and
friendship followed me everywhere, I have now only two of the smaller
ones who cling to me out of mere pity. I pray you, let these dark
abodes lend their solitude to the anguish of my heart, and suffer me
to hide my shame and grief in the midst of their gloom.

FLORA _and the other deities withdraw; and_ VENUS _with her retinue
descends from her chariot._


SCENE II.--VENUS, CUPID, AEGIALE, PHA�NE, CUPID

AEGI. We know not what to do, goddess; while we see you overwhelmed by
this grief, our respect bids us be silent, our zeal would have us
speak.

VEN. Speak; but if your cares would please me, leave all your advice
for a fitter time; and speak of my wrath but to own me right; that was
the keenest insult my divinity could ever receive; but revenge I shall
have if gods have any power.

PHA. Your wisdom, your discernment, are greater than ours in deciding
what may be worthy of you; yet, methinks, a mighty goddess should not
thus give way to wrath.

VEN. That is the very reason of my extreme anger; the greater the
brilliancy of my rank, the deeper the insult. If I did not stand on so
lofty a height, the indignation of my heart would not be so violent.
I, the daughter of the Thunderer, mother of the love-inspiring god; I,
the sweetest yearning of heaven and earth, who received birth only to
charm; I, who have seen everything that hath breath utter so many vows
at my shrines, and by immortal rights have held the sovereign sway of
beauty in all ages; I, whose eyes have forced two mighty gods to yield
me the prize of beauty--I see my rights and my victory disputed by a
wretched mortal. Shall the ridiculous excess of foolish obstinacy go
so far as to oppose to me a little girl? Shall I constantly hear a
rash verdict on the beauty of her features and of mine, and from the
loftiest heaven where I shine shall I hear it said to the prejudiced
world, "She is fairer than Venus"?

AEGI. This is the way with mortals, this is the style of mankind; they
are impertinent in their comparisons.

PHA. In the century in which we live, they cannot praise without
insulting great names.

VEN. Ah! how well does the insolent rigour of these words avenge Juno
and Pallas, and comfort their hearts for the dazzling glory which the
famous apple has won me. I see them rejoicing at my sorrow, assuming
every moment a cruel smile, and with fixed gaze carefully seeking the
confusion that lurks in my eyes. Their triumphant joy, when this
affront is keenest felt, seems to tell me, "Boast, Venus, boast, the
charms of thy features; by the verdict of one man was the victory made
over us, but by the judgment of all, a mere mortal snatches it from
you." Ah! that blow is the direst; it pierces my heart, I cannot bear
its unequalled severity; the pleasure of my rivals is too great an
addition to my poignant grief. My son, if ever my feelings had any
weight with you, if ever I have been dear to you, if you bear a heart
that can share the resentment of a mother who loves you so tenderly,
use here your utmost power to support my interests, and cause Psyche
to feel the shafts of my revenge through your own darts. To render her
miserable, choose the dart that will please me most, one of those in
which lurks the keenest venom, and which you hurl in your wrath. See
that she loves, even to madness, the basest and lowest of mortals, and
let her hear the cruel torture of love unreturned.

CUP. In the world nothing is heard but complaints of Cupid; everywhere
a thousand freaks are laid to my charge, and you could not believe the
evil and the foolish things which are daily said of me. If, to assist
your wrath ...

VEN. Be gone; no longer resist your mother's wishes; use reasoning
only to find the shortest method of offering a sacrifice to my
outraged glory. Let your departure be your only answer to my
entreaties, and do not see my face again until you have avenged me.

CUPID _flies off, and_ VENUS _withdraws with the two_ GRACES. _The
scenery changes to a large town, with palaces and houses of different
architecture on both sides of the stage._




ACT I

SCENE I.--AGLAURA, CIDIPPE.


AGL. My sister, there are sorrows which are rendered greater by
keeping them to ourselves; let us speak freely of our joint distress,
and give vent in our conversations to the poignant grief which fills
our hearts. We are sisters in misfortune, and your heart and mine have
so much in common that we can unite them, and in our just complaints
murmur, with a common lament, against the cruelty of our fate. My
sister, what secret fatality makes the whole world bow before our
younger sister's charms? and how is it that, amongst so many different
princes who are brought by fortune to this place, not one has any love
for us? What! must we see them on all sides pressing forward to lay
their hearts at her feet, whilst they pass our charms slightingly by?
What spell has heaven cast over our eyes? What have they done to the
gods that they are thus left without homage amidst all the glorious
tribute of which others proudly boast? Can there be for us, my sister,
any greater trial than to see how all hearts disdain our beauty, and
how the fortunate Psyche insolently reigns with full sway over the
crowd of lovers who ever attend her?

CID. Ah! my sister, our fate is enough to bereave one of reason, and
all the ills of nature are nothing in comparison.

AGL. At times I can almost shed tears over it; it takes away my
happiness and my rest; my constancy finds itself powerless against
such a misfortune; my mind is for ever dwelling over it, and the ill
success of our charms and the triumph of Psyche are ever before my
eyes. At night, unceasingly, comes to me the remembrance of it, and
nothing can banish the cruel picture. As soon as sweet slumber comes
to deliver me from it, it is immediately recalled to my memory by some
dream which startles me from my sleep.

CID. That is just what I suffer from, my sister. All that you say, I
see myself, and you depict everything that I experience.

AGL. Well, let us discuss the matter. What all-powerful charms have
been bestowed upon her? Tell me how, by the least of her looks, she
has acquired honour in the great art of pleasing? What is there in her
person that can inspire such passion? What right of sway over all
hearts has her beauty given her? She has some comeliness, some of the
brilliancy of youth; we are all agreed upon that, and I do not gainsay
it. But must we yield to her because we are her seniors by a few
years? Must we, therefore, consider ourselves quite commonplace? Are
we made so as to excite derision? Have we no charms, no power of
pleasing, no complexion, no good eyes, no dignity and bearing, by
which we may win hearts? Do me the favour, sister, to speak to me
frankly. Am I, in your opinion, so fashioned that my merit is below
hers? And do you think that she surpasses me in her attire?

CID. You, my sister? By no means. Yesterday, at the hunt, I compared
you and her for a long time, and, without flattery, you appeared to me
the more beautiful. But tell me truly, sister, without blandishment,
am I deceiving myself when I think that I am so framed as to deserve
the glory of a conquest?

AGL. You, my sister? You possess, without disguise, everything that
can excite a loving passion. Your least actions are full of a charm
which moves my soul. And I would be your lover if I were not a woman.

CID. Whence comes it, then, that she bears off the palm from us; that,
at the first glance, all hearts give up the struggle, and that no
tribute of sighs and vows is paid to our loveliness?

AGL. All the women, with one voice, find her attractions but small;
and, sister, I have discovered the cause of the number of lovers she
holds in thrall.

CID. I guess it. We may presume that some mystery is hidden under it.
This secret of captivating everybody is not an ordinary effect of
nature; the Thessalian art must be mixed up in it, and, doubtless,
some one has given to her a charm by which she makes herself beloved.

AGL. My opinion is founded on a more solid basis, and the charms by
which she draws all hearts to herself are a demeanour at all times
free of reserve; caressing words and looks; a smile full of sweetness,
which invites everyone, and promises them nothing but favours. Our
glory is departed; and that lofty pride which, by a full observance of
noble trials, exacted a proof of the constancy of our lovers, exists
no longer. We have degenerated, and are now reduced to hope for
nothing unless we throw ourselves into the arms of the men.

CID. Yes, that is the secret; and I see that you understand it better
than I. It is because we cling too much to modesty, sister, that no
lovers come to us; it is because we try to sustain too strictly the
honour of our sex and of our birth. Men, nowadays, like what comes
easily to them; hope attracts them more than love; and that is how
Psyche deprives us of all the lovers we see under her sway. Let us
follow her example, and suit ourselves to the times; let us stoop,
sister, to make advances, and let us no longer keep to those dull
morals which rob us of the fruits of our best years.

AGL. I approve of this idea; and we have an opportunity of making a
first trial of it upon the two princes who have last arrived. They are
charming, sister, and to me their whole person.... Have you noticed
them?

CID. Ah! Both are formed in such a mould that my soul.... They are
perfect, my sister.

AGL. I think we might seek their affections without dishonour to
ourselves.

CID. I think that, without shame, a beautiful princess might bestow
her heart upon them.

AGL. Here they both are. I admire their manners and attire.

CID. They in no way fall short of all that we have said of them.


SCENE II.--CLEOMENES, AGENOR, AGLAURA, CIDIPPE.

AGL. Wherefore, princes, wherefore do you thus hasten away? Does our
appearance fill you with fear?

CLE. We were led to believe, Madam, that the Princess Psyche might be
here.

AGL. Has this place no longer any charm for you if it is not adorned
by her presence?

AGE. This place may be pleasant enough, but in our impatience we would
find the Princess Psyche.

CID. Something very important must doubtless be urging you both to
seek her.

CLE. The motive is powerful enough, since our happiness depends
entirely upon her.

AGL. Might we be allowed to inquire into the secret implied by these
words?

CLE. We do not pretend to make a mystery of it. Indeed, it would show
itself in spite of us; and the secret, Madam, does not last long when
it is love.

CID. Without further words, Princes, it means that you are both in
love with Psyche.

AGE. We are both under her sway, and we go with one accord to declare
our passion to her.

AGL. It is certainly something quite new, and rather odd, to see two
rivals so well agreed.

CLE. It is true that the thing is rare; but it is not impossible for
two perfect friends.

CID. In this spot, is she the only fair one, and can you find none
other with whom to divide your admiration?

AGL. Amongst all the nobly born, is she the only one whom your eyes
deem worthy of your tenderness?

CLE. Do we reason when we fall in love? Do we choose the object of our
attachment? And when we bestow our hearts, do we weigh the right of
the fair one to fascinate us?

AGE. Without having the power of choosing, we follow in such a passion
something which delights us; and when love touches a heart, we have no
reasons to give.

AGL. Indeed, I pity the painful troubles to which I see your hearts
expose themselves. You love one whose bright charms will mingle grief
with the hopes they hold out to you, and whose heart will not fulfil
all that her eyes promise.

CID. The hope which calls you into the rank of her lovers will
experience many disappointments in the favours she bestows; and the
fitful changes of her inconstant heart will cause you many painful
hours.

AGL. A clear discernment of your worth makes us pity the fate into
which this passion will lead you; and if you wished, you could both
find a more constant heart and charms as great.

CID. A choice sweeter by half can rescue your mutual friendship from
love; and there is such a rare merit apparent in you both that a
gentle counsel would, out of pity, save your hearts from what they are
preparing for themselves.

CLE. This generous advice shows us a kindness which touches our
hearts; but heaven, madam, reduces us to the misfortune of not being
able to profit by it.

AGE. Your illustrious pity would in vain dissuade us from a love of
which we both dread the result. What our friendship, Madam, has not
done cannot be effected by any other means.

CID. The power of Psyche must have.... Here she is.


SCENE III.--PSYCHE, CIDIPPE, AGLAURA, CLEOMENES, AGENOR.

CID. Come, sister, and enjoy what is offered to you.

AGL. Prepare your charms to receive here a new triumph.

CID. These two princes have both so well felt the power of your beauty
that their lips are eager to declare it.

PSY. I little thought myself to be the cause of their pensiveness, and
I should have expected it to be quite otherwise when I found them
talking to you.

AGL. We have neither sufficient rank nor beauty to make us deserving
of their love and solicitude, but they favour us with the honour of
their confidence.

CLE. (_to_ PSYCHE). The avowal which we would make to your divine
charms, Madam, is, no doubt, a rash one; but so many hearts, on the
point of expiring, are by such avowals obliged to displease you, that
you have ceased to punish them by the terrors of your wrath. You see
in us two friends who were joined in childhood by a happy similarity
of feeling, and this tender union has been strengthened by a hundred
contests of esteem and gratitude. The attachment of our friendship has
been proved in the severe assaults of unfavourable fortune, the
contempt of death, the sight of torture, and the glorious splendour of
mutual good offices; but whatever trials it may have endured, to-day
witnesses its greatest triumph, and nothing proves so much its tried
fidelity as its duration through the rivalry of love. Yes, in spite of
so many charms, its constancy subjects our vows to the laws it gives
us. It comes with sweet and entire deference, to submit the success of
our passion to your choice; and, to give a weight to our competition
which may bring the balance of state reasons to favour the choice of
one of us, this friendship intends of free will to unite our two
estates to the fortune of the happy one.

AGE. Yes, Madam, we wish to make of these two estates, which we
propose to unite under your happy choice, a help towards obtaining
you. The sacrifice which we make to the king, your father, in order to
ensure this happiness, has nothing difficult in it to our loving
hearts, and it will be a necessary gift that the rejected unfortunate
should make over to the one who is fortunate a power which he will no
longer know bow to enjoy.

PSY. Princes, you both display to my eyes a choice so precious and
dazzling that it would satisfy the proudest heart. But your passion,
your friendship, your supreme virtue, all increase the value of your
vows of fidelity, and make it a merit that I should oppose myself to
what you ask of me. I must not listen to my heart only before engaging
in such a union, but my hand must await my father's decision before it
can dispose of itself, and my sisters have rights superior to mine.
But if I were referred absolutely to my own wishes, you might both
have too great a share in them, and my entire esteem be so evenly
balanced between you that I should not be able to decide in favour of
either. I would indeed respond with most affectionate interest to the
ardour of your suit, but amid so much merit two hearts are too much
for me, one heart too little for you. The accomplishment of my dearest
wishes would be to me a burden were it granted to me by your love.
Yes, Princes, I should greatly prefer you to all those whose love will
follow yours, but I could never have the heart to prefer one of you to
the other. My tenderness would be too great a sacrifice to the one
whom I might choose, and I should think myself barbarously unjust to
inflict so great a wrong upon the other. Indeed, you both possess such
greatness of soul that it would be wrong to make either of you
miserable, and you must seek in love the means of being both happy. If
your hearts honour me enough to give me the right of disposing of
them, I have two sisters well fitted to please, who might make your
destinies happy, and whom friendship endears to me enough for me to
wish that you should be their husbands.

CLE. Can a heart whose love, alas! is extreme, consent to be given
away by her it loves? We yield up our two hearts, Madam, to your
divine charms, even should you doom them to death; but we beg you not
to make them over to any one but yourself.

AGE. It would be too unjust to the princesses, Madam, and too poor a
tribute to their charms, if we should give to them the remains of a
former affection. Only the faithful purity of a first love deserves to
aspire to the honour to which your kindness invites us, for each of
your sisters merits a love which has sighed for her alone.

AGL. It seems to me, Princes, without any offence, that before thus
refusing, you might wait until our intentions had been declared. Do
you think our hearts so susceptible and tender? And when people
propose your offering yourselves to us, are you so sure of being
accepted?

CID. I think our sentiments are lofty enough to lead us to refuse a
heart which wants soliciting; and we wish to conquer our lovers by the
power of our own merit.


SCENE IV.--PSYCHE, AGLAURA, CIDIPPE, CLEOMENES, AGENOR, LYCAS.

LYC. (_to_ PSYCHE). Ah! Madam!

PSY. What is the matter?

LYC. The king....

PSY. What?

LYC. Requests your presence.

PSY. What am I to augur from your agitation?

LYC. You will know it only too soon.

PSY. Alas! how you excite my fears about the king!

LYC. Fear only for yourself; you are the one to be pitied.

PSY. I can praise heaven, and be no longer anxious, when I know that I
am the only one in danger. But tell me, Lycas, what alarms you.

LYC. Suffer me, Madam, to obey him who sent me hither; and I beg of
you, learn from his lips what troubles me thus.

PSY. Let us go and hear what this is which makes them fear that my
courage will fail me.


SCENE V.--AGLAURA, CIDIPPE, LYCAS.

AGL. If your orders do not extend to us, tell us what great misfortune
is hidden under your sadness.

LYC. Alas! hear for yourselves, princesses, the great misfortune which
is known to the whole court. These are the very words which, through
the oracle, destiny has spoken to the king, and which grief, Madam,
has engraven on my heart:--

  "No one must think to lead
  Psyche to Hymen's shrine;
  But all with earnest speed,
  In pompous mournful line,
  High to the mountain crest
  Must take her; there to await,
  Forlorn, in deep unrest,
  A monster who envenoms all,
  Decreed by fate her husband;
  A serpent whose dark poisonous breath
  And rage e'er hold the world in thrall,
  Shaking the heavens high and realms of death."

After so severe a decree, I leave you to judge for yourselves if the
gods could have manifested their wrath in a more cruel and fearful
manner.


SCENE VII.--AGLAURA, CIDIPPE.

CID. How does this sudden misfortune into which destiny has plunged
Psyche affect you, sister?

AGL. But how does it affect you, sister?

CID. To speak the truth, my heart is not very much grieved at it.

AGL. My heart feels something which very much resembles joy. Let us
go; Fate has sent us a calamity which we can consider as a blessing.


FIRST INTERLUDE.

_The scenery changes to horrible rocks, and shows a dreadful cavern in
the distance. It is in this desert that_ PSYCHE, _in obedience to the
oracle, is to be exposed. A band of afflicted people come to bewail
her death. Some give utterance to their pity by touching complaints
and mournful lays, while the rest express their grief by a dance full
of every mark of the most violent despair_.

WAILINGS _sung by a woman and two men_.

WOMAN.
  Ah! weep with me, ye forests;
  Ye mighty rocks of hardest adamant,
  Ye Springs, ye beasts,
  Lament the fate of one so fair.

1ST MAN.
  Alas! dire grief

2ND MAN.
  Without relief!

1ST MAN.
  Cruel death!

2ND MAN.
  Fell decree

ALL THREE (_together_).
  Of sternest fate that dooms to die
  Such beauty rare! Oh! heavens high!
  And stars! behold! and sigh!

WOMAN.
  My sad, sad lay repeat,
    Ye caverns deep;
    With notes of sorrow greet
  Her death, ye mountains steep;
  Re-echo, woods, and silent hills,
  My grief; and ye, soft rippling rills!

1ST MAN.
  Alas! dire grief

2ND MAN.
  Without relief!

1ST MAN.
  Cruel death!

2ND MAN.
  Fell decree

ALL THREE (_together_).
  Of sternest fate that dooms to die
  Such beauty rare! Oh! heavens high!
  And stars! behold! and sigh!

2ND MAN.
  Who then, eternal gods, will doom
  A guiltless maid to lasting gloom?
  Oh! this thy rigour, heaven, shames
  Hell's unrelenting flames!

1ST MAN.
  Cruel will

2ND MAN.
  Of gods severe!

THE TWO MEN.
  Say why this hard decree,
  To crush a heart so free
      From guilt or stain?
  Oh! fell edict unheard ere this!
  Thou doomest a maid who showers bliss
    Upon the mortal race.
    She the sad earth would grace,
      And would give life for pain!

WOMAN.
  All tears are idle, all sighs.
  Heaven wills it so--she dies!
  Whene'er the gods their powers wield,
  All man can do--is but to yield.

1ST MAN.
  Alas! dire grief

2ND MAN.
  Without relief!

1ST MAN.
  Cruel death!

2ND MAN.
  Fell decree!




ACT II.

SCENE I.--THE KING, PSYCHE, AGLAURA, CIDIPPE, LYCAS, _and_ FOLLOWERS.


PSY. The cause of your tears, my Lord, is dear to me; but you are too
kind when you allow a father's love to overmaster the duties of a
great king. The homage which here you pay to nature is fraught with
too much injury to the rank which you hold. I must decline its
touching favours. Check somewhat the sway of your grief over your
wisdom, and cease to honour my destiny with tears, which, springing
from a king's heart, show weakness.

KING. Ah! my daughter! close not my eyes to these tears; my grief is
reasonable, even though it be extreme; and when such a loss as mine
must endure for ever, wisdom herself, believe me, may weep. 'Tis in
vain that pride of regal sway bids us be insensible to such
calamities; as vain for reason to come to our help, and desire us to
see with unmoved eye the death of what we love. The effort required is
barbarous in the eyes of the universe--'tis brutality rather than
highest virtue. In this misfortune I will not wear a show of
insensibility, and hide the grief I feel. I renounce the vanity of
this fierce callousness, known as fortitude, and whatever be the name
given to the keen pain, the pangs of which I feel, I will exhibit it,
my daughter, to the gaze of all, and in the heart of a king display
that of a man.

PSY. I deserve not this violent grief. Seek, I pray, to resist the
claims it asserts over your heart, whose might a thousand events have
marked. What! for me, my Lord, you must abandon that kingly firmness
of which, under the blows of misfortune, you have shown such perfect
proofs?

KING. In numberless occasions firmness is easy. All revolutions to
which ruthless fortune can expose us--loss of rank, persecution,
envy's venom, hatred's dart--present nothing which the will of a soul,
but a little swayed by reason, cannot easily brave. But those rigours
which crush the heart under the weight of bitter grief are ... are the
cruel darts of those severe decrees of fate which deprive us for ever
of our loved ones. Against such ills reason offers no available
weapons. These are the direst blows that the gods in their wrath can
hurl against us!

PSY. My Lord, one consolation is still left you. Your marriage has
been graced with more than one gift from the gods, and by hiding me
from your sight, they with open favour deprive you of nothing but what
they have not carefully made good for you. Enough remains to relieve
your sorrow, and this law of heaven which you call cruel leaves
sufficient room in the two princesses, my sisters, for paternal love
wherein to place all its kindness.

KING. Ah! empty comfort to my sorrow. There is naught that can console
me for thy loss. My grief fills my soul, I am conscious of nothing
else; in presence of such cruel destiny, I look to what I lose, and
see not what I still retain.

PSY. My Lord, you know better than myself that we must rule our will
by that of heaven; and in this sad farewell I can only say to you that
which you can much better say to others. These gods are sovereign
lords of the gifts they deign to offer us; they leave them in our
hands so long only as it pleases them; when they withdraw them, we
have no right to murmur over the favours which their hands refuse any
longer to pour upon us. My Lord, I am a gift they have offered to your
vows, and when, by this decree, they wish to take me back, they
deprive you of nothing that you do not hold from them; and it is
without a murmur that you must resign me.

KING. Ah! seek, I pray, better foundations for the comfort thy heart
would offer me. Do not by the fallacy of thy reasoning increase the
burden of the piercing grief which now torments me. Dost thou imagine
that thou givest me a powerful reason why I should not complain of
this decree of heaven? and in this proceeding of the gods, of which
thou biddest me be satisfied, dost thou not clearly see a deadly
severity? Consider the state in which the gods force me to resign
thee, and that in which my hapless heart received thee. Thou shalt
know then that they take from me much more than they gave: from them I
received in thee, my daughter, a gift I did not ask for; then I found
in it but few charms, and without joy I saw my family increased by it.
But my heart and my eyes have made a sweet habit of this gift. Fifteen
years of care, of watchfulness, of study, have I employed to render it
precious to me. I have decked it with the lovely wealth of a thousand
brilliant virtues; I have enshrined in it, by assiduous care, the
rarest treasures that wisdom yields; to it clings the tenderness of my
soul. I have made it the charm, the joy of this heart, the solace of
my wearied senses, the sweet hope of my old age. All this they take
from me--these gods! And thou wouldst have me utter no complaint
concerning this dire edict from which I suffer! Ah! with too much
rigour their power tramples upon the affections of our heart. To
withdraw their gift, have they not waited till I had made it my all?
Rather, if it was their purpose to remove it, had it not been better
to give me nothing?

PSY. My Lord! dread the wrath of those gods whom you dare upbraid.

KING. After this blow, what more can they inflict on me?

PSY. Ah! my Lord! I tremble for your sins, of which I am the cause; I
hate myself for this....

KING. Ah! let them bear with my legitimate complaints; 'tis pain
enough for me to obey them; it ought to suffice them that my heart
abandons thee to the barbarous respect we must bear them, without
claiming also to control the grief that so frightful a decree calls
forth. My just despair can know no bounds. My grief, my grief, I will
nurse it for ever! I will feel for ever the loss I sustain, of
heaven's rigour I will always raise high my complaint; until death I
will unceasingly weep for that than which the whole world could give
me naught more precious.

PSY. Ah! I pray you, my Lord, spare my weakness. I need constancy in
these circumstances. Add not to the excess of my grief by the tears of
your fondness. My sorrow alone is deep enough; my fate and your grief
are too much for my heart.

KING. True! I must spare thee my disconsolate trouble. The fatal
moment has come. I must tear myself from thee; but how can I utter
this dreadful word? And yet I must! Heaven commands it. An unavoidable
cruelty forces me to leave thee in this fatal spot. Farewell, I go...
Farewell.


SCENE II.--PSYCHE, AGLAURA, CIDIPPE.

PSY. Follow the king, my sisters; dry his tears, solace his grief. You
would fill him with alarm were you to, expose yourselves to my
misfortune. Preserve for him whatever he possesses still; the serpent
I expect might prove hurtful to you, and draw you in the same fate as
myself; nay, through _your_ death might cause me a second death.
Me alone has heaven condemned to his poisonous breath; nothing could
save me; and I need no example to die.

AGL. Grudge us not this cruel privilege of mingling our tears with
your sorrows; suffer our sighs to answer your last sighs; accept this
last pledge of our tender love.

PSY. 'Tis but to lose yourselves to no purpose.

CID. 'Tis to hope for a miracle in your favour, or to accompany you to
the tomb.

PSY. What room is there for hope after such an oracle?

AGL. An oracle is ever veiled in obscurity; the more we believe that
we know its meaning, the less do we understand it. Perhaps, after all,
you must expect from it nothing but glory and happiness. Suffer us,
dear sister, to behold this mortal dread deceived by a worthy issue;
or at least let us die with you, if heaven does not show itself more
propitious to our prayers.

PSY. Dear sister, lend a readier ear to nature's voice, which summons
you to stand by the king. You love me too much, and duty murmurs; you
know its unavoidable laws. A father ought to be dearer to you than
myself; become both the mainstays of his old age. A thousand kings, a
thousand rival kings, cherish love for you; you both owe your father a
son-in-law and grandchildren. A thousand kings vie with each other to
whisper their vows to you. Me alone the oracle demands, and alone,
too, I will die, if I can, without weakness, or, if not, at least
without you as witnesses of that little which nature has left me.

AGL. Then by sharing your woe we annoy you!

CID. I dare go somewhat further, we offend you!

PSY. No; but you add to my torture, and perhaps increase the wrath of
heaven.

AGL. It is your will; we go. May that same heaven, more just, and less
severe, decree for you the fate we desire, and for which our sincere
friendship, in spite of you and of the oracle, still hopes!

PSY. Farewell. This hope, these vows, my sisters, none of the gods
will ever fulfil.


SCENE III.--PSYCHE (_alone_).

Alone, at last, I can look on this terrible change, which from the
summit of highest glory hurls me to the tomb. This glory was without
parallel. Its sheen spread from pole to pole; all kings seemed created
to love me; all their subjects, looking upon me as on a goddess, were
but now beginning to accustom me to the incense they never ceased to
offer; sighs followed me, for which I gave naught in return. My soul
remained fancy-free, while it captivated so many, and in the midst of
so much love was queen of all hearts, and yet mistress of my own. Oh!
heaven! hast thou counted a crime this want of feeling? All this
severity which thou dost exhibit, is it because in return for their
vows I have given nothing but esteem? If such be thy law, why didst
thou not create in me that which merit and love create in others,
and.... But what do I see here?


SCENE IV.--CLEOMENES, AGENOR, PSYCHE.

CLE. Behold in us two friends, two rivals, whose only wish is to
expose our life to save yours.

PSY. Can I listen to you when I have refused two sisters? Princes!
think you that you could defend me against heaven? To surrender
yourselves to the serpent, whose coming I must await here, is but a
despair ill-becoming great hearts; and to die when I die is to
overwhelm a sensitive, soul, that already has but too many sorrows.

AGE. A serpent is not invincible; Cadmus, who loved no one, slew Mars'
own reptile. We love, and Love makes everything possible for the heart
that follows his standard, for the hand of whose darts he is himself
the guide.

PSY. Do you expect his aid in behalf of an ungrateful one whom all his
shafts have been unable to wound? Think you he can stay his vengeance,
when 'tis bursting forth, and help you to release me from its stroke?
Even if you should serve me, even if you should restore me to life,
what reward do you hope for from that which knows no love?

CLE. It is not by the hope of so lovely a reward that we are animated.
We seek only to obey the dictates of a love that dares not presume,
whatever its efforts may be, that it can be so fortunate as to please
you, so worthy as to kindle within you a responsive flame.

AGE. Live, fair princess, and live for another; we will behold it with
a jealous eye, we will die of it, yet of a death sweeter far than if
we had to see you die. If we cannot save your life by the loss of
ours, whatever love you may prefer to ours, we are ready to die of
grief and of love.

PSY. Live, Princes, live, and no longer seek to ward off or to share
my fate. I believe I have told you, heaven seeks me alone; me alone
has it condemned. Methinks, I hear already the deadly hissing of its
minister, who even now draws nigh. My dread pictures him to me, ever
offers him to my view. Fear has mastered all my feelings; under its
influence I see him on the summit of this rock; I sink for very
weakness, and my fainting heart scarce keeps up a remnant of courage.
Farewell, Princes; flee, lest he poison you.

AGE. We have seen nothing as yet to astonish us. And since you deem
your death so nigh, if strength fail you, we have both arms and hearts
which hope never forsakes. It may be a rival has dictated this oracle;
and gold has made its interpreter speak. It would be no miracle if a
man has answered in the stead of a dumb deity; and everywhere we have
but too many examples that temples, no less than other places, are the
abode of the wicked.

CLE. Suffer us to oppose to the cowardly ravisher to whom sacrilege
abandons you a love that heaven has chosen for the defender of the
only fair one for whom we wish to live. If we dare not aspire to her
possession, at least, in the midst of her danger, allow us to follow
the ardour and dictates of our passion.

PSY. These dictates, this extreme ardour, with which your hearts are
filled in my behalf, obey them in behalf of others, in behalf of my
sisters. Live for them, since I die. Lament the cruel rigour of my
fate; and by your death do not give my sisters new ground for sorrow.
These are my last wishes, and in all ages the orders of the dying have
been received as law.

CLE. Princess....

PSY. Once more, Princes, live for my sisters. So long as you love me,
you must obey me; do not drive me to hate you, and to look upon you as
rebels for being too faithful to me. Go, leave me to die alone in this
spot, where I have no voice left except to say farewell. But I feel
myself lifted up, and the air opens a road whence you will no longer
hear this dying voice. Farewell, Princes, farewell, for the last time.
See, can you doubt my destiny?

PSYCHE _is borne through the air by two_ ZEPHYRS.

AGE. We lose sight of her. Prince, let us both seek on the summit of
this rock some means of following her.

CLE. Let us seek those of not surviving her.


SCENE V.--LOVE (_in the air_).

LOVE. Die, then, rivals of a jealous god, whose wrath you have
deserved, since your heart was sensible to the same charms. And thou,
Vulcan, fashion a thousand brilliant ornaments to adorn the palace
where Love will dry Psyche's tears, and yield himself her slave.


SECOND INTERLUDE.

_The scene changes to a splendid terrace, surrounded by pillars
emblazoned with golden figures. The whole represents a magnificent
palace, which_ LOVE _designs for_ PSYCHE. _Six_ CYCLOPS, _accompanied
by four_ FAIRIES, _introduce a ballet, and, whilst keeping time,
give the last touches to four huge silver vases which the_ FAIRIES
_have brought. The ballet is twice interrupted by this recitation of_
VULCAN, _which he gives out in two parts._


PART I.

  Hasten, these seats prepare
    For heaven's gentlest god.
  No strength, no effort spare;
  With mighty zeal and constant care
    Do now, my lads, what must be done.
  When Love commands us--see!
  What haste too great can be?

  Great Love no lazy hand will brook;
    So work with might and main.
      Your ancient hammers ply,
      And sparks will swiftly fly
    Beneath your arms that rain
    The fast, resounding blows;
    While zeal to please him glows
      Within your heaving breasts.


PART II.

  Then serve a god so kind,
  Who loves great zeal to find.
  No strength, no effort spare;
  With mighty zeal and constant care
    Do now, my lads, what must be done.
  When Love commands us--see!
  What haste too great can be?

  Great Love no lazy hand can brook;
    So work with might and main.
      Your ancient hammers ply,
      And sparks will swiftly fly
    Beneath your arms that rain
    The fast, resounding blows,
    While zeal to please him glows;
      Within your heaving breasts.




ACT III.

SCENE I.--LOVE, ZEPHYR.


ZEP. Yes! right gallantly have I acquitted myself of your errand; and
from the summit of that rock I have softly borne this beauty through
the air to this enchanted palace, where, with full freedom, you can
decree her fate. Yet you astonish me by this mighty change in your
appearance. That figure, that countenance, that costume, perfectly
conceal your real being, and I defy the most cunning to see in you
to-day the god of love.

LOVE. 'Tis because I do not wish to be known to Psyche. 'Tis my heart,
my heart alone, I wish to unfold; nothing more than the sweet raptures
of this keen passion, which her charms excite within it. To express
its gentle pining, and to hide what may be from those eyes that impose
on me their will, I have assumed this form which thou seest.

ZEP. You are a master in everything; this is how I know it. Often the
gods, when in love, have been seen assuming various disguises, seeking
to alleviate the pleasing wound inflicted on all hearts by your fiery
darts; but in good sense you outstrip them. Yours is the form
necessary for succeeding with the lovely sex, for whom we sigh. Yes,
the assistance derived from that form is powerful; and, apart from
rank and wit, whoever finds the means of being so fashioned does not
sigh in vain.

LOVE. I have decided, my dear Zephyr, to remain always thus; and the
oldest of all loves cannot be blamed for this. It is time to issue
from this long infancy, that wears out my patience. It is time,
henceforth, that I should be grown up.

ZEP. You are right. You cannot do better; and you are initiated into a
mystery that demands no childish powers.

LOVE. This change will, no doubt, vex my mother.

ZEP. I foresee some anger in that quarter, although disputes about age
ought not to exist among immortals; yet, your mother Venus shares the
spirit of beauties, who do not like grown-up children. But whereat I
fancy her offended is the line of conduct you are pursuing; and 'tis a
strange method of avenging her, to love the beauty she wished to see
punished. This hatred to which she expects the power of a son
generally feared by the gods to answer....

LOVE. Let us drop this discourse, Zephyr, and tell me whether thy eyes
do not find Psyche the fairest woman in the world? Is there aught on
the earth, aught in heaven, that could seize from her the glorious
title of matchless beauty? But I see her, my dear Zephyr, wondering at
the splendours of this spot.

ZEP. You can show yourself, to put an end to her torture, and unfold
to her her glorious destiny. Speak to one another all that sighs,
lips, and glances can speak. As a discreet confident, I know my duty,
and will not interrupt lovers' secrets.


SCENE II.--PSYCHE (_alone_).

Where am I? and in a spot I deemed deserted, what skilled hand has
reared this palace, which art and nature deck with the rarest gifts
that the eye could ever admire. Everything smiles, shines, sparkles in
this garden, in these apartments, whose pompous furniture presents
nothing that does not charm and flatter the beholder; and
whithersoever my fears lead me, I see under my feet naught but gold or
flowers. Can heaven have formed this world of wonders for the abode of
a serpent? And when, by this sight, it amuses and stays the unequalled
rigour of my jealous fate, does it wish to show that it repents of it?
No, no; this is the darkest, the keenest shaft of its hatred, so
fertile in its cruelties. This hatred, by a renewed and unparalleled
sternness, lays before my gaze the choice it has made of all that is
fairest in the world, only that I may leave it with deeper regret.

How foolish is my hope if it fancies it can thus alleviate my pain.
Every moment that my death is delayed becomes a new misfortune for me;
the more it stays its coming, the oftener I die.

Leave me no longer to pine; come, take thy victim, monster, whose
mission it is to slay me. Wouldst thou have me seek thee? and must I
rouse thy fury to devour me? If heaven wills my death, if my life be a
crime, dare at length to seize whatever little remains of it; I am
tired of murmuring against a lawful penalty; I am weary of sighs;
come, that I may end the death I am dying.


SCENE III.--LOVE, PSYCHE, ZEPHYR.

LOVE. Behold this serpent, this pitiless monster, whom a wonderful
oracle has prepared for you, and who perhaps does not inspire such
dread as you had imagined.

PSY. You, my Lord! you are that monster who, so spoke the oracle,
threatens my sad life? you, who seem rather a god, deigning
miraculously to come yourself to my rescue?

LOVE. What need of help in the midst of an empire where all that
breathes only awaits your look to do its bidding, where I am the only
monster you have to fear?

PSY. But small is the fear that a monster like you inspires, and if it
has any venom, a soul has little reason to venture on the least
complaint against a pleasing poison, the cure of which all the heart
would dread! Scarce do I behold you than already my calmed fears
suffer the image of death to vanish; and I feel I know not what
unknown fire flow through my frozen veins: Esteem I have felt, and
kindness, friendship, gratitude; compassion's innocent sorrows have
made me know its power, but I have not yet felt what I now feel. I
know not what it is, but I know that it fills me with delight, and
causes me no alarm. The longer I gaze on you, the more I feel the
spell. Nothing that I have ever felt had the same effect; and I would
tell you, my Lord, that I love you, did I know what love is. Turn them
not away, those eyes that poison me, those eyes so tender, so
piercing, yet so loving, that look as if they shared the confusion
they cause me. Alas! the more dangerous they prove, the more fondly I
cling to them. What decree of heaven is it which I cannot understand,
that forces me to tell you more than I should? I, whose modesty ought
at least to wait that you explain the confusion that, I see, is within
you. You sigh, my Lord, as I sigh; your senses, like mine, seem
amazed. 'Tis my duty to be silent concerning this, yours to speak it,
yet it is I who tell this to you.

LOVE. Your heart, Psyche, has ever been too insensible, and you must
not wonder if, to repair the insult, Love now pays himself with usury
for that which your soul ought to have granted him. The time is come
in which your lips must breathe those sighs so long restrained; and
while it draws you from that fierce humour, an endless rapture, as
sweet as it is unknown, must wound you as deeply as it ought to have
wounded you during those golden days the course of which your
unfeeling soul has profaned.

PSY. Not to love is, then, a great crime?

LOVE. Do you suffer a hard punishment for it?

PSY. The punishment is mild indeed.

LOVE. The penalty is suited to the offence; and Love, on this glorious
day, avenges himself of lack of love by an excess of love.

PSY. Would I had been punished before! My life's happiness lies in it.
I ought to blush at it, or to whisper it low, but this torture has too
many charms. Suffer me to say, and to repeat it aloud; though I said
it a hundred times, I would never blush for it. It is not I who speak;
and the wonderful empire, the amiable violence of your presence, sway
my voice as soon as I begin to speak. Vainly does my modesty take
secret offence at it; vainly would my sex and decency bind me to other
laws; it is your eyes that dictate my answer, and my lips, the slaves
of their almighty power, no longer consult me on the self-respect I
owe myself.

LOVE. Fair Psyche, believe what these eyes tell you. Let yours vie
with each other in instructing me of all your emotions. Trust this
sighing heart, which, so long as yours will answer, will tell you more
by a sigh than a hundred looks can express. 'Tis the sweetest
language, the most powerful, the truest of all!

PSY. The understanding of it was due to both our hearts to make them
equally satisfied. I have sighed, you have understood me; you sigh,
and I heard you. But release me from doubt, my Lord, and tell me, if
by the same road Zephyr has led you hither after me; to tell me what I
hear now. When I arrived here, were you expected? and when you speak
to him, are you obeyed?

LOVE. The empire I exercise over this sweet climate is as sovereign as
yours is over my heart. _Love_ is favourable to me, and 'tis for his
sake that Aeolus has placed Zephyr under my command. It was Love who,
to reward my passion, dictated this oracle, by which your fair days
that were threatened have been released from a throng of lovers; and
which has freed me from the lasting obstacle of so many ardent sighs
that were unworthy of being addressed to you. Ask not of me what this
region be, nor the name of its ruler; you shall know it in time. My
object is to win you; but I wish to do so by my services, my assiduous
care, my constant vows, by a lover's sacrifice of all that I am, of
all my power can effect. The splendour of my rank must not solicit you
for me, neither must I make a merit of my power; and though sovereign
lord of this blissful realm, I wish to owe you, Psyche, to nothing but
my love.

Come with me, Princess, and admire its marvels; prepare your eyes and
ears to the charms it will offer you. You shall gaze on woods and
meads, contesting their beauties with gold and gems; you shall hear
nothing but sweet concerts; a hundred beauties shall serve you here;
without envy they shall worship you, and every moment with a humble
and raptured soul shall solicit the honour of your commands.

PSY. My will waits upon yours; I can no longer have one of my own; but
at any rate your oracle has severed me from two sisters, and the king,
my father, whom my supposed death has all three reduced to bewail me.
Suffer my sisters to be witnesses of my glory and your love for me, to
dissipate the error which overwhelms their soul with mortal sorrow.

Lend them too, as you did me, Zephyr's wings, that they may facilitate
their access to your empire, as they did mine. Let them see where I
live, let them wonder at the success of my loss.

LOVE. You do not yield me all your soul, Psyche. This affectionate
remembrance of a father and two sisters snatches from me part of that
which I crave for my passion only. Have no eyes for anyone but for me,
who have none but for you. Let love for me, and the desire of pleasing
me, be your only thought, and when such cares dare divert you from
it....

PSY. Can you be jealous of affection for kin?

LOVE. I am jealous, my Psyche, jealous of all nature. The sun's rays
kiss you too often; your tresses are too sensible to the wooing of the
breeze; no sooner does it caress them than I murmur. The very air
which you breathe passes with too much pleasure between your lips;
your robes cling too closely to your form. I know not what bewilders
me, and I dread amidst your sighs some stray one.

But you would see your sisters. Be gone, Zephyr; Psyche commands, I
cannot forbid.


SCENE IV.--LOVE, PSYCHE.

LOVE. When you shall show them this blissful seat, make them a
thousand gifts from these treasures; lavish on them endearments,
caresses; and, if possible, exhaust the tendernesses that blood
demands, so that you may yield yourself entirely to love. I shall not
importune you with my presence, but let not your meeting be too long,
remembering that you rob _me_ of whatever attention you pay _them_.

PSY. Your love grants me a favour, which 'twere not possible for me to
abuse.

LOVE. Still, let us visit these gardens, this palace, where you will
meet naught but what will pale before your dazzling charms. And you,
little Cupids, you, young Zephyrs, whose souls are but soft sighs, vie
with each other in showing what joy you feel at the appearance of my
princess.


THIRD INTERLUDE.

_Entry of ballet, composed of four_ CUPIDS _and four_ ZEPHYRS, _twice
interrupted by a dialogue sung by a_ CUPID _and a_ ZEPHYR.

LOVE, PSYCHE.

PART I.


A ZEPHYR.


    Ye gentle youth, follow
    Love's sweet and tender glow;
    In happy days and fair,
  From passion's joys do not forbear.--
  'Tis to deceive they tell you, aye,
  You should avoid the wooing sigh,
    And fear the pressing suit.--
    'Tis now the time to learn
    What fires within you burn!

_They sing together._

  All gentle hearts in turn
    With love must glow;
  And greater charms that burn
    A greater debt will owe.

A ZEPHYR (_alone_).
  A youthful heart and tender
  At last must yield surrender.

BOTH (_together_).
  All gentle hearts in turn
    With love must glow;
  And greater charms that burn
    A greater debt will owe.

A CUPID (_alone_).
  What boots to play the truant's part,
  And shield yourselves against the dart?
   The sunny day is flown and gone,
  The hour lost may ne'er be won.

BOTH (_together_).
  All gentle hearts in turn
    With love must glow;
  And greater charms that burn
    A greater debt will owe.


PART II.

A ZEPHYR.
  Great Love hath potent charms;
  To him we yield our arms;
  His cares and sorrows sweet
  Have, too, their joy--though fleet!
    To follow him, all hearts
    Would court a thousand darts.
  If we would taste his deep delight,
  Ah! we must pine till fades the light
    Before our eyes.
  A worthless life it is--when love
  Fills not the heart it fain would move!

_They sing together._

  In love if we must grieve and sigh,
  A moment's bliss still well repays
  The ills and woes of many days.

A ZEPHYR (_alone_).
    'Midst hopes and fears,
    And mystery and tears,
  We cannot, without the touch of pain,
      Bliss seek again.

BOTH (_together_).
  In love if we must grieve and sigh,
  A moment's bliss still well repays
  The ills and woes of many days.

A CUPID (_alone_).
  What better deed is there to do
  Than strive to please and softly woo?
  A lover's part is sweetest care,
  And this it is that all must bear.

BOTH (_together_).
  In love if we must grieve and sigh,
  A moment's bliss still well repays
  The ills and woes of many days.




ACT IV.

_The scene changes to a splendid palace, in the interior of which is
seen at the end of a long vestibule a lovely garden, in which are many
trees laden with all kinds of fruit._

SCENE I.--AGLAURA, CIDIPPE.


AGL. I can bear it no longer, my sister. I have seen too many wonders;
future times will scarcely conceive them; this sun, that sees all, and
lays all before our gaze, never beheld the like. This dazzling palace
and this stately equipage are a display hateful to me; shame as well
as spite overwhelm me. How cruelly Fortune has treated us; see how her
inconsiderate bounty blindly lavishes, exhausts, and unites her
efforts to make all these treasures the lot of a younger sister!

CID. I share all your feelings; your griefs are mine; in this
delightful spot, all that displeases you wounds me; all which you
consider a deadly insult oppresses me no less than yourself, and
leaves bitterness within my breast and blushes on my brow.

AGL. No, my sister, no living queen, in her own realm speaks in such
sovereign tones as Psyche in these abodes. Here we see her obeyed with
scrupulous exactitude; and a yearning study of her will seeks it even
in her eyes, a thousand beauties throng around her, and seem to say to
our jealous looks, "Whatever your charms may be, she is still fairer,
and we who serve her are fairer than you." She orders, it is done;
none refuse, none rebel. Flora, clinging to her steps, lavishes her
sweetest charms around her; Zephyr flies to execute her orders, and
his mistress and he, too much a prey to her charms, forget their own
love in their eagerness to serve her.

CID. She has gods at her services, soon she will have altars; our sway
extends over weak mortals only, whose continual caprice and impudence,
rebelling secretly from us, oppose either murmurs or stratagem to our
will.

AGL. It was but little indeed that at our court so many hearts
contended for her, preferring her to us! It was not enough that she
was there worshipped night and day by a crowd of lovers. When we were
comforting ourselves with seeing her on the brink of the grave by the
sudden order of the oracle, she thought fit to display before us the
miracle of her new destiny, and has chosen our eyes to be witnesses of
that which at the bottom of our hearts we least desire.

CID. What above all fills my heart with despair is to see this lover,
so perfect, so born to please, a captive under her sway. Were it in
our power to choose from so many monarchs, should we find one who
bears such a noble mien? To see your wishes fulfilled beyond
expectation is oftentimes a bliss that engenders unhappiness; there is
no splendid train, no proud palace, but opens some door to incurable
ills. But to possess a lover of perfect merit, to see yourself dearly
beloved by him, is a happiness so lofty, so exquisite, that its worth
cannot be expressed.

AGL. No more of this, my sister; the thought of it would kill us; let
us rather think of revenge; let us find means of breaking the spell
that fosters this affection between her and him.

She comes; I have darts ready, such as she shall find difficult to
parry.


SCENE II.--PSYCHE, AGLAURA, CIDIPPE.

PSY. I come to bid you farewell; my lover wishes your departure. He
can no longer endure that you should deprive him of a particle of the
joy he feels in being alone to contemplate me. The merest look, the
slightest word, is a treasure for his love, and I rob him of it when I
grant it to my sisters in favour of the ties of blood.

AGL. Jealousy is very keen, and these nice sentiments well deserve
that he who shows such tenderness for you should be considered above
the generality of lovers. I speak thus because I do not know him; nor
do you know his name, or that of those to whom he owes the light. This
alarms us. I hold him to be a mighty prince, whose power is extreme,
far above kingly sway. His treasure which he has strewn beneath your
feet would put Abundance herself to the blush. Your love for him is as
keen as his for you; you are his delight, he is yours; your happiness,
my sister, would be perfect if you but knew whom you love.

PSY. What care I! He loves me. The more he sees me, the more I please
him. There are no pleasures which delight the soul, but anticipate my
wishes. I do not understand the cause of your alarm when all here
obeys my will.

AGL. What boots it that all bows to you here if this lover ever
conceals what he is? If we are alarmed, it is for your interest alone.
Vain it is that everything meets you with a smile, and brings delight;
true love scorns reserve; and whoever persists in concealment is
conscious that he is in some way open to reproach. Should this suitor
prove fickle--for often change in love is pleasing, and between
ourselves, I dare say that, however dazzling the flash of your charms,
there are others as fair as you--if, I say, another beauty should bind
him under new thralls, if in the state in which you are now, alone and
defenceless at his mercy, he should go so far as to offer violence, on
whom should the king wreak his vengeance for this change or this
insolence?

PSY. You fill me with dread. Kind heaven! can I be so unfortunate?

CID. Who knows but that Hymen's knot....

PSY. Say no more, I could not bear it.

AGL. I have but one word more to say. This prince who loves you, sways
the winds, gives us Zephyr's wings for a chariot, and every moment
lavishes on you new pleasures, when he thus openly breaks the order of
nature, may perhaps mingle some little imposture with so much love.
Perhaps this palace is nothing more than an enchantment; these gilt
ceilings, these mountains of wealth, with which he buys your
affection, so soon as he shall be weary of your caresses, will vanish
in a moment. You know as well as ourselves what power lies in spells.

PSY. In my turn, what cruel alarms I feel!

AGL. Our friendship seeks your good only.

PSY. Farewell, sisters, we must close our meeting; I love, and fear
lest he should grow impatient; go, and to-morrow, if I may, you shall
see me, either happier or crushed by the deepest anguish.

AGL. We go to apprise the king of the new glory, the excess of bliss
which heaven showers upon you.

CID. We go to relate to him the surprising and marvellous tale of so
pleasing a change.

PSY. Trouble him not, sisters, with your suspicions, and when you
describe to him this charming empire....

AGL. We both know what we must conceal and what speak, and need no
lessons.

ZEPHYR _carries off_ PSYCHE'S _sisters in a cloud, which
descends to the earth, and in which he bears them rapidly away._


SCENE III.--LOVE, PSYCHE.

LOVE. You are alone at last. I can once more without your importunate
sisters as witnesses declare to you what sway eyes so fair have won
over me, and how extreme is the delight that a sincere ardour inspires
when once it has locked two hearts together. I can unfold to you the
loving eagerness of my enraptured soul, and swear that, enslaved to
you alone, its rapture has no other aim than to behold this ardour
followed by a similar ardour, to conceive no other wish but to bind my
vows to your desires, and make all that pleases you my only delight.
But wherefore does a cloud of sadness seem to dim the brightness of
those beautiful eyes? Is there aught which you can want in these
abodes? Scorn you the homage of the vows here paid to you?

PSY. No, my Lord!

LOVE. What is it then? And to what must I attribute my misfortune? You
sigh less from love than from grief. The roses of your cheek are
faded, a token of secret sorrow. Scarce are your sisters gone than you
sigh of regret. Ah! my Psyche, when two hearts are swayed by an equal
passion, can their sighs have a different object? and when their love
is true, and the loved one nigh, is there room to sigh for relatives?

PSY. That is not the cause of my sorrow.

LOVE. Is it the absence of a rival, and a favoured rival too, that
causes this neglect?

Psy. How ill you understand a heart wholly yours. I love you, my Lord;
and my love is vexed at the undeserved suspicion which you have
conceived. You but little know your own deserts, if you fear that you
are not loved. I love you; and since I beheld the light of day, I have
shown myself proud enough to scorn the vows of more than one king; and
since I must disclose to you my whole heart, I have found none but you
worthy of me. And yet I feel a certain sadness, which I would fain
conceal from you; a gloomy grief is mingled with all my affection. Ask
not the cause of it; perhaps, if you knew it, you would punish me for
it, and if I still dare to aspire to anything, I am sure I should not
obtain it.

LOVE. And do you not dread lest I should in my turn feel vexed at you
for so ill understanding your own powers, or for pretending to be
ignorant of the absolute sway you exercise over me? Ah! if you doubt
it in the least, be undeceived. Speak.

PSY. I should have to bear with the shame of a refusal.

LOVE. I pray you to harbour kinder feelings in my behalf; the trial of
it is easy. Speak; everything waits on your will. If you cannot trust
my words without oaths, I swear by those beautiful eyes, those lords
of my heart, those divine authors of my passion; and if it be not
sufficient to swear by your beautiful eyes, I swear by the Styx, by
which all the gods do swear.

PSY. After this assurance, my fears are somewhat allayed. My Lord,
here I look on pomp and abundance, I adore you, and you worship me; my
heart is enraptured, my senses charmed by it; but amidst this highest
bliss, I have the misfortune of not knowing which it is whom I love.
Dispel this darkness, and unfold to me who this perfect lover is.

LOVE. Psyche, what is that you say?

PSY. That this is the happiness for which I long, and that if you
refuse it to me ...

LOVE. I have sworn it, I am no longer master of it; but you do not
know what you ask. Leave me my secret. If I discover myself, I lose
you and you me. The only remedy is for you to retract your words.

PSY. Is this my sovereign sway over you?

LOVE. Your power is unbounded, and I am wholly yours. But if our
wooing has charms for you, lay no obstacle in the way of its pleasing
continuance. Do not force me to flight. This would be the least
misfortune which can happen to us from that wish which has seduced
you.

PSY. My Lord, you now wish to test me; but I know how far I am to
believe it. I pray you to let me know the measure of my glory, and no
longer to conceal from me for what illustrious choice I have rejected
the vows of so many kings.

LOVE. Do you will it so?

PSY. Suffer me to beseech you to it.

LOVE. If you knew what cruel misfortune you draw upon yourself by
it....

PSY. My Lord, you fill me with despair.

LOVE. Think well on it; I can yet be silent.

PSY. Do you pledge yourself by oaths which you do not mean to keep.

LOVE. Be it so! I am a god, the most powerful of all gods, absolute
master on this earth, and in the heavens; my power is supreme in the
ocean and the air; in a word, I am Love himself. I have wounded myself
with my own darts for love of you; and, alas! but for the violence
which you impose on me, and which has turned my passion for you into
wrath, you would have me now for your husband. Your wish is
accomplished; you know whom you loved; you know the lover whom you
charmed; see now what misfortune is upon us. Yourself you force me to
abandon you, yourself you force me to deprive you of all the fruits of
your victory. It may be that your beautiful eyes will see me no more;
this palace, these grounds, once vanished with me, will cause your
rising glory to fade away. You would not believe me, and the
dispelling of this doubt has for fruit that Fate, at whose blows the
very heavens tremble, mightier than my love, mightier than all the
gods united, which is even now showing its hatred to you, and driving
me hence.

LOVE _flies away, and the gardens vanish._


SCENE IV.

_The stage represents a desert and the wild banks of a river._

PSYCHE, _the_ RIVER GOD, _reclining on a bank of reeds, and leaning on
an urn._

PSY. Cruel destiny! aching pain! fatal curiosity! Speak, dread
solitude, what hast thou done with all my felicity? I loved a god; was
beloved by him; my happiness redoubled at every moment; and now behold
me, alone, bewailing, in the midst of a desert, where, to increase my
pain, when shame and despair are upon me, I feel my love increasing
now that I have lost the lover. Its very remembrance charms and
poisons my soul. Its delights tyrannise over a wretched heart, which
my passion has condemned to the keenest pain. Kind heaven! When Love
abandoned me, why did he leave me the fire he had breathed into me. O
thou! the pure and inexhaustible source of all good, lord of men and
gods, dear author of the pain I now endure, art thou for ever vanished
from my sight? I! I banished thee! when love was deepest, when bliss
supreme, an unworthy suspicion filled my heart with alarm. Ungrateful
heart, the fire was but ill-kindled; for from the first moment of love
we cannot have any wish other than that of him whom we cherish. Let me
die, it is the only choice left me after the loss I have made. For
whom, great gods, would I live, for whom entertain a single wish?
Thou, river, whose wave washes these desert sands, bury my crime in
thy waters; and end ills so miserable by allowing me to find a rest in
thy bed.

THE RIVER GOD. Thy death would sully my stream, Psyche. Heaven forbids
it. Perhaps after such heavy sorrows, another fate awaits thee. Rather
flee Venus' implacable anger. I see her seeking thee in order to
punish thee; the son's love has excited the mother's hatred. Flee! I
will detain her.

PSY. I shall await her avenging wrath! What can it have that will not
be too pleasant for me? Whoever seeks death dreads no gods or
goddesses, but can defy all their darts.


SCENE V.--VENUS, PSYCHE, THE RIVER GOD.

VEN. Insolent Psyche, you dare then to await my arrival after you have
deprived me on earth of my honours, after your seducing charms have
received the incense which is due to mine alone? I have seen my
shrines forsaken, I have seen all the world, enslaved by your charms,
idolise you as the sovereign beauty, offer to you a homage until then
unknown, and not stay to consider whether there was another Venus at
all; notwithstanding this, I see you bold enough not to dread the
punishment your crime justly deserves, and to meet my gaze as if my
resentment were but little matter.

PSY. If I have been loved by a few mortals, is it a crime in me to
have possessed charms by which they allowed their eyes to be captured
while they were blind to you? I am but what heaven hath made me, I
have only those attractions which it has been willing to lend me; if
the vows that were paid to me pleased you but little, you had only to
show yourself, to conceal no longer from men that perfect beauty which
has but to show itself in order to bring them back to their duty.

VEN. You should have guarded better against these vows; this
veneration, this incense ought to be declined, and in order to
undeceive them more effectively, you should yourself have rendered
this homage to me in their presence. You found pleasure in this error,
from which on the contrary you should have shrunk with horror. Your
haughty temper, proud of having rejected a thousand kings, has carried
the extravagant ambition of its choice even to the skies.

PSY. Have I in my ambition aspired to heaven?

VEN. Your insolence is without an equal; do you not aspire to the gods
when you reject all the kings of the world?

PSY. If Love had hardened my heart to all their passion, and had
reserved me for himself alone, do I stand guilty? and must you to-day
as a price for so dazzling a love crush me with everlasting sorrow?

VEN. Psyche, you should have known your position better, and the rank
of this god.

PSY. And has he allowed me time and opportunity for doing so when from
the first he became absolute master of my heart?

VEN. You have allowed your heart to be charmed by him, and you have
loved him as soon as he said, "I love."

PSY. How could I refuse to love the god who inspires all with love,
and who was pleading his own cause? He is your son; you well know his
power, his merit.

VEN. Yes; he is my son; but a son who excites my wrath; a son who ill
returns to me what he knows is due; a son who knows that I am
forsaken, and who, the more to flatter his own unworthy affection,
since you return his love, wounds no one, forces no one to come to my
shrine and address his supplications to me. You have made a rebel of
him; but the whole world shall behold my dire revenge on you, and I
shall teach you whether it is meet for a mortal maiden to suffer a god
to sigh at her feet. Follow me; you shall find by your own experience
to what degree of mad self-reliance this ambition was leading you.
Come, and arm yourself with as much patience as you possess
presumption.


FOURTH INTERLUDE.

_The scenes represent the infernal regions; a sea of fire is
discovered, whose waves are rolling unceasingly. This terrible sea is
enclosed by burning ruins; and, standing in the midst of the raging
billows, through a frightful opening, appears_ PLUTO'S _palace. Eight_
FURIES _issue from it, and form the entry of the ballet, in which they
show their delight at having kindled such dire wrath in the heart of
the sweetest of divinities. A_ GOBLIN _adds perilous jumps to their
dances, and meanwhile_ PSYCHE, _who, in obedience to_ VENUS, _has come
to the infernal regions, is seen crossing again in_ CHARON'S _bark,
holding the box given to her by_ PROSERPINA _for_ VENUS.




ACT V.

SCENE I.--PSYCHE (_alone_)


Alas! Ye awful waves of hell, ye gloomy palaces where Megaera and her
sisters hold their court, far ever foes to the sun's light, amongst
your Ixions and your Tantaluses, in the midst of so many incessant
tortures, in these hideous recesses, what pain, what toil so great as
those to which Venus condemns my love? Yet my troubles satisfy not her
wrath; and since I am subject to her laws, since I see myself a prey
to her resentment, in these cruel moments I must have had more than
one soul, more than one life, to fulfil her commands. Yet all this I
could bear with joy if, in the midst of her hatred, my eyes could
behold, were it for one moment only, my darling, my beloved lover! His
name I dare not utter; my lips, whose guilt it was to exact too much,
are now unworthy of him; and in this deadly anguish, the keenest pain
my ever-returning death subjects me to is that I may not see him. If
his anger lasted still, no anguish could equal mine; but if he felt
any pity for a soul that worships him, however great the sufferings to
which I am condemned, I should feel them not. Yea, thou mighty
destiny, if he would but stay his wrath, all my sorrows would be at an
end. Ah! a mere look from the son suffices to make me insensible to
the mother's fury. I will doubt it no longer; he shares my grief, he
sees what I endure, and weeps with me; my sufferings are his too; it
is a self-imposed law of love; in spite of Venus, in spite of my
crime, he it is who sustains and revives me in the midst of the
dangers I have to encounter. He harbours still the tender feelings
urged by his passion, and hastens to restore me to new life as soon as
I perish. But what would with me those two shades I see advancing
towards me through the doubtful light of these dark recesses?


SCENE II.--PSYCHE, CLEOMENES, AGENOR.

PSY. Cleomenes, Agenor, is it not you whom I see? Who has deprived you
of life?

CLE. The meetest grief that could have caused a noble despair. That
funeral pomp where you awaited the fiercest rigour and highest
injustice of a fate most dark.

AGE. On that same rock where heaven in its wrath was promising to you,
instead of a husband, a dragon who would forthwith devour you, we held
ourselves ready to repulse his fury, or die with you. You know it
well, Princess; and when you disappeared from our gaze through the
air, both, equally carried away by our love and grief, cast ourselves
headlong from that rock, in order to follow your beauty, or rather to
feel that love-born joy of offering in your behalf a first prey to the
monster.

CLE. We were fortunately deceived as to the meaning of your oracle;
but here we have recognised its miracle, and learned that the serpent,
ready to devour you, was the god who is the source of all love, and
who, in spite of his divinity, adoring you himself, could not bear
that mortals such as we are should presume to love you.

AGE. We now enjoy a pleasant death, as a reward for having followed
you. What would have been life to us if we could not have been yours?
Here we behold your charms once more; which neither of us would ever
have seen again in the world above. Happy shall we be if we see the
merest tear honour the misfortunes of which you have been the cause.

PSY. How can I have more tears to shed when my own misfortunes have
been carried to the highest pitch? Let us mingle our sighs, since we
have so fatal a destiny; we cannot exhaust sighs; but yours, Princes,
are uttered in behalf of an ungrateful being. You would not survive my
misfortune; but under whatever blow I fall, I cannot die for you.

CLE. Have we deserved aught else, we whose great passion has not
ceased to weary you with the tale of our woes?

PSY. Princes, you might have won my whole soul but for your being
rivals; those incomparable qualities which attended the vows of both
rendered you too deserving of love to allow me to reject either.

AGE. You have been able, without injustice or cruelty, to refuse a
heart reserved for a god. But behold Venus! Fate bids us return, and
forces us to say "Farewell."

PSY. Is not leisure allowed you to tell me what your abode is here?

CLE. Among groves ever green, where we breathe naught but love; no
sooner do we die of love than through love we revive; we sigh for love
under the sweet laws of his blest empire; and everlasting night dares
not expel from it the day which Love himself brings on our phantoms,
which he inspires, and of which he forms a court even in Hades.

AGE. Your envious sisters, who descended here below after us lost
themselves in the hope of losing you. Both, each in turn, as a reward
for the plot which cost them their life, suffer, now the rock at
Ixion's side, now the vulture at Tityus'! Love, by means of the
Zephyrs, has executed on them swift justice for their envenomed and
jealous malice. Those winged ministers of his just wrath, under
pretence of restoring them again to you, cast them both to the bottom
of a precipice, where the hideous spectacle of their mangled bodies
displays but the first and least torture for that stratagem the
cunning of which was the cause of the ills you now endure.

PSY. How I pity them!

CLE. You alone are to be pitied; but we tarry too long conversing with
you. Farewell! May we live in your remembrance; may you, and that
soon, have nothing further to dread. Soon may Love exalt you to
heaven, place you beside the other gods, and, kindling again a flame
that cannot be extinguished, release for ever your beauteous eyes from
the task of increasing daylight in these realms!


SCENE III.--PSYCHE (_alone_).

Hapless lovers! their passion still continues; though dead, both love
me--me, whose harshness so ill received their vows. 'Tis not thus thou
actest--thou, who alone hast seized my heart; lover whom I still prize
a thousand times more than my life, and who breakest such charming
ties. Shun me no longer, and leave me to hope that one day thou shalt
cast a glance on me, that by my sufferings, I shall please thee, and
again win thy plighted faith. But my woes have disfigured me too much
to allow to entertain such hopes. Eyes dejected, sad, despairing,
pining, and with cheeks faded, what have I that can speak in my favour
if some miracle impossible to foresee does not restore to me the
beauty which once captivated thee? This treasure of divine beauty,
which Proserpina has entrusted to me for Venus, contains charms which
I can make mine own, and their lustre must be extreme, since beauty
herself, Venus, requires them to adorn herself. Would it be a great
crime to snatch a few? To captivate a god, who has been my lover, to
recover his affection, and put an end to my torture, can anything that
I may do be unlawful? Let me open it. What vapours cloud my brain? and
what do I behold issuing from this open casket? Love, unless thy
compassion forbids my death, I must needs descend to the tomb, never
to live again.

PSYCHE _swoons, and_ LOVE _flies towards her_.


SCENE IV.

LOVE. Thy danger, Psyche, dispels my wrath; nay, the violence of my
passion has never abated; and though thou hast excited my highest
displeasure, yet my anger was harboured only against my mother's
wrath. I have seen all thy toils, I have followed all thy misfortunes,
and throughout my sighs have answered thy tears. Look on me, I am
still the same. What, again and again, I repeat that I love thee, and
yet thou wilt not say that thou lovest me! Can it be that thy
beauteous eyes are for ever closed, that they are for ever bereft of
daylight? O Death! need'st thou have taken so cruel a dart, and,
regardless of my eternal being, endangered my own life! How oft,
ungrateful deity, have I swelled thy dark empire by the contempt or
the cruelty of a fierce and proud fair one? How many faithful lovers,
since I must confess it, have I, through irresistible raptures,
sacrificed to thee? Go, I shall wound no more souls, I shall pierce no
more hearts, but with darts dipped in the divine liquors that foster
heaven's immortal passions. I shall hurl them no more but to make as
many lovers as there are gods. As for thee, thou inexorable mother,
who forcest her to bereave me of what I held dearest in this world,
dread, in thy turn, the effects of my wrath. Thou wouldst sway my
feelings, thou who art often swayed by my will; thou who wearest a
heart as sensitive as that of mortals; thou enviest to mine the
raptures of thine own! But in this same heart I shall plunge such
darts as shall be followed by jealous sorrow. I shall crush thee by
abasing ravishments, and ever choose as objects for thy dearest
longings Adonises and Anchises who will nurse nothing but hatred
towards thee.


SCENE V.--VENUS, LOVE, PSYCHE (_still senseless_).

VEN. The threat is full of respect, and the anger of a rebellious son
presumptuous....

LOVE. I am no longer a child; my childhood has been but too long, and
my wrath is as just as it is impetuous.

VEN. Its impetuosity should be subdued, and thou oughtest to remember
that to me thou owest thy birth.

LOVE. And thou mightest well not forget that thou possessest a heart
and beauty that hold their power from me; that my bow is the only
support of this power, that without my shafts it is nothing, and that
if the stoutest hearts have suffered themselves to be drawn in thy
triumphant train, thou hast never enslaved any one whose chains it was
not my pleasure to forge. Mention no more those rights of birth that
fetter my desires; and if thou dost not wish to lose a thousand sighs,
pay thy tribute to gratitude when thou seest me; thou whose glory and
delights are the offsprings of my power.

VEN. How hast thou defended this glory of which thou speakest? How
hast thou restored it to me? And when thou hast seen my shrines
deserted, my temples violated, the honours due to me rivalled by those
of another, if thou hast shared my shame, how hast thou punished
Psyche, who hath stolen them from me? I bade thee throw a spell over
her, that she might love the basest of mortals, who would not
condescend to answer her passion but by continual repulse and
cruellest contempt; and thyself thou hast loved her! Thou hast seduced
immortal deities against me; for the Zephyrs have concealed her from
me; for thee, Apollo himself, by an oracle cleverly turned, had
snatched her from my power so well that, but for the curiosity which
by a blind distrust restored her to my vengeance, she escaped for ever
my angry passion. See to what thy love has reduced her, thine own
Psyche! See! her soul is even now departing; and if thine is still
smitten, receive now her last breath. Threaten and brave me if thou
wilt, but she must die. So much insolence suits thee well; and I must
needs bow to all it pleases thee to say, I, who can do nothing without
thy darts.

LOVE. Thy power is but too great, relentless goddess! Fate abandons
her to thy wrath; but be less inexorable to the prayers and tears of a
son who beseeches thee on his knees. It must be a pleasant sight
enough for thee to see on one side Psyche expiring, on the other a son
who, in a suppliant voice, wishes to hold his heart's happiness from
thee only. Give me back my Psyche, restore to her all her charms,
surrender her to my tears, to my love, to my grief; for she is my
eyes' delight, my heart's happiness.

VEN. However deep thy love for Psyche, do not expect me to put an end
to her misfortunes. If Fate abandons her to me, I abandon her to her
fate. Importune me no more, and let her in the midst of her calamities
triumph or perish without Venus.

LOVE. Alas! if I am too importunate, I would not be so if I could but
die!

VEN. This grief is not common that drives an immortal to long for
death.

LOVE. Thou mayest judge of the intensity of my passion by its very
excess; wilt thou not be merciful?

VEN. I must confess thy love touches my heart; it disarms, it abates
my sternness; thy Psyche shall see the light again.

LOVE. How powerfully I shall cause thy sway to be felt everywhere!

VEN. Ay! thou shalt behold her decked in her first beauty; but I will
have the entire deference of thy grateful vows. I will that a true
respect allow my love to select for thee another spouse.

LOVE. And I will have no such grace; I assume all my former boldness;
I will have Psyche; I will have her plighted faith; I will that she
live again, and that she live for me; and I reckon as naught that thy
wearied hatred give way to favour another maiden. Jupiter, who even
now appears, shall judge betwixt us, and decide between my
insubordination and thy wrath.

_The lightning flashes, the thunder rolls, and_ JUPITER
_appears in the air borne aloft by his eagle_.


SCENE VI.--JUPITER, VENUS, LOVE, PSYCHE (_senseless_).

LOVE. O thou to whom alone all is possible, father of gods, lord of
mortals, soften the rigour of an inexorable mother, who without me
would have no shrines. I have wept, I have supplicated; I sigh, I
threaten. Sighs and threats are alike vain. She will not perceive that
on my displeasure hangs the happy or sad condition of the whole world,
and that if Psyche dies, if Psyche be not mine, I am no longer "Love".
Yes! I shall break my bow, shatter my arrows; I shall even extinguish
my sacred flame, and leave all nature to pine to death; or if I deign
to wound a few more hearts with these golden shafts that arrest my
sway, I shall wound you all above in behalf of mortals, while I shall
hurl against them blunted darts only that inspire hatred, and produce
thankless and cruel rebels. What tyrannical law is this that would
bind me to keep my shafts ever ready to serve you, and would have me
make conquest upon conquest for you, while you forbid me to make one
for myself?

JUP. (_to_ VENUS). My daughter, show thyself less severe towards
him; his Psyche's destiny is even now in thy hands. Fate, at thy
slightest word, is ready to follow up thy wrath. Speak, and let a
mother's tenderness prevail upon thy designs. All dread this wrath
which awes even me. Will thou leave the world to become the prey of
hatred, disorder, and confusion, and change a god of union, of
delights, of joy, into one of bitterness and division? Consider the
lofty rank we hold, and say whether passion ought to sway our
feelings. The word revenge is pleasing to mortals; the more is it meet
that we should resort to forgiveness.

VEN. I forgive this rebel son. Yet would you have me submit to the
reproach that a contemptible mortal, the object of my wrath, proud
Psyche, because she displays some charms, has defiled my alliance and
my son's couch?

JUP. Well, then, I make her immortal, so that all shall be equal.

VEN. I feel no longer hatred or contempt for her, but admit her to the
honour of this conjugal tie. Psyche! recover your life, never more to
lose it. Jupiter has contrived your restoration, and I abandon that
lofty humour which opposed itself to your wishes.

PSY. (_recovering from her fainting condition_). It is you then,
mighty goddess, who restores the life to this innocent being?

VEN. Jupiter extends his pardon to you, and my wrath lasts no longer.
Live! Venus commands it. Love allows it.

PSY. (_to_ LOVE). At last I see you again, dear object of my
passion!

LOVE. (_to_ PSYCHE). You are mine at last, my soul's own delight!

JUP. Come, lovers, come; and conclude in heaven so great, so lofty a
union. Come, fair Psyche, to change thy destiny, and take thy place
among the gods.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PSYCHE***


******* This file should be named 7444-8.txt or 7444-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/7/4/4/7444



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

