The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ancient East, by D. G. Hogarh

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Ancient East

Author: D. G. Hogarh

Posting Date: February 12, 2015 [EBook #7474]
Release Date: February, 2005
First Posted: May 6, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ANCIENT EAST ***




Produced by Charles Franks, Julie Barkley and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team










HOME UNIVERSITY LIBRARY OF MODERN KNOWLEDGE


No. 92


_Editors_:

HERBERT FISHER, M.A., F.B.A.
PROF. GILBERT MURRAY, LITT.D., LL.D., F.B.A.
PROF. J. ARTHUR THOMSON, M.A.
PROF. WILLIAM T. BREWSTER, M.A.





THE ANCIENT EAST


BY


D. G. HOGARTH, M.A., F.B.A., F.S.A.

KEEPER OF THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM, OXFORD;
AUTHOR OF "IONIA AND THE EAST,"
"THE NEARER EAST," ETC.



CONTENTS


INTRODUCTORY

I    THE EAST IN 1000 B.C.

II   THE EAST IN 800 B.C.

III  THE EAST IN 600 B.C.

IV   THE EAST IN 400 B.C.

V    THE VICTORY OF THE WEST

VI   EPILOGUE

NOTE ON BOOKS




LIST OF MAPS


1. THE REGION OF THE ANCIENT EAST AND ITS MAIN DIVISIONS

2. ASIATIC EMPIRE OF EGYPT. TEMP. AMENHETEP III

3. HATTI EMPIRE AT ITS GREATEST EXTENT. EARLY 13TH CENTURY B.C.

4. ASSYRIAN EMPIRE AT ITS GREATEST EXTENT. EARLY YEARS OF ASHURBANIPAL

5. PERSIAN EMPIRE (WEST) AT ITS GREATEST EXTENT. TEMP. DARIUS HYSTASPIS

6. HELLENISM IN ASIA. ABOUT 150 B.C.





THE ANCIENT EAST


INTRODUCTORY


The title of this book needs a word of explanation, since each of its
terms can legitimately be used to denote more than one conception both
of time and place. "The East" is understood widely and vaguely nowadays
to include all the continent and islands of Asia, some part of
Africa--the northern part where society and conditions of life are most
like the Asiatic--and some regions also of South-Eastern and Eastern
Europe. Therefore it may appear arbitrary to restrict it in the present
book to Western Asia. But the qualifying term in my title must be
invoked in justification. It is the East not of to-day but of antiquity
with which I have to deal, and, therefore, I plead that it is not
unreasonable to understand by "The East" what in antiquity European
historians understood by that term. To Herodotus and his contemporary
Greeks Egypt, Arabia and India were the South; Thrace and Scythia were
the North; and Hither Asia was the East: for they conceived nothing
beyond except the fabled stream of Ocean. It can be pleaded also that my
restriction, while not in itself arbitrary, does, in fact, obviate an
otherwise inevitable obligation to fix arbitrary bounds to the East. For
the term, as used in modern times, implies a geographical area
characterized by society of a certain general type, and according to his
opinion of this type, each person, who thinks or writes of the East,
expands or contracts its geographical area.

It is more difficult to justify the restriction which will be imposed in
the following chapters on the word Ancient. This term is used even more
vaguely and variously than the other. If generally it connotes the
converse of "Modern," in some connections and particularly in the study
of history the Modern is not usually understood to begin where the
Ancient ended but to stand only for the comparatively Recent. For
example, in History, the ill-defined period called the Middle and Dark
Ages makes a considerable hiatus before, in the process of
retrospection, we get back to a civilization which (in Europe at least)
we ordinarily regard as Ancient. Again, in History, we distinguish
commonly two provinces within the undoubted area of the Ancient, the
Prehistoric and the Historic, the first comprising all the time to which
human memory, as communicated by surviving literature, ran not, or, at
least, not consciously, consistently and credibly. At the same time it
is not implied that we can have no knowledge at all of the Prehistoric
province. It may even be better known to us than parts of the Historic,
through sure deduction from archaeological evidence. But what we learn
from archaeological records is annalistic not historic, since such
records have not passed through the transforming crucible of a human
intelligence which reasons on events as effects of causes. The boundary
between Prehistoric and Historic, however, depends too much on the
subjectivity of individual historians and is too apt to vary with the
progress of research to be a fixed moment. Nor can it be the same for
all civilizations. As regards Egypt, for example, we have a body of
literary tradition which can reasonably be called Historic, relating to
a time much earlier than is reached by respectable literary tradition of
Elam and Babylonia, though their civilizations were probably older than
the Egyptian.

For the Ancient East as here understood, we possess two bodies of
historic literary tradition and two only, the Greek and the Hebrew; and
as it happens, both (though each is independent of the other) lose
consistency and credibility when they deal with history before 1000 B.C.
Moreover, Prof. Myres has covered the prehistoric period in the East in
his brilliant _Dawn of History_. Therefore, on all accounts, in treating
of the historic period, I am absolved from looking back more than a
thousand years before our era.

It is not so obvious where I may stop. The overthrow of Persia by
Alexander, consummating a long stage in a secular contest, which it is
my main business to describe, marks an epoch more sharply than any other
single event in the history of the Ancient East. But there are grave
objections to breaking off abruptly at that date. The reader can hardly
close a book which ends then, with any other impression than that since
the Greek has put the East under his feet, the history of the centuries,
which have still to elapse before Rome shall take over Asia, will simply
be Greek history writ large--the history of a Greater Greece which has
expanded over the ancient East and caused it to lose its distinction
from the ancient West. Yet this impression does not by any means
coincide with historical truth. The Macedonian conquest of Hither Asia
was a victory won by men of Greek civilization, but only to a very
partial extent a victory of that civilization. The West did not
assimilate the East except in very small measure then, and has not
assimilated it in any very large measure to this day. For certain
reasons, among which some geographical facts--the large proportion of
steppe-desert and of the human type which such country breeds--are
perhaps the most powerful, the East is obstinately unreceptive of
western influences, and more than once it has taken its captors captive.
Therefore, while, for the sake of convenience and to avoid entanglement
in the very ill-known maze of what is called "Hellenistic" history, I
shall not attempt to follow the consecutive course of events after 330
B.C., I propose to add an epilogue which may prepare readers for what
was destined to come out of Western Asia after the Christian era, and
enable them to understand in particular the religious conquest of the
West by the East. This has been a more momentous fact in the history of
the world than any political conquest of the East by the West.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the further hope of enabling readers to retain a clear idea of the
evolution of the history, I have adopted the plan of looking out over
the area which is here called the East, at certain intervals, rather
than the alternative and more usual plan of considering events
consecutively in each several part of that area. Thus, without
repetition and overlapping, one may expect to convey a sense of the
history of the whole East as the sum of the histories of particular
parts. The occasions on which the surveys will be taken are purely
arbitrary chronological points two centuries apart. The years 1000, 800,
600, 400 B.C. are not, any of them, distinguished by known events of the
kind that is called epoch-making; nor have round numbers been chosen for
any peculiar historic significance. They might just as well have been
1001, 801 and so forth, or any other dates divided by equal intervals.
Least of all is any mysterious virtue to be attached to the millenary
date with which I begin. But it is a convenient starting-point, not only
for the reason already stated, that Greek literary memory--the only
literary memory of antiquity worth anything for early history--goes back
to about that date; but also because the year 1000 B.C. falls within a
period of disturbance during which certain racial elements and groups,
destined to exert predominant influence on subsequent history, were
settling down into their historic homes.

A westward and southward movement of peoples, caused by some obscure
pressure from the north-west and north-east, which had been disturbing
eastern and central Asia Minor for more than a century and apparently
had brought to an end the supremacy of the Cappadocian Hatti, was
quieting down, leaving the western peninsula broken up into small
principalities. Indirectly the same movement had brought about a like
result in northern Syria. A still more important movement of Iranian
peoples from the farther East had ended in the coalescence of two
considerable social groups, each containing the germs of higher
development, on the north-eastern and eastern fringes of the old
Mesopotamian sphere of influence. These were the Medic and the Persian.
A little earlier, a period of unrest in the Syrian and Arabian deserts,
marked by intermittent intrusions of nomads into the western
fringe-lands, had ended in the formation of new Semitic states in all
parts of Syria from Shamal in the extreme north-west (perhaps even from
Cilicia beyond Amanus) to Hamath, Damascus and Palestine. Finally there
is this justification for not trying to push the history of the Asiatic
East much behind 1000 B.C.--that nothing like a sure chronological basis
of it exists before that date. Precision in the dating of events in West
Asia begins near the end of the tenth century with the Assyrian Eponym
lists, that is, lists of annual chief officials; while for Babylonia
there is no certain chronology till nearly two hundred years later. In
Hebrew history sure chronological ground is not reached till the
Assyrian records themselves begin to touch upon it during the reign of
Ahab over Israel. For all the other social groups and states of Western
Asia we have to depend on more or less loose and inferential
synchronisms with Assyrian, Babylonian or Hebrew chronology, except for
some rare events whose dates may be inferred from the alien histories of
Egypt and Greece.

       *       *       *       *       *

The area, whose social state we shall survey in 1000 B.C. and re-survey
at intervals, contains Western Asia bounded eastwards by an imaginary
line drawn from the head of the Persian Gulf to the Caspian Sea. This
line, however, is not to be drawn rigidly straight, but rather should
describe a shallow outward curve, so as to include in the Ancient East
all Asia situated on this side of the salt deserts of central Persia.
This area is marked off by seas on three sides and by desert on the
fourth side. Internally it is distinguished into some six divisions
either by unusually strong geographical boundaries or by large
differences of geographical character. These divisions are as follows--

(1) A western peninsular projection, bounded by seas on three sides and
divided from the rest of the continent by high and very broad mountain
masses, which has been named, not inappropriately, _Asia Minor_, since
it displays, in many respects, an epitome of the general characteristics
of the continent. (2) A tangled mountainous region filling almost all
the rest of the northern part of the area and sharply distinct in
character not only from the plateau land of Asia Minor to the west but
also from the great plain lands of steppe character lying to the south,
north and east. This has perhaps never had a single name, though the
bulk of it has been included in "Urartu" (Ararat), "Armenia" or
"Kurdistan" at various epochs; but for convenience we shall call it
_Armenia_. (3) A narrow belt running south from both the former
divisions and distinguished from them by much lower general elevation.
Bounded on the west by the sea and on the south and east by broad tracts
of desert, it has, since Greek times at least, been generally known as
_Syria_. (4) A great southern peninsula largely desert, lying high and
fringed by sands on the land side, which has been called, ever since
antiquity, _Arabia_. (5) A broad tract stretching into the continent
between Armenia and Arabia and containing the middle and lower basins of
the twin rivers, Euphrates and Tigris, which, rising in Armenia, drain
the greater part of the whole area. It is of diversified surface,
ranging from sheer desert in the west and centre, to great fertility in
its eastern parts; but, until it begins to rise northward towards the
frontier of "Armenia" and eastward towards that of the sixth division,
about to be described, it maintains a generally low elevation. No common
name has ever included all its parts, both the interfluvial region and
the districts beyond Tigris; but since the term _Mesopotamia_, though
obviously incorrect, is generally understood nowadays to designate it,
this name may be used for want of a better. (6) A high plateau, walled
off from Mesopotamia and Armenia by high mountain chains, and extending
back to the desert limits of the Ancient East. To this region, although
it comprises only the western part of what should be understood by
_Iran_, this name may be appropriated "without prejudice."

[Plate 1: THE REGION OF THE ANCIENT EAST AND ITS MAIN DIVISIONS]





CHAPTER I

THE EAST IN 1000 B.C.


In 1000 B.C. West Asia was a mosaic of small states and contained, so
far as we know, no imperial power holding wide dominion over aliens.
Seldom in its history could it so be described. Since it became
predominantly Semitic, over a thousand years before our survey, it had
fallen under simultaneous or successive dominations, exercised from at
least three regions within itself and from one without.


SECTION 1. BABYLONIAN EMPIRE

The earliest of these centres of power to develop foreign empire was
also that destined, after many vicissitudes, to hold it latest, because
it was the best endowed by nature to repair the waste which empire
entails. This was the region which would be known later as Babylonia
from the name of the city which in historic times dominated it, but, as
we now know, was neither an early seat of power nor the parent of its
distinctive local civilization. This honour, if due to any one city,
should be credited to Ur, whose also was the first and the only truly
"Babylonian" empire. The primacy of Babylonia had not been the work of
its aboriginal Sumerian population, the authors of what was highest in
the local culture, but of Semitic intruders from a comparatively
barbarous region; nor again, had it been the work of the earliest of
these intruders (if we follow those who now deny that the dominion of
Sargon of Akkad and his son Naram-sin ever extended beyond the lower
basins of the Twin Rivers), but of peoples who entered with a second
series of Semitic waves. These surged out of Arabia, eternal motherland
of vigorous migrants, in the middle centuries of the third millennium
B.C. While this migration swamped South Syria with "Canaanites," it
ultimately gave to Egypt the Hyksos or "Shepherd Kings," to Assyria its
permanent Semitic population, and to Sumer and Akkad what later
chroniclers called the First Babylonian Dynasty. Since, however, those
Semitic interlopers had no civilization of their own comparable with
either the contemporary Egyptian or the Sumerian (long ago adopted by
earlier Semitic immigrants), they inevitably and quickly assimilated
both these civilizations as they settled down.

At the same time they did not lose, at least not in Mesopotamia, which
was already half Semitized, certain Bedawi ideas and instincts, which
would profoundly affect their later history. Of these the most important
historically was a religious idea which, for want of a better term, may
be called Super-Monotheism. Often found rooted in wandering peoples and
apt long to survive their nomadic phase, it consists in a belief that,
however many tribal and local gods there may be, one paramount deity
exists who is not only singular and indivisible but dwells in one spot,
alone on earth. His dwelling may be changed by a movement of his people
_en masse_, but by nothing less; and he can have no real rival in
supreme power. The fact that the paramount Father-God of the Semites
came through that migration _en masse_ to take up his residence in
Babylon and in no other city of the wide lands newly occupied, caused
this city to retain for many centuries, despite social and political
changes, a predominant position not unlike that to be held by Holy Rome
from the Dark Ages to modern times.

Secondly the Arabs brought with them their immemorial instinct of
restlessness. This habit also is apt to persist in a settled society,
finding satisfaction in annual recourse to tent or hut life and in
annual predatory excursions. The custom of the razzia or summer raid,
which is still obligatory in Arabia on all men of vigour and spirit, was
held in equal honour by the ancient Semitic world. Undertaken as a
matter of course, whether on provocation or not, it was the origin and
constant spring of those annual marches to the frontiers, of which royal
Assyrian monuments vaingloriously tell us, to the exclusion of almost
all other information. Chederlaomer, Amraphel and the other three kings
were fulfilling their annual obligation in the Jordan valley when Hebrew
tradition believed that they met with Abraham; and if, as seems agreed,
Amraphel was Hammurabi himself, that tradition proves the custom of the
razzia well established under the First Babylonian Dynasty.

Moreover, the fact that these annual campaigns of Babylonian and
Assyrian kings were simply Bedawi razzias highly organized and on a
great scale should be borne in mind when we speak of Semitic "empires,"
lest we think too territorially. No permanent organization of
territorial dominion in foreign parts was established by Semitic rulers
till late in Assyrian history. The earlier Semitic overlords, that is,
all who preceded Ashurnatsirpal of Assyria, went a-raiding to plunder,
assault, destroy, or receive submissive payments, and their ends
achieved, returned, without imposing permanent garrisons of their own
followers, permanent viceroys, or even a permanent tributary burden, to
hinder the stricken foe from returning to his own way till his turn
should come to be raided again. The imperial blackmailer had possibly
left a record of his presence and prowess on alien rocks, to be defaced
at peril when his back was turned; but for the rest only a sinister
memory. Early Babylonian and Early Assyrian "empire," therefore, meant,
territorially, no more than a geographical area throughout which an
emperor could, and did, raid without encountering effective opposition.

Nevertheless, such constant raiding on a great scale was bound to
produce some of the fruits of empire, and by its fruits, not its
records, we know most surely how far Babylonian Empire had made itself
felt. The best witnesses to its far-reaching influence are first, the
Babylonian element in the Hittite art of distant Asia Minor, which shows
from the very first (so far as we know it, i.e. from at least 1500 B.C.)
that native artists were hardly able to realize any native ideas without
help from Semitic models; and secondly, the use of Babylonian writing
and language and even Babylonian books by the ruling classes in Asia
Minor and Syria at a little later time. That governors of Syrian cities
should have written their official communications to Pharaohs of the
Eighteenth Dynasty in Babylonian cuneiform (as the archives found at
Amarna in Upper Egypt twenty years ago show us they did) had already
afforded such conclusive proof of early and long maintained Babylonian
influence, that the more recent discovery that Hittite lords of
Cappadocia used the same script and language for diplomatic purposes has
hardly surprised us.

It has been said already that Babylonia was a region so rich and
otherwise fortunate that empire both came to it earlier and stayed later
than in the other West Asian lands which ever enjoyed it at all. When we
come to take our survey of Western Asia in 400 B.C. we shall see an
emperor still ruling it from a throne set in the lower Tigris basin,
though not actually in Babylon. But for certain reasons Babylonian
empire never endured for any long period continuously. The aboriginal
Akkadian and Sumerian inhabitants were settled, cultivated and home
keeping folk, while the establishment of Babylonian empire had been the
work of more vigorous intruders. These, however, had to fear not only
the imperfect sympathy of their own aboriginal subjects, who again and
again gathered their sullen forces in the "Sea Land" at the head of the
Persian Gulf and attacked the dominant Semites in the rear, but also
incursions of fresh strangers; for Babylonia is singularly open on all
sides. Accordingly, revolts of the "Sea Land" folk, inrushing hordes
from Arabia, descents of mountain warriors from the border hills of Elam
on the south-eastern edge of the twin river basin, pressure from the
peoples of more invigorating lands on the higher Euphrates and
Tigris--one, or more than one such danger ever waited on imperial
Babylon and brought her low again and again. A great descent of Hatti
raiders from the north about 1800 B.C. seems to have ended the imperial
dominion of the First Dynasty. On their retirement Babylonia, falling
into weak native hands, was a prey to a succession of inroads from the
Kassite mountains beyond Elam, from Elam itself, from the growing
Semitic power of Asshur, Babylon's former vassal, from the Hittite
Empire founded in Cappadocia about 1500 B.C., from the fresh wave of
Arabian overflow which is distinguished as the Aramaean, and from yet
another following it, which is usually called Chaldaean; and it was not
till almost the close of the twelfth century that one of these intruding
elements attained sufficient independence and security of tenure to
begin to exalt Babylonia again into a mistress of foreign empire. At
that date the first Nebuchadnezzar, a part of whose own annals has been
recovered, seems to have established overlordship in some part of
Mediterranean Asia--_Martu_, the West Land; but this empire perished
again with its author. By 1000 B.C. Babylon was once more a small state
divided against itself and threatened by rivals in the east and the
north.


SECTION 2. ASIATIC EMPIRE OF EGYPT

During the long interval since the fall of the First Babylonian Dynasty,
however, Western Asia had not been left masterless. Three other imperial
powers had waxed and waned in her borders, of which one was destined to
a second expansion later on. The earliest of these to appear on the
scene established an imperial dominion of a kind which we shall not
observe again till Asia falls to the Greeks; for it was established in
Asia by a non-Asiatic power. In the earlier years of the fifteenth
century a Pharaoh of the strong Eighteenth Dynasty, Thothmes III, having
overrun almost all Syria up to Carchemish on the Euphrates, established
in the southern part of that country an imperial organization which
converted his conquests for a time into provincial dependencies of
Egypt. Of the fact we have full evidence in the archives of Thothmes'
dynastic successors, found by Flinders Petrie at Amarna; for they
include many reports from officials and client princes in Palestine and
Phoenicia.

If, however, the word empire is to be applied (as in fact we have
applied it in respect of early Babylonia) to a sphere of habitual
raiding, where the exclusive right of one power to plunder is
acknowledged implicitly or explicitly by the raided and by surrounding
peoples, this "Empire" of Egypt must both be set back nearly a hundred
years before Thothmes III and also be credited with wider limits than
those of south Syria. Invasions of Semitic Syria right up to the
Euphrates were first conducted by Pharaohs in the early part of the
sixteenth century as a sequel to the collapse of the power of the
Semitic "Hyksos" in Egypt. They were wars partly of revenge, partly of
natural Egyptian expansion into a neighbouring fertile territory, which
at last lay open, and was claimed by no other imperial power, while the
weak Kassites ruled Babylon, and the independence of Assyria was in
embryo. But the earlier Egyptian armies seem to have gone forth to Syria
simply to ravage and levy blackmail. They avoided all fenced places, and
returned to the Nile leaving no one to hold the ravaged territory. No
Pharaoh before the successor of Queen Hatshepsut made Palestine and
Phoenicia his own. It was Thothmes III who first reduced such
strongholds as Megiddo, and occupied the Syrian towns up to Arvad on the
shore and almost to Kadesh inland--he who by means of a few forts,
garrisoned perhaps by Egyptian or Nubian troops and certainly in some
instances by mercenaries drawn from Mediterranean islands and coasts, so
kept the fear of himself in the minds of native chiefs that they paid
regular tribute to his collectors and enforced the peace of Egypt on all
and sundry Hebrews and Amorites who might try to raid from east or
north.

In upper Syria, however, he and his successors appear to have attempted
little more than Thothmes I had done, that is to say, they made
periodical armed progresses through the fertile parts, here and there
taking a town, but for the most part taking only blackmail. Some strong
places, such as Kadesh, it is probable they never entered at all. Their
raids, however, were frequent and effective enough for all Syria to come
to be regarded by surrounding kings and kinglets as an Egyptian sphere
of influence within which it was best to acknowledge Pharaoh's rights
and to placate him by timely presents. So thought and acted the kings of
Mitanni across Euphrates, the kings of Hatti beyond Taurus, and the
distant Iranians of the Kassite dynasty in Babylonia.

Until the latter years of Thothmes' third successor, Amenhetep III, who
ruled in the end of the fifteenth century and the first quarter of the
fourteenth, the Egyptian peace was observed and Pharaoh's claim to Syria
was respected. Moreover, an interesting experiment appears to have been
made to tighten Egypt's hold on her foreign province. Young Syrian
princes were brought for education to the Nile, in the hope that when
sent back to their homes they would be loyal viceroys of Pharaoh: but
the experiment seems to have produced no better ultimate effect than
similar experiments tried subsequently by imperial nations from the
Romans to ourselves.

[Plate 2: ASIATIC EMPIRE OF EGYPT. TEMP. AMENHETEP III]

Beyond this conception of imperial organization the Egyptians never
advanced. Neither effective military occupation nor effective
administration of Syria by an Egyptian military or civil staff was so
much as thought of. Traces of the cultural influence of Egypt on the
Syrian civilization of the time (so far as excavation has revealed its
remains) are few and far between; and we must conclude that the number
of genuine Egyptians who resided in, or even passed through, the Asiatic
province was very small. Unadventurous by nature, and disinclined to
embark on foreign trade, the Nilots were content to leave Syria in
vicarious hands, so they derived some profit from it. It needed,
therefore, only the appearance of some vigorous and numerous tribe in
the province itself, or of some covetous power on its borders, to end
such an empire. Both had appeared before Amenhetep's death--the Amorites
in mid Syria, and a newly consolidated Hatti power on the confines of
the north. The inevitable crisis was met with no new measures by his
son, the famous Akhenaten, and before the middle of the fourteenth
century the foreign empire of Egypt had crumbled to nothing but a sphere
of influence in southernmost Palestine, having lasted, for better or
worse, something less than two hundred years. It was revived, indeed, by
the kings of the Dynasty succeeding, but had even less chance of
duration than of old. Rameses II, in dividing it to his own great
disadvantage with the Hatti king by a Treaty whose provisions are known
to us from surviving documents of both parties, confessed Egyptian
impotence to make good any contested claim; and by the end of the
thirteenth century the hand of Pharaoh was withdrawn from Asia, even
from that ancient appanage of Egypt, the peninsula of Sinai. Some
subsequent Egyptian kings would make raids into Syria, but none was
able, or very desirous, to establish there a permanent Empire.


SECTION 3. EMPIRE OF THE HATTI

[Plate 3: HATTI EMPIRE AT ITS GREATEST EXTENT. EARLY 13TH CENTURY B.C.]

The empire which pressed back the Egyptians is the last but one which we
have to consider before 1000 B.C. It has long been known that the
Hittites, variously called _Kheta_ by Egyptians and _Heth_ or _Hatti_ by
Semites and by themselves, developed into a power in westernmost Asia at
least as early as the fifteenth century; but it was not until their
cuneiform archives were discovered in 1907 at Boghazkeui in northern
Cappadocia that the imperial nature of their power, the centre from
which it was exerted, and the succession of the rulers who wielded it
became clear. It will be remembered that a great Hatti raid broke the
imperial sway of the First Babylonian Dynasty about 1800 B.C. Whence
those raiders came we have still to learn. But, since a Hatti people,
well enough organized to invade, conquer and impose its garrisons, and
(much more significant) its own peculiar civilization, on distant
territories, was seated at Boghazkeui (it is best to use this modern
name till better assured of an ancient one) in the fifteenth century, we
may reasonably believe Eastern Asia Minor to have been the homeland of
the Hatti three centuries before. As an imperial power they enter
history with a king whom his own archives name Subbiluliuma (but
Egyptian records, Sapararu), and they vanish something less than two
centuries later. The northern half of Syria, northern Mesopotamia, and
probably almost all Asia Minor were conquered by the Hatti before 1350
B.C. and rendered tributary; Egypt was forced out of Asia; the Semitic
settlements on the twin rivers and the tribes in the desert were
constrained to deference or defence. A century and a half later the
Hatti had returned into a darkness even deeper than that from which they
emerged. The last king of Boghazkeui, of whose archives any part has
come to light, is one Arnaunta, reigning in the end of the thirteenth
century. He may well have had successors whose documents may yet be
found; but on the other hand, we know from Assyrian annals, dated only a
little later, that a people, possibly kin to the Hatti and certainly
civilized by them, but called by another name, Mushkaya or Mushki (we
shall say more of them presently), overran most, if not all, the Hatti
realm by the middle of the twelfth century. And since, moreover, the
excavated ruins at both Boghazkeui, the capital of the Hatti, and
Carchemish, their chief southern dependency, show unmistakable signs of
destruction and of a subsequent general reconstruction, which on
archaeological grounds must be dated not much later than Arnaunta's
time, it seems probable that the history of Hatti empire closed with
that king. What happened subsequently to surviving detachments of this
once imperial people and to other communities so near akin by blood or
civilization, that the Assyrians, when speaking generally of western
foes or subjects, long continued to call them Hatti, we shall consider
presently.


SECTION 4. EARLY ASSYRIAN EMPIRE

Remains Assyria, which before 1000 B.C. had twice conquered an empire of
the same kind as that credited to the First Babylonian Dynasty and twice
recoiled. The early Assyrian expansions are, historically, the most
noteworthy of the early West Asian Empires because, unlike the rest,
they were preludes to an ultimate territorial overlordship which would
come nearer to anticipating Macedonian and Roman imperial systems than
any others precedent. Assyria, rather than Babylon or Egypt, heads the
list of aspirants to the Mastership of the World.

There will be so much to say of the third and subsequent expansion of
Assyria, that her earlier empires may be passed over briefly. The middle
Tigris basin seems to have received a large influx of Semites of the
Canaanitic wave at least as early as Babylonia, and thanks to various
causes--to the absence of a prior local civilization as advanced as the
Sumerian, to greater distance from such enterprising fomenters of
disturbance as Elam and Arabia, and to a more invigorating
climate--these Semites settled down more quickly and thoroughly into an
agricultural society than the Babylonians and developed it in greater
purity. Their earliest social centre was Asshur in the southern part of
their territory. There, in proximity to Babylonia, they fell inevitably
under the domination of the latter; but after the fall of the First
Dynasty of Babylon and the subsequent decline of southern Semitic
vigour, a tendency manifested itself among the northern Semites to
develop their nationality about more central points. Calah, higher up
the river, replaced Asshur in the thirteenth century B.C., only to be
replaced in turn by Nineveh, a little further still upstream; and
ultimately Assyria, though it had taken its name from the southern city,
came to be consolidated round a north Mesopotamian capital into a power
able to impose vassalage on Babylon and to send imperial raiders to the
Mediterranean, and to the Great Lakes of Armenia. The first of her kings
to attain this sort of imperial position was Shalmaneser I, who early in
the thirteenth century B.C. appears to have crushed the last strength of
the north Mesopotamian powers of Mitanni and Khani and laid the way open
to the west lands. The Hatti power, however, tried hard to close the
passages and it was not until its catastrophe and the retirement of
those who brought it about--the Mushki and their allies--that about 1100
Tiglath Pileser I could lead his Assyrian raiders into Syria, and even,
perhaps, a short distance across Taurus. Why his empire died with him we
do not know precisely. A new invasion of Arabian Semites, the Aramaeans,
whom he attacked at Mt. Bishri (Tell Basher), may have been the cause.
But, in any case, the fact is certain. The sons of the great king, who
had reached Phoenician Aradus and there embarked vaingloriously on
shipboard to claim mastery of the Western Sea, were reduced to little
better than vassals of their father's former vassal, Babylon; and up to
the close of the eleventh century Assyria had not revived.


SECTION 5. NEW FORCES IN 1000 B.C.

Thus in 1000 B.C., we look round the East, and, so far as our vision can
penetrate the clouds, see no one dominant power. Territories which
formerly were overridden by the greater states, Babylonia, Egypt,
Cappadocia and Assyria, seem to be not only self-governing but free from
interference, although the vanished empires and a recent great movement
of peoples have left them with altered political boundaries and
sometimes with new dynasties. None of the political units has a much
larger area than another, and it would not have been easy at the moment
to prophesy which, or if any one, would grow at the expense of the rest.

The great movement of peoples, to which allusion has just been made, had
been disturbing West Asia for two centuries. On the east, where the well
organized and well armed societies of Babylonia and Assyria offered a
serious obstacle to nomadic immigrants, the inflow had been pent back
beyond frontier mountains. But in the west the tide seems to have flowed
too strongly to be resisted by such force as the Hatti empire of
Cappadocia could oppose, and to have swept through Asia Minor even to
Syria and Mesopotamia. Records of Rameses III tell how a great host of
federated peoples appeared on the Asian frontier of Egypt very early in
the twelfth century. Among them marched men of the "Kheta" or Hatti, but
not as leaders. These strong foes and allies of Seti I and Rameses II,
not a century before, had now fallen from their imperial estate to
follow in the wake of newcomers, who had lately humbled them in their
Cappadocian home. The geographical order in which the scribes of Rameses
enumerated their conquests shows clearly the direction from which the
federals had come and the path they followed. In succession they had
devastated Hatti (i.e. Cappadocia), Kedi (i.e. Cilicia), Carchemish and
central Syria. Their victorious progress began, therefore, in northern
Asia Minor, and followed the great roads through the Cilician passes to
end at last on the very frontiers of Egypt. The list of these newcomers
has long interested historians; for outlandish as their names were to
Egyptians, they seem to our eyes not unfamiliar, and are possibly
travesties of some which are writ large on pages of later history. Such
are the Pulesti or Philistines, and a group hailing apparently from Asia
Minor and the Isles, Tjakaray, Shakalsha, Danaau and Washasha,
successors of Pisidian and other Anatolian allies of the Hittites in the
time of Rameses II, and of the Lycian, Achaean and Sardinian pirates
whom Egypt used sometimes to beat from her borders, sometimes to enlist
in her service. Some of these peoples, from whatever quarters they had
come, settled presently into new homes as the tide receded. The Pulesti,
if they were indeed the historic Philistines, stranded and stayed on the
confines of Egypt, retaining certain memories of an earlier state, which
had been theirs in some Minoan land. Since the Tjakaray and the Washasha
seem to have sprung from lands now reckoned in Europe, we may count this
occasion the first in history on which the west broke in force into the
east.

Turn to the annals of Assyria and you will learn, from records of
Tiglath Pileser I, that this northern wave was followed up in the same
century by a second, which bore on its crest another bold horde from
Asia Minor. Its name, Mushki, we now hear for the first time, but shall
hear again in time to come. A remnant of this race would survive far
into historic times as the Moschi of Greek geographers, an obscure
people on the borders of Cappadocia and Armenia. But who precisely the
first Mushki were, whence they had originally come, and whither they
went when pushed back out of Mesopotamia, are questions still debated.
Two significant facts are known about their subsequent history; first,
that two centuries later than our date they, or some part of them, were
settled in Cappadocia, apparently rather in the centre and north of that
country than in the south: second, that at that same epoch and later
they had kings of the name Mita, which is thought to be identical with
the name Midas, known to early Greek historians as borne by kings of
Phrygia.

Because of this last fact, the Mushki have been put down as
proto-Phrygians, risen to power after the fall of the Cappadocian Hatti.
This contention will be considered hereafter, when we reach the date of
the first known contact between Assyria and any people settled in
western Asia Minor. But meanwhile, let it be borne in mind that their
royal name Mita does not necessarily imply a connection between the
Mushki and Phrygia; for since the ethnic "Mitanni" of north Mesopotamia
means "Mita's men," that name must have long been domiciled much farther
east.

On the whole, whatever their later story, the truth about the Mushki,
who came down into Syria early in the twelfth century and retired to
Cappadocia some fifty years later after crossing swords with Assyria, is
probably this--that they were originally a mountain people from northern
Armenia or the Caucasus, distinct from the Hatti, and that, having
descended from the north-east in a primitive nomadic state into the seat
of an old culture possessed by an enfeebled race, they adopted the
latter's civilization as they conquered it and settled down. But
probably they did not fix themselves definitely in Cappadocia till the
blow struck by Tiglath Pileser had checked their lust of movement and
weakened their confidence of victory. In any case, the northern storms
had subsided by 1000 B.C., leaving Asia Minor, Armenia and Syria
parcelled among many princes.


SECTION 6. ASIA MINOR

Had one taken ship with Achaeans or Ionians for the western coast of
Anatolia in the year 1000, one would have expected to disembark at or
near some infant settlement of men, not natives by extraction, but newly
come from the sea and speaking Greek or another Aegean tongue. These men
had ventured so far to seize the rich lands at the mouths of the long
Anatolian valleys, from which their roving forefathers had been almost
entirely debarred by the provincial forces of some inland power,
presumably the Hatti Empire of Cappadocia. In earlier days the Cretans,
or their kin of Mycenaean Greece in the latest Aegean age, had been able
to plant no more than a few inconsiderable colonies of traders on
Anatolian shores. Now, however, their descendants were being steadily
reinforced from the west by members of a younger Aryan race, who mixed
with the natives of the coast, and gradually mastered or drove them
inland. Inconsiderable as this European soakage into the fringe of the
neighbouring continent must have seemed at that moment, we know that it
was inaugurating a process which ultimately would affect profoundly all
the history of Hither Asia. That Greek Ionian colonization first
attracts notice round about 1000 B.C. marks the period as a cardinal
point in history. We cannot say for certain, with our present knowledge,
that any one of the famous Greek cities had already begun to grow on the
Anatolian coasts. There is better evidence for the so early existence of
Miletus, where the German excavators have found much pottery of the
latest Aegean age, than of any other. But, at least, it is probable that
Greeks were already settled on the sites of Cnidus, Teos, Smyrna,
Colophon, Phocea, Cyme and many more; while the greater islands Rhodes,
Samos, Chios and Mitylene had apparently received western settlers
several generations ago, perhaps before even the first Achaean raids
into Asia.

The western visitor, if he pushed inland, would have avoided the
south-western districts of the peninsula, where a mountainous country,
known later as Caria, Lycia, and Pisidia, was held by primitive hill-men
settled in detached tribal fashion like modern Albanians. They had never
yet been subdued, and as soon as the rising Greek ports on their coasts
should open a way for them to the outer world, they would become known
as admirable mercenary soldiery, following a congenial trade which, if
the Pedasu, who appear in records of Egyptian campaigns of the
Eighteenth Dynasty, were really Pisidians, was not new to them. North of
their hills, however, lay broader valleys leading up to the central
plateau; and, if Herodotus is to be believed, an organized monarchical
society, ruled by the "Heraclids" of Sardes, was already developed
there. We know practically nothing about it; but since some three
centuries later the Lydian people was rich and luxurious in the Hermus
valley, which had once been a fief of the Hatti, we must conclude that
it had been enjoying security as far back as 1000 B.C. Who those
Heraclid princes were exactly is obscure. The dynastic name given to
them by Herodotus probably implies that they traced their origin (i.e.
owed especial allegiance) to a God of the Double War-Axe, whom the
Greeks likened to Heracles, but we liken to Sandan, god of Tarsus and of
the lands of the south-east. We shall say more of him and his
worshippers presently.

Leaving aside the northern fringe-lands as ill known and of small
account (as we too shall leave them), our traveller would pass up from
the Lydian vales to find the Cappadocian Hatti no longer the masters of
the plateau as of old. No one of equal power seems to have taken their
place; but there is reason to think that the Mushki, who had brought
them low, now filled some of their room in Asia Minor. But these Mushki
had so far adopted Hatti civilization either before or since their great
raiding expedition which Tiglath Pileser I of Assyria repelled, that
their domination can scarcely have made much difference to the social
condition of Asia Minor. Their capital was probably where the Hatti
capital had been--at Boghazkeui; but how far their lordship radiated
from that centre is not known.

In the south-east of Asia Minor we read of several principalities, both
in the Hatti documents of earlier centuries and in Assyrian annals of
later date; and since some of their names appear in both these sets of
records, we may safely assign them to the same localities during the
intermediate period. Such are Kas in later Lycaonia, Tabal or Tubal in
south-eastern Cappadocia, Khilakku, which left its name to historical
Cilicia, and Kue in the rich eastern Cilician plain and the
north-eastern hills. In north Syria again we find both in early and in
late times Kummukh, which left to its district the historic name,
Commagene. All these principalities, as their earlier monuments prove,
shared the same Hatti civilization as the Mushki and seem to have had
the same chief deities, the axe-bearing Sandan, or Teshup, or Hadad,
whose sway we have noted far west in Lydia, and also a Great Mother, the
patron of peaceful increase, as he was of warlike conquest. But whether
this uniformity of civilization implies any general overlord, such as
the Mushki king, is very questionable. The past supremacy of the Hatti
is enough to account for large community of social features in 1000 B.C.
over all Asia Minor and north Syria.


SECTION 7. SYRIA

It is time for our traveller to move on southward into "Hatti-land," as
the Assyrians would long continue to call the southern area of the old
Hatti civilization. He would have found Syria in a state of greater or
less disintegration from end to end. Since the withdrawal of the strong
hands of the Hatti from the north and the Egyptians from the south, the
disorganized half-vacant land had been attracting to itself successive
hordes of half-nomadic Semites from the eastern and southern steppes. By
1000 B.C. these had settled down as a number of Aramaean societies each
under its princeling. All were great traders. One such society
established itself in the north-west, in Shamal, where, influenced by
the old Hatti culture, an art came into being which was only saved
ultimately by Semitic Assyria from being purely Hittite. Its capital,
which lay at modern Sinjerli, one of the few Syrian sites scientifically
explored, we shall notice later on. South lay Patin and Bit Agusi; south
of these again, Hamath and below it Damascus--all new Aramaean states,
which were waiting for quiet times to develop according to the measure
of their respective territories and their command of trade routes. Most
blessed in both natural fertility and convenience of position was
Damascus (Ubi or Hobah), which had been receiving an Aramaean influx for
at least three hundred years. It was destined to outstrip the rest of
those new Semitic states; but for the moment it was little stronger than
they. As for the Phoenician cities on the Lebanon coast, which we know
from the Amarna archives and other Egyptian records to have long been
settled with Canaanitic Semites, they were to appear henceforward in a
light quite other than that in which the reports of their Egyptian
governors and visitors had hitherto shown them. Not only did they very
rapidly become maritime traders instead of mere local territorial
centres, but (if we may infer it from the lack of known monuments of
their higher art or of their writing before 1000 B.C.) they were making
or just about to make a sudden advance in social development. It should
be remarked that our evidence, that other Syrian Semites had taken to
writing in scripts of their own, begins not much later at various
points--in Shamal, in Moab and in Samaria.

This rather sudden expansion of the Phoenicians into a maritime power
about 1000 B.C. calls for explanation. Herodotus thought that the
Phoenicians were driven to take to the sea simply by the growing
inadequacy of their narrow territory to support the natural increase of
its inhabitants, and probably he was partly right, the crisis of their
fate being hastened by Armaean pressure from inland. But the advance in
their culture, which is marked by the development of their art and their
writing, was too rapid and too great to have resulted only from new
commerce with the sea; nor can it have been due to any influence of the
Aramaean elements which were comparatively fresh from the Steppes. To
account for the facts in Syria we seem to require, not long previous to
this time, a fresh accession of population from some area of higher
culture. When we observe, therefore, among the earlier Phoenician and
south Syrian antiquities much that was imported, and more that derived
its character, from Cyprus and even remoter centres of the Aegean
culture of the latest Minoan Age, we cannot regard as fantastic the
belief of the Cretan discoverer, Arthur Evans, that the historic
Phoenician civilization, and especially the Phoenician script, owed
their being in great measure to an immigration from those nearest
oversea lands which had long possessed a fully developed art and a
system of writing. After the fall of the Cnossian Dynasty we know that a
great dispersal of Cretans began, which was continued and increased
later by the descent of the Achaeans into Greece. It has been said
already that the Pulesti or Philistines, who had followed the first
northern horde to the frontiers of Egypt early in the twelfth century,
are credibly supposed to have come from some area affected by Minoan
civilization, while the Tjakaray and Washasha, who accompanied them,
were probably actual Cretans. The Pulesti stayed, as we know, in
Philistia: the Tjakaray settled at Dor on the South Phoenician coast,
where Unamon, an envoy of Rameses XI, found them. These settlers are
quite sufficient to account for the subsequent development of a higher
culture in mid and south Syria, and there may well have been some
further immigration from Cyprus and other Aegean lands which, as time
went on, impelled the cities of Phoenicia, so well endowed by nature, to
develop a new culture apace about 1000 B.C.


SECTION 8. PALESTINE

If the Phoenicians were feeling the thrust of Steppe peoples, their
southern neighbours, the Philistines, who had lived and grown rich on
the tolls and trade of the great north road from Egypt for at least a
century and a half, were feeling it too. During some centuries past
there had come raiding from the south-east deserts certain sturdy and
well-knit tribes, which long ago had displaced or assimilated the
Canaanites along the highlands west of Jordan, and were now tending to
settle down into a national unity, cemented by a common worship. They
had had long intermittent struggles, traditions of which fill the Hebrew
Book of Judges--struggles not only with the Canaanites, but also with
the Amorites of the upper Orontes valley, and later with the Aramaeans
of the north and east, and with fresh incursions of Arabs from the
south; and most lately of all they had had to give way for about half a
century before an expansive movement of the Philistines, which carried
the latter up to Galilee and secured to them the profits of all the
Palestinian stretch of the great North Road. But about a generation
before our date the northernmost of those bold "Habiri," under an
elective _sheikh_ Saul, had pushed the Philistines out of Bethshan and
other points of vantage in mid-Palestine, and had become once more free
of the hills which they had held in the days of Pharaoh Menephthah.
Though, at the death of Saul, the enemy regained most of what he had
lost, he was not to hold it long. A greater chief, David, who had risen
to power by Philistine help and now had the support of the southern
tribes, was welding both southern and northern Hebrews into a single
monarchical society and, having driven his old masters out of the north
once more, threatened the southern stretch of the great North Road from
a new capital, Jerusalem. Moreover, by harrying repeatedly the lands
east of Jordan up to the desert edge, David had stopped further
incursions from Arabia; and, though the Aramaean state of Damascus was
growing into a formidable danger, he had checked for the present its
tendency to spread southwards, and had strengthened himself by
agreements with another Aramaean prince, him of Hamath, who lay on the
north flank of Damascus, and with the chief of the nearest Phoenician
city, Tyre. The latter was not yet the rich place which it would grow to
be in the next century, but it was strong enough to control the coast
road north of the Galilean lowlands. Israel not only was never safer,
but would never again hold a position of such relative importance in
Syria, as was hers in a day of many small and infant states about 1000
B.C.: and in later times, under the shadow of Assyria and the menace of
Egypt, the Jews would look back to the reigns of David and his successor
with some reason as their golden age.

The traveller would not have ventured into Arabia; nor shall we. It was
then an unknown land lying wholly outside history. We have no record (if
that mysterious embassy of the "Queen of Sheba," who came to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, be ruled out) of any relations between a state of the
civilized East and an Arabian prince before the middle of the ninth
century. It may be that, as Glaser reckoned, Sabaean society in the
south-west of the peninsula had already reached the preliminary stage of
tribal settlement through which Israel passed under its Judges, and was
now moving towards monarchy; and that of this our traveller might have
learned something in Syria from the last arrived Aramaeans. But we, who
can learn nothing, have no choice but to go north with him again,
leaving to our right the Syrian desert roamed by Bedawis in much the
same social state as the Anazeh to-day, owing allegiance to no one. We
can cross Euphrates at Carchemish or at Til Barsip opposite the Sajur
mouth, or where Thapsacus looked across to the outfall of the Khabur.


SECTION 9. MESOPOTAMIA

No annals of Assyria have survived for nearly a century before 1000
B.C., and very few for the century after that date. Nor do Babylonian
records make good our deficiency. Though we cannot be certain, we are
probably safe in saying that during these two centuries Assyrian and
Babylonian princes had few or no achievements to record of the kind
which they held, almost alone, worthy to be immortalized on stone or
clay--that is to say, raids, conquests, sacking of cities, blackmailing
of princes. Since Tiglath Pileser's time no "Kings of the World" (by
which title was signified an overlord of Mesopotamia merely) had been
seated on either of the twin rivers. What exactly had happened in the
broad tract between the rivers and to the south of Taurus since the
departure of the Mushki hordes (if, indeed, they did all depart), we do
not know. The Mitanni, who may have been congeners of the latter, seem
still to have been holding the north-west; probably all the north-east
was Assyrian territory. No doubt the Kurds and Armenians of Urartu were
raiding the plains impartially from autumn to spring, as they always did
when Assyria was weak. We shall learn a good deal more about Mesopotamia
proper when the results of the German excavations at Tell Halaf, near
Ras el-Ain, are complete and published. The most primitive monuments
found there are perhaps relics of that power of Khani (Harran), which
was stretched even to include Nineveh before the Semitic _patesis_ of
Asshur grew to royal estate and moved northward to make imperial
Assyria. But there are later strata of remains as well which should
contain evidence of the course of events in mid-Mesopotamia during
subsequent periods both of Assyrian domination and of local
independence.

Assyria, as has been said, was without doubt weak at this date, that is,
she was confined to the proper territory of her own agricultural
Semites. This state of things, whenever existent throughout her history,
seems to have implied priestly predominance, in which Babylonian
influence went for much. The Semitic tendency to super-Monotheism, which
has already been noticed, constantly showed itself among the eastern
Semites (when comparatively free from military tyranny) in a reversion
of their spiritual allegiance to one supreme god enthroned at Babylon,
the original seat of east Semitic theocracy. And even when this city had
little military strength the priests of Marduk appear often to have
succeeded in keeping a controlling hand on the affairs of stronger
Assyria. We shall see later how much prestige great Ninevite war-lords
could gain even among their own countrymen by Marduk's formal
acknowledgment of their sovereignty, and how much they lost by
disregarding him and doing injury to his local habitation. At their very
strongest the Assyrian kings were never credited with the natural right
to rule Semitic Asia which belonged to kings of Babylon. If they desired
the favour of Marduk they must needs claim it at the sword's point, and
when that point was lowered, his favour was always withdrawn. From first
to last they had perforce to remain military tyrants, who relied on no
acknowledged legitimacy but on the spears of conscript peasants, and at
the last of mercenaries. No dynasty lasted long in Assyria, where
popular generals, even while serving on distant campaigns, were often
elevated to the throne--in anticipation of the imperial history of Rome.

It appears then that our traveller would have found Babylonia, rather
than Assyria, the leading East Semitic power in 1000 B.C.; but at the
same time not a strong power, for she had no imperial dominion outside
lower Mesopotamia. Since a dynasty, whose history is obscure--the
so-called Pash� kings in whose time there was one strong man,
Nabu-Kudur-usur (Nebuchadnezzar) I--came to an inglorious end just about
1000 B.C., one may infer that Babylonia was passing at this epoch
through one of those recurrent political crises which usually occurred
when Sumerian cities of the southern "Sea-Land" conspired with some
foreign invader against the Semitic capital. The contumacious survivors
of the elder element in the population, however, even when successful,
seem not to have tried to set up new capitals or to reestablish the
pre-Semitic state of things. Babylon had so far distanced all the older
cities now that no other consummation of revolt was desired or believed
possible than the substitution of one dynasty for another on the throne
beloved of Marduk. Sumerian forces, however, had not been the only ones
which had contributed to overthrow the last king of the Pash� dynasty.
Nomads of the _Suti_ tribes had long been raiding from the western
deserts into Akkad; and the first king set up by the victorious peoples
of the Sea-Land had to expel them and to repair their ravages before he
could seat himself on a throne which was menaced by Elam on the east and
Assyria on the north, and must fall so soon as either of these found a
strong leader.




CHAPTER II

THE EAST IN 800 B.C.


Two centuries have passed over the East, and at first sight it looks as
if no radical change has taken place in its political or social
condition. No new power has entered it from without; only one new state
of importance, the Phrygian, has arisen within. The peoples, which were
of most account in 1000, are still of the most account in 800--the
Assyrians, the Babylonians, the Mushki of Cappadocia, the tribesmen of
Urartu, the Aramaeans of Damascus, the trading Phoenicians on the Syrian
coast and the trading Greeks on the Anatolian. Egypt has remained behind
her frontier except for one raid into Palestine about 925 B.C., from
which Sheshenk, the Libyan, brought back treasures of Solomon's temple
to enhance the splendour of Amen. Arabia has not begun to matter. There
has been, of course, development, but on old lines. The comparative
values of the states have altered: some have become more decisively the
superiors of others than they were two hundred years ago, but they are
those whose growth was foreseen. Wherein, then, lies the great
difference? For great difference there is. It scarcely needs a second
glance to detect the change, and any one who looks narrowly will see not
only certain consequent changes, but in more than one quarter signs and
warnings of a coming order of things not dreamt of in 1000 B.C.


SECTION 1. MIDDLE KINGDOM OF ASSYRIA

The obvious novelty is the presence of a predominant power. The mosaic
of small states is still there, but one holds lordship over most of
them, and that one is Assyria. Moreover, the foreign dominion which the
latter has now been enjoying for three-parts of a century is the first
of its kind established by an Asiatic power. Twice, as we have seen, had
Assyria conquered in earlier times an empire of the nomad Semitic type,
that is, a licence to raid unchecked over a wide tract of lands; but, so
far as we know, neither Shalmaneser I nor Tiglath Pileser I had so much
as conceived the idea of holding the raided provinces by a permanent
official organization. But in the ninth century, when Ashurnatsirpal and
his successor Shalmaneser, second of the name, marched out year by year,
they passed across wide territories held for them by governors and
garrisons, before they reached others upon which they hoped to impose
like fetters. We find Shalmaneser II, for example, in the third year of
his reign, fortifying, renaming, garrisoning and endowing with a royal
palace the town of Til Barsip on the Euphrates bank, the better to
secure for himself free passage at will across the river. He has finally
deprived Ahuni its local Aramaean chief, and holds the place as an
Assyrian fortress. Thus far had the Assyrian advanced his territorial
empire but not farther. Beyond Euphrates he would, indeed, push year by
year, even to Phoenicia and Damascus and Cilicia, but merely to raid,
levy blackmail and destroy, like the old emperors of Babylonia or his
own imperial predecessors of Assyria.

There was then much of the old destructive instinct in Shalmaneser's
conception of empire; but a constructive principle also was at work
modifying that conception. If the Great King was still something of a
Bedawi Emir, bound to go a-raiding summer by summer, he had conceived,
like Mohammed ibn Rashid, the Arabian prince of Jebel Shammar in our own
days, the idea of extending his territorial dominion, so that he might
safely and easily reach fresh fields for wider raids. If we may use
modern formulas about an ancient and imperfectly realized imperial
system, we should describe the dominion of Shalmaneser II as made up
(over and above its Assyrian core) of a wide circle of foreign
territorial possessions which included Babylonia on the south, all
Mesopotamia on the west and north, and everything up to Zagros on the
east; of a "sphere of exclusive influence" extending to Lake Van on the
north, while on the west it reached beyond the Euphrates into mid-Syria;
and, lastly, of a licence to raid as far as the frontiers of Egypt.
Shalmaneser's later expeditions all passed the frontiers of that sphere
of influence. Having already crossed the Amanus mountains seven times,
he was in Tarsus in his twenty-sixth summer; Damascus was attacked again
and again in the middle of his reign; and even Jehu of Samaria paid his
blackmail in the year 842.

Assyria in the ninth century must have seemed by far the strongest as
well as the most oppressive power that the East had known. The reigning
house was passing on its authority from father to son in an unbroken
dynastic succession, which had not always been, and would seldom
thereafter be, the rule. Its court was fixed securely in midmost
Assyria, away from priest-ridden Asshur, which seems to have been always
anti-imperial and pro-Babylonian; for Ashurnatsirpal had restored Calah
to the capital rank which it had held under Shalmaneser I but lost under
Tiglath Pileser, and there the kings of the Middle Empire kept their
throne. The Assyrian armies were as yet neither composed of soldiers of
fortune, nor, it appears, swelled by such heterogeneous provincial
levies as would follow the Great Kings of Asia in later days; but they
were still recruited from the sturdy peasantry of Assyria itself. The
monarch was an absolute autocrat directing a supreme military despotism.
Surely such a power could not but endure. Endure, indeed, it would for
more than two centuries. But it was not so strong as it appeared. Before
the century of Ashurnatsirpal and Shalmaneser II was at an end, certain
inherent germs of corporate decay had developed apace in its system.

Natural law appears to decree that a family stock, whose individual
members have every opportunity and licence for sensual indulgence, shall
deteriorate both physically and mentally at an ever-increasing rate.
Therefore, _pari passu_, an Empire which is so absolutely autocratic
that the monarch is its one mainspring of government, grows weaker as it
descends from father to son. Its one chance of conserving some of its
pristine strength is to develop a bureaucracy which, if inspired by the
ideas and methods of earlier members of the dynasty, may continue to
realize them in a crystallized system of administration. This chance the
Middle Assyrian Kingdom never was at any pains to take. There is
evidence for delegation of military power by its Great Kings to a
headquarter staff, and for organization of military control in the
provinces, but none for such delegation of the civil power as might have
fostered a bureaucracy. Therefore that concentration of power in single
hands, which at first had been an element of strength, came to breed
increasing weakness as one member of the dynasty succeeded another.

Again, the irresistible Assyrian armies, which had been led abroad
summer by summer, were manned for some generations by sturdy peasants
drawn from the fields of the Middle Tigris basin, chiefly those on the
left bank. The annual razzia, however, is a Bedawi institution, proper
to a semi-nomadic society which cultivates little and that lightly, and
can leave such agricultural, and also such pastoral, work as must needs
be done in summer to its old men, its young folk and its women, without
serious loss. But a settled labouring population which has deep lands to
till, a summer crop to raise and an irrigation system to maintain is in
very different case. The Assyrian kings, by calling on their
agricultural peasantry, spring after spring, to resume the life of
militant nomads, not only exhausted the sources of their own wealth and
stability, but bred deep discontent. As the next two centuries pass more
and more will be heard of depletion and misery in the Assyrian lands.
Already before 800 we have the spectacle of the agricultural district of
Arbela rebelling against Shalmaneser's sons, and after being appeased
with difficulty, rising again against Adadnirari III in a revolt which
is still active when the century closes.

Lastly, this militant monarchy, whose life was war, was bound to make
implacable enemies both within and without. Among those within were
evidently the priests, whose influence was paramount at Asshur.
Remembering who it was that had given the first independent king to
Assyria they resented that their city, the chosen seat of the earlier
dynasties, which had been restored to primacy by the great Tiglath
Pileser, should fall permanently to the second rank. So we find Asshur
joining the men of Arbela in both the rebellions mentioned above, and it
appears always to have been ready to welcome attempts by the Babylonian
Semites to regain their old predominance over Southern Assyria.


SECTION 2. URARTU

As we should expect from geographical circumstances, Assyria's most
perilous and persistent foreign enemies were the fierce hillmen of the
north. In the east, storms were brewing behind the mountains, but they
were not yet ready to burst. South and west lay either settled districts
of old civilization not disposed to fight, or ranging grounds of nomads
too widely scattered and too ill organized to threaten serious danger.
But the north was in different case. The wild valleys, through which
descend the left bank affluents of the Upper Tigris, have always
sheltered fierce fighting clans, covetous of the winter pasturage and
softer climate of the northern Mesopotamian downs, and it has been the
anxious care of one Mesopotamian power after another, even to our own
day, to devise measures for penning them back. Since the chief weakness
of these tribes lies in a lack of unity which the subdivided nature of
their country encourages, it must have caused no small concern to the
Assyrians that, early in the ninth century, a Kingdom of Urartu or, as
its own people called it, Khaldia, should begin to gain power over the
communities about Lake Van and the heads of the valleys which run down
to Assyrian territory. Both Ashurnatsirpal and Shalmaneser led raid
after raid into the northern mountains in the hope of weakening the
tribes from whose adhesion that Vannic Kingdom might derive strength.
Both kings marched more than once up to the neighbourhood of the Urmia
Lake, and Shalmaneser struck at the heart of Urartu itself three or four
times; but with inconclusive success. The Vannic state continued to
flourish and its kings--whose names are more European in sound than
Asiatic--Lutipris, Sarduris, Menuas, Argistis, Rusas--built themselves
strong fortresses which stand to this day about Lake Van, and borrowed a
script from their southern foes to engrave rocks with records of
successful wars. One of these inscriptions occurs as far west as the
left bank of Euphrates over against Malatia. By 800 B.C., in spite of
efforts made by Shalmaneser's sons to continue their father's policy of
pushing the war into the enemy's country, the Vannic king had succeeded
in replacing Assyrian influence by the law of Khaldia in the uppermost
basin of the Tigris and in higher Mesopotamia--the "Nairi" lands of
Assyrian scribes; and his successors would raid farther and farther into
the plains during the coming age.


SECTION 3. THE MEDES

Menacing as this power of Urartu appeared at the end of the ninth
century to an enfeebled Assyrian dynasty, there were two other racial
groups, lately arrived on its horizon, which in the event would prove
more really dangerous. One of these lay along the north-eastern frontier
on the farther slopes of the Zagros mountains and on the plateau beyond.
It was apparently a composite people which had been going through a slow
process of formation and growth. One element in it seems to have been of
the same blood as a strong pastoral population which was then ranging
the steppes of southern Russia and west central Asia, and would come to
be known vaguely to the earliest Greeks as Cimmerians, and scarcely less
precisely to their descendants, as Scyths. Its name would be a household
word in the East before long. A trans-Caucasian offshoot of this had
settled in modern Azerbaijan, where for a long time past it had been
receiving gradual reinforcements of eastern migrants, belonging to what
is called the Iranian group of Aryans. Filtering through the passage
between the Caspian range and the salt desert, which Teheran now guards,
these Iranians spread out over north-west Persia and southwards into the
well-watered country on the western edge of the plateau, overlooking the
lowlands of the Tigris basin. Some part of them, under the name Parsua,
seems to have settled down as far north as the western shores of Lake
Urmia, on the edge of the Ararat kingdom; another part as far south as
the borders of Elam. Between these extreme points the immigrants appear
to have amalgamated with the settled Scyths, and in virtue of racial
superiority to have become predominant partners in the combination. At
some uncertain period--probably before 800 B.C.--there had arisen from
the Iranian element an individual, Zoroaster, who converted his people
from element-worship to a spiritual belief in personal divinity; and by
this reform of cult both raised its social status and gave it political
cohesion. The East began to know and fear the combination under the name
_Manda_, and from Shalmaneser II onwards the Assyrian kings had to
devote ever more attention to the Manda country, raiding it, sacking it,
exacting tribute from it, but all the while betraying their growing
consciousness that a grave peril lurked behind Zagros, the peril of the
Medes. [Footnote: I venture to adhere throughout to the old
identification of the _Manda_ power, which ultimately overthrew Assyria,
with the _Medes_, in spite of high authorities who nowadays assume that
the latter played no part in that overthrow, but have been introduced
into this chapter of history by an erroneous identification made by
Greeks. I cannot believe that both Greek and Hebrew authorities of very
little later date both fell into such an error.]


SECTION 4. THE CHALDAEANS

The other danger, the more imminent of the two, threatened Assyria from
the south. Once again a Semitic immigration, which we distinguish as
Chaldaean from earlier Semitic waves, Canaanite and Aramaean, had
breathed fresh vitality into the Babylonian people. It came, like
earlier waves, out of Arabia, which, for certain reasons, has been in
all ages a prime source of ethnic disturbance in West Asia. The great
southern peninsula is for the most part a highland steppe endowed with a
singularly pure air and an uncontaminated soil. It breeds, consequently,
a healthy population whose natality, compared to its death-rate, is
unusually high; but since the peculiar conditions of its surface and
climate preclude the development of its internal food-supply beyond a
point long ago reached, the surplus population which rapidly accumulates
within it is forced from time to time to seek its sustenance elsewhere.
The difficulties of the roads to the outer world being what they are
(not to speak of the certainty of opposition at the other end), the
intending emigrants rarely set out in small bodies, but move restlessly
within their own borders until they are grown to a horde, which famine
and hostility at home compel at last to leave Arabia. As hard to arrest
as their own blown sands, the moving Arabs fall on the nearest fertile
regions, there to plunder, fight, and eventually settle down. So in
comparatively modern times have the Shammar tribesmen moved into Syria
and Mesopotamia, and so in antiquity moved the Canaanites, the
Aramaeans, and the Chaldaeans. We find the latter already well
established by 900 B.C. not only in the "Sea Land" at the head of the
Persian Gulf, but also between the Rivers. The Kings of Babylon, who
opposed Ashurnatsirpal and Shalmaneser II, seem to have been of
Chaldaean extraction; and although their successors, down to 800 B.C.,
acknowledged the suzerainty of Assyria, they ever strove to repudiate
it, looking for help to Elam or the western desert tribes. The times,
however, were not quite ripe. The century closed with the reassertion of
Assyrian power in Babylon itself by Adadnirari.


SECTION 5. SYRIAN EXPANSION OF ASSYRIA

Such were the dangers which, as we now know, lurked on the horizon of
the Northern Semites in 800 B.C. But they had not yet become patent to
the world, in whose eyes Assyria seemed still an irresistible power
pushing ever farther and farther afield. The west offered the most
attractive field for her expansion. There lay the fragments of the Hatti
Empire, enjoying the fruits of Hatti civilization; there were the
wealthy Aramaean states, and still richer Phoenician ports. There urban
life was well developed, each city standing for itself, sufficient in
its territory, and living more or less on the caravan trade which
perforce passed under or near its walls between Egypt on the one hand
and Mesopotamia and Asia Minor on the other. Never was a fairer field
for hostile enterprise, or one more easily harried without fear of
reprisal, and well knowing this, Assyria set herself from
Ashurnatsirpal's time forward systematically to bully and fleece Syria.
It was almost the yearly practice of Shalmaneser II to march down to the
Middle Euphrates, ferry his army across, and levy blackmail on
Carchemish and the other north Syrian cities as far as Cilicia on the
one hand and Damascus on the other. That done, he would send forward
envoys to demand ransom of the Phoenician towns, who grudgingly paid it
or rashly withheld it according to the measure of his compulsion. Since
last we looked at the Aramaean states, Damascus has definitely asserted
the supremacy which her natural advantages must always secure to her
whenever Syria is not under foreign domination. Her fighting dynasty of
Benhadads which had been founded, it seems, more than a century before
Shalmaneser's time, had now spread her influence right across Syria from
east to west and into the territories of Hamath on the north and of the
Hebrews on the south. Ashurnatsirpal had never ventured to do more than
summon at long range the lord of this large and wealthy state to
contribute to his coffers; but this tributary obligation, if ever
admitted, was continually disregarded, and Shalmaneser II found he must
take bolder measures or be content to see his raiding-parties restricted
to the already harried north. He chose the bold course, and struck at
Hamath, the northernmost Damascene dependency, in his seventh summer. A
notable victory, won at Karkar on the Middle Orontes over an army which
included contingents from most of the south Semitic states--one came,
for example, from Israel, where Ahab was now king,--opened a way towards
the Aramaean capital; but it was not till twelve years later that the
Great King actually attacked Damascus. But he failed to crown his
successes with its capture, and reinvigorated by the accession of a new
dynasty, which Hazael, a leader in war, founded in 842, Damascus
continued to bar the Assyrians from full enjoyment of the southern lands
for another century.

Nevertheless, though Shalmaneser and his dynastic successors down to
Adadnirari III were unable to enter Palestine, the shadow of Assyrian
Empire was beginning to creep over Israel. The internal dissensions of
the latter, and its fear and jealousy of Damascus had already done much
to make ultimate disaster certain. In the second generation after David
the radical incompatibility between the northern and southern Hebrew
tribes, which under his strong hand and that of his son had seemed one
nation, reasserted its disintegrating influence. While it is not certain
if the twelve tribes were ever all of one race, it is quite certain that
the northern ones had come to be contaminated very largely with Aramaean
blood and infected by mid-Syrian influences, which the relations
established and maintained by David and Solomon with Hamath and
Phoenicia no doubt had accentuated, especially in the territories of
Asher and Dan. These tribes and some other northerners had never seen
eye to eye with the southern tribes in a matter most vital to Semitic
societies, religious ideal and practice. The anthropomorphic monotheism,
which the southern tribes brought up from Arabia, had to contend in
Galilee with theriomorphic polytheism, that is, the tendency to embody
the qualities of divinity in animal forms. For such beliefs as these
there is ample evidence in the Judaean tradition, even during the
pre-Palestinian wanderings. Both reptile and bovine incarnations
manifest themselves in the story of the Exodus, and despite the fervent
missionary efforts of a series of Prophets, and the adhesion of many,
even among the northern tribesmen, to the more spiritual creed, these
cults gathered force in the congenial neighbourhood of Aramaeans and
Phoenicians, till they led to political separation of the north from the
south as soon as the long reign of Solomon was ended. Thereafter, until
the catastrophe of the northern tribes, there would never more be a
united Hebrew nation. The northern kingdom, harried by Damascus and
forced to take unwilling part in her quarrels, looked about for foreign
help. The dynasty of Omri, who, in order to secure control of the great
North Road, had built himself a capital and a palace (lately discovered)
on the hill of Samaria, relied chiefly on Tyre. The succeeding dynasty,
that of Jehu, who had rebelled against Omri's son and his Phoenician
queen, courted Assyria, and encouraged her to press ever harder on
Damascus. It was a suicidal policy; for in the continued existence of a
strong Aramaean state on her north lay Israel's one hope of long life.
Jeroboam II and his Prophet Jonah ought to have seen that the day of
reckoning would come quickly for Samaria when once Assyria had settled
accounts with Damascus.

To some extent, but unfortunately not in all detail, we can trace in the
royal records the advance of Assyrian territorial dominion in the west.
The first clear indication of its expansion is afforded by a notice of
the permanent occupation of a position on the eastern bank of the
Euphrates, as a base for the passage of the river. This position was Til
Barsip, situated opposite the mouth of the lowest Syrian affluent, the
Sajur, and formerly capital of an Aramaean principate. That its
occupation by Shalmaneser II in the third year of his reign was intended
to be lasting is proved by its receiving a new name and becoming a royal
Assyrian residence. Two basaltic lions, which the Great King then set up
on each side of its Mesopotamian gate and inscribed with commemorative
texts, have recently been found near Tell Ahmar, the modern hamlet which
has succeeded the royal city. This measure marked Assyria's definite
annexation of the lands in Mesopotamia, which had been under Aramaean
government for at least a century and a half. When this government had
been established there we do not certainly know; but the collapse of
Tiglath Pileser's power about 1100 B.C. so nearly follows the main
Aramaean invasion from the south that it seems probable this invasion
had been in great measure the cause of that collapse, and that an
immediate consequence was the formation of Aramaean states east of
Euphrates. The strongest of them and the last to succumb to Assyria was
Bit-Adini, the district west of Harran, of which Til Barsip had been the
leading town.

The next stage of Assyrian expansion is marked by a similar occupation
of a position on the Syrian side of the Euphrates, to cover the landing
and be a gathering-place of tribute. Here stood Pitru, formerly a Hatti
town and, perhaps, the Biblical Pethor, situated beside the Sajur on
some site not yet identified, but probably near the outfall of the
stream. It received an Assyrian name in Shalmaneser's sixth year, and
was used afterwards as a base for all his operations in Syria. It served
also to mask and overawe the larger and more wealthy city of Carchemish,
a few miles north, which would remain for a long time to come free of
permanent Assyrian occupation, though subjected to blackmail on the
occasion of every western raid by the Great King.

With this last westward advance of his permanent territorial holding,
Shalmaneser appears to have rested content. He was sure of the Euphrates
passage and had made his footing good on the Syrian bank. But we cannot
be certain; for, though his known records mention the renaming of no
other Syrian cities, many may have been renamed without happening to be
mentioned in the records, and others may have been occupied by standing
Assyrian garrisons without receiving new names. Be that as it may, we
can trace, year by year, the steady pushing forward of Assyrian raiding
columns into inner Syria. In 854 Shalmaneser's most distant base of
operations was fixed at Khalman (Aleppo), whence he marched to the
Orontes to fight, near the site of later Apamea, the battle of Karkar.
Five years later, swooping down from a Cilician raid, he entered Hamath.
Six more years passed before he made more ground to the south, though he
invaded Syria again in force at least once during the interval. In 842,
however, having taken a new road along the coast, he turned inland from
Beirut, crossed Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon, and succeeded in reaching the
oasis of Damascus and even in raiding some distance towards the Hauran;
but he did not take (perhaps, like the Bedawi Emir he was, he did not
try to take) the fenced city itself. He seems to have repeated his visit
three years later, but never to have gone farther. Certainly he never
secured to himself Phoenicia, Coele-Syria or Damascus, and still less
Palestine, by any permanent organization. Indeed, as has been said, we
have no warrant for asserting that in his day Assyria definitely
incorporated in her territorial empire any part of Syria except that one
outpost of observation established at Pitru on the Sajur. Nor can more
be credited to Shalmaneser's immediate successors; but it must be
understood that by the end of the century Adadnirari had extended
Assyria's sphere of influence (as distinct from her territorial holding)
somewhat farther south to include not only Phoenicia but also northern
Philistia and Palestine with the arable districts east of Jordan.


SECTION 6. CILICIA

When an Assyrian emperor crossed Euphrates and took up quarters in Pitru
to receive the submission of the western chiefs and collect his forces
for raiding the lands of any who might be slow to comply, he was much
nearer the frontiers of Asia Minor than those of Phoenicia or the
Kingdom of Damascus. Yet on three occasions out of four, the lords of
the Middle Assyrian Kingdom were content to harry once again the
oft-plundered lands of mid-Syria, and on the fourth, if they turned
northward at all, they advanced no farther than eastern Cilicia, that
is, little beyond the horizon which they might actually see on a clear
day from any high ground near Pitru. Yet on the other side of the
snow-streaked wall which bounded the northward view lay desirable
kingdoms, Khanigalbat with its capital, Milid, comprising the fertile
district which later would be part of Cataonia; Tabal to west of it,
extending over the rest of Cataonia and southern Cappadocia; and Kas,
possessing the Tyanitis and the deep Lycaonian plain. Why, then, did
those imperial robbers in the ninth century so long hold their hands
from such tempting prey? No doubt, because they and their armies, which
were not yet recruited from other populations than the Semites of
Assyria proper, so far as we know, were by origin Arabs, men of the
south, to whom the high-lying plateau country beyond Taurus was just as
deterrent as it has been to all Semites since. Tides of Arab invasion,
surging again and again to the foot of the Taurus, have broken sometimes
through the passes and flowed in single streams far on into Asia Minor,
but they have always ebbed again as quickly. The repugnance felt by the
Assyrians for Asia Minor may be contrasted with the promptitude which
their Iranian successors showed in invading the peninsula, and may be
illustrated by all subsequent history. No permanent footing was ever
established in Asia Minor by the Saracens, its definite conquest being
left to the north-country Turks. The short-lived Arab power of Mehemet
Ali, which rebelled against the Turks some eighty years ago, advanced on
to the plateau only to recede at once and remain behind the Taurus. The
present dividing line of peoples which speak respectively Arabic and
Turkish marks the Semite's immemorial limit. So soon as the land-level
of northern Syria attains a mean altitude of 2500 feet, the Arab tongue
is chilled to silence.

We shall never find Assyrian armies, therefore, going far or staying
long beyond Taurus. But we shall find them going constantly, and as a
matter of course, into Cilicia, notwithstanding the high mountain wall
of Amanus which divides it from Syria. Cilicia--all that part of it at
least which the Assyrians used to raid--lies low, faces south and is
shielded by high mountains from northerly and easterly chills. It
enjoys, indeed, a warmer and more equable climate than any part of
Syria, except the coastal belt, and socially it has always been related
more nearly to the south lands than to its own geographical whole, Asia
Minor. A Semitic element was predominant in the population of the plain,
and especially in its chief town, Tarsus, throughout antiquity. So
closely was Cilicia linked with Syria that the Prince of Kue (its
eastern part) joined the Princes of Hamath and of Damascus and their
south Syrian allies in that combination for common defence against
Assyrian aggression, which Shalmaneser broke at Karkar in 854: and it
was in order to neutralize an important factor in the defensive power of
Syria that the latter proceeded across Patin in 849 and fell on Kue. But
some uprising at Hamath recalled him then, and it was not till the
latter part of his reign that eastern Cilicia was systematically
subdued.

Shalmaneser devoted a surprising amount of attention to this small and
rather obscure corner of Asia Minor. He records in his twenty-fifth year
that already he had crossed Amanus seven times; and in the year
succeeding we find him again entering Cilicia and marching to Tarsus to
unseat its prince and put another more pliable in his room. Since,
apparently, he never used Cilicia as a base for further operations in
force beyond Taurus, being content with a formal acknowledgment of his
majesty by the Prince of Tabal, one is forced to conclude that he
invaded the land for its own sake. Nearly three centuries hence, out of
the mist in which Cilicia is veiled more persistently than almost any
other part of the ancient East, this small country will loom up suddenly
as one of the four chief powers of Asia, ruled by a king who, hand in
hand with Nebuchadnezzar II, negotiates a peace between the Lydians and
the Medes, each at the height of their power. Then the mist will close
over it once more, and we shall hear next to nothing of a long line of
kings who, bearing a royal title which was graecized under the form
Syennesis, reigned at Tarsus, having little in common with other
Anatolian princes. But we may reasonably infer from the circumstances of
the pacific intervention just mentioned that Cilician power had been
growing for a long time previous; and also from the frequency with which
Shalmaneser raided the land, that already in the ninth century it was
rich and civilized. We know it to have been a great centre of Sandan
worship, and may guess that its kings were kin of the Mushki race and,
if not the chief survivors of the original stock which invaded Assyria
in Tiglath Pileser's time, ranked at least among the chief inheritors of
the old Hatti civilization. Some even date its civilization earlier
still, believing the Keftiu, who brought rich gifts to the Pharaohs of
the eighteenth and succeeding dynasties, to have been Cilicians.

Unfortunately, no scientific excavation of early sites in Cilicia has
yet been undertaken; but for many years past buyers of antiquities have
been receiving, from Tarsus and its port, engraved stones and seals of
singularly fine workmanship, which belong to Hittite art but seem of
later date than most of its products. They display in their decoration
certain peculiar designs, which have been remarked also in Cyprus, and
present some peculiarities of form, which occur also in the earliest
Ionian art. Till other evidence comes to hand these little objects must
be our witnesses to the existence of a highly developed sub-Hittite
culture in Cilicia which, as early as the ninth century, had already
been refined by the influence of the Greek settlements on the Anatolian
coasts and perhaps, even earlier, by the Cretan art of the Aegean area.
Cilician civilization offers a link between east and west which is worth
more consideration and study than have been given to it by historians.


SECTION 7. ASIA MINOR

Into Asia Minor beyond Taurus we have no reason to suppose that an
Assyrian monarch of the ninth century ever marched in person, though
several raiding columns visited Khanigalbat and Tabal, and tributary
acknowledgment of Assyrian dominance was made intermittently by the
princes of both those countries in the latter half of Shalmaneser's
reign. The farther and larger part of the western peninsula lay outside
the Great King's reach, and we know as little of it in the year 800 as,
perhaps, the Assyrians themselves knew. We do know, however, that it
contained a strong principality centrally situated in the southern part
of the basin of the Sangarius, which the Asiatic Greeks had begun to
know as Phrygian. This inland power loomed very large in their world--so
large, indeed, that it masked Assyria at this time, and passed in their
eyes for the richest on earth. On the sole ground of its importance in
early Greek legend, we are quite safe in dating not only its rise but
its attainment of a dominant position to a period well before 800 B.C.
But, in fact, there are other good grounds for believing that before the
ninth century closed this principality dominated a much wider area than
the later Phrygia, and that its western borders had been pushed outwards
very nearly to the Ionian coast. In the Iliad, for example, the
Phrygians are spoken of as immediate neighbours of the Trojans; and a
considerable body of primitive Hellenic legend is based on the early
presence of Phrygians not only in the Troad itself, but on the central
west coast about the Bay of Smyrna and in the Caystrian plain, from
which points of vantage they held direct relations with the immigrant
Greeks themselves. It seems, therefore, certain that at some time before
800 B.C. nearly all the western half of the peninsula owed allegiance
more or less complete to the power on the Sangarius, and that even the
Heraclid kings of Lydia were not independent of it.

If Phrygia was powerful enough in the ninth century to hold the west
Anatolian lands in fee, did it also dominate enough of the eastern
peninsula to be ranked the imperial heir of the Cappadocian Hatti? The
answer to this question (if any at all can be returned on very slight
evidence) will depend on the view taken about the possible identity of
the Phrygian power with that obscure but real power of the Mushki, of
which we have already heard. The identity in question is so generally
accepted nowadays that it has become a commonplace of historians to
speak of the "Mushki-Phrygians." Very possibly they are right. But, by
way of caution, it must be remarked that the identification depends
ultimately on another, namely, that of Mita, King of the Mushki, against
whom Ashurbanipal would fight more than a century later, with Midas,
last King of Phrygia, who is mentioned by Herodotus and celebrated in
Greek myth. To assume this identity is very attractive. Mita of Mushki
and Midas of Phrygia coincide well enough in date; both ruled in Asia
Minor; both were apparently leading powers there; both fought with the
Gimirrai or Cimmerians. But there are also certain difficulties of which
too little account has perhaps been taken. While Mita seems to have been
a common name in Asia as far inland as Mesopotamia at a much earlier
period than this, the name Midas, on the other hand, came much later
into Phrygia from the west, if there is anything in the Greek tradition
that the Phryges or Briges had immigrated from south-east Europe. And
supported as this tradition is not only by the occurrence of similar
names and similar folk-tales in Macedonia and in Phrygia, but also by
the western appearance of the later Phrygian art and script, we can
hardly refuse it credit. Accordingly, if we find the origin of the
Phrygians in the Macedonian Briges, we must allow that Midas, as a
Phrygian name, came from Europe very much later than the first
appearance of kings called Mita in Asia, and we are compelled to doubt
whether the latter name is necessarily the same as Midas. When allusions
to the Mushki in Assyrian records give any indication of their local
habitat, it lies in the east, not the west, of the central Anatolian
plain--nearly, in fact, where the Moschi lived in later historical
times. The following points, therefore, must be left open at present:
(1) whether the Mushki ever settled in Phrygia at all; (2) whether, if
they did, the Phrygian kings who bore the names Gordius and Midas can
ever have been Mushkite or have commanded Mushkite allegiance; (3)
whether the kings called Mita in records of Sargon and Ashurbanipal were
not lords rather of the eastern Mushki than of Phrygia. It cannot be
assumed, on present evidence at any rate (though it is not improbable),
that Phrygian kings ruled the Mushki of Cappadocia, and in virtue of
that rule had an empire almost commensurate with the lost sway of the
Hatti.

Nevertheless theirs was a strong power, the strongest in Anatolia, and
the fame of its wealth and its walled towns dazzled and awed the Greek
communities, which were thickly planted by now on the western and
south-western coasts. Some of these had passed through the trials of
infancy and were grown to civic estate, having established wide trade
relations both by land and sea. In the coming century Cyme of Aeolis
would give a wife to a Phrygian king. Ephesus seems to have become
already an important social as well as religious centre. The objects of
art found in 1905 on the floor of the earliest temple of Artemis in the
plain (there was an earlier one in the hills) must be dated--some of
them--not later than 700, and their design and workmanship bear witness
to flourishing arts and crafts long established in the locality.
Miletus, too, was certainly an adult centre of Hellenism and about to
become a mother of new cities, if she had not already become so. But, so
early as this year 800, we know little about the Asiatic Greek cities
beyond the fact of their existence; and it will be wiser to let them
grow for another two centuries and to speak of them more at length when
they have become a potent factor in West Asian society. When we ring up
the curtain again after two hundred years, it will be found that the
light shed on the eastern scene has brightened; for not only will
contemporary records have increased in volume and clarity, but we shall
be able to use the lamp of literary history fed by traditions, which had
not had to survive the lapse of more than a few generations.




CHAPTER III

THE EAST IN 600 B.C.


When we look at the East again in 600 B.C. after two centuries of war
and tumultuous movements we perceive that almost all its lands have
found fresh masters. The political changes are tremendous. Cataclysm has
followed hard on cataclysm. The Phrygian dynasty has gone down in
massacre and rapine, and from another seat of power its former client
rules Asia Minor in its stead. The strongholds of the lesser Semitic
peoples have almost all succumbed, and Syria is a well-picked bone
snatched by one foreign dog from another. The Assyrian colossus which
bestrid the west Asiatic world has failed and collapsed, and the Medes
and the Chaldaeans--these two clouds no bigger than a man's hand which
had lain on Assyria's horizon--fill her seat and her room. As we look
back on it now, the political revolution is complete; but had we lived
in the year 600 at Asshur or Damascus or Tyre or Tarsus, it might have
impressed us less. A new master in the East did not and does not always
mean either a new earth or a new heaven.

Let us see to how much the change really amounted. The Assyrian Empire
was no more. This is a momentous fact, not to be esteemed lightly. The
final catastrophe has happened only six years before our date; but the
power of Assyria had been going downhill for nearly half a century, and
it is clear, from the freedom with which other powers were able to move
about the area of her empire some time before the end, that the East had
been free of her interference for years. Indeed, so near and vital a
centre of Assyrian nationality as Calah, the old capital of the Middle
Empire, had been taken and sacked, ere he who was to be the last "Great
King" of the northern Semites ascended his throne.


SECTION 1. THE NEW ASSYRIAN KINGDOM

For the last hundred and fifty years Assyrian history--a record of black
oppression abroad and blacker intrigue at home--has recalled the rapid
gathering and slower passing away of some great storm. A lull marks the
first half of the ninth century. Then almost without warning the full
fury of the cloud bursts and rages for nearly a hundred years. Then the
gloom brightens till all is over. The dynasty of Ashurnatsirpal and
Shalmaneser II slowly declined to its inevitable end. The capital itself
rose in revolt in the year 747, and having done with the lawful heirs,
chose a successful soldier, who may have been, for aught we know, of
royal blood, but certainly was not in the direct line. Tiglath
Pileser--for he took a name from earlier monarchs, possibly in
vindication of legitimacy--saw (or some wise counsellor told him) that
the militant empire which he had usurped must rely no longer on annual
levies of peasants from the Assyrian villages, which were fast becoming
exhausted; nor could it continue to live on uncertain blackmail
collected at uncertain intervals now beyond Euphrates, now in Armenia,
now again from eastern and southern neighbours. Such Bedawi ideas and
methods were outworn. The new Great King tried new methods to express
new ideas. A soldier by profession, indebted to the sword for his
throne, he would have a standing and paid force always at his hand, not
one which had to be called from the plough spring by spring. The lands,
which used to render blackmail to forces sent expressly all the way from
the Tigris, must henceforward be incorporated in the territorial empire
and pay their contributions to resident governors and garrisons.
Moreover, why should these same lands not bear a part for the empire in
both defence and attack by supplying levies of their own to the imperial
armies? Finally the capital, Calah, with its traditions of the dead
dynasty, the old regime and the recent rebellion, must be replaced by a
new capital, even as once on a time Asshur, with its Babylonian and
priestly spirit, had been replaced. Accordingly sites, a little higher
up the Tigris and more centrally situated in relation to both the
homeland and the main roads from west and east, must be promoted to be
capitals. But in the event it was not till after the reign of Sargon
closed that Nineveh was made the definitive seat of the last Assyrian
kings.

Organized and strengthened during Tiglath Pileser's reign of eighteen
years, this new imperial machine, with its standing professional army,
its myriad levies drawn from all fighting races within its territory,
its large and secure revenues and its bureaucracy keeping the provinces
in constant relation to the centre, became the most tremendous power of
offence which the world had seen. So soon as Assyria was made conscious
of her new vigour by the ease with which the Urartu raiders, who had
long been encroaching on Mesopotamia, and even on Syria, were driven
back across the Nairi lands and penned into their central fastnesses of
Van; by the ease, too, with which Babylonia was humbled and occupied
again, and the Phoenician ports and the city of Damascus, impregnable
theretofore, were taken and held to tribute--she began to dream of world
empire, the first society in history to conceive this unattainable
ideal. Certain influences and events, however, would defer awhile any
attempt to realize the dream. Changes of dynasty took place, thanks
partly to reactionary forces at home and more to the praetorian basis on
which the kingdom now reposed, and only one of his house succeeded
Tiglath Pileser. But the set-back was of brief duration. In the year 722
another victorious general thrust himself on to the throne and, under
the famous name of Sargon, set forth to extend the bounds of the empire
towards Media on the east, and over Cilicia into Tabal on the west,
until he came into collision with King Mita of the Mushki and held him
to tribute.


SECTION 2. THE EMPIRE OF SARGON

Though at least one large province had still to be added to the Assyrian
Empire, Sargon's reign may be considered the period of its greatest
strength. He handed on to Sennacherib no conquests which could not have
been made good, and the widest extent of territory which the central
power was adequate to hold. We may pause, then, just before Sargon's
death in 705, to see what the area of that territory actually was.

Its boundaries cannot be stated, of course, with any approach to the
precision of a modern political geographer. Occupied territories faded
imperceptibly into spheres of influence and these again into lands
habitually, or even only occasionally, raided. In some quarters,
especially from north-east round to north-west, our present
understanding of the terms of ancient geography, used by Semitic
scribes, is very imperfect, and, when an Assyrian king has told us
carefully what lands, towns, mountains and rivers his army visited, it
does not follow that we can identify them with any exactness. Nor should
the royal records be taken quite at their face value. Some discount has
to be allowed (but how much it is next to impossible to say) on reports,
which often ascribe all the actions of a campaign not shared in by the
King in person (as in certain instances can be proved) to his sole
prowess, and grandiloquently enumerate twoscore princedoms and kingdoms
which were traversed and subdued in the course of one summer campaign in
very difficult country. The illusion of immense achievement, which it
was intended thus to create, has often imposed itself on modern critics,
and Tiglath Pileser and Sargon are credited with having marched to the
neighbourhood of the Caspian, conquering or holding to ransom great
provinces, when their forces were probably doing no more than climbing
from valley to valley about the headwaters of the Tigris affluents, and
raiding chiefs of no greater territorial affluence than the Kurdish beys
of Hakkiari.

East of Assyria proper, the territorial empire of Sargon does not seem
to have extended quite up to the Zagros watershed; but his sphere of
influence included not only the heads of the Zab valleys, but also a
region on the other side of the mountains, reaching as far as Hamadan
and south-west Azerbaijan, although certainly not the eastern or
northern districts of the latter province, or Kaswan, or any part of the
Caspian littoral. On the north, the frontier of Assyrian territorial
empire could be passed in a very few days' march from Nineveh. The
shores of neither the Urmia nor the Van Lake were ever regularly
occupied by Assyria, and, though Sargon certainly brought into his
sphere of influence the kingdom of Urartu, which surrounded the latter
lake and controlled the tribes as far as the western shore of the
former, it is not proved that his armies ever went round the east and
north of the Urmia Lake, and it is fairly clear that they left the
northwestern region of mountains between Bitlis and the middle Euphrates
to its own tribesmen.

Westwards and southwards, however, Sargon's arm swept a wider circuit.
He held as his own all Mesopotamia up to Diarbekr, and beyond Syria not
only eastern and central Cilicia, but also some districts north of
Taurus, namely, the low plain of Milid or Malatia, and the southern part
of Tabal; but probably his hand reached no farther over the plateau than
to a line prolonged from the head of the Tokhma Su to the neighbourhood
of Tyana, and returning thence to the Cilician Gates. Beyond that line
began a sphere of influence which we cannot hope to define, but may
guess to have extended over Cappadocia, Lycaonia and the southern part
of Phrygia. Southward, all Syria was Sargon's, most of it by direct
occupation, and the rest in virtue of acknowledged overlordship and
payment of tribute. Even the seven princes of Cyprus made such
submission. One or two strong Syrian towns, Tyre and Jerusalem, for
example, withheld payment if no Assyrian army was at hand; but their
show of independence was maintained only on sufferance. The Philistine
cities, after Sargon's victory over their forces and Egyptian allies at
Raphia, in 720, no longer defended their walls, and the Great King's
sphere of influence stretched eastward right across the Hamad and
southward over north Arabia. Finally, Babylonia was all his own even to
the Persian Gulf, the rich merchants supporting him firmly in the
interests of their caravan trade, however the priests and the peasantry
might murmur. But Elam, whose king and people had carried serious
trouble into Assyria itself early in the reign, is hardly to be reckoned
to Sargon even as a sphere of influence. The marshes of its south-west,
the tropical plains of the centre and the mountains on the east, made it
a difficult land for the northern Semites to conquer and hold. Sargon
had been wise enough to let it be. Neither so prudent nor so fortunate
would be his son and successors.


SECTION 3. THE CONQUEST OF EGYPT

Such was the empire inherited by Sargon's son, Sennacherib. Not content,
he would go farther afield to make a conquest which has never remained
long in the hands of an Asiatic power. It was not only lust of loot,
however, which now urged Assyria towards Egypt. The Great Kings had long
found their influence counteracted in southern Syria by that of the
Pharaohs. Princes of both Hebrew states, of the Phoenician and the
Philistine cities and even of Damascus, had all relied at one time or
another on Egypt, and behind their combinations for defence and their
individual revolts Assyria had felt the power on the Nile. The latter
generally did no more in the event to save its friends than it had done
for Israel when Shalmaneser IV beleaguered, and Sargon took and
garrisoned, Samaria; but even ignorant hopes and empty promises of help
cause constant unrest. Therefore Sennacherib, after drastic chastisement
of the southern states in 701 (both Tyre and Jerusalem, however, kept
him outside their walls), and a long tussle with Chaldaean Babylon, was
impelled to set out in the last year, or last but one, of his reign for
Egypt. In southern Palestine he was as successful as before, but,
thereafter, some signal disaster befell him. Probably an epidemic
pestilence overtook his army when not far across the frontier, and he
returned to Assyria only to be murdered.

He bequeathed the venture to the son who, after defeating his parricide
brothers, secured his throne and reigned eleven years under a name which
it has been agreed to write Esarhaddon. So soon as movements in Urartu
and south-western Asia Minor had been suppressed, and, more important,
Babylon, which his father had dishonoured, was appeased, Esarhaddon took
up the incomplete conquest. Egypt, then in the hands of an alien dynasty
from the Upper Nile and divided against itself, gave him little trouble
at first. In his second expedition (670) he reached Memphis itself,
carried it by assault, and drove the Cushite Tirhakah past Thebes to the
Cataracts. The Assyrian proclaimed Egypt his territory and spread the
net of Ninevite bureaucracy over it as far south as the Thebaid; but
neither he nor his successors cared to assume the style and titles of
the Pharaohs, as Persians and Greeks, wiser in their generations, would
do later on. Presently trouble at home, excited by a son rebelling after
the immemorial practice of the east, recalled Esarhaddon to Assyria;
Tirhakah moved up again from the south; the Great King returned to meet
him and died on the march.

[Plate 4: ASSYRIAN EMPIRE AT ITS GREATEST EXTENT. EARLY YEARS OF
ASHURBANIPAL]

But Memphis was reoccupied by Esarhaddon's successor, and since the
latter took and ruined Thebes also, and, after Tirhakah's death, drove
the Cushites right out of Egypt, the doubtful credit of spreading the
territorial empire of Assyria to the widest limits it ever reached falls
to Ashurbanipal. Even Tyre succumbed at last, and he stretched his
sphere of influence over Asia Minor to Lydia. First of Assyrian kings he
could claim Elam with its capital Susa as his own (after 647), and in
the east he professed overlordship over all Media. Mesopotamian arts and
letters now reached the highest point at which they had stood since
Hammurabi's days, and the fame of the wealth and luxury of "Sardanapal"
went out even into the Greek lands. About 660 B.C. Assyria seemed in a
fair way to be mistress of the desirable earth.


SECTION 4. DECLINE AND FALL OF ASSYRIA

Strong as it seemed in the 7th century, the Assyrian Empire was,
however, rotten at the core. In ridding itself of some weaknesses it had
created others. The later Great Kings of Nineveh, raised to power and
maintained by the spears of paid praetorians, found less support even
than the old dynasty of Calah had found, in popular religious sentiment,
which (as usual in the East) was the ultimate basis of Assyrian
nationality; nor, under the circumstances, could they derive much
strength from tribal feeling, which sometimes survives the religious
basis. Throughout the history of the New Kingdom we can detect the
influence of a strong opposition centred at Asshur. There the last
monarch of the Middle Kingdom had fixed his dwelling under the wing of
the priests; there the new dynasty had dethroned him as the consummation
of an anti-sacerdotal rising of nobles and of peasant soldiery. Sargon
seems to have owed his elevation two generations later to revenge taken
for this victory by the city folk; but Sargon's son, Sennacherib, in his
turn, found priestly domination intolerable, and, in an effort to crush
it for ever, wrecked Babylon and terrorized the central home of Semitic
cult, the great sacerdotal establishment of Bel-Marduk. After his
father's murder, Esarhaddon veered back to the priests, and did so much
to court religious support, that the military party incited Ashurbanipal
to rebellion and compelled his father to associate the son in the royal
power before leaving Assyria for the last time to die (or be killed) on
the way to Egypt. Thus the whole record of dynastic succession in the
New Kingdom has been typically Oriental, anticipating, at every change
of monarch, the history of Islamic Empires. There is no trace of
unanimous national sentiment for the Great King. One occupant of the
throne after another gains power by grace of a party and holds it by
mercenary swords.

Another imperial weakness was even more fatal. So far as can be learned
from Assyria's own records and those of others, she lived on her
territorial empire without recognizing the least obligation to render
anything to her provinces for what they gave--not even to render what
Rome gave at her worst, namely, peace. She regarded them as existing
simply to endow her with money and men. When she desired to garrison or
to reduce to impotence any conquered district, the population of some
other conquered district would be deported thither, while the new
subjects took the vacant place. What happened when Sargon captured
Samaria happened often elsewhere (Ashurbanipal, for example, made Thebes
and Elam exchange inhabitants), for this was the only method of
assimilating alien populations ever conceived by Assyria. When she
attempted to use natives to govern natives the result was such disaster
as followed Ashurbanipal's appointment of Psammetichus, son of Necho, to
govern Memphis and the Western Delta.

Rotten within, hated and coveted by vigorous and warlike races on the
east, the north and the south, Assyria was moving steadily towards her
catastrophe amid all the glory of "Sardanapal." The pace quickened when
he was gone. A danger, which had lain long below the eastern horizon,
was now come up into the Assyrian field of vision. Since Sargon's
triumphant raids, the Great King's writ had run gradually less and less
far into Media; and by his retaliatory invasions of Elam, which
Sennacherib had provoked, Ashurbanipal not only exhausted his military
resources, but weakened a power which had served to check more dangerous
foes.

We have seen that the "Mede" was probably a blend of Scythian and
Iranian, the latter element supplying the ruling and priestly classes.
The Scythian element, it seems, had been receiving considerable
reinforcement. Some obscure cause, disturbing the northern steppes,
forced its warlike shepherds to move southward in the mass. A large
body, under the name Gimirrai or Cimmerians, descended on Asia Minor in
the seventh century and swept it to the western edge of the plateau and
beyond; others pressed into central and eastern Armenia, and, by
weakening the Vannic king, enabled Ashurbanipal to announce the
humiliation of Urartu; others again ranged behind Zagros and began to
break through to the Assyrian valleys. Even while Ashurbanipal was still
on the throne some of these last had ventured very far into his realm;
for in the year of his death a band of Scythians appeared in Syria and
raided southwards even to the frontier of Egypt. It was this raid which
virtually ended the Assyrian control of Syria and enabled Josiah of
Jerusalem and others to reassert independence.

The death of Ashurbanipal coincided also with the end of direct Assyrian
rule over Babylon. After the death of a rebellious brother and viceroy
in 648, the Great King himself assumed the Babylonian crown and ruled
the sacred city under a Babylonian name. But there had long been
Chaldaean principalities in existence, very imperfectly incorporated in
the Assyrian Empire, and these, inspiring revolts from time to time, had
already succeeded in placing more than one dynast on the throne of
Babylon. As soon as "Sardanapal" was no more and the Scythians began to
overrun Assyria, one of these principalities (it is not known which)
came to the front and secured the southern crown for its prince
Nabu-aplu-utsur, or, as the Greeks wrote the name, Nabopolassar. This
Chaldaean hastened to strengthen himself by marrying his son,
Nebuchadnezzar, to a Median princess, and threw off the last pretence of
submission to Assyrian suzerainty. He had made himself master of
southern Mesopotamia and the Euphrates Valley trade-route by the year
609.

At the opening of the last decade of the century, therefore, we have
this state of things. Scythians and Medes are holding most of eastern
and central Assyria; Chaldaeans hold south Mesopotamia; while Syria,
isolated from the old centre of empire, is anyone's to take and keep. A
claimant appears immediately in the person of the Egyptian Necho, sprung
from the loins of that Psammetichus who had won the Nile country back
from Assyria. Pharaoh entered Syria probably in 609, broke easily
through the barrier which Josiah of Jerusalem, greatly daring in this
day of Assyrian weakness, threw across his path at Megiddo, went on to
the north and proceeded to deal as he willed with the west of the
Assyrian empire for four or five years. The destiny of Nineveh was all
but fulfilled. With almost everything lost outside her walls, she held
out against the Scythian assaults till 606, and then fell to the Mede
Uvakhshatra, known to the Greeks as Kyaxares. The fallen capital of West
Asia was devastated by the conquerors to such effect that it never
recovered, and its life passed away for ever across the Tigris, to the
site on which Mosul stands at the present day.


SECTION 5. THE BABYLONIANS AND THE MEDES

Six years later,--in 600 B.C.--this was the position of that part of the
East which had been the Assyrian Empire. Nebuchadnezzar, the Chaldaean
king of Babylon, who had succeeded his father about 605, held the
greater share of it to obedience and tribute, but not, apparently, by
means of any such centralized bureaucratic organization as the Assyrians
had established. Just before his father's death he had beaten the
Egyptians in a pitched battle under the walls of Carchemish, and
subsequently had pursued them south through Syria, and perhaps across
the frontier, before being recalled to take up his succession. He had
now, therefore, no rival or active competitor in Syria, and this part of
the lost empire of Assyria seems to have enjoyed a rare interval of
peace under native client princes who ruled more or less on Assyrian
lines. The only fenced places which made any show of defiance were Tyre
and Jerusalem, which both relied on Egypt. The first would outlast an
intermittent siege of thirteen years; but the other, with far less
resources, was soon to pay full price for having leaned too long on the
"staff of a broken reed."

About the east and north a different story would certainly have to be
told, if we could tell it in full. But though Greek traditions come to
our aid, they have much less to say about these remote regions than the
inscribed annals of that empire, which had just come to its end, have
had hitherto: and unfortunately the Median inheritors of Assyria have
left no epigraphic records of their own--at least none have been found.
If, as seems probable, the main element of Kyaxares' war strength was
Scythian, we can hardly expect to find records either of his conquest or
the subsequent career of the Medes, even though Ecbatana should be laid
bare below the site of modern Hamadan; for the predatory Scyth, like the
mediaeval Mongol, halted too short a time to desire to carve stones, and
probably lacked skill to inscribe them. To complete our discomfiture,
the only other possible source of light, the Babylonian annals, sheds
none henceforward on the north country and very little on any country.
Nebuchadnezzar--so far as his records have been found and read--did not
adopt the Assyrian custom of enumerating first and foremost his
expeditions and his battles; and were it not for the Hebrew Scriptures,
we should hardly know that his armies ever left Babylonia, the
rebuilding and redecoration of whose cities and shrines appear to have
constituted his chief concern. True, that in such silence about warlike
operations, he follows the precedent of previous Babylonian kings; but
probably that precedent arose from the fact that for a long time past
Babylon had been more or less continuously a client state.

We must, therefore, proceed by inference. There are two or three
recorded events earlier and later than our date, which are of service.
First, we learn from Babylonian annals that Kyaxares, besides
overrunning all Assyria and the northern part of Babylonia after the
fall of Nineveh, took and pillaged Harran and its temple in north-west
Mesopotamia. Now, from other records of Nabonidus, fourth in succession
to Nebuchadnezzar, we shall learn further that this temple did not come
into Babylonian hands till the middle of the following century. The
reasonable inference is that it had remained since 606 B.C. in the power
of the Medes, and that northern Mesopotamia, as well as Assyria, formed
part of a loose-knit Median "Empire" for a full half century before 552
B.C.

Secondly, Herodotus bears witness to a certain event which occurred
about the year 585, in a region near enough to his own country for the
fact to be sufficiently well known to him. He states that, after an
expedition into Cappadocia and a war with Lydia, the Medes obtained,
under a treaty with the latter which the king of Babylon and the prince
of Cilicia promoted, the Halys river as a "scientific frontier" on the
north-west. This statement leaves us in no doubt that previously the
power of Ecbatana had been spread through Armenia into the old Hatti
country of Cappadocia, as well as over all the north of Mesopotamia, in
the widest sense of this vague term.

Something more, perhaps, may be inferred legitimately from this same
passage of Herodotus. The mediation of the two kings, so unexpectedly
coupled, must surely mean that each stood to one of the two belligerents
as friend and ally. If so (since a Babylonian king can hardly have held
such a relation to distant Lydia, while the other prince might well have
been its friend), Cilicia was probably outside the Median "sphere of
influence," while Babylon fell within it; and Nebuchadnezzar--for he it
must have been, when the date is considered, though Herodotus calls him
by a name, Labynetus, otherwise unknown--was not a wholly independent
ruler, though ruler doubtless of the first and greatest of the client
states of Media. Perhaps that is why he has told us so little of
expeditions and battles, and confined his records so narrowly to
domestic events. If his armies marched only to do the bidding of an
alien kinsman-in-law, he can have felt but a tepid pride in their
achievements.

In 600 B.C., then, we must picture a Median "Empire," probably of the
raiding type, centred in the west of modern Persia and stretching
westward over all Armenia (where the Vannic kingdom had ceased to be),
and southward to an ill-defined point in Mesopotamia. Beyond this point
south and west extended a Median sphere of influence which included
Babylonia and all that obeyed Nebuchadnezzar even to the border of Elam
on the one hand and the border of Egypt on the other. Since the heart of
this "Empire" lay in the north, its main activities took place there
too, and probably the discretion of the Babylonian king was seldom
interfered with by his Median suzerain. In expanding their power
westward to Asia Minor, the Medes followed routes north of Taurus, not
the old Assyrian war-road through Cilicia. Of so much we can be fairly
sure. Much else that we are told of Media by Herodotus--his marvellous
account of Ecbatana and scarcely less wonderful account of the reigning
house--must be passed by till some confirmation of it comes to light;
and that, perhaps, will never be.


SECTION 6. ASIA MINOR

A good part of the East, however, remains which owed allegiance neither
to Media nor to Babylon. It is, indeed, a considerably larger area than
was independent of the Farther East at the date of our last survey. Asia
Minor was in all likelihood independent from end to end, from the Aegean
to the Euphrates--for in 600 B.C. Kyaxares had probably not yet come
through Urartu--and from the Black Sea to the Gulf of Issus. About much
of this area we have far more trustworthy information now than when we
looked at it last, because it had happened to fall under the eyes of the
Greeks of the western coastal cities, and to form relations with them of
trade and war. But about the residue, which lay too far eastward to
concern the Greeks much, we have less information than we had in 800
B.C., owing to the failure of the Assyrian imperial annals.

The dominant fact in Asia Minor in 600 B.C. is the existence of a new
imperial power, that of Lydia. Domiciled in the central west of the
peninsula, its writ ran eastwards over the plateau about as far as the
former limits of the Phrygian power, on whose ruins it had arisen. As
has been stated already, there is reason to believe that its "sphere of
influence," at any rate, included Cilicia, and the battle to be fought
on the Halys, fifteen years after our present survey, will argue that
some control of Cappadocia also had been attempted. Before we speak of
the Lydian kingdom, however, and of its rise to its present position, it
will be best to dispose of that outlying state on the southeast,
probably an ally or even client of Lydia, which, we are told, was at
this time one of the "four powers of Asia." These powers included
Babylon also, and accordingly, if our surmise that the Mede was then the
overlord of Nebuchadnezzar be correct, this statement of Eusebius, for
what it is worth, does not imply that Cilicia had attained an imperial
position. Doubtless of the four "powers," she ranked lowest.


SECTION 7. CILICIA

It will be remembered how much attention a great raiding Emperor of the
Middle Assyrian period, Shalmaneser II, had devoted to this little
country. The conquering kings of later dynasties had devoted hardly
less. From Sargon to Ashurbanipal they or their armies had been there
often, and their governors continuously. Sennacherib is said to have
rebuilt Tarsus "in the likeness of Babylon," and Ashurbanipal, who had
to concern himself with the affairs of Asia Minor more than any of his
predecessors, was so intimately connected with Tarsus that a popular
tradition of later days placed there the scene of his death and the
erection of his great tomb. And, in fact, he may have died there for all
that we know to the contrary; for no Assyrian record tells us that he
did not. Unlike the rest of Asia Minor, Cilicia was saved by the
Assyrians from the ravages of the Cimmerians. Their leader, Dugdamme,
whom the Greeks called Lygdamis, is said to have met his death on the
frontier hills of Taurus, which, no doubt, he failed to pass. Thus, when
Ashurbanipal's death and the shrinking of Ninevite power permitted
distant vassals to resume independence, the unimpaired wealth of Cilicia
soon gained for her considerable importance. The kings of Tarsus now
extended their power into adjoining lands, such as Kue on the east and
Tabal on the north, and probably over even the holding of the Kummukh;
for Herodotus, writing a century and a half after our date, makes the
Euphrates a boundary of Cilicia. He evidently understood that the
northernmost part of Syria, called by later geographers (but never by
him) Commagene, was then and had long been Cilician territory. His
geographical ideas, in fact, went back to the greater Cilicia of
pre-Persian time, which had been one of the "four great powers of Asia."

The most interesting feature of Cilician history, as it is revealed very
rarely and very dimly in the annals of the New Assyrian Kingdom,
consists in its relation to the earliest eastward venturing of the
Greeks. The first Assyrian king with whom these western men seem to have
collided was Sargon, who late in the eighth century, finding their ships
in what he considered his own waters, i.e. on the coasts of Cyprus and
Cilicia, boasts that he "caught them like fish." Since this action of
his, he adds, "gave rest to Kue and Tyre," we may reasonably infer that
the "Ionian pirates" did not then appear on the shores of Phoenicia and
Cilicia for the first time; but, on the contrary, that they were already
a notorious danger in the easternmost Levant. In the year 720 we find a
nameless Greek of Cyprus (or Ionia) actually ruling Ashdod. Sargon's
successor, Sennacherib, had serious trouble with the Ionians only a few
years later, as has been learned from the comparison of a royal record
of his, only recently recovered and read, with some statements made
probably in the first place by the Babylonian historian, Berossus, but
preserved to us in a chronicle of much later date, not hitherto much
heeded. Piecing these scraps of information together, the Assyrian
scholar, King, has inferred that, in the important campaign which a
revolt of Tarsus, aided by the peoples of the Taurus on the west and
north, compelled the generals of Sennacherib to wage in Cilicia in the
year 698, Ionians took a prominent part by land, and probably also by
sea. Sennacherib is said (by a late Greek historian) to have erected an
"Athenian" temple in Tarsus after the victory, which was hardly won; and
if this means, as it may well do, an "Ionic" temple, it states a by no
means incredible fact, seeing that there had been much local contact
between the Cilicians and the men of the west. Striking similarities of
form and artistic execution between the early glyptic and toreutic work
of Ionia and Cilicia respectively have been mentioned in the last
chapter; and it need only be added here, in conclusion, that if Cilicia
had relations with Ionia as early as the opening of the seventh
century--relations sufficient to lead to alliance in war and to
modification of native arts--it is natural enough that she should be
found allied a few years later with Lydia rather than with Media.


SECTION 8. PHRYGIA

When we last surveyed Asia Minor as a whole it was in large part under
the dominance of a central power in Phrygia. This power is now no more,
and its place has been taken by another, which rests on a point nearer
to the western coast. It is worth notice, in passing, how Anatolian
dominion has moved stage by stage from east to west--from the Halys
basin in northern Cappadocia, where its holders had been, broadly
speaking, in the same cultural group as the Mesopotamian East, to the
middle basin of the Sangarius, where western influences greatly modified
the native culture (if we may judge by remains of art and script). Now
at last it has come to the Hermus valley, up which blows the breath of
the Aegean Sea. Whatever the East might recover in the future, the
Anatolian peninsula was leaning more and more on the West, and the
dominion of it was coming to depend on contact with the vital influence
of Hellenism, rather than on connection with the heart of west Asia.

A king Mita of the Mushki first appears in the annals of the New
Assyrian Kingdom as opposing Sargon, when the latter, early in his
reign, tried to push his sphere of influence, if not his territorial
empire, beyond the Taurus to include the principalities of Kue and
Tabal; and the same Mita appears to have been allied with Carchemish in
the revolt which ended with its siege and final capture in 717 B.C. As
has been said in the last chapter, it is usual to identify this king
with one of those "Phrygians" known to the Greeks as Midas--preferably
with the son of the first Gordius, whose wealth and power have been
immortalized in mythology. If this identification is correct, we have to
picture Phrygia at the close of the eighth century as dominating almost
all Asia Minor, whether by direct or by indirect rule; as prepared to
measure her forces (though without ultimate success) against the
strongest power in Asia; and as claiming interests even outside the
peninsula. Pisiris, king of Carchemish, appealed to Mita as his ally,
either because the Mushki of Asia Minor sat in the seat of his own
forbears, the Hatti of Cappadocia, or because he was himself of Mushki
kin. There can be no doubt that the king thus invoked was king of
Cappadocia. Whether he was king also of Phrygia, i.e. really the same as
Midas son of Gordius, is, as has been said already, less certain. Mita's
relations with Kue, Tabal and Carchemish do not, in themselves, argue
that his seat of power was anywhere else than in the east of Asia Minor,
where Moschi did actually survive till much later times: but, on the
other hand, the occurrence of inscriptions in the distinctive script of
Phrygia at Eyuk, east of the Halys, and at Tyana, south-east of the
central Anatolian desert, argue that at some time the filaments of
Phrygian power did stretch into Cappadocia and towards the land of the
later Moschi.

It must also be admitted that the splendour of the surviving rock
monuments near the Phrygian capital is consistent with its having been
the centre of a very considerable empire, and hardly consistent with its
having been anything less. The greatest of these, the tomb of a king
Midas (son not of Gordius but of Atys), has for fa�ade a cliff about a
hundred feet high, cut back to a smooth face on which an elaborate
geometric pattern has been left in relief. At the foot is a false door,
while above the immense stone curtain the rock has been carved into a
triangular pediment worthy of a Greek temple and engraved with a long
inscription in a variety of the earliest Greek alphabet. There are many
other rock-tombs of smaller size but similar plan and decoration in the
district round the central site, and others which show reliefs of human
figures and of lions, the latter of immense proportions on two famous
fa�ades. When these were carved, the Assyrian art of the New Kingdom was
evidently known in Phrygia (probably in the early seventh century), and
it is difficult to believe that those who made such great things under
Assyrian influence can have passed wholly unmentioned by contemporary
Assyrian records. Therefore, after all, we shall, perhaps, have to admit
that they were those same Mushki who followed leaders of the name Mita
to do battle with the Great Kings of Nineveh from Sargon to
Ashurbanipal.

There is no doubt how the Phrygian kingdom came by its end. Assyrian
records attest that the Gimirrai or Cimmerians, an Indo-European
Scythian folk, which has left its name to Crim Tartary, and the present
Crimea, swept southward and westward about the middle of the seventh
century, and Greek records tell how they took and sacked the capital of
Phrygia and put to death or forced to suicide the last King Midas.


SECTION 9. LYDIA

It must have been in the hour of that disaster, or but little before,
that a Mermnad prince of Sardes, called Guggu by Assyrians and Gyges by
Greeks, threw off any allegiance he may have owed to Phrygia and began
to exalt his house and land of Lydia. He was the founder of a new
dynasty, having been by origin, apparently, a noble of the court who
came to be elevated to the throne by events differently related but
involving in all the accounts some intrigue with his predecessor's
queen. One historian, who says that he prevailed by the aid of Carians,
probably states a fact; for it was this same Gyges who a few years later
seems to have introduced Carian mercenaries to the notice of
Psammetichus of Egypt. Having met and repulsed the Cimmerian horde
without the aid of Ashurbanipal of Assyria, to whom he had applied in
vain, Gyges allied himself with the Egyptian rebel who had just founded
the Saite dynasty, and proceeded to enlarge his boundaries by attacking
the prosperous Greeks on his western hand. But he was successful only
against Colophon and Magnesia on the Maeander, inland places, and failed
before Smyrna and Miletus, which could be provisioned by their fleets
and probably had at their call a larger proportion of those warlike
"Ionian pirates" who had long been harrying the Levant. In the course of
a long reign, which Herodotus (an inexact chronologist) puts at
thirty-eight years, Gyges had time to establish his power and to secure
for his Lydians the control of the overland trade; and though a fresh
Cimmerian horde, driven on, says Herodotus, by Scythians (perhaps these
were not unconnected with the Medes then moving westward, as we know),
came down from the north, defeated and killed him, sacked the
unfortified part of his capital and swept on to plunder what it could of
the land as far as the sea without pausing to take fenced places, his
son Ardys, who had held out in the citadel of Sardes, and made his
submission to Ashurbanipal, was soon able to resume the offensive
against the Greeks. After an Assyrian attack on the Cimmerian flank or
rear had brought about the death of the chief barbarian leader in the
Cilician hills, and the dispersal of the storm, the Lydian marched down
the Maeander again. He captured Priene, but like his predecessor and his
successor, he failed to snatch the most coveted prize of the Greek
coast, the wealthy city Miletus at the Maeander mouth.

Up to the date of our present survey, however, and for half a century
yet to come, these conquests of the Lydian kings in Ionia and Caria
amounted to little more than forays for plunder and the levy of
blackmail, like the earlier Mesopotamian razzias. They might result in
the taking and sacking of a town here and there, but not in the holding
of it. The Carian Greek Herodotus, born not much more than a century
later, tells us expressly that up to the time of Croesus, that is, to
his own father's time, all the Greeks kept their freedom: and even if he
means by this statement, as possibly he does, that previously no Greeks
had been subjected to regular slavery, it still supports our point: for,
if we may judge by Assyrian practice, the enslaving of vanquished
peoples began only when their land was incorporated in a territorial
empire. We hear nothing of Lydian governors in the Greek coastal cities
and find no trace of a "Lydian period" in the strata of such Ionian and
Carian sites as have been excavated. So it would appear that the Lydians
and the Greeks lived up to and after 600 B.C. in unquiet contact, each
people holding its own on the whole and learning about the other in the
only international school known to primitive men, the school of war.

Herodotus represents that the Greek cities of Asia, according to the
popular belief of his time, were deeply indebted to Lydia for their
civilization. The larger part of this debt (if real) was incurred
probably after 600 B.C.; but some constituent items of the account must
have been of older date--the coining of money, for example. There is,
however, much to be set on the other side of the ledger, more than
Herodotus knew, and more than we can yet estimate. Too few monuments of
the arts of the earlier Lydians and too few objects of their daily use
have been found in their ill-explored land for us to say whether they
owed most to the West or to the East. From the American excavation of
Sardes, however, we have already learned for certain that their script
was of a Western type, nearer akin to the Ionian than even the Phrygian
was; and since their language contained a great number of Indo-European
words, the Lydians should not, on the whole, be reckoned an Eastern
people. Though the names given by Herodotus to their earliest kings are
Mesopotamian and may be reminiscent of some political connection with
the Far East at a remote epoch--perhaps that of the foreign relations of
Ur, which seem to have extended to Cappadocia--all the later royal and
other Lydian names recorded are distinctly Anatolian. At any rate all
connection with Mesopotamia must have long been forgotten before
Ashurbanipal's scribes could mention the prayer of "Guggu King of Luddi"
as coming from a people and a land of which their master and his
forbears had not so much as heard. As the excavation of Sardes and of
other sites in Lydia proceeds, we shall perhaps find that the higher
civilization of the country was a comparatively late growth, dating
mainly from the rise of the Mermnads, and that its products will show an
influence of the Hellenic cities which began not much earlier than 600
B.C., and was most potent in the century succeeding that date.

We know nothing of the extent of Lydian power towards the east, unless
the suggestions already based on the passage of Herodotus concerning the
meeting of Alyattes of Lydia with Kyaxares the Mede on the Halys, some
years later than the date of our present survey, are well founded. If
they are, then Lydia's sphere of influence may be assumed to have
included Cilicia on the south-east, and its interests must have been
involved in Cappadocia on the north-east. It is not unlikely that the
Mermnad dynasty inherited most of what the Phrygian kings had held
before the Cimmerian attack; and perhaps it was due to an oppressive
Lydian occupation of the plateau as far east as the Halys and the foot
of Anti-Taurus, that the Mushki came to be represented in later times
only by Moschi in western Armenia, and the men of Tabal by the equally
remote and insignificant Tibareni.


SECTION 10. THE GREEK CITIES

Of the Greek cities on the Anatolian coast something has been said
already. The great period of the elder ones as free and independent
communities falls between the opening of the eighth century and the
close of the sixth. Thus they were in their full bloom about the year
600. By the foundation of secondary colonies (Miletus alone is said to
have founded sixty!) and the establishment of trading posts, they had
pushed Hellenic culture eastwards round the shores of the peninsula, to
Pontus on the north and to Cilicia on the south. In the eyes of
Herodotus this was the happy age when "all Hellenes were free" as
compared with his own experience of Persian overlordship. Miletus, he
tells us, was then the greatest of the cities, mistress of the sea; and
certainly some of the most famous among her citizens, Anaximander,
Anaximenes, Hecataeus and Thales, belong approximately to this epoch, as
do equally famous names from other Asiatic Greek communities, such as
Alcaeus and Sappho of Lesbos, Mimnermus of Smyrna or Colophon, Anacreon
of Teos, and many more. The fact is significant, because studies and
literary activities like theirs could hardly have been pursued except in
highly civilized, free and leisured societies where life and wealth were
secure.

If, however, the brilliant culture of the Asiatic Greeks about the
opening of the sixth century admits no shadow of doubt, singularly few
material things, which their arts produced, have been recovered for us
to see to-day. Miletus has been excavated by Germans to a very
considerable extent, without yielding anything really worthy of its
great period, or, indeed, much that can be referred to that period at
all, except sherds of a fine painted ware. It looks as if the city at
the mouth of the greatest and largest valley, which penetrates Asia
Minor from the west coast, was too important in subsequent ages and
suffered chastisements too drastic and reconstructions too thorough for
remains of its earlier greatness to survive except in holes and corners.
Ephesus has given us more archaic treasures, from the deposits bedded
down under the later reconstructions of its great shrine of Artemis; but
here again the site of the city itself, though long explored by
Austrians, has not added to the store. The ruins of the great Roman
buildings which overlie its earlier strata have proved, perhaps, too
serious an impediment to the excavators and too seductive a prize.
Branchidae, with its temple of Apollo and Sacred Way, has preserved for
us a little archaic statuary, as have also Samos and Chios. We have
archaic gold work and painted vases from Rhodes, painted sarcophagi from
Clazomenae, and painted pottery made there and at other places in Asia
Minor, although found mostly abroad. But all this amounts to a very poor
representation of the Asiatic Greek civilization of 600 B.C. Fortunately
the soil still holds far more than has been got out of it. With those
two exceptions, Miletus and Ephesus, the sites of the elder Hellenic
cities on or near the Anatolian coast still await excavators who will go
to the bottom of all things and dig systematically over a large area;
while some sites await any excavation whatsoever, except such as is
practised by plundering peasants.

In their free youth the Asiatic Greeks carried into fullest practice the
Hellenic conception of the city-state, self-governing, self-contained,
exclusive. Their several societies had in consequence the intensely
vivid and interested communal existence which develops civilization as a
hot-house develops plants; but they were not democratic, and they had
little sense of nationality--defects for which they were to pay dearly
in the near future. In spite of their associations for the celebration
of common festivals, such as the League of the twelve Ionian cities, and
that of the Dorian Hexapolis in the south-west, which led to discussion
of common political interests, a separatist instinct, reinforced by the
strong geographical boundaries which divided most of the civic
territories, continually reasserted itself. The same instinct was ruling
the history of European Greece as well. But while the disaster, which in
the end it would entail, was long avoided there through the insular
situation of the main Greek area as a whole and the absence of any
strong alien power on its continental frontier, disaster impended over
Asiatic Greece from the moment that an imperial state should become
domiciled on the western fringe of the inland plateau. Such a state had
now appeared and established itself; and if the Greeks of Asia had had
eyes to read, the writing was on their walls in 600 B.C.

Meanwhile Asiatic traders thronged into eastern Hellas, and the Hellenes
and their influence penetrated far up into Asia. The hands which carved
some of the ivories found in the earliest Artemisium at Ephesus worked
on artistic traditions derived ultimately from the Tigris. So, too,
worked the smiths who made the Rhodian jewellery, and so, the artists
who painted the Milesian ware and the Clazomenae sarcophagi. On the
other side of the ledger (though three parts of its page is still hidden
from us) we must put to Greek credit the script of Lydia, the rock
pediments of Phrygia, and the forms and decorative schemes of many
vessels and small articles in clay and bronze found in the Gordian
tumuli and at other points on the western plateau from Mysia to
Pamphylia. The men of "Javan," who had held the Syrian sea for a century
past, were known to Ezekiel as great workers in metal; and in Cyprus
they had long met and mingled their culture with that of men from the
East.

It was implied in the opening of this chapter that in 600 B.C. social
changes in the East would be found disproportionate to political
changes; and on the whole they seem so to have been. The Assyrian Empire
was too lately fallen for any great modification of life to have taken
place in its area, and, in fact, the larger part of that area was being
administered still by a Chaldaean monarchy on the established lines of
Semitic imperialism. Whether the centre of such a government lay at
Nineveh or at Babylon can have affected the subject populations very
little. No new religious force had come into the ancient East, unless
the Mede is to be reckoned one in virtue of his Zoroastrianism. Probably
he did not affect religion much in his early phase of raiding and
conquest. The great experience, which was to convert the Jews from
insignificant and barbarous highlanders into a cultured, commercial and
cosmopolitan people of tremendous possibilities had indeed begun, but
only for a part of the race, and so far without obvious result. The
first incursion of Iranians in force, and that slow soakage of
Indo-European tribes from Russia, which was to develop the Armenian
people of history, are the most momentous signs of coming change to be
noted between 800 and 600 B.C. with one exception, the full import of
which will be plain at our next survey. This was the eastward movement
of the Greeks.




CHAPTER IV

THE EAST IN 400 B.C.


As the fifth century draws to its close the East lies revealed at last
in the light of history written by Greeks. Among the peoples whose
literary works are known to us, these were the first who showed
curiosity about the world in which they lived and sufficient
consciousness of the curiosity of others to record the results of
inquiry. Before our present date the Greeks had inquired a good deal
about the East, and not of Orientals alone. Their own public men,
military and civil, their men of science, their men of letters, their
merchants in unknown number, even soldiers of theirs in thousands, had
gone up into Inner Asia and returned. Leading Athenians, Solon, Hippias
and Themistocles, had been received at Eastern courts or had accompanied
Eastern sovereigns to war, and one more famous even than these,
Alcibiades, had lately lived with a Persian satrap. Greek physicians,
Democedes of Croton, Apollonides of Cos, Ctesias of Cnidus, had
ministered to kings and queens of Persia in their palaces. Herodotus of
Halicarnassus had seen Babylon, perhaps, and certainly good part of
Syria; Ctesias had dwelt at Susa and collected notes for a history of
the Persian Empire; Xenophon of Attica had tramped from the
Mediterranean to the Tigris and from the Tigris to the Black Sea, and
with him had marched more than ten thousand Greeks. Not only have works
by these three men of letters survived, wholly or in part, to our time,
but also many notes on the East as it was before 400 B.C. have been
preserved in excerpts, paraphrases and epitomes by later authors. And we
still have some archaeological documents to fall back upon. If the
cuneiform records of the Persian Empire are less abundant than those of
the later Assyrian Kingdom, they nevertheless include such priceless
historical inscriptions as that graven by Darius, son of Hystaspes, on
the rock of Behistun. There are also hieroglyphic, hieratic and demotic
texts of Persian Egypt; inscriptions of Semitic Syria and a few of
archaic Greece; and much other miscellaneous archaeological material
from various parts of the East, which, even if uninscribed, can inform
us of local society and life.


SECTION 1. EASTWARD MOVEMENT OF THE GREEKS

The Greek had been pushing eastward for a long time. More than three
hundred years ago, as has been shown in the last chapter, he had become
a terror in the farthest Levant. Before another century had passed he
found his way into Egypt also. Originally hired as mercenaries to
support a native revolt against Assyria, the Greeks remained in the Nile
valley not only to fight but to trade. The first introduction of them to
the Saite Pharaoh, Psammetichus, was promoted by Gyges the Lydian to
further his own ends, but the first development of their social
influence in Egypt was due to the enterprise of Miletus in establishing
a factory on the lowest course of the Canopic Nile. This post and two
standing camps of Greek mercenaries, one at Tahpanhes watching the
approach from Asia, the other at Memphis overawing the capital and
keeping the road to Upper Egypt, served to introduce Ionian civilization
to the Delta in the seventh century. Indeed, to this day our knowledge
of the earliest fine painted pottery of Ionia and Caria depends largely
on the fragments of their vases imported into Egypt which have been
found at Tahpanhes, Memphis and another Greek colony, Naukratis, founded
a little later (as will be told presently) to supersede the original
Milesian factory. Though those foreign vases themselves, with their
decoration of nude figure subjects which revolted vulgar Egyptian
sentiment, did not go much beyond the Greek settlements (like the Greek
courtesans of Naukratis, who perhaps appealed only to the more
cosmopolitan Saites), their art certainly influenced all the finer art
of the Saitic age, initiating a renascence whose characteristics of
excessive refinement and meticulous delicacy survived to be reinforced
in the Ptolemaic period by a new infusion of Hellenic culture.

So useful or so dangerous--at any rate so numerous--did the Greeks
become in Lower Egypt by the opening of the sixth century that a
reservation was assigned to them beside the Egyptian town of Piemro, and
to this alone, according to Herodotus, newcomers from the sea were
allowed to make their way. This foreign suburb of Piemro was named
Naukratis, and nine cities of the Asiatic Greeks founded a common
sanctuary there. Other maritime communities of the same race (probably
the more powerful, since Miletus is named among them) had their
particular sanctuaries also and their proper places. The Greeks had come
to Egypt to stay. We have learned from the remains of Naukratis that
throughout the Persian domination, which superseded the Saitic before
the close of the sixth century, a constant importation of products of
Ionia, Attica, Sparta, Cyprus and other Hellenic centres was maintained.
The place was in full life when Herodotus visited Egypt, and it
continued to prosper until the Greek race, becoming rulers of all the
land, enthroned Hellenism at Alexandria on the sea itself.


SECTION 2. PHOENICIAN CARRIERS

Nor was it only through Greek sea-rovers and settlers in Cilicia, and
through Greek mercenaries, merchants and courtesans in the Nile-Delta,
that the East and the West had been making mutual acquaintance. Other
agencies of communication had been active in bringing Mesopotamian
models to the artists of the Ionian and Dorian cities in Asia Minor, and
Ionian models to Mesopotamia and Syria. The results are plain to see, on
the one hand in the fabric and design of early ivories, jewellery and
other objects found in the archaic Artemisium at Ephesus, and in the
decoration of painted pottery produced at Miletus; on the other hand, in
the carved ivories of the ninth century found at Calah on the Tigris.
But the processes which produced these results are not so clear. If the
agents or carriers of those mutual influences were certainly the
Phoenicians and the Lydians, we cannot yet apportion with confidence to
each of these peoples the responsibility for the results, or be sure
that they were the only agents, or independent of other middlemen more
directly in contact with one party or the other.

The Phoenicians have pushed far afield since we looked at them last. By
founding Carthage more than half-way towards the Pillars of Hercules the
city of Tyre completed her occupation of sufficient African harbours,
beyond the reach of Egypt, and out of the Greek sphere, to appropriate
to herself by the end of the ninth century the trade of the western
Mediterranean basin. By means of secondary settlements in west Sicily,
Sardinia and Spain, she proceeded to convert this sea for a while into
something like a Phoenician lake. No serious rival had forestalled her
there or was to arise to dispute her monopoly till she herself, long
after our date, would provoke Rome. The Greek colonies in Sicily and
Italy, which looked westward, failed to make head against her at the
first, and soon dropped out of the running; nor did the one or two
isolated centres of Hellenism on other shores do better. On the other
hand, in the eastern basin of the Mediterranean, although it was her own
home-sea, Tyre never succeeded in establishing commercial supremacy, and
indeed, so far as we know, she never seriously tried to establish it. It
was the sphere of the Aegean mariners and had been so as far back as
Phoenician memory ran. The Late Minoan Cretans and men of Argolis, the
Achaean rovers, the Ionian pirates, the Milesian armed merchantmen had
successively turned away from it all but isolated and peaceful ships of
Sidon and Tyre, and even so near a coast as Cyprus remained foreign to
the Phoenicians for centuries after Tyre had grown to full estate. In
the Homeric stories ships of the Sidonians, though not unknown, make
rare appearances, and other early legends of the Greeks, which make
mention of Phoenician visits to Hellenic coasts, imply that they were
unusual phenomena, which aroused much local curiosity and were long
remembered. The strangeness of the Phoenician mariners, the unfamiliar
charm of their cargoes--such were the impressions left on Greek story by
the early visits of Phoenician ships.

That they did pay such visits, however, from time to time is certain.
The little Egyptian trinkets, which occur frequently in Hellenic strata
of the eighth to the sixth centuries, are sufficient witness of the
fact. They are most numerous in Rhodes, in Caria and Ionia, and in the
Peloponnese. But the main stream of Tyrian commerce hugged the south
rather than the north coasts of the Eastern Mediterranean. Phoenician
sailors were essentially southerners--men who, if they would brave now
and again the cold winds of the Aegean and Adriatic, refused to do so
oftener than was necessary--men to whom African shores and a climate
softened by the breath of the Ocean were more congenial.

If, however, the Phoenicians were undoubtedly agents who introduced the
Egyptian culture to the early Hellenes of both Asia and Europe, did they
also introduce the Mesopotamian? Not to anything like the same extent,
if we may judge by the products of excavations. Indeed, wherever
Mesopotamian influence has left unmistakable traces upon Greek soil, as
in Cyprus and Ionia or at Corinth and Sparta, it is often either certain
or probable that the carrying agency was not Phoenician. We find the
nearest affinities to archaic Cypriote art (where this was indebted to
Asiatic art at all) in Cilician and in Hittite Syrian art. Early Ionian
and Carian strata contain very little that is of Egyptian character, but
much whose inspiration can be traced ultimately to Mesopotamia; and
research in inner Asia Minor, imperfect though its results are yet, has
brought to light on the plateau so much parallelism to Ionian
Orientalizing art, and so many examples of prior stages in its
development, that we must assume Mesopotamian influence to have reached
westernmost Asia chiefly by overland ways. As for the European sites,
since their Orientalism appears to have been drawn from Ionia, it also
had come through Asia overland.

Therefore on the whole, though Herodotus asserts that the Phoenician
mariners carried Assyrian cargoes, there is remarkably little evidence
that those cargoes reached the West, and equally little that Phoenicians
had any considerable direct trade with Mesopotamia. They may have been
responsible for the small Egyptian and Egyptianizing objects which have
been found by the excavators of Carchemish and Sakjegeuzi in strata of
the ninth and eighth centuries; but the carrying of similar objects
eastward across the Euphrates was more probably in Hittite hands than
theirs. The strongest Nilotic influence which affected Mesopotamian art
is to be noticed during the latter half of the New Assyrian Kingdom,
when there was no need for alien intermediaries to keep Nineveh in
communication with its own province of Egypt.

Apparently, therefore, it was not through the Phoenicians that the
Greeks had learned most of what they knew about the East in 400 B.C.
Other agents had played a greater part and almost all the
intercommunication had been effected by way, not of the Levant Sea, but
of the land bridge through Asia Minor. In the earlier part of our story,
during the latter rule of Assyria in the farther East and the subsequent
rule of the Medes and the Babylonians in her room, intercourse had been
carried on almost entirely by intermediaries, among whom (if something
must be allowed to the Cilicians) the Lydians were undoubtedly the most
active. In the later part of the story it will be seen that the
intermediaries have vanished; the barriers are down; the East has itself
come to the West and intercourse is immediate and direct. How this
happened--what agency brought Greeks and Orientals into an intimate
contact which was to have the most momentous consequences to
both--remains to be told.


SECTION 3. THE COMING OF THE PERSIANS

We have seen already how a power, which had grown behind the frontier
mountains of the Tigris basin, forced its way at last through the
defiles and issued in the riverine plains with fatal results to the
north Semitic kings. By the opening of the sixth century Assyria had
passed into Median hands, and these were reaching out through Armenia to
central Asia Minor. Even the south Semites of Babylonia had had to
acknowledge the superior power of the newcomers and, probably, to accept
a kind of vassalage. Thus, since all lower Mesopotamia with most part of
Syria obeyed the Babylonian, a power, partly Iranian, was already
overshadowing two-thirds of the East before Cyrus and his Persians
issued upon the scene. It is important to bear this fact in mind when
one comes to note the ease with which a hitherto obscure king of Anshan
in Elam would prove able to possess himself of the whole Semitic Empire,
and the rapidity with which his arms would appear in the farthest west
of Asia Minor on the confines of the Greeks themselves. Nebuchadnezzar
allied with and obedient to the Median king, helping him on the Halys in
585 B.C. to arrange with Lydia a division of the peninsula of Asia Minor
on the terms _uti possidetis_--that is the significant situation which
will prepare us to find Cyrus not quite half a century later lord of
Babylon, Jerusalem and Sardes.

What events, passing in the far East among the divers groups of the
Iranians themselves and their Scythian allies, led to this king of a
district in Elam, whose own claim to have belonged by blood to any of
those groups is doubtful, consolidating all the Iranians whether of the
south or north under his single rule into a mighty power of offence, we
do not know. Stories current among the Greeks and reported by Herodotus
and Ctesias represented Cyrus as in any case a Persian, but as either
grandson of a Median king (though not his natural heir) or merely one of
his court officials. What the Greeks had to account for (and so have we)
is the subsequent disappearance of the north Iranian kings of the Medes
and the fusion of their subjects with the Persian Iranians under a
southern dynasty. And what the Greeks did not know, but we do, from
cuneiform inscriptions either contemporary with, or very little
subsequent to, Cyrus' time, only complicates the problem; since these
bear witness that Cyrus was known at first (as has been indicated
already) for a king of Elam, and not till later for a king of Persia.
Ctesias, who lived at Susa itself while at was the Persian capital,
agrees with Herodotus that Cyrus wrested the lordship of the Medes from
the native dynasty by force; but Herodotus adds that many Medes were
consenting parties.

These problems cannot be discussed here. The probability is, summarily,
this. Some part of the southern or Persian group of Iranians which,
unlike the northern, was not contaminated with Scyths, had advanced into
Elam while the Medes were overrunning and weakening the Semitic Empire;
and in Anshan it consolidated itself into a territorial power with Susa
for capital. Presently some disaffection arose among the northern
Iranians owing, perhaps, to favour shown by the Median kings to their
warlike Scythian subjects, and the malcontents called in the king of
Anshan. The issue was fought out in central West Persia, which had been
dominated by the Medes since the time of Kyaxares' father, Phraortes,
and when it was decided by the secession of good part of the army of
King Astyages, Cyrus of Anshan took possession of the Median Empire with
the goodwill of much of the Median population. This empire included
then, beside the original Median land, not only territories conquered
from Assyria but also all that part of Persia which lay east of Elam.
Some time, doubtless, elapsed before the sovereignty of Cyrus was
acknowledged by all Persia; but, once his lordship over this land was an
accomplished fact, he naturally became known as king primarily of the
Persians, and only secondarily of the Medes, while his seat remained at
Susa in his own original Elamite realm. The Scythian element in and
about his Median province remained unreconciled, and one day he would
meet his death in a campaign against it; but the Iranian element
remained faithful to him and his son, and only after the death of the
latter gave expression by a general revolt to its discontent with the
bargain it had made.


SECTION 4. FALL OF LYDIA

Cyrus must have met with little or no opposition in the western Median
provinces, for we find him, within a year or two of his recognition by
both Persians and Medes, not only on his extreme frontier, the Halys
river, but able to raid across it and affront the power of Lydia. To
this action he was provoked by Lydia itself. The fall of the Median
dynasty, with which the royal house of Lydia had been in close alliance
since the Halys pact, was a disaster which Croesus, now king of Sardes
in the room of Alyattes, was rash enough to attempt to repair. He had
continued with success his father's policy of extending Lydian dominion
to the Aegean at the expense of the Ionian Greeks; and, master of
Ephesus, Colophon and Smyrna, as well as predominant partner in the
Milesian sphere, he secured to Lydia the control and fruition of
Anatolian trade, perhaps the most various and profitable in the world at
that time. A byword for wealth and luxury, the Lydians and their king
had nowadays become soft, slow-moving folk, as unfit to cope with the
mountaineers of the wild border highlands of Persia as, if Herodotus'
story is well founded, they were ignorant of their quality. Croesus took
his time, sending envoys to consult oracles near and far. Herodotus
tells us that he applied to Delphi not less than thrice and even to the
oracle of Ammon in the Eastern Sahara. At least a year must have been
spent in these inquiries alone, not to speak of an embassy to Sparta and
perhaps others to Egypt and Babylon. These preliminaries at length
completed, the Lydian gathered the levies of western Asia Minor and set
out for the East. He found the Halys in flood--it must have been in late
spring--and having made much ado of crossing it, spent the summer in
ravaging with his cavalry the old homeland of the Hatti. Thus he gave
Cyrus time to send envoys to the Ionian cities to beg them attack Lydia
in the rear, and time to come down himself in force to his far western
province. Croesus was brought to battle in the first days of the autumn.
The engagement was indecisive, but the Lydians, having no mind to stay
out the winter on the bleak Cappadocian highlands and little suspicion
that the enemy would think of further warfare before spring, went back
at their leisure to the Hermus valley, only to hear at Sardes itself
that the Persian was hot in pursuit. A final battle was fought under the
very walls of the Lydian capital and lost by Croesus; the lower town was
taken and sacked; and the king, who had shut himself with his guards
into the citadel and summoned his allies to his rescue come five months,
was a prisoner of Cyrus within two weeks. It was the end of Lydia and of
all buffers between the Orient and Greece. East and West were in direct
contact and the omens boded ill to the West. Cyrus refused terms to the
Greeks, except the powerful Milesians, and departing for the East again,
left Lydia to be pacified and all the cities of the western coasts,
Ionian, Carian, Lycian and what not, excepting only Miletus, to be
reduced by his viceroys.


SECTION 5. PERSIAN EMPIRE

Cyrus himself had still to deal with a part of the East which, not
having been occupied by the Medes, though in a measure allied and
subservient to them, saw no reason now to acknowledge the new dynasty.
This is the part which had been included in the New Babylonian Empire.
The Persian armies invaded Babylonia. Nabonidus was defeated finally at
Opis in June 538; Sippara fell, and Cyrus' general appearing before
Babylon itself received it without a struggle at the hands of the
disaffected priests of Bel-Marduk. The famous Herodotean tale of Cyrus'
secret penetration down the dried bed of Euphrates seems to be a
mistaken memory of a later recapture of the city after a revolt from
Darius, of which more hereafter. Thus once more it was given to Cyrus to
close a long chapter of Eastern history--the history of imperial
Babylon. Neither did he make it his capital, nor would any other lord of
the East so favour it. If Alexander perhaps intended to revive its
imperial position, his successor, Seleucus, so soon as he was assured of
his inheritance, abandoned the Euphratean city for the banks of the
Tigris and Orontes, leaving it to crumble to the heap which it is
to-day.

The Syrian fiefs of the Babylonian kings passed _de jure_ to the
conqueror; but probably Cyrus himself never had leisure or opportunity
to secure them _de facto_. The last decade of his life seems to have
been spent in Persia and the north-east, largely in attempts to reduce
the Scythian element, which threatened the peace of Media; and at the
last, having brought the enemy to bay beyond the Araxes, he met there
defeat and death. But Cambyses not only completed his father's work in
Syria, but fulfilled what is said to have been his further project by
capturing Egypt and establishing there a foreign domination which was to
last, with some intervals, nearly two hundred years. By the end of the
sixth century one territorial empire was spread over the whole East for
the first time in history; and it was with a colossus, bestriding the
lands from the Araxes to the Upper Nile and from the Oxus to the Aegean
Sea, that the Greeks stood face to face in the gate of the West.

Before, however, we become absorbed in contemplation of a struggle which
will take us into a wider history, let us pause a moment to consider the
nature of the new power come out of the East, and the condition of such
of its subject peoples as have mattered most in the later story of
mankind. It should be remarked that the new universal power is not only
non-Semitic for the first time in well-certified history, but controlled
by a very pure Aryan stock, much nearer kin to the peoples of the West
than any Oriental folk with which they have had intimate relations
hitherto. The Persians appeared from the Back of Beyond, uncontaminated
by Alarodian savagery and unhampered by the theocratic prepossessions
and nomadic traditions of Semites. They were highlanders of unimpaired
vigour, frugal habit, settled agricultural life, long-established social
cohesion and spiritual religious conceptions. Possibly, too, before they
issued from the vast Iranian plateau, they were not wholly unversed in
the administration of wide territories. In any case, their quick
intelligence enabled them to profit by models of imperial organization
which persisted in the lands they now acquired; for relics of the
Assyrian system had survived under the New Babylonian rule, and perhaps
also under the Median. Thereafter the experience gained by Cambyses in
Egypt must have gone for something in the imperial education of his
successor Darius, to whom historians ascribe the final organization of
Persian territorial rule. From the latter's reign onward we find a
regular provincial system linked to the centre as well as might be by a
postal service passing over state roads. The royal power is delegated to
several officials, not always of the ruling race, but independent of
each other and directly responsible to Susa: these live upon their
provinces but must see to it first and foremost that the centre receives
a fixed quota of money and a fixed quota of fighting men when required.
The Great King maintains royal residences in various cities of the
empire, and not infrequently visits them; but in general his viceroys
are left singularly free to keep the peace of their own governorates and
even to deal with foreign neighbours at their proper discretion.

If we compare the Persian theory of Empire with the Assyrian, we note
still a capital fault. The Great King of Susa recognized no more
obligation than his predecessors of Nineveh to consider the interests of
those he ruled and to make return to them for what he took. But while,
on the one hand, no better imperial theory was conceivable in the sixth
century B.C., and certainly none was held or acted upon in the East down
to the nineteenth century A.D., on the other, the Persian imperial
practice mitigated its bad effects far more than the Assyrian had done.
Free from the Semitic tradition of annual raiding, the Persians reduced
the obligation of military service to a bearable burden and avoided
continual provocation of frontier neighbours. Free likewise from Semitic
supermonotheistic ideas, they did not seek to impose their creed. Seeing
that the Persian Empire was extensive, decentralized and provided with
imperfect means of communication, it could subsist only by practising
provincial tolerance. Its provincial tolerance seems to have been
systematic. We know a good deal of the Greeks and the Jews under its
sway, and in the history of both we miss such signs of religious and
social oppression as marked Assyrian rule. In western Asia Minor the
satraps showed themselves on the whole singularly conciliatory towards
local religious feeling and even personally comformable to it; and in
Judaea the hope of the Hebrews that the Persian would prove a deliverer
and a restorer of their estate was not falsified. Hardly an echo of
outrage on the subjects of Persia in time of peace has reached our ears.
If the sovereign of the Asiatic Greek cities ran counter to Hellenic
feeling by insisting on "tyrant" rule, he did no more than continue a
system under which most of those cities had grown rich. It is clear that
they had little else to complain of than absence of a democratic freedom
which, as a matter of fact, some of them had not enjoyed in the day of
their independence. The satraps seem to have been supplied with few, or
even no, Persian troops, and with few Persian aides on their
administrative staff. The Persian element in the provinces must, in
fact, have been extraordinarily small--so small that an Empire, which
for more than two centuries comprehended nearly all western Asia, has
left hardly a single provincial monument of itself, graven on rock or
carved on stone.


SECTION 6. JEWS

If we look particularly at the Jews--those subjects of Persia who
necessarily share most of our interest with the Greeks--we find that
Persian imperial rule was no sooner established securely over the former
Babylonian fief in Palestine than it began to undo the destructive work
of its predecessors. Vainly expecting help from the restored Egyptian
power, Jerusalem had held out against Nebuchadnezzar till 587. On its
capture the dispersion of the southern Jews, which had already begun
with local emigrations to Egypt, was largely increased by the
deportation of a numerous body to Babylonia. As early, however, as 538,
the year of Cyrus' entry into Babylon (doubtless as one result of that
event), began a return of exiles to Judaea and perhaps also to Samaria.
By 520 the Jewish population in South Palestine was sufficiently strong
again to make itself troublesome to Darius, and in 516 the Temple was in
process of restoration. Before the middle of the next century Jerusalem
was once more a fortified city and its population had been further
reinforced by many returned exiles who had imbibed the economic
civilization, and also the religiosity of Babylonia. Thenceforward the
development of the Jews into a commercial people proceeds without
apparent interruption from Persian governors, who (as, for example,
Nehemiah) could themselves be of the subject race. Even if large
accretions of other Semites, notably Aramaeans, be allowed
for--accretions easily accepted by a people which had become rather a
church than a nation--it remains a striking testimony to Persian
toleration that after only some six or seven generations the once
insignificant Jews should have grown numerous enough to contribute an
important element to the populations of several foreign cities. It is
worth remark also that even when, presumably, free to return to the home
of their race, many Jews preferred to remain in distant parts of the
Persian realm. Names mentioned on contract tablets of Nippur show that
Jews found it profitable to still sit by the waters of Babylon till late
in the fifth century; while in another distant province of the Persian
Empire (as the papyri of Syene have disclosed) a flourishing
particularist settlement of the same race persisted right down to and
after 500 B.C.


SECTION 7. ASIA UNDER PERSIA

On the whole evidence the Persians might justifiably claim that their
imperial organization in its best days, destitute though it was of
either the centralized strength or the theoretic justification of modern
civilized rule, achieved a very considerable advance, and that it is not
unworthy to be compared even to the Roman in respect of the freedom and
peace which in effect it secured to its subjects.

[Plate 5: PERSIAN EMPIRE (WEST) AT ITS GREATEST EXTENT. TEMP. DARIUS
HYSTASPIS]

Not much more need--or can--be said about the other conquered peoples
before we revert to the Greeks. Though Cyrus did not live to receive in
person the submission of all the west Asian peoples, his son Cambyses
had received it before his short reign of eight years came to an end.
Included in the empire now were not only all the mainland territories
once dominated by the Medes and the Babylonians, but also much wider
lands east, west and south, and even Mediterranean islands which lay
near the Asiatic shores. Among these last was Cyprus, now more closely
linked to Phoenicia than of old, and combining with the latter to
provide navies for the Great King's needs. On the East, the Iranian
plateau, watched from two royal residences, Pasargadae in the south and
Ecbatana in the north, swelled this realm to greater dimensions than any
previous eastern empire had boasted. On the south, Cambyses added Cyrene
and, less surely, Nabia to Egypt proper, which Assyria had possessed for
a short time, as we have seen. On the west, Cyrus and his generals had
already secured all Asia which lay outside the Median limit, including
Cilicia, where (as also in other realms, e.g. Phoenicia, Cyprus, Caria)
the native dynasty accepted a client position.

This, however, is not to be taken to mean that all the East settled down
at once into contented subservience. Cambyses, by putting his brother to
death, had cut off the direct line of succession. A pretender appeared
in the far East; Cambyses died on the march to meet him, and at once all
the oriental provinces, except the homeland of Persia, were up in
revolt. But a young cognate of the royal house, Darius, son of
Hystaspes, a strong man, slew the pretender, and once secure on the
throne, brought Media, Armenia, Elam and at last Babylonia, back to
obedience. The old imperial city on the Euphrates would make one more
bid for freedom six years later and then relapse into the estate of a
provincial town. Darius spent some twenty years in organizing his empire
on the satrap system, well known to us from Greek sources, and in
strengthening his frontiers. To promote the latter end he passed over
into Europe, even crossing the Danube in 511 to check Scythian raids;
and he secured the command of the two straits and the safety of his
northwest Asiatic possessions by annexing the south-east of the Balkan
peninsula with the flourishing Greek cities on its coasts.


SECTION 8. PERSIA AND THE GREEKS

The sixth century closed and the fifth century ran three years of its
course in apparently unbroken peace between East and West. But trouble
was near at hand. Persia had imposed herself on cities which possessed a
civilization superior, not only potentially but actually, to her own; on
cities where individual and communal passion for freedom constituted the
one religion incompatible with her tolerant sway; on cities conscious of
national identity with a powerful group outside the Persian Empire, and
certain sooner or later to engage that group in warfare on their behalf.

Large causes, therefore, lay behind the friction and intrigue which,
after a generation of subjection, caused the Ionian cities, led, as of
old, by Miletus, to ring up the first act of a dramatic struggle
destined to make history for a very long time to come. We cannot examine
here in detail the particular events which induced the Ionian Revolt.
Sufficient to say they all had their spring in the great city of
Miletus, whose merchant princes and merchant people were determined to
regain the power and primacy which they had enjoyed till lately. A
preliminary failure to aggrandize themselves with the goodwill of Persia
actually brought on their revolt, but it only precipitated a struggle
inevitable ultimately on one side of the Aegean or the other.

After setting the whole Anatolian coast from the Bosporus to Pamphylia
and even Cyprus in a blaze for two years, the Ionian Revolt failed,
owing as much to the particularist jealousies of the Greek cities
themselves as to vigorous measures taken against them by Darius on land
and his obedient Phoenicians at sea. A naval defeat sealed the fate of
Miletus, whose citizens found, to the horror of all Greece, that, on
occasion, the Persian would treat rebels like a loyal successor of
Shalmaneser and Nebuchadnezzar. But even though it failed, the Revolt
brought on a second act in the drama. For, on the one hand, it had
involved in Persian politics certain cities of the Greek motherlands,
notably Athens, whose contingent, greatly daring, affronted the Great
King by helping to burn the lower town of Sardes; and on the other, it
had prompted a despot on the European shore of the Dardanelles, one
Miltiades, an Athenian destined to immortal fame, to incense Darius yet
more by seizing his islands of Lemnos and Imbros.

Evidently neither could Asiatic Greeks be trusted, even though their
claws were cut by disarmament and their motives for rebellion had been
lessened by the removal of their despots, nor could the Balkan province
be held securely, while the western Greeks remained defiant and Athens,
in particular, aiming at the control of Aegean trade, supported the
Ionian colonies. Therefore Darius determined to strike at this city
whose exiled despot, Hippias, promised a treacherous co-operation; and
he summoned other Greek states to make formal submission and keep the
peace. A first armada sent to coast round the northern shore in 492
added Macedonia to the Persian Empire; but it was crippled and stayed by
storms. A second, sent two years later direct across the Aegean, reduced
the Cyclad isles, revenged itself on Eretria, one of the minor culprits
in the Sardian affair, and finally brought up by the Attic shore at
Marathon. The world-famous defeat which its landing parties suffered
there should be related by a historian rather of Greece than of the
East; and so too should the issue of a third and last invasion which,
ten years later, after old Darius' death, Xerxes led in person to defeat
at Salamis, and left to meet final rout under his generalissimo at
Plataea. For our purpose it will be enough to note the effects which
this momentous series of events had on the East itself.


SECTION 9. RESULTS OF THE PERSIAN ATTACKS ON GREECE

Obviously the European failure of Persia affected the defeated less than
the victorious party. Except upon the westernmost fringe of the Persian
Empire we have no warrant for saying that it had any serious political
result at all. A revolt of Egypt which broke out in the last year of
Darius, and was easily suppressed by his successor, seems not to have
been connected with the Persian disaster at Marathon; and even when two
more signal defeats had been suffered in Greece, and a fourth off the
shore of Asia itself--the battle of Mycale--upon which followed closely
the loss of Sestus, the European key of the Hellespont, and more
remotely the loss not only of all Persian holdings in the Balkans and
the islands, but also of the Ionian Greek cities and most of the
Aeolian, and at last (after the final naval defeat off the Eurymedon) of
the whole littoral of Anatolia from Pamphylia right round to the
Propontis--not even after all these defeats and losses did the Persian
power suffer diminution in inner Asia or loss of prestige in inland Asia
Minor. Some years, indeed, had still to elapse before the ever-restless
Egyptian province used the opportunity of Xerxes' death to league itself
with the new power and make a fresh attempt to shake off the Persian
yoke; but once more it tried in vain.

When Persia abandoned direct sovereignty over the Anatolian littoral she
suffered little commercial loss and became more secure. It is clear that
her satraps continued to manage the western trade and equally clear that
the wealth of her empire increased in greater ratio than that of the
Greek cities. There is little evidence for Hellenic commercial expansion
consequent on the Persian wars, but much for continued and even
increasing Hellenic poverty. In the event Persia found herself in a
position almost to regain by gold what she had lost by battle, and to
exercise a financial influence on Greece greater and longer lasting than
she ever established by arms. Moreover, her empire was less likely to be
attacked when it was limited by the western edge of the Anatolian
plateau, and no longer tried to hold any European territory. There is a
geographical diversity between the Anatolian littoral and the plateau.
In all ages the latter alone has been an integral part of inner Asia,
and the society and politics of the one have remained distinct from
those of the other. The strong frontier of Asia at its western
peninsular extremity lies not on, but behind the coast.

At the same time, although their immediate results to the Persian Empire
were not very hurtful, those abortive expeditions to Europe had sown the
seeds of ultimate catastrophe. As a direct consequence of them the
Greeks acquired consciousness of their own fighting value on both land
and sea as compared with the peoples of inner Asia and the Phoenicians.
Their former fear of numerical superiorities was allayed, and much of
the mystery, which had hitherto magnified and shielded Oriental power,
was dissipated. No less obviously those expeditions served to suggest to
the Greeks for the first time that there existed both a common enemy of
all their race and an external field for their own common encroachment
and plundering. So far as an idea of nationality was destined ever to be
operative on Greek minds it would draw its inspiration thenceforward
from a sense of common superiority and common hostility to the Oriental.
Persia, in a word, had laid the foundations and promoted the development
of a Greek nationality in a common ambition directed against herself. It
was her fate also, by forcing Athens into the front of the Greek states,
to give the nascent nation the most inspiriting and enterprising of
leaders--the one most fertile in imperial ideas and most apt to proceed
to their realization: and in her retreat before that nation she drew her
pursuer into a world which, had she herself never advanced into Europe,
would probably not have seen him for centuries to come.

Moreover, by a subsequent change of attitude towards her victorious
foe--though that change was not wholly to her discredit--Persia bred in
the Greeks a still better conceit of themselves and a better
understanding of her weakness. The Persians, with the intelligence and
versatility for which their race has always been remarkable, passed very
rapidly from overweening contempt to excessive admiration of the Greeks.
They set to work almost at once to attract Hellenic statesmen and men of
science to their own society, and to make use of Hellenic soldiers and
sailors. We soon find western satraps cultivating cordial relations with
the Ionian cities, hospitably entertaining Greeks of distinction and
conciliating Greek political and religious prepossessions. They must
have attained considerable success, while thus unwittingly preparing
disaster. When, a little more than a century later, western Europe would
come eastward in force, to make an end of Persian dominion, some of the
greater Ionian and Carian cities would offer a prolonged resistance to
it which is not to be accounted for only by the influence of Persian
gold or of a Persian element in their administration. Miletus and
Halicarnassus shut their gates and defended their walls desperately
against Alexander because they conceived their own best interests to be
involved in the continuance of the Persian Empire. Nor were the Persians
less successful with Greeks actually taken into their service. The Greek
mercenaries remained to a man loyal to the Great King when the Greek
attack came, and gave Alexander his hardest fighting in the three great
battles which decided the fate of the East. None the less, such an
attitude towards Greeks was suicidal. It exalted the spirit of Europe
while it depraved the courage and sapped the self-reliance of Asia.


SECTION 10. THE FIRST COUNTER-ATTACKS

This, however, is to anticipate the sequel. Let us finally fix our eyes
on the Eastern world in 400 B.C. and review it as it must then have
appeared to eyes from which the future was all concealed. The coasts of
Asia Minor, generally speaking, were in Greek hands, the cities being
autonomous trading communities, as Greeks understood autonomy; but most
of them until four years previously had acknowledged the suzerainty or
rather federal leadership of Athens and now were acknowledging less
willingly a Spartan supremacy established at first with Persian
co-operation. Many of these cities, which had long maintained very close
relations with the Persian governors of the nearer _hinterland_, not
only shaped their policy to please the latter, but even acknowledged
Persian suzerainty; and since, as it happens, at this particular moment
Sparta had fallen out with Persia, and a Spartan army, under
Dercyllidas, was occupying the Aeolian district of the north, the
"medizing" cities of Ionia and Caria were in some doubt of their future.
On the whole they inclined still to the satraps. Persian influence and
even control had, in fact, greatly increased on the western coast since
the supersession of Athens by a power unaccustomed to imperial politics
and notoriously inapt in naval matters; and the fleets of Phoenicia and
Cyprus, whose Greek princes had fallen under Phoenician domination, had
regained supremacy at sea.

Yet, only a year before, "Ten Thousand" heavy-armed Greeks (and near
half as many again of all arms), mostly Spartan, had marched right
through western Asia. They went as mercenary allies of a larger native
force led by Cyrus, Persian prince-governor of west central Anatolia,
who coveted the diadem of his newly enthroned brother. Having traversed
the old Lydian and Phrygian kingdoms they moved down into Cilicia and up
again over north Syria to the Euphrates, bound (though they only learned
it at last by the waters of the Great River itself) for Babylon. But
they never reached that city. Cyrus met death and his oriental soldiers
accepted defeat at Cunaxa, some four days' march short of the goal. But
the undefeated Greeks, refusing to surrender, and, few though they were,
so greatly dreaded by the Persians that they were not directly molested,
had to get back to their own land as best they might. How, robbed of
their original leaders they yet reached the Black Sea and safety by way
of the Tigris valley and the wild passes of Kurdish Armenia all readers
of Xenophon, the Athenian who succeeded to the command, know well. Now
in 400 B.C. they were reappearing in the cities of west Asia and Europe
to tell how open was the inner continent to bold plunderers and how
little ten Orientals availed in attack or defence against one Greek.
Such stories then and there incited Sparta to a forward policy, and one
day would encourage a stronger Western power than hers to march to the
conquest of the East.

We are fortunate in having Xenophon's detailed narrative of the
adventures of these Greeks, if only because it throws light by the way
on inner Asia almost at the very moment of our survey. We see Sardes
under Persia what it had been under Lydia, the capital city of Anatolia;
we see the great valley plains of Lydia and Phrygia, north and south,
well peopled, well supplied, and well in hand, while the rough foothills
and rougher heights of Taurus are held by contumacious mountaineers who
are kept out of the plains only by such periodic chastisement as Cyrus
allowed his army to inflict in Pisidia and Lycaonia. Cilicia is being
administered and defended by its own prince, who bears the same name or
title as his predecessor in the days of Sennacherib, but is feudally
accountable to the Great King. His land is so far his private property
that Cyrus, though would-be lord of all the empire, encourages the
pillage of the rich provincial capital. The fleet of Cyrus lands men and
stores unmolested in north Syria, while the inner country up to the
Euphrates and down its valley as far as Babylonia is at peace. The Great
King is able to assemble above half a million men from the east and
south to meet his foe, besides the levy of Media, a province which now
seems to include most of the ancient Assyria. These hundreds of
thousands constitute a host untrained, undisciplined, unstable, unused
to service, little like the ordered battalions of an essentially
military power such as the Assyrian had been.

From the story of the Retreat certain further inferences may be drawn.
First, Babylonia was a part of the empire not very well affected to the
Great King; or else the Greeks would have been neither allowed by the
local militia to enter it so easily nor encouraged by the Persians to
leave it. Second, the ancient Assyria was a peaceful province not
coerced by a standing Persian force or garrisons of any strength. Third,
southern Kurdistan was not held by or for the Great King and it paid
tribute only to occasional pressure. Fourth, the rest of Kurdistan and
Armenia as far north as the upper arm of the Euphrates was held,
precariously, by the Persians; and lastly, north of the Euphrates valley
up to the Black Sea all was practical independence. We do not know
anything precise about the far eastern provinces or the south Syrian in
this year, 400. Artaxerxes, the Great King, came from Susa to meet his
rebellious brother, but to Babylon he returned to put to death the
betrayed leaders of the Greeks. At this moment Ctesias, the Cnidian
Greek, was his court physician and no friend either to Cyrus or to
Spartans; he was even then in correspondence with the Athenian Conon who
would presently be made a Persian admiral and smash the Spartan fleet.
Of his history of Persia some few fragments and some epitomized extracts
relating to this time have survived. These have a value, which the mass
of his book seems not to have had; for they relate what a contemporary,
singularly well placed to learn court news, heard and saw. One gathers
that king and court had fallen away from the ideas and practice of the
first Cyrus. Artaxerxes was unwarlike, lax in religion (though he had
been duly consecrated at Pasargadae) and addicted to non-Zoroastrian
practices. Many Persians great and small were disaffected towards him
and numbers rallied to his brother; but he had some Western adventurers
in his army. Royal ladies wielded almost more power at the court than
the Great King, and quarrelled bitterly with one another.

Plutarch, who drew material for his life of Artaxerxes not only from
Ctesias, but also from authorities now lost to us, leaves us with much
the same impression of the lords of the East at the close of the fifth
century B.C. Corrupt and treacherous central rule, largely directed by
harem intrigue; an unenthusiastic body of subjects, abandoned to the
schemes of satraps; inefficient and casually collected armies in which
foreign mercenaries were almost the only genuine soldiers--such was
Persia now. It was something very unlike the vigorous rule of Cyrus and
the imperial system of the first Darius--something very like the Ottoman
Empire in the eighteenth century A.D.--something which would collapse
before the first Western leader of men who could command money of his
own making and a professional army of his own people.




CHAPTER V

THE VICTORY OF THE WEST


The climax was reached in about seventy years more. When these had
passed into history, so had also the Persian Empire, and the East, as
the Greeks had conceived it thus far and we have understood it, was
subject to the European race which a century and a half before it had
tried to subdue in Europe itself. To this race (and to the historian
also) "the East," as a geographical term, standing equally for a spatial
area and for a social idea, has ceased to mean what it once meant: and
the change would be lasting. It is true that the East did not cease to
be distinguished as such; for it would gradually shake itself free
again, not only from control by the West, but from the influence of the
latter's social ideas. Nevertheless, since the Western men, when they
went back to their own land, had brought the East into the world known
to them--into a circle of lands accepted as the dwelling of civilized
man--the date of Alexander's overthrow of the Persian Empire makes an
epoch which divides universal history as hardly any other divides it.

Dramatic as the final catastrophe would be, it will not surprise us when
it comes, nor did it, as a matter of fact, surprise the generation which
witnessed it. The romantic conception of Alexander, as a little David
who dared a huge Goliath, ignores the facts of previous history, and
would have occurred to no contemporary who had read the signs of the
times. The Eastern colossus had been dwindling so fast for nearly a
century that a Macedonian king, who had already subdued the Balkan
peninsula, loomed at least as large in the world's eye, when he crossed
the Hellespont, as the titular Emperor of contumacious satraps and
ever-rebelling provinces of western Asia. To accept this view we have
only to look back over seventy years since that march of Ten Thousand
Greeks, with which our last survey closed.


SECTION 1. PERSIA AND ITS PROVINCES

Before the expedition of Cyrus there may have been, and evidently were,
enough seeds of corruption in the state of Persia; but they had not
become known by their fruits. No satrap for a century past had tried to
detach himself and his province from the Empire; hardly a subject people
had attempted to re-assert its independence. There were, indeed, two
exceptions, both of them peoples which had never identified themselves
at any time with the fortunes of their alien masters. One of these was,
of course, the Asiatic Greek, the other was the Egyptian people; but the
contumacy of the first threatened a danger not yet realized by Asia; the
rebellious spirit of the last concerned, as yet, itself alone.

It was Egypt, however, which really gave the first warning of Persian
dissolution. The weakest spot in the Assyrian Empire proved weakest in
the Persian. The natural barriers of desert, swamp and sea, set between
Egypt and the neighbouring continent, are so strong that no Asiatic
Power, which has been tempted to conquer the rich Nile valley, has ever
been able to keep it long. Under its own leaders or some rebellious
officer of its new masters it has reasserted independence sooner or
later, and all history is witness that no one, whether in Asia or in
Europe, holds Egypt as a foreign province unless he holds also the sea.
During the century which had elapsed since Cambyses' conquest the
Egyptians had rebelled more than once (most persistently about 460),
calling in the sea-lords to their help on each occasion. Finally, just
before the death of Darius Nothus, and some five years before Cyrus left
Sardes, they rose again under an Egyptian, and thereafter, for about
sixty years, not the kings of Susa, but three native dynasties in
succession, were to rule Egypt. The harm done to the Persian Empire by
this defection was not measured by the mere loss of the revenues of a
province. The new kings of Egypt, who owed much to Greek support, repaid
this by helping every enemy of the Great King and every rebel against
his authority. It was they who gave asylum to the admiral and fleet of
Cyrus after Cunaxa, and sent corn to Agesilaus when he invaded Asia
Minor; they supplied money and ships to the Spartan fleet in 394, and
helped Evagoras of Cyprus in a long resistance to his suzerain. When
Tyre and the cities of the Cilician coast revolted in 380, Egypt was
privy to their designs, and she made common cause with the satraps and
governors of Western Asia, Syria and Phoenicia when, in combination,
they planned rebellion in 373 to the grave peril of the Empire. Twelve
years later we find an Egyptian king marching in person to raise
Phoenicia.

The Persian made more than one effort to recover his province. After
conspicuous failure with his own generals Artaxerxes adopted tardily the
course which Clearchus, captain of the Ten Thousand, is said to have
advised after the battle of Cunaxa, and tried his fortune once more with
Greek _condottieri_, only to find Greek generals and Greek mercenaries
arrayed against them. It had come to this, that the Persian king and his
revolted province equally depended on mercenary swords, neither daring
to meet Greek except with Greek. Well had the lesson of the march of the
Ten Thousand been read, marked and digested in the East!


SECTION 2. PERSIA AND THE WEST

It had been marked in the West as well, and its fruits were patent
within five years. The dominant Greek state of the hour, avowing an
ambition which no Greek had betrayed before, sent its king, Agesilaus,
across to Asia Minor to follow up the establishment of Spartan hegemony
on the coasts by an invasion of inland Persia. He never penetrated
farther than about half-way up the Maeander Valley, and did Persia no
harm worth speaking of; for he was not the leader, nor had he the
resources in men and in money, to carry through so distant and doubtful
an adventure. But Agesilaus' campaigning in Asia Minor between 397 and
394 has this historical significance: it demonstrates that Greeks had
come to regard a march on Susa as feasible and desirable.

It was not, however, in fact feasible even then. Apart from the lack of
a military force in any one state of Greece large enough, sufficiently
trained, and led by a leader of the necessary magnetism and genius for
organization, to undertake, unaided by allies on the way, a successful
march to a point many months distant from its base--apart from this
deficiency, the Empire to be conquered had not yet been really shaken.
The Ten Thousand Greeks would in all likelihood never have got under
Clearchus to Cunaxa or anywhere within hundreds of miles of it, but for
the fact that Cyrus was with them and the adherents of his rising star
were supplying their wants and had cleared a road for them through Asia
Minor and Syria. In their Retreat they were desperate men, of whom the
Great King was glad to be quit. The successful accomplishment of that
retreat must not blind us to the almost certain failure which would have
befallen the advance had it been attempted under like conditions.


SECTION 3. THE SATRAPS

What, ultimately, was to reduce the Persian Empire to such weakness that
a Western power would be able to strike at its heart with little more
than forty thousand men, was the disease of disloyalty which spread
among the great officers during the first half of the fourth century.
Before Cyrus' expedition we have not heard of either satraps or client
provinces raising the standard of revolt (except in Egypt), since the
Empire had been well established; and if there was evident collusion
with that expedition on the part of provincial officers in Asia Minor
and Syria, the fact has little political significance, seeing that Cyrus
was a scion of the royal House, and the favourite of the Queen-Mother.
But the fourth century is hardly well begun before we find satraps and
princes aiding the king's enemies and fighting for their own hand
against him or a rival officer. Agesilaus was helped in Asia Minor both
by the prince of Paphlagonia and by a Persian noble. Twenty years later
Ariobarzanes of Pontus rises in revolt; and hard on his defection
follows a great rebellion planned by the satraps of Caria, Ionia, Lydia,
Phrygia and Cappadocia--nearly all Asia Minor in fact--in concert with
coastal cities of Syria and Phoenicia. Another ten years pass and new
governors of Mysia and Lydia rise against their king with the help of
the Egyptians and Mausolus, client prince of Halicarnassus. Treachery or
lack of resources and stability brought these rebels one after another
to disaster; but an Empire whose great officers so often dare such
adventures is drawing apace to its catastrophe.

The causes of this growing disaffection among the satraps are not far to
seek. At the close of the last chapter we remarked the deterioration of
the harem-ridden court in the early days of Artaxerxes; and as time
passed, the spectacle of a Great King governing by treachery, buying his
enemies, and impotent to recover Egypt even with their mercenary help
had its effect. Belief gained ground that the ship of Empire was
sinking, and even in Susa the fear grew that a wind from the West was to
finish her. The Great King's court officers watched Greek politics
during the first seventy years of the fourth century with ever closer
attention. Not content with enrolling as many Greeks as possible in the
royal service, they used the royal gold to such effect to buy or support
Greek politicians whose influence could be directed to hindering a union
of Greek states and checking the rising power of any unit, that a Greek
orator said in a famous passage that the archers stamped on the Great
King's coins were already a greater danger to Greece than his real
archers had ever been.

By such lavish corruption, by buying the soldiers and the politicians of
the enemy, a better face was put for a while on the fortunes of the
dynasty and the Empire. Before the death of the aged Artaxerxes Mnemon
in 358, the revolt of the Western satraps had collapsed. His successor,
Ochus, who, to reach the throne, murdered his kin like any
eighteenth-century sultan of Stambul, overcame Egyptian obstinacy about
346, after two abortive attempts, by means of hireling Greek troops, and
by similar vicarious help he recovered Sidon and the Isle of Cyprus. But
it was little more than the dying flicker of a flame fanned for the
moment by that same Western wind which was already blowing up to the
gale that would extinguish it. The heart of the Empire was not less
rotten because its shell was patched, and in the event, when the storm
broke a few years later, nothing in West Asia was able to make any stand
except two or three maritime cities, which fought, not for Persia, but
for their own commercial monopolies.


SECTION 4. MACEDONIA

The storm had been gathering on the Western horizon for some time past.
Twenty years earlier there had come to the throne of Macedonia a man of
singular constructive ability and most definite ambition. His
heritage--or rather his prize, for he was not next of kin to his
predecessor--was the central southern part of the Balkan peninsula, a
region of broad fat plains fringed and crossed by rough hills. It was
inhabited by sturdy gentry and peasantry and by agile highlanders, all
composed of the same racial elements as the Greeks, with perhaps a
preponderant infusion of northern blood which had come south long ago
with emigrants from the Danubian lands. The social development of the
Macedonians--to give various peoples one generic name--had, for certain
reasons, not been nearly so rapid as that of their southern cousins.
They had never come in contact with the higher Aegean civilization, nor
had they mixed their blood with that of cultivated predecessors; their
land was continental, poor in harbours, remote from the luxurious
centres of life, and of comparatively rigorous climate; its
configuration had offered them no inducement to form city-states and
enter on intense political life. But, in compensation, they entered the
fourth century unexhausted, without tribal or political impediments to
unity, and with a broad territory of greater natural resources than any
southern Greek state. Macedonia could supply itself with the best cereal
foods and to spare, and had unexploited veins of gold ore. But the most
important thing to remark is this--that, compared with Greece, Macedonia
was a region of Central Europe. In the latter's progress to imperial
power we shall watch for the first time in recorded history a
continental European folk bearing down peninsular populations of the
Mediterranean.

Philip of Macedon, who had been trained in the arts of both war and
peace in a Greek city, saw the weakness of the divided Hellenes, and the
possible strength of his own people, and he set to work from the first
with abounding energy, dogged persistence and immense talent for
organization to make a single armed nation, which should be more than a
match for the many communities of Hellas. How he accomplished his
purpose in about twenty years: how he began by opening mines of precious
metal on his south-eastern coast, and with the proceeds hired
mercenaries: how he had Macedonian peasants drilled to fight in a
phalanx formation more mobile than the Theban and with a longer spear,
while the gentry were trained as heavy cavalry: how he made experiments
with his new soldiers on the inland tribes, and so enlarged his
effective dominions that he was able to marshal henceforward far more
than his own Emathian clansmen: how for six years he perfected this
national army till it was as professional a fighting machine as any
condottiere's band of that day, while at the same time larger and of
much better temper: how, when it was ready in the spring of the year
353, he began a fifteen years' war of encroachment on the holdings of
the Greek states and particularly of Athens, attacking some of her
maritime colonies in Macedonia and Thrace: how, after a campaign in
inland Thrace and on the Chersonese, he appeared in Greece, where he
pushed at last through Thermopylae: how, again, he withdrew for several
seasons into the Balkan Peninsula, raided it from the Adriatic to the
Black Sea, and ended with an attack on the last and greatest of its free
Greek coastal cities, Perinthus and Byzantium: how, finally, in 338,
coming south in full force, he crushed in the single battle of Chaeronea
the two considerable powers of Greece, Athens and Thebes, and secured at
last from every Greek state except Sparta (which he could afford to
neglect) recognition of his suzerainty--these stages in Philip's making
of a European nation and a European empire must not be described more
fully here. What concerns us is the end of it all; for the end was the
arraying of that new nation and that new empire for a descent on Asia. A
year after Chaeronea Philip was named by the Congress of Corinth
Captain-General of all Greeks to wreak the secular vengeance of Hellas
on Persia.

How long he had consciously destined his fighting machine to an ultimate
invasion of Asia we do not know. The Athenians had explicitly stated to
the Great King in 341 that such was the Macedonian's ambition, and four
years earlier public suggestion of it had been made by the famous
orator, Isocrates, in an open letter written to Philip himself. Since
the last named was a man of long sight and sustained purpose, it is not
impossible that he had conceived such an ambition in youth and had been
cherishing it all along. While Philip was in Thebes as a young man, old
Agesilaus, who first of Greeks had conceived the idea of invading the
inland East, was still seeking a way to realize his oft-frustrated
project; and in the end he went off to Egypt to make a last effort after
Philip was already on the throne. The idea had certainly been long in
the air that any military power which might dominate Hellas would be
bound primarily by self-interest and secondarily by racial duty to turn
its arms against Asia. The Great King himself knew this as well as any
one. After the Athenian warning in 341, his satraps in the north-west of
Asia Minor were bidden assist Philip's enemies in every possible way;
and it was thanks in no small measure to their help, that the Byzantines
repulsed the Macedonians from their walls in 339.

Philip had already made friends of the princely house of Caria, and was
now at pains to secure a footing in north-west Asia Minor. He threw,
therefore, an advance column across the Dardanelles under his chief
lieutenant, Parmenio, and proposed to follow it in the autumn of the
year 336 with a Grand Army which he had been recruiting, training and
equipping for a twelvemonth. The day of festival which should inaugurate
his great venture arrived; but the venture was not to be his. As he
issued from his tent to attend the games he fell by the hand of a
private enemy; and his young son, Alexander, had at first enough to do
to re-establish a throne which proved to have more foes than friends.


SECTION 5. ALEXANDER'S CONQUEST OF THE EAST

A year and a half later Alexander's friends and foes knew that a greater
soldier and empire-maker than Philip ruled in his stead, and that the
father's plan of Asiatic conquest would suffer nothing at the hands of
the son. The neighbours of Macedonia as far as the Danube and all the
states of the Greek peninsula had been cowed to submission again in one
swift and decisive campaign. The States-General of Greece, re-convoked
at Corinth, confirmed Philip's son in the Captain-Generalship of Hellas,
and Parmenio, once more despatched to Asia, secured the farther shore of
the Hellespont. With about forty thousand seasoned horse and foot, and
with auxiliary services unusually efficient for the age, Alexander
crossed to Persian soil in the spring of 334.

There was no other army in Asia Minor to offer him battle in form than a
force about equal in numbers to his own, which had been collected
locally by the western satraps. Except for its contingent of Greek
mercenaries, this was much inferior to the Macedonian force in fighting
value. Fended by Parmenio from the Hellespontine shore, it did the best
it could by waiting on the farther bank of the Granicus, the nearest
considerable stream which enters the Marmora, in order either to draw
Alexander's attack, or to cut his communications, should he move on into
the continent. It did not wait long. The heavy Macedonian cavalry dashed
through the stream late on an afternoon, made short work of the Asiatic
constituents, and having cleared a way for the phalanx helped it to cut
up the Greek contingent almost to a man before night fell. Alexander was
left with nothing but city defences and hill tribes to deal with till a
fuller levy could be collected from other provinces of the Persian
Empire and brought down to the west, a process which would take many
months, and in fact did take a full year. But some of the Western cities
offered no small impediment to his progress. If Aeolia, Lydia and Ionia
made no resistance worth mentioning, the two chief cities of Caria,
Miletus and Halicarnassus, which had been enjoying in virtual freedom a
lion's share of Aegean trade for the past century, were not disposed to
become appanages of a military empire. The pretension of Alexander to
lead a crusade against the ancient oppressor of the Hellenic race
weighed neither with them, nor, for that matter, with any of the Greeks
in Asia or Europe, except a few enthusiasts. During the past seventy
years, ever since celebrations of the deliverance of Hellas from the
Persian had been replaced by aspirations towards counter invasion, the
desire to wreak holy vengeance had gone for little or nothing, but
desire to plunder Persia had gone for a great deal. Therefore, any
definite venture into Asia aroused envy, not enthusiasm, among those who
would be forestalled by its success. Neither with ships nor men had any
leading Greek state come forward to help Alexander, and by the time he
had taken Miletus he realized that he must play his game alone, with his
own people for his own ends. Thenceforward, neglecting the Greeks, he
postponed his march into the heart of the Persian Empire till he had
secured every avenue leading thither from the sea, whether through Asia
Minor or Syria or Egypt.

After reducing Halicarnassus and Caria, Alexander did no more in Asia
Minor than parade the western part of it, the better to secure the
footing he had gained in the continent. Here and there he had a brush
with hill-men, who had long been unused to effective control, while with
one or two of their towns he had to make terms; but on the approach of
winter, Anatolia was at his feet, and he seated himself at Gordion, in
the Sakaria valley, where he could at once guard his communications with
the Hellespont and prepare for advance into farther Asia by an easy
road. Eastern Asia Minor, that is Cappadocia, Pontus and Armenia, he
left alone, and its contingents would still be arrayed on the Persian
side in both the great battles to come. Certain northern districts also,
which had long been practically independent of Persia, e.g. Bithynia and
Paphlagonia, had not been touched yet. It was not worth his while at
that moment to spend time in fighting for lands which would fall in any
case if the Empire fell, and could easily be held in check from western
Asia Minor in the meantime. His goal was far inland, his danger he well
knew, on the sea--danger of possible co-operation between Greek fleets
and the greater coastal cities of the Aegean and the Levant. Therefore,
with the first of the spring he moved down into Cilicia to make the
ports of Syria and Egypt his, before striking at the heart of the
Empire.

The Great King, last and weakest of the Darius name, had realized the
greatness of his peril and come down with the levy of all the Empire to
try to crush the invader in the gate of the south lands. Letting his foe
pass round the angle of the Levant coast, Darius, who had been waiting
behind the screen of Amanus, slipped through the hills and cut off the
Macedonian's retreat in the defile of Issus between mountain and sea.
Against another general and less seasoned troops a compact and
disciplined Oriental force would probably have ended the invasion there
and then; but that of Darius was neither compact nor disciplined. The
narrowness of the field compressed it into a mob; and Alexander and his
men, facing about, saw the Persians delivered into their hand. The fight
lasted little longer than at Granicus and the result was as decisive a
butchery. Camp, baggage-train, the royal harem, letters from Greek
states, and the persons of Greek envoys sent to devise the destruction
of the Captain-General--all fell to Alexander.

Assured against meeting another levy of the Empire for at least a
twelvemonth, he moved on into Syria. In this narrow land his chief
business, as we have seen, was with the coast towns. He must have all
the ports in his hand before going up into Asia. The lesser dared not
gainsay the victorious phalanx; but the queen of them all, Tyre,
mistress of the eastern trade, shut the gates of her island citadel and
set the western intruder the hardest military task of his life. But the
capture of the chief base of the hostile fleets which still ranged the
Aegean was all essential to Alexander, and he bridged the sea to effect
it. One other city, Gaza, commanding the road to Egypt, showed the same
spirit with less resources, and the year was far spent before the
Macedonians appeared on the Nile to receive the ready submission of a
people which had never willingly served the Persian. Here again,
Alexander's chief solicitude was for the coasts. Independent Cyrene,
lying farthest west, was one remaining danger and the openness of the
Nile mouths another. The first danger dissolved with the submission,
which Cyrene sent to meet him as he moved into Marmarica to the attack;
the second was conjured by the creation of the port of Alexandria,
perhaps the most signal act of Alexander's life, seeing to what stature
the city would grow, what part play in the development of Greek and Jew,
and what vigour retain to this day. For the moment, however, the new
foundation served primarily to rivet its founder's hold on the shores of
the Greek and Persian waters. Within a few months the hostile fleets
disappeared from the Levant and Alexander obtained at last that command
of the sea without which invasion of inner Asia would have been more
than perilous, and permanent retention of Egypt impossible.

Thus secure of his base, he could strike inland. He went up slowly in
the early part of 331 by the traditional North Road through Philistia
and Palestine and round the head of the Syrian Hamad to Thapsacus on
Euphrates, paying, on the way, a visit of precaution to Tyre, which had
cost him so much toil and time a year before. None opposed his crossing
of the Great River; none stayed him in Mesopotamia; none disputed his
passage of the Tigris, though the ferrying of his force took five days.
The Great King himself, however, was lying a few marches south of the
mounds of Nineveh, in the plain of Gaugamela, to which roads converging
from south, east and north had brought the levies of all the empire
which remained to him. To hordes drawn from fighting tribes living as
far distant as frontiers of India, banks of the Oxus, and foothills of
the Caucasus, was added a phalanx of hireling Greeks more than three
times as numerous as that which had been cut up on the Granicus. Thus
awaited by ten soldiers to each one of his own on open ground chosen by
his enemy, Alexander went still more slowly forward and halted four and
twenty hours to breathe his army in sight of the Persian out posts.
Refusing to risk an attack on that immense host in the dark, he slept
soundly within his entrenchments till sunrise of the first day of
October, and then in the full light led out his men to decide the fate
of Persia. It was decided by sundown, and half a million broken men were
flying south and east into the gathering night. But the Battle of
Arbela, as it is commonly called--the greatest contest of armies before
the rise of Rome--had not been lightly won. The active resistance of the
Greek mercenaries, and the passive resistance of the enormous mass of
the Asiatic hordes, which stayed attack by mere weight of flesh and
closed again behind every penetrating column, made the issue doubtful,
till Darius himself, terrified at the oncoming of the heavy Macedonian
cavalry, turned his chariot and lost the day. Alexander's men had to
thank the steadiness which Philip's system had given them, but also, in
the last resort, the cowardice of the opposing chief.

The Persian King survived to be hunted a year later, and caught, a dying
man, on the road to Central Asia; but long before that and without
another pitched battle the Persian throne had passed to Alexander.
Within six months he had marched to and entered in turn, without other
let or hindrance than resistance of mountain tribesmen in the passes,
the capitals of the Empire--Babylon, Susa, Persepolis, Ecbatana; and
since these cities all held by him during his subsequent absence of six
years in farther Asia, the victory of the West over the Ancient East may
be regarded as achieved on the day of Arbela.




CHAPTER VI

EPILOGUE


Less than ten years later, Alexander lay dead in Babylon. He had gone
forward to the east to acquire more territories than we have surveyed in
any chapter of this book or his fathers had so much as known to exist.
The broad lands which are now Afghanistan, Russian Turkestan, the
Punjab, Scinde, and Beluchistan had been subdued by him in person and
were being held by his governors and garrisons. This Macedonian Greek
who had become an emperor of the East greater than the greatest
theretofore, had already determined that his Seat of Empire should be
fixed in inner Asia; and he proposed that under his single sway East and
West be distinct no longer, but one indivisible world, inhabited by
united peoples. Then, suddenly, he was called to his account, leaving no
legitimate heir of his body except a babe in its mother's womb. What
would happen? What, in fact, did happen?

It is often said that the empire which Alexander created died with him.
This is true if we think of empire as the realm of a single emperor. As
sole ruler of the vast area between the Danube and the Sutlej Alexander
was to have no successor. But if we think of an empire as the realm of a
race or nation, Greater Macedonia, though destined gradually to be
diminished, would outlive its founder by nearly three hundred years; and
moreover, in succession to it, another Western empire, made possible by
his victory and carried on in some respects under his forms, was to
persist in the East for several centuries more. As a political conquest,
Alexander's had results as long lasting as can be credited to almost any
conquest in history. As the victory of one civilization over another it
was never to be brought quite to nothing, and it had certain permanent
effects. These this chapter is designed to show: but first, since the
development of the victorious civilization on alien soil depended
primarily on the continued political supremacy of the men in whom it was
congenital, it is necessary to see how long and to what extent political
dominion was actually held in the East by men who were Greeks, either by
birth or by training.

Out of the turmoil and stress of the thirty years which followed
Alexander's death, two Macedonians emerged to divide the Eastern Empire
between them. The rest--transient embarrassed phantoms of the Royal
House, regents of the Empire hardly less transient, upstart satraps, and
even one-eyed Antigonus, who for a brief moment claimed jurisdiction
over all the East--never mattered long to the world at large and matter
not at all here and now. The end of the fourth century sees Seleucus of
Babylonia lording it over the most part of West Asia which was best
worth having, except the southern half of Syria and the coasts of Asia
Minor and certain isles in sight of them, which, if not subject to
Ptolemy of Egypt, were free of both kings or dominated by a third,
resident in Europe and soon to disappear. In the event those two,
Seleucus and Ptolemy, alone of all the Macedonian successors, would
found dynasties destined to endure long enough in kingdoms great enough
to affect the general history of civilization in the Ancient East.

Seleucus has no surviving chronicler of the first or the second rank,
and consequently remains one of the most shadowy of the greater men of
action in antiquity. We can say little of him personally, except that he
was quick and fearless in action, prepared to take chances, a born
leader in war, and a man of long sight and persistent purpose. Alexander
had esteemed and distinguished him highly, and, marrying him to Apama, a
noble Iranian lady, convinced him of his own opinion that the point from
which to rule an Asiatic empire was Babylonia. Seleucus let the first
partition of the dead man's lands go by, and not till the first turmoil
was over and his friend Ptolemy was securely seated in Egypt, did he ask
for a province. The province was Babylonia. Ejected by the malevolence
of Antigonus, he regained it by grace of Ptolemy in 312, established
ascendency over all satraps to east of him during the next half-dozen
years, letting only India go, and then came west in 305 to conquer and
slay Antigonus at Ipsus in central Asia Minor. The third king,
Lysimachus of Thrace, was disposed of in 281, and Seleucus, dying a few
months later, left to his dynastic successors an Asiatic empire of
seventy-two provinces, very nearly equal to Alexander's, with important
exceptions in Asia Minor.

In Asia Minor neither Seleucus nor the Seleucids ever held anything
effectively except the main lines of communication from East to West and
the district in which these come down to the Aegean Sea. The south
coast, as has been said, remained in Egyptian hands almost all through
the Seleucid period. The southwest obeyed the island republic of Rhodes.
Most of the Greek maritime cities of the northwest and north kept their
freedom more or less inviolate; while inland a purely Greek monarchy,
that of Pergamum, gradually extended its sway up to the central desert.
In the north a formidable barrier to Seleucid expansion arose within
five years of Seleucus' death, namely, a settlement of Gauls who had
been invited across the straits by a king of Bithynia. After charging
and raiding in all directions these intractable allies were penned by
the repeated efforts of both the Seleucid and the Pergamene kings into
the upper Sakaria basin (henceforth to be known as Galatia) and there
they formed a screen behind which Bithynia and Paphlagonia maintained
sturdy independence. The north-east also was the seat of independent
monarchies. Cappadocia, Pontus and Armenia, ruled by princes of Iranian
origin, were never integral parts of the Seleucid Empire, though
consistently friendly to its rulers. Finally, in the hill-regions of the
centre, as of the coasts, the Seleucid writ did not run.

Looked at as a whole, however, and not only from a Seleucid point of
view, the Ancient East, during the century following Seleucus' death
(forty-three years after Alexander's), was dominated politically by
Hellenes over fully nine-tenths of its area. About those parts of it
held by cities actually Greek, or by Pergamum, no more need be said. As
for Seleucus and his successors, though the latter, from Antiochus Soter
onward, had a strain of Iranian blood, they held and proved themselves
essentially Hellenic. Their portraits from first to last show European
features, often fine. Ptolemy Lagus and all the Lagidae remained
Macedonian Greeks to a man and a woman and to the bitter end, with the
greatest Hellenic city in the world for their seat. As for the remaining
tenth part of the East, almost the whole of it was ruled by princes who
claimed the title "philhellene," and justified it not only by political
friendliness to the Seleucidae and the Western Greeks, but also by
encouraging Greek settlers and Greek manners. So far as patronage and
promotion by the highest powers could further it, Hellenism had a fair
chance in West Asia from the conquest of Alexander down to the
appearance of Rome in the East. What did it make of this chance? How far
in the event did those Greek and Macedonian rulers, philhellenic Iranian
princes and others, hellenize West Asia? If they did succeed in a
measure, but not so completely that the East ceased to be distinct from
the West, what measure was set to their several influences, and why?

[Plate 6: HELLENISM IN ASIA. ABOUT 150 B.C.]

Let us see, first, what precisely Hellenism implied as it was brought to
Asia by Alexander and practised by his successors. Politically it
implied recognition by the individual that the society of which he was a
member had an indefeasible and virtually exclusive claim on his good
will and his good offices. The society so recognized was not a family or
a tribe, but a city and its proper district, distinguished from all
other cities and their districts. The geographical configuration and the
history of Greece, a country made up in part of small plains ringed in
by hills and sea, in part of islands, had brought about this limitation
of political communities, and had made patriotism mean to the Greek
devotion to his city-state. To a wider circle he was not capable of
feeling anything like the same sense of obligation or, indeed, any
compelling obligation at all. If he recognized the claim of a group of
city-states, which remotely claimed common origin with his own, it was
an academic feeling: if he was conscious of his community with all
Hellenes as a nation it was only at moments of particular danger at the
hands of a common non-Hellenic foe. In short, while not insensible to
the principle of nationality he was rarely capable of applying it
practically except in regard to a small society with whose members he
could be acquainted personally and among whom he could make his own
individuality felt. He had no feudal tradition, and no instinctive
belief that the individualities composing a community must be
subordinate to any one individual in virtue of the latter's patriarchal
or representative relation to them.

Let us deal with this political implication of Hellenism before we pass
on to its other qualities. In its purity political Hellenism was
obviously not compatible with the monarchical Macedonian state, which
was based on feudal recognition of the paternal or representative
relation of a single individual to many peoples composing a nation. The
Macedonians themselves, therefore, could not carry to Asia, together
with their own national patriotism (somewhat intensified, perhaps, by
intercourse during past generations with Greek city-states) any more
than an outside knowledge of the civic patriotism of the Greeks. Since,
however, they brought in their train a great number of actual Greeks and
had to look to settlement of these in Asia for indispensable support of
their own rule, commerce and civilization, they were bound to create
conditions under which civic patriotism, of which they knew the value as
well as the danger, might continue to exist in some measure. Their
obvious policy was to found cities wherever they wished to settle
Greeks, and to found them along main lines of communication, where they
might promote trade and serve as guardians of the roads; while at the
same time, owing to their continual intercourse with each other, their
exposure to native sojourners and immigrants and their necessary
dependence on the centre of government, they could hardly repeat in Asia
the self-centred exclusiveness characteristic of cities in either
European Greece or the strait and sharply divided valleys of the west
Anatolian coast. In fact, by design or not, most Seleucid foundations
were planted in comparatively open country. Seleucus alone is said to
have been responsible for seventy-five cities, of which the majority
clustered in that great meeting-place of through routes, North Syria,
and along the main highway through northern Asia Minor to Ephesus. In
this city, Seleucus himself spent most of his last years. We know of few
Greek colonies, or none, founded by him or his dynasty beyond the
earlier limits of the Ancient East, where, in Afghanistan, Turkestan and
India, Alexander had planted nearly all his new cities. Possibly his
successor held these to be sufficient; probably he saw neither prospect
of advantage nor hope of success in creating Greek cities in a region so
vast and so alien; certainly neither he nor his dynasty was ever in such
a position to support or maintain them, if founded east of Media, as
Alexander was and proposed to be, had longer life been his. But in
western Asia from Seleucia on Tigris, an immense city of over half a
million souls, to Laodicea on Lycus and the confines of the old Ionian
littoral, Seleucus and his successors created urban life, casting it in
a Hellenic mould whose form, destined to persist for many centuries to
come, would exercise momentous influence on the early history of the
Christian religion.

By founding so many urban communities of Greek type the Macedonian kings
of West Asia undeniably introduced Hellenism as an agent of political
civilization into much of the Ancient East, which needed it badly and
profited by it. But the influence of their Hellenism was potent and
durable only in those newly founded, or newly organized, urban
communities and their immediate neighbourhood. Where these clustered
thickly, as along the Lower Orontes and on the Syrian coast-line, or
where Greek farmers had settled in the interspaces, as in Cyrrhestica
(i.e. roughly, central North Syria), Hellenism went far to make whole
districts acquire a civic spirit, which, though implying much less sense
of personal freedom and responsibility than in Attica or Laconia, would
have been recognized by an Athenian or a Spartan as kin to his own
patriotism. But where the cities were strung on single lines of
communication at considerable intervals, as in central Asia Minor and in
Mesopotamia, they exerted little political influence outside their own
walls. For Hellenism was and remained essentially a property of
communities small enough for each individual to exert his own personal
influence on political and social practice. So soon as a community
became, in numbers or distribution, such as to call for centralized, or
even representative, administration, patriotism of the Hellenic type
languished and died. It was quite incapable of permeating whole peoples
or of making a nation, whether in the East or anywhere else. Yet in the
East peoples have always mattered more than cities, by whomsoever
founded and maintained.

Hellenism, however, had, by this time, not only a political implication
but also moral and intellectual implications which were partly effects,
partly causes, of its political energy. As has been well said by a
modern historian of the Seleucid house, Hellenism meant, besides a
politico-social creed, also a certain attitude of mind. The
characteristic feature of this attitude was what has been called
Humanism, this word being used in a special sense to signify
intellectual interest confined to human affairs, but free within the
range of these. All Greeks were not, of course, equally humanistic in
this sense. Among them, as in all societies, there were found
temperaments to which transcendental speculation appealed, and these
increasing in number, as with the loss of their freedom the city-states
ceased to stand for the realization of the highest possible good in this
world, made Orphism and other mystic cults prevail ever more and more in
Hellas. But when Alexander carried Hellenism to Asia it was still
broadly true that the mass of civilized Hellenes regarded anything that
could not be apprehended by the intellect through the senses as not only
outside their range of interest but non-existent. Further, while nothing
was held so sacred that it might not be probed or discussed with the
full vigour of an inquirer's intelligence, no consideration except the
logic of apprehended facts should determine his conclusion. An argument
was to be followed wherever it might lead, and its consequences must be
faced in full without withdrawal behind any non-intellectual screen.
Perfect freedom of thought and perfect freedom of discussion over the
whole range of human matters; perfect freedom of consequent action, so
the community remained uninjured--this was the typical Hellene's ideal.
An instinctive effort to realize it was his habitual attitude towards
life. His motto anticipated the Roman poet's "I am human: nothing human
do I hold no business of mine!"

By the time the Western conquest of Asia was complete, this attitude,
which had grown more and more prevalent in the centres of Greek life
throughout the fifth and fourth centuries, had come to exclude anything
like religiosity from the typical Hellenic character. A religion the
Greek had of course, but he held it lightly, neither possessed by it nor
even looking to it for guidance in the affairs of his life. If he
believed in a world beyond the grave, he thought little about it or not
at all, framing his actions with a view solely to happiness in the
flesh. A possible fate in the hereafter seemed to him to have no bearing
on his conduct here. That disembodied he might spend eternity with the
divine, or, absorbed into the divine essence, become himself
divine--such ideas, though not unknown or without attraction to rarer
spirits, were wholly impotent to combat the vivid interest in life and
the lust of strenuous endeavour which were bred in the small worlds of
the city-states.

The Greeks, then, who passed to Asia in Alexander's wake had no
religious message for the East, and still less had the Macedonian
captains who succeeded him. Born and bred to semibarbaric superstitions,
they had long discarded these, some for the freethinking attitude of the
Greek, and all for the cult of the sword. The only thing which, in their
Emperor's lifetime, stood to them for religion was a feudal devotion to
himself and his house. For a while this feeling survived in the ranks of
the army, as Eumenes, wily Greek that he was, proved by the manner and
success of his appeals to dynastic loyalty in the first years of the
struggle for the succession; and perhaps, we may trace it longer still
in the leaders, as an element, blended with something of homesickness
and something of national tradition, in that fatality which impelled
each Macedonian lord of Asia, first Antigonus, then Seleucus, finally
Antiochus the Great, to hanker after the possession of Macedonia and be
prepared to risk the East to win back the West. Indeed, it is a
contributory cause of the comparative failure of the Seleucids to keep
their hold on their Asiatic Empire that their hearts were never wholly
in it.

For the rest, they and all the Macedonian captains alike were
conspicuously irreligious men, whose gods were themselves. They were
what the age had made them, and what all similar ages make men of
action. Theirs was a time of wide conquests recently achieved by right
of might alone, and left to whomsoever should be mightiest. It was a
time when the individual had suddenly found that no accidental
defects--lack of birth, or property, or allies--need prevent him from
exploiting for himself a vast field of unmeasured possibilities, so he
had a sound brain, a stout heart and a strong arm. As it would be again
in the age of the Crusades, in that of the Grand Companies, and in that
of the Napoleonic conquests, every soldier knew that it rested only with
himself and with opportunity, whether or no he should die a prince. It
was a time for reaping harvests which others had sown, for getting
anything for nothing, for frank and unashamed lust of loot, for selling
body and soul to the highest bidder, for being a law to oneself. In such
ages the voice of the priest goes for as little as the voice of
conscience, and the higher a man climbs, the less is his faith in a
power above him.

Having won the East, however, these irreligious Macedonians found they
had under their hand a medley of peoples, diverse in many
characteristics, but almost all alike in one, and that was their
religiosity. Deities gathered and swarmed in Asia. Men showed them
fierce fanatic devotion or spent lives in contemplation of the idea of
them, careless of everything which Macedonians held worth living for,
and even of life itself. Alexander had been quick to perceive the
religiosity of the new world into which he had come. If his power in the
East was to rest on a popular basis he knew that basis must be
religious. Beginning with Egypt he set an example (not lost on the man
who would be his successor there) of not only conciliating priests but
identifying himself with the chief god in the traditional manner of
native kings since immemorial time; and there is no doubt that the cult
of himself, which he appears to have enjoined increasingly on his
followers, his subjects and his allies, as time went on, was consciously
devised to meet and captivate the religiosity of the East. In Egypt he
must be Ammon, in Syria he would be Baal, in Babylon Bel. He left the
faith of his fathers behind him when he went up to the East, knowing as
well as his French historian knew in the nineteenth century, that in
Asia the "dreams of Olympus were less worth than the dreams of the Magi
and the mysteries of India, pregnant with the divine." With these last,
indeed, he showed himself deeply impressed, and his recorded attitude
towards the Brahmans of the Punjab implies the earliest acknowledgment
made publicly by a Greek, that in religion the West must learn from the
East.

Alexander, who has never been forgotten by the traditions and myths of
the East, might possibly, with longer life, have satisfied Asiatic
religiosity with an apotheosis of himself. His successors failed either
to keep his divinity alive or to secure any general acceptance of their
own godhead. That they tried to meet the demand of the East with a new
universal cult of imperial utility and that some, like Antiochus IV, the
tyrant of early Maccabaean history, tried very hard, is clear. That they
failed and that Rome failed after them is writ large in the history of
the expansion of half-a-dozen Eastern cults before the Christian era,
and of Christianity itself.

Only in the African province did Macedonian rule secure a religious
basis. What an Alexander could hardly have achieved in Asia, a Ptolemy
did easily in Egypt. There the _de facto_ ruler, of whatever race, had
been installed a god since time out of mind, and an omnipotent
priesthood, dominating a docile people, stood about the throne. The
Assyrian conquerors had stiffened their backs in Egypt to save
affronting the gods of their fatherland; but the Ptolemies, like the
Persians, made no such mistake, and had three centuries of secure rule
for their reward. The knowledge that what the East demanded could be
provided easily and safely even by Macedonians in the Nile valley alone
was doubtless present to the sagacious mind of Ptolemy when, letting all
wider lands pass to others, he selected Egypt in the first partition of
the provinces.

The Greek, in a word, had only his philosophies to offer to the
religiosity of the East. But a philosophy of religion is a complement
to, a modifying influence on, religion, not a substitute sufficient to
satisfy the instinctive and profound craving of mankind for God. While
this craving always possessed the Asiatic mind, the Greek himself, never
naturally insensible to it, became more and more conscious of his own
void as he lived in Asia. What had long stood to him for religion,
namely passionate devotion to the community, was finding less and less
to feed on under the restricted political freedom which was now his lot
everywhere. Superior though he felt his culture to be in most respects,
it lacked one thing needful, which inferior cultures around him
possessed in full. As time went on he became curious, then receptive, of
the religious systems among whose adherents he found himself, being
coerced insensibly by nature's abhorrence of a vacuum. Not that he
swallowed any Eastern religion whole, or failed, while assimilating what
he took, to transform it with his own essence. Nor again should it be
thought that he gave nothing at all in return. He gave a philosophy
which, acting almost as powerfully on the higher intelligences of the
East as their religions acted on his intelligence, created the
"Hellenistic" type, properly so called, that is the oriental who
combined the religious instinct of Asia with the philosophic spirit of
Greece--such an oriental as (to take two very great names), the Stoic
apostle Zeno, a Phoenician of Cyprus, or the Christian apostle, Saul the
Jew of Tarsus. By the creation of this type, East and West were brought
at last very near together, divided only by the distinction of religious
philosophy in Athens from philosophic religion in Syria.

The history of the Near East during the last three centuries before the
Christian era is the history of the gradual passing of Asiatic religions
westward to occupy the Hellenic vacuum, and of Hellenic philosophical
ideas eastward to supplement and purify the religious systems of West
Asia. How far the latter eventually penetrated into the great Eastern
continent, whether even to India or China, this is no place to discuss:
how far the former would push westward is written in the modern history
of Europe and the New World. The expansion of Mithraism and of
half-a-dozen other Asiatic and Egyptian cults, which were drawn from the
East to Greece and beyond before the first century of the Hellenistic
Age closed, testifies to the early existence of that spiritual void in
the West which a greater and purer religion, about to be born in Galilee
and nurtured in Antioch, was at last to fill. The instrumentality of
Alexander and his successors in bringing about or intensifying that
contact and intercourse between Semite and Greek, which begot the
philosophic morality of Christianity and rendered its westward expansion
inevitable, stands to their credit as a historic fact of such tremendous
import that it may be allowed to atone for more than all their sins.

This, then, the Seleucids did--they so brought West and East together
that each learned from the other. But more than that cannot be claimed
for them. They did not abolish the individuality of either; they did not
Hellenize even so much of West Asia as they succeeded in holding to the
end. In this they failed not only for the reasons just considered--lack
of vital religion in their Macedonians and their Greeks, and
deterioration of the Hellenism of Hellenes when they ceased to be
citizens of free city-states--but also through individual faults of
their own, which appear again and again as the dynasty runs its course;
and perhaps even more for some deeper reason, not understood by us yet,
but lying behind the empirical law that East is East and West is West.

As for the Seleucid kings themselves they leave on us, ill-known as
their characters and actions are, a clear impression of approximation to
the traditional type of the Greek of the Roman age and since. As a
dynasty they seem to have been quickly spoilt by power, to have been
ambitious but easily contented with the show and surface of success, to
have been incapable and contemptuous of thorough organization, and to
have had little in the way of policy, and less perseverance in the
pursuit of it. It is true that our piecemeal information comes largely
from writers who somewhat despised them; but the known history of the
Seleucid Empire, closed by an extraordinarily facile and ignominious
collapse before Rome, supports the judgment that, taken one with
another, its kings were shallow men and haphazard rulers who owed it
more to chance than to prudence that their dynasty endured so long.

Their strongest hold was on Syria, and in the end their only hold. We
associate them in our minds particularly with the great city of Antioch,
which the first Seleucus founded on the Lower Orontes to gather up trade
from Egypt, Mesopotamia and Asia Minor in the North Syrian country. But,
as a matter of fact, that city owes its fame mainly to subsequent Roman
masters. For it did not become the capital of Seleucid preference till
the second century B.C.--till, by the year 180, the dynasty, which had
lost both the Western and the Eastern provinces, had to content itself
with Syria and Mesopotamia alone. Not only had the Parthians then come
down from Turkestan to the south of the Caspian (their kings assumed
Iranian names but were they not, like the present rulers of Persia,
really Turks?), but Media too had asserted independence and Persia was
fallen away to the rule of native princes in Fars. Seleucia on Tigris
had become virtually a frontier city facing an Iranian and Parthian
peril which the imperial incapacity of the Seleucids allowed to develop,
and even Rome would never dispel. On the other flank of the empire a
century of Seleucid efforts to plant headquarters in Western Asia Minor,
whether at Ephesus or Sardes, and thence to prosecute ulterior designs
on Macedonia and Greece, had been settled in favour of Pergamum by the
arms and mandate of the coming arbiter of the East, the Republic of
Rome. Bidden retire south of Taurus after the battle of Magnesia in 190,
summarily ordered out of Egypt twenty years later, when Antiochus
Epiphanes was hoping to compensate the loss of west and east with gain
of the south, the Seleucids had no choice of a capital. It must
thenceforth be Antioch or nothing.

That, however, a Macedonian dynasty was forced to concentrate in north
Syria whatever Hellenism it had (though after Antiochus Epiphanes its
Hellenism steadily grew less) during the last two centuries before the
Christian era was to have a momentous effect on the history of the
world. For it was one of the two determining causes of an increase in
the influence of Hellenism upon the Western Semites, which issued
ultimately in the Christian religion. From Cilicia on the north to
Phoenicia and Palestine in the south, such higher culture, such
philosophical study as there were came more and more under the influence
of Greek ideas, particularly those of the Stoic School, whose founder
and chief teacher (it should never be forgotten) had been a Semite, born
some three hundred years before Jesus of Nazareth. The Hellenized
University of Tarsus, which educated Saul, and the Hellenistic party in
Palestine, whose desire to make Jerusalem a southern Antioch brought on
the Maccabaean struggle, both owed in a measure their being and their
continued vitality to the existence and larger growth of Antioch on the
Orontes.

But Phoenicia and Palestine owed as much of their Hellenism (perhaps
more) to another Hellenized city and another Macedonian dynasty--to
Alexandria and to the Ptolemies. Because the short Maccabaean period of
Palestinian history, during which a Seleucid did happen to be holding
all Syria, is very well and widely known, it is apt to be forgotten
that, throughout almost all other periods of the Hellenistic Age,
southern Syria, that is Palestine and Phoenicia as well as Cyprus and
the Levant coast right round to Pamphylia, was under the political
domination of Egypt. The first Ptolemy added to his province some of
these Asiatic districts and cities, and in particular Palestine and
Coele-Syria, very soon after he had assumed command of Egypt, and making
no secret of his intention to retain them, built a fleet to secure his
end. He knew very well that if Egypt is to hold in permanency any
territory outside Africa, she must be mistress of the sea. After a brief
set-back at the hands of Antigonus' son, Ptolemy made good his hold when
the father was dead; and Cyprus also became definitely his in 294. His
successor, in whose favour he abdicated nine years later, completed the
conquest of the mainland coasts right round the Levant at the expense of
Seleucus' heir. In the event, the Ptolemies kept almost all that the
first two kings of the dynasty had thus won until they were supplanted
by Rome, except for an interval of a little more than fifty years from
199 to about 145; and even during the latter part of this period south
Syria was under Egyptian influence once more, though nominally part of
the tottering Seleucid realm.

The object pursued by the Macedonian kings of Egypt in conquering and
holding a thin coastal fringe of mainland outside Africa and certain
island posts from Cyprus to the Cyclades was plainly commercial, to get
control of the general Levant trade and of certain particular supplies
(notably ship-timber) for their royal port of Alexandria. The first
Ptolemy had well understood why his master had founded this city after
ruining Tyre, and why he had taken so great pains both earlier and later
to secure his Mediterranean coasts. Their object the Ptolemies obtained
sufficiently, although they never eliminated the competition of the
Rhodian republic and had to resign to it the command of the Aegean after
the battle of Cos in 246. But Alexandria had already become a great
Semitic as well as Grecian city, and continued to be so for centuries to
come. The first Ptolemy is said to have transplanted to Egypt many
thousands of Jews who quickly reconciled themselves to their exile, if
indeed it had ever been involuntary; and how large its Jewish population
was by the reign of the second Ptolemy and how open to Hellenic
influence, may be illustrated sufficiently by the fact that at
Alexandria, during that reign, the Hebrew scriptures were translated
into Greek by the body of Semitic scholars which has been known since as
the Septuagint. Although it was consistent Ptolemaic policy not to
countenance Hellenic proselytism, the inevitable influence of Alexandria
on south Syria was stronger than that consciously exerted by Antiochus
Epiphanes or any other Seleucid; and if Phoenician cities had become
homes of Hellenic science and philosophy by the middle of the third
century, and if Yeshua or Jason, High Priest of Jehovah, when he applied
to his suzerain a hundred years later for leave to make Jerusalem a
Greek city, had at his back a strong party anxious to wear hats in the
street and nothing at all in the gymnasium, Alexandria rather than
Antioch should have the chief credit--or chief blame!

Before, however, all this blending of Semitic religiosity with Hellenic
philosophical ideas, and with something of the old Hellenic mansuetude,
which had survived even under Macedonian masters to modify Asiatic
minds, could issue in Christianity, half the East, with its dispersed
heirs of Alexander, had passed under the common and stronger yoke of
Rome. Ptolemaic Alexandria and Seleucid Antioch had prepared Semitic
ground for seed of a new religion, but it was the wide and sure peace of
the Roman Empire that brought it to birth and gave it room to grow. It
was to grow, as all the world knows, westward not eastward, making
patent by its first successes and by its first failures how much
Hellenism had gone to the making of it. The Asian map of Christianity at
the end, say, of the fourth century of the latter's existence, will show
it very exactly bounded by the limits to which the Seleucid Empire had
carried Greeks in any considerable body, and the further limits to which
the Romans, who ruled effectively a good deal left aside by their
Macedonian predecessors--much of central and eastern Asia Minor for
example, and all Armenia--had advanced their Graeco-Roman subjects.

Beyond these bounds neither Hellenism nor Christianity was fated in that
age to strike deep roots or bear lasting fruit. The Farther East--the
East, that is to say, beyond Euphrates--remained unreceptive and
intolerant of both influences. We have seen how almost all of it had
fallen away from the Seleucids many generations before the birth of
Christ, when a ring of principalities, Median, Parthian, Persian,
Nabathsean, had emancipated the heart of the Orient from its short
servitude to the West; and though Rome, and Byzantium after her, would
push the frontier of effective European influence somewhat eastward
again, their Hellenism could never capture again that heart which the
Seleucids had failed to hold. This is not to say that nothing of
Hellenism passed eastward of Mesopotamia and made an abiding mark.
Parthian and Sassanian art, the earlier Buddhist art of north-western
India and Chinese Turkestan, some features even of early Mohammedan art,
and some, too, of early Mohammedan doctrine and imperial policy,
disprove any sweeping assertion that nothing Greek took root beyond the
bounds of the Roman Empire. But it was very little of Hellenism and not
at all its essence. We must not be deceived by mere borrowings of exotic
things or momentary appreciations of foreign luxuries. That the
Parthians were witnessing a performance of the Bacchae of Euripides,
when the head of hapless Crassus was brought to Ctesiphon, no more
argues that they had the Western spirit than our taste for Chinese
curios or Japanese plays proves us informed with the spirit of the East.

The East, in fine, remained the East. It was so little affected after
all by the West that in due time its religiosity would be pregnant with
yet another religion, antithetical to Hellenism, and it was so little
weakened that it would win back again all it had lost and more, and keep
Hither Asia in political and cultural independence of the West until our
own day. If modern Europe has taken some parts of the gorgeous East in
fee which were never held by Macedonian or Roman, let us remember in our
pride of race that almost all that the Macedonians and the Romans did
hold in Asia has been lost to the West ever since. Europe may and
probably will prevail there again; but since it must be by virtue of a
civilization in whose making a religion born of Asia has been the
paramount indispensable factor, will the West even then be more creditor
than debtor of the East?





NOTE ON BOOKS

The authorities cited at the end of Prof. J. L. Myres' _Dawn of History_
(itself an authority), in the Home University Library, are to a great
extent suitable for those who wish to read more widely round the theme
of the present volume, since those (e.g. the geographical works given in
_Dawn of History_, p. 253, paragraph 2) which are not more or less
essential preliminaries to a study of the Ancient East at any period,
mostly deal with the historic as well as the prehistoric age. To spare
readers reference to another volume, however, I will repeat here the
most useful books in Prof. Myres' list, adding at the same time certain
others, some of which have appeared since the issue of his volume.

For the history of the whole region in the period covered by my volume,
E. Meyer's _Geschichte Alterthums_, of a new edition of which a French
translation is in progress and has already been partly issued, is the
most authoritative. Sir G. Maspero's _Histoire ancienne des peuples de
l'Orient classique_ (English translation in 3 vols. under the titles
_The Dawn of Civilization_ (Egypt and Chaldaea); _The Struggle of the
Nations_ (Egypt, Syria, and Assyria); _The Passing of the Empires_) is
still valuable, but rather out of date. There has appeared recently a
more modern and handy book than either, Mr. H. R. Hall's _The Ancient
History of the Near East_ (1913), which gathers up, not only what was in
the books by Mr. Hall and Mr. King cited by Prof. Myres, but also the
contents of Meyer's and Maspero's books, and others, and the results of
more recent research, in some of which the author has taken part. This
book includes in its scope both Egypt and the Aegean area, besides
Western Asia.

For the special history of Babylonia and Assyria and their Empires, R.
W. Rogers' _History of Babylonia and Assyria_, 2 vols., has been kept up
to date and is the most convenient summary for an English reader. H.
Winckler's _History of Babylonia and Assyria_ (translated from the
German by J. A. Craig, 1907) is more brilliant and suggestive, but needs
to be used with more caution. A. T. Olmstead's _Western Asia in the Days
of Sargon of Assyria_ (1908) is an instructive study of the Assyrian
Empire at its height.

For the Hittite Empire and civilization J. Garstang's _The Land of the
Hittites_ (1910) is the best recent book which aims at being
comprehensive. But it must be borne in mind that this subject is in the
melting-pot at present, that excavations now in progress have added
greatly to the available evidence, and that very few of the Boghazkeui
archives were published when Garstang's book was issued. D. G. Hogarth's
articles on the Hittites, in Enc. Brit, and Enc. Brit. Year-book,
summarize some more recent research; but there is no compendium of
Hittite research which is really up to date.

For Semitic Syrian history, Rogers and Winckler, as cited above, will
probably be found sufficient; and also for the Urartu peoples. For
Western Asia Minor and the Greeks, besides D.G. Hogarth's _Ionia and
the East_, the new edition of Beloch's _Griechische Geschichte_ gives
all, and more than all, that the general reader will require. If German
is a difficulty to him, he must turn to J.B. Bury's _History of Greece_
and to the later part of Hall's _Ancient History of the Near East_,
cited above. For Alexander's conquest he can go to J. Karst, _Geschichte
des hellenistischen Zeitalters_, Vol. I (1901), B. Niese, _Geschichte
der griechischen und makedonischen Staaten_ (1899), or D.G. Hogarth,
_Philip and Alexander of Macedon_ (1897); but the great work of J.G.
Droysen, _Das Hellenismus_ (French translation), lies behind all these.

Finally, the fourth English volume of A. Holm's _History of Greece_
(1898) and E.R. Bevan's _House of Seleucus_ (1902) will supply most
that is known of the Hellenistic Age in Asia.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ancient East, by D. G. Hogarh

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ANCIENT EAST ***

***** This file should be named 7474-8.txt or 7474-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/4/7/7474/

Produced by Charles Franks, Julie Barkley and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

