The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Boy's Ride, by Gulielma Zollinger

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Boy's Ride

Author: Gulielma Zollinger

Posting Date: September 26, 2012 [EBook #7806]
Release Date: March, 2005
First Posted: May 18, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BOY'S RIDE ***




Produced by Patricia L. Ehler, Suzanne L. Shell, Charles
Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team











[Illustration: "Yield Thee in the King's Name"]




A BOY'S RIDE




BY
GULIELMA ZOLLINGER

1909



ILLUSTRATIONS AND COVER DESIGN
BY FANNY M. CHAMBERS


ILLUSTRATIONS

"Yield thee in the king's name!"

Hugo seeks shelter within the walls

"Thou art welcome, my lad," said Lady De Aldithely

"It is well thou hast me to lead thee"

Humphrey and Hugo in the oak tree

The little spy and Humphrey

Hugo looked about him with interest

Humphrey started up, snatching a great bunch of long, flaming reeds

None knew which way to turn to escape

Richard Wood finds Walter Skinner

Walter Skinner's horse refused to be controlled

Richard Wood beckoned the Saxons to approach

He rode to the edge of the moat and looked down

Humphrey in priest's garb

Bartlemy bore garments for disguise

Humphrey, half turning in his saddle, saw a priest




A BOY'S RIDE




CHAPTER I


It was the last of May in the north of England, in the year 1209. A
very different England from what any boy of to-day has seen. A chilly
east wind was blowing. The trees of the vast forests were all in leaf
but the ash trees, and they were unfolding their buds. And along a
bridle-path a few miles southwest of York a lad of fourteen was riding,
while behind him followed a handsome deerhound. A boy of fourteen, at
that age of the world, was an older and more important personage than
he is to-day. If he were well-born he had, generally, by this time,
served his time as a page and was become an esquire in the train of
some noble lord. That this lad had not done so was because his uncle, a
prior in whose charge he had been reared since the early death of his
parents, had designed him for a priest. Priest, however, he had
declined to be, and his uncle had now permitted him to go forth
unattended to attach himself as page to some lord, if he could.

To-day he seemed very much at home in the great wood as he glanced
about him fearlessly, but so he would have been anywhere. Apparently he
was unprotected from assault save by the bow he carried. In reality he
wore a shirt of chain mail beneath his doublet, a precaution which he
the more willingly took because of his good hope one day to be a
knight, when not only the shirt of mail, but the helmet, shield, sword,
and lance would be his as well.

It was not far from noon when he came to the great open place cleared
of all timber and undergrowth which announced the presence of a castle.
And looking up, he saw the flag of the De Aldithelys flying from its
turrets.

There was a rustle in the thicket, horse and deerhound pricked up their
ears, and then ran pursued by flying arrows. And now ride! ride, my
brave boy, and seek shelter within the walls! For till thou reach them,
thy shirt of mail must be thy salvation.

The drawbridge was yet down, for a small party of men-at-arms had just
been admitted, and across it rushed boy, and horse, and dog before the
warder had time to wind his horn: the horse and rider unharmed, but the
deerhound wounded.

[Illustration: Hugo Seeks Shelter within the Walls]

The warder stared upon the strange boy, and the boy stared back at him.
And then the warder crossed himself. "'Tis some witchcraft," he
muttered. "Here cometh the young lord, and all the time I know that the
young lord is safe within the walls."

The grooms also crossed themselves before they drew up the bridge. But
the boy, unconcerned, rode on across the outer court and passed into
the inner one followed by the wounded dog. Here the men-at-arms were
dismounting, horses were neighing, and grooms running about. The boy,
too, dismounted, and bent anxiously over his dog.

Presently a young voice demanded, "Whence comest thou?"

The boy looked up to see his counterpart, the son of the lord of the
castle, standing imperiously before him.

"From York," answered the stranger, briefly. "Hast thou a leech that
can care for my dog? See how he bleeds."

"Oh, ay," was the answer. "But how came he wounded? He hath been
deer-stealing, perchance, and the ranger hath discovered him."

"Nay," replied the strange lad, in tones the echo of his questioner's.
"Thou doest Fleetfoot wrong. We were but pursuing our way when from
yonder thicket to the north and adjoining the open, a flight of arrows
came. I had been sped myself but for my shirt of mail."

The leech had now advanced and was caring skilfully for the dog while
the strange lad looked on, now and then laying a caressing hand on the
hound's head.

Meanwhile the men-at-arms conferred together and exchanged wise looks
while a stout and clumsy Saxon serving-man of about forty shook his
head. "I did dream of an earthquake no longer ago than night before
last," he said, "which is a dream that doth ever warn the dreamer and
all concerned with him to be cautious and careful. Here cometh riding
the twin of our young lord: and the Evil One only knoweth how this
stranger hath the nose, the eyes, the mouth, the complexion, the gait,
the size, and the voice of our young lord, Josceline De Aldithely.
Thinkest thou not, William Lorimer, it were cautious and careful to put
him and his hound outside the walls, to say nothing of his horse?"

William Lorimer, the captain of the men-at-arms, smiled in derision. A
great belief in dreams and omens was abroad in the land: and nowhere
had it a more devoted adherent than in Humphrey, the Saxon serving-man,
and nowhere a greater scoffer than in William Lorimer.

"I see thou scoffest, William Lorimer," pursued Humphrey. "But were he
put out, then might those minions of the king shoot at him once more,
and spare to shoot at our young lord. I will away to our lady, and see
what she ordereth."

There had always been times in England when no man who stood in the way
of another was safe, but these were the times when women and children
were not safe. For perhaps the wickedest king who ever sat upon the
English throne occupied it now, and his name was John.

This king had tried to snatch the kingdom from his brother, Richard
Coeur de Lion, and had failed. When Richard was dead, and John was made
king in his stead, there was still another claimant to the throne,--his
nephew Arthur,--and him the king in 1204 had murdered, so report said,
with his own hand. This was the deed that lost him Normandy and all his
other French possessions, and shut him up to rule in England alone. And
the English soon had enough of him. He was now in a conflict with the
Pope, who had commanded him to receive Stephen Langton as Archbishop of
Canterbury. This John had refused to do. Now, the kingdom, on account
of the king's disobedience, was under the papal interdict, and the king
was threatened with excommunication.

England had at this time many, many churches, and their bells, before
this unfortunate situation, had seemed to be ringing all day long. They
rang to call the people to the ordinary church services; they rang to
call them to work, and to bid them cease from work. They rang when a
baby was born, and when there was a death. And for many other things
they rang. Now, under the interdict, no bell rang. There were no usual
church services, and everywhere was fasting. A strange England it
seemed.

The king had never gotten on well with his barons, and they hated him.
Nevertheless they would have stood by him if he had been at all just to
them. And surely he needed them to stand by him, for all the world was
against him. The French were eager to fight him, and the Church was
arrayed against him. But all these things only made the king harder and
more unjust to the barons because just now they were the only ones in
his power, and his wicked heart was full of rage. He had hit upon one
means of punishing them which they all could feel,--he struck them
through their wives and children. Some of the barons were obliged to
flee from England for their lives. Many were obliged to give the king
their sons as pledges of their loyalty. In every man's knowledge was
the sad case of one baron who had been obliged to flee with his wife
and son into hiding. The king, through his officers, had pursued them,
ferreted them out of their hiding-place, taken the wife and son
captive, shut them up in prison, and starved them to death. Lord De
Aldithely himself had been obliged to flee, but his son would never be
delivered up peaceably to the king's messengers, for De Aldithely
castle was strong and well defended.

This was the meaning of the arrows shot at the strange boy. The king's
messengers, who were constantly spying on the castle from the wood in
the hope of gaining possession of the person of the young lord by
stratagem, had taken him for Josceline, the young heir of the De
Aldithelys.

And now came a summons for both lads to come to the ladies' bower, for
Humphrey had not been idle.

"My change of raiment?" said the strange lad, inquiringly.

"Shall be in thy chamber presently," answered Josceline.

"I would that Fleetfoot also might be conveyed thither," said the
stranger, with an engaging smile.

"It shall be done," promised Josceline.

He gave the necessary commands to two grooms, and the lads, each the
counterpart of the other, waited a few moments and then started toward
the tower stairway, followed by the grooms bearing the huge dog between
them on a stretcher. The stair was steep, narrow, and winding, and
built of stone. Josceline went first, and was followed by the stranger,
who every now and then glanced back to speak a reassuring word to his
dog. At the entrance to the ladies' bower Josceline paused. "Thou
mayest, if thou like, lay the dog for a while on a skin by my mother's
fire," he said, and looked inquiringly at his guest.

"That would I be glad to do," was the grateful reply. "See how he
shivers from the loss of blood and the chill air."

For answer Josceline waved his hand toward his mother's parlor, and the
grooms, conveying the dog, obediently entered. For all but Humphrey,
the Saxon serving-man, were accustomed to obey the young heir
unquestioningly. But Humphrey obeyed no one without question. It was
often necessary to convince his rather slow reason and his active and
many superstitions before his obedience could be secured. No one else
in the castle would have dared to take his course, but Humphrey was
thus favored and trusted because he was born a servant in Lord De
Aldithely's father's house, and was ten years older than the mistress
of the castle, whose master was now gone. He had already told Lady De
Aldithely all that he knew of the strange lad, and had advised her,
with his accustomed frankness, to put lad, horse, and hound at once
without the castle walls. Lady De Aldithely had listened, and when he
had finished, without any comment, she had commanded him to send the
two lads to her.

For a moment Humphrey had seemed disappointed. Then recovering himself
he had made answer, "Oh, ay. It will no doubt be best to see for
yourself first, and there is no denying that the three can then be put
outside the walls."

Receiving no reply, he had withdrawn and delivered his message.

Lady De Aldithely was standing evidently in deep thought when the
little group entered. The strange lad looked at her curiously. He saw a
slight figure clad in a green robe, and as she turned he caught the
gleam of a jewel in the golden fillet that bound her wimple on the
forehead. Her eyes were blue, and her look one of high courage shadowed
somewhat by an expression of anxiety. One could well believe that,
however anxious and worried she might be, she would still dare to do
what seemed to her best. She now diligently and eagerly compared the
two lads, glancing quickly from one to the other, and their exceeding
great likeness to each other seemed to strike her with astonishment. At
last she smiled and spoke to the stranger. "Thou art welcome, my lad,"
she said kindly. "But whence comest thou? and what is thy name?"

[Illustration: "Thou Art Welcome My Lad" Said Lady De Aldithely]

"I am to-day from York, and I am called Hugo Aungerville," was the
frank reply with an answering smile.

"To-day," repeated Lady De Aldithely. "That argueth that thy residence
is not there, as doth also thy name, which is strange to me."

"Thou art right," replied Hugo. "I come from beyond Durham, from the
priory of St. Wilfrid, the prior whereof is my uncle, I having no other
kin so near as he."

"And whither dost thou journey?" asked Lady De Aldithely.

"South," was the answer. "My uncle, the prior, would have had me bred a
priest, but I would be a knight. Therefore he hath at last given me his
blessing and bid me fare forth to attach myself to the train of some
nobleman."

"Why did he not secure thee a place himself?" asked Lady De Aldithely
in surprise.

"Because he hath too great caution," was the answer. "These be
troublous times. Few be true to the king, and no man knoweth who those
few be. Should he choose for me a place and use his influence to secure
it, perchance the next week the noble lord might be fleeing, and all in
his service, under the hatred of the king. And there might be those who
would say, 'Here is Hugo Aungerville, the page to my lord, and the
nephew of the prior of St. Wilfrid.' And then might the king pull down
the priory about my uncle's ears,--that is, I mean he would set my
uncle packing. For the priory is fat, and with the prior gone--why, the
king is so much the richer. Thou knowest the king."

"Too well," rejoined Lady De Aldithely, with a sigh. "The Archbishop of
York is 'gone packing,' as thou sayest, and the king is all the richer
therefor. And this is thy dog that hath the arrow wound," she
continued, as she advanced a few steps and laid her hand on the hound's
head. "I have here a medicament of wonderful power." She turned to a
little casket on a table and unlocked it. Then taking out a small
flask, she opened it and, stooping over the dog, poured a few drops on
the bandage of his wound. "He is now as good as well," she said
smilingly. "That is, with our good leech's care, which he shall have.
Nay, thou needst not speak thy thanks. They are written in thy face. I
see thou lovest thy dog."

"Yea, my lady, right well. I have naught else to love."

"Except thine uncle, the prior," said Lady De Aldithely.

"Except my uncle," agreed Hugo.

All this time Josceline had waited with impatience and he now spoke.
"He is not to be put outside the walls, mother, is he?"

"Nay, my son. That were poor hospitality. He may bide here so long as
he likes."




CHAPTER II


Life was rather monotonous at the castle, as Hugo found. Occasionally
the men-at-arms sallied out, but there were no guests, for Lady De
Aldithely was determined to keep her son, if possible, and would trust
few strangers. It was a mystery to Humphrey why she had trusted Hugo.

"I may have dreams of earthquakes," he grumbled, "and what doth it
count? Naught. Here cometh a lad, most like sent by the Evil One, and
he is taken in, and housed and fed, and his hound leeched; and he goeth
often to my lady's bower to chat with her; and often into the tilt-yard
to practise with our young lord Josceline; and often lieth on the
rushes in the great hall at the evening time before the fire with the
men-at-arms; and he goeth to the gates with the warder and the grooms;
and on the walls with William Lorimer; and Robert Sadler followeth him
about to have speech with him and to hear what he will say; and he is
as good as if he were My Lord Hugo with everybody, when he is but Hugo,
a strange lad, and no lord at all."

It was as Humphrey had said. Hugo was a favorite with all in the
castle. His company was a great solace to Lady De Aldithely in
particular. She was drawn to trust him, and every day confided more and
more to him concerning her painful and perilous situation. "I am
convinced," she said one day when two weeks had passed, "that there is
mischief brewing. I fear that I shall lose my boy, and it will break
his father's heart."

Hugo looked sympathetic.

"Thou knowest that fathers' hearts can break," she said. "Our first
King Henry fell senseless when his son was lost."

"What fearest thou, Lady De Aldithely?" asked Hugo.

"Treachery," was the answer. "There is some one within the castle walls
who will ere long betray us."

Hugo was silent a while. He was old for his years, very daring, and
fond of adventure. And he loved Lady De Aldithely not only for her
kindness to him, but for the attention she had given to Fleetfoot. At
last he spoke. "I have a plan. But, perchance, thou mistakest and there
is no traitor within the walls."

Lady De Aldithely looked at him quickly. "Nay, I am not mistaken," she
said.

"Then this is my plan," announced Hugo. "Josceline and I be alike. I
will personate him. In a week Fleetfoot will be quite recovered. We
will go forth. They who watch will think they see Josceline and pursue
me. I will lead them a merry chase, I warrant thee."

"But, my boy!" cried Lady De Aldithely. "What wild plan is this? Thou
lead such evil men a merry chase? Speak rather of the dove leading the
hawk a merry chase."

"Even so I will lead them," declared Hugo. "If they catch me, they
shall do well."

Lady De Aldithely smiled at the boyish presumption. "My poor lad!" she
said. "How if they catch thee with an arrow as they caught Fleetfoot?
Thou mightest find no castle then to give thee shelter, no leech to
salve thy wound."

"For thee, because of thy kindness, I will risk that," declared Hugo,
after a pause.

Lady De Aldithely put up her hand. "Hush!" she said. "Speak no more at
present to me, and nothing on the subject at any time to any but me. I
hear footsteps."

The footsteps, bounding and light, drew nearer, and presently Josceline
looked in at the door. "Come, Hugo!" he cried. "Let us away to the
tilt-yard and do our exercise."

Josceline was already an esquire, and very diligent in the exercises
required of an esquire as a part of his training for knighthood. But
not more diligent than Hugo had been during his stay at the castle. For
Hugo felt himself at a disadvantage on account of having been bred up
at the priory, and was eager to make up for his shortcomings. In all
their practice Robert Sadler, one of the men-at-arms, was present. And
both boys liked him very well. He was not a young man, being some sixty
years old, and gray and withered. He was of Irish parentage, and short
in stature; and he had a tongue to which falsehood was not so much a
stranger as the truth. He was also as inquisitive as a magpie, and
ready to put his own ignorant construction on all that he saw and
heard. The two boys, however, had never stopped to think of his
character. He was always praising their performances in the tilt-yard,
and always deferring to them, so that they regarded him very favorably
and were quite ready to abide by his judgment. To-day he was waiting
for them with a tall horse which he held by the bridle. "I would fain
see both of you vault over him," he said.

Josceline advanced, put one hand on the saddlebow and the other on the
horse's neck, and vaulted over fairly well. After him came Hugo, whose
performance was about equal to Josceline's.

"It was the cousin to the king that could not do so well as that,"
commented Robert Sadler.

"And how knowest thou that?" asked Josceline, complacently. "Didst thou
see him?"

"See him!" exclaimed Robert Sadler. "I have seen him more times than
thou art years old. And never did he do so well as thou and Hugo."

With hearts full of pride the two went from vaulting over the horse to
striking heavy blows with a battle axe.

"Ah!" cried Robert Sadler. "Could the cousin to the king see the
strokes that ye make, he were fit to die from shame. He can strike not
much better than a baby. I could wish that all mine enemies might
strike me no more heavily than the cousin to the king."

"This cousin to the king must be worthless," observed Josceline, his
face red from the exertion of striking.

"Worthless!" exclaimed Robert Sadler. "It were not well that the king
heard that word, but a true word it is. Worthless he is."

"I knew not that the king had a cousin," observed Hugo, with uplifted
axe.

"There was never a man born," declared Robert Sadler, recklessly, "who
had not a cousin. And would the king that hath everything else be
lacking in a common thing like a cousin? Thy speech is well nigh
treasonable. But strike thou on. I will not stay to see thee put the
king's cousin to shame, and then hear thee deny there is such a one."
And he stalked off to the stables leading the horse.

"I fear thou hast angered him," said Josceline. "But no matter. He will
not harbor anger long." And so it proved. For before the two had
finished striking he had returned to the tilt-yard apparently full of
good humor.

Two days went by. Then Lady De Aldithely spoke again to Hugo of his
project. "Hast abandoned thy plan?" she asked.

"Nay, my lady," he replied. "How should I abandon it? Is it not a good
one?"

"Good for my son," admitted Lady De Aldithely, "but bad for thee."

"Thou wilt find it will be bad for neither," said Hugo, stoutly. "I am
resolved."

Lady De Aldithely sighed in relief. "Come nearer," she said. "I would
confide in thee, and none but thou must hear. I have discovered the
traitor within our walls. For a sum of money he will deliver my son to
the king. Ask me not how. I have discovered it."

Hugo looked at her and his eyes flashed indignation. "Deliver
Josceline, he shall not!" he cried.

"He could but for thee, for we are powerless."

"Then again I say, he shall not."

"Come nearer still," said Lady De Aldithely. "I would tell thee the
man's name. What sayest thou to Robert Sadler?"

Hugo stared. "Robert Sadler!" he repeated. "Why, 'tis he of all the
men-at-arms, save William Lorimer, who is kindest to Josceline and me.
He will be ever with us; in the tilt-yard, in the stables, in the hall,
everywhere."

"To watch you," said Lady De Aldithely. "To mark what you say. To catch
your plans."

"He shall catch no more plans from me!" cried Hugo, indignantly. "I
will speak no more with him, nor be with him."

"Ah, but thou must," counselled Lady De Aldithely. "Wert thou to turn
from him, as thou sayest, he would know at once thou hadst been warned
against him, and would hasten his own plans. What said he to thee
yesterday?"

"He did ask me when I should leave the castle."

Lady De Aldithely's face clouded with anxiety. "And what didst thou
answer?" she asked.

"I said it might be one day and it might be another. For thou didst
forbid me to speak of my plan."

"I marvel at thy prudence," smiled Lady De Aldithely. "Where didst thou
learn it?"

"From my uncle, the prior. He never telleth aught to any man. And no
one can wring from him ay or nay by a question."

"A blessing upon him!" breathed Lady De Aldithely.

The boy's eyes brightened. "He is a good man, my uncle, the prior," he
said. "And ever he saith to me, 'In troublous times a prudent tongue is
worth ten lances and shields.'"

Lady De Aldithely smiled. "May he keep his priory in peace," she said.
"'Twere a pity that he should lose it."

Hugo looked at her gratefully. Not every one so leniently regarded the
prior's prudence. In more than one quarter his reticence was severely
blamed. By some it was called cowardice, by others self-seeking.

"And now thou knowest the worst," said Lady De Aldithely. "Within three
days I will contrive to send Robert Sadler hence on an errand. When he
is gone thou shalt go forth in the daylight, and that same night my son
and I will flee into Scotland. There, if no one tracks our steps, we
may be safe. Were I to drive Robert Sadler forth as a traitor, I know
full well that some other would arise in his place to practise
treachery against us. And so we flee."

And now Hugo drew himself proudly up. He felt that he was trusted and
that he was doing a knight's part in rescuing a lady in distress,
though he had not, as yet, taken his knightly vow, and was not even an
esquire.

Lady De Aldithely saw it and smiled. "Thou must put off that high look,
dear lad," she said. "It might beget wonderment in the brain of Robert
Sadler, and so lead him to seek its cause. Look and act as thou hast in
the past. Call to mind thine uncle, the prior, and guard not only thy
tongue, but the glance of thine eye, and the carriage of thy body."

Hugo blushed. "I fear I am like to mar all without thy counsel," he
said humbly.

"Thou art but a lad," replied Lady De Aldithely, kindly, "and my
counsel thou shalt freely have. And now I must tell thee that thou art
to take our good Humphrey with thee on thy journey."

Hugo started and looked disappointed. But all he said was, "Dost not
think him very like an old crone, with his dreams and his omens and his
charms?"

"I may not criticise Humphrey thus," said Lady De Aldithely, gravely,
"because I know his great faithfulness to me and mine. And thou knowest
there is much superstition abroad in the land--too much to make it just
to single out Humphrey for dislike because he is tainted with it. I
send him with thee because I have the highest regard for thy safety.
Thou wilt consent to take him to attend thee?"

"If thou require it," answered Hugo, reluctantly.

"I do require it," said Lady De Aldithely, "and I thank thee for
yielding. Now go. Come not again to me until Robert Sadler be well sped
on his journey. Had I but known that he was treacherous and greedy of
gold, no matter how gained, he had never been admitted to these walls."

Obediently Hugo left the apartment and slowly descended the winding
stair. And almost at the small door of the stairway tower he found
Robert Sadler waiting for him. The traitor was growing impatient and
was now resolved to proceed more boldly. "Thou stayest long with her
ladyship," he began. "I had thought the sun would set or ever thou came
down the stair."

Hugo did not meet his glance. He was trying hard to conceal the sudden
aversion he had to the man-at-arms, the sudden desire he felt to look
him scornfully in the face, and then turn on his heel and leave him.
And he knew he must succeed in his effort or Josceline was lost.

Meanwhile the man-at-arms stole questioning glances at him. He could
see that the boy was not his usual self, but he did not guess the cause
of his changed manner. With his usual prying way he began:

"Thou hast been here now a fortnight and more. Perchance her ladyship
will be rid of thee. Was't of that she spake to thee?"

And now Hugo had sufficiently conquered himself so that he dared to
lift his eyes. Innocently he looked into the traitor's face. "We spake
of my uncle, the prior," he said.

For a moment Robert Sadler was silent. "That is it," he thought. "She
will send him packing back to his uncle. The lad wishes not to go.
Therefore he looks down. Now is the time to ask him about the postern
key. When one is angered a little then is when he telleth what he hath
discovered."

He cast a searching look at Hugo, but by it he learned nothing. The boy
now began to take his way toward the tilt-yard, and Robert Sadler kept
close at his side, talking as he went.

"Women be by nature suspicious, you will find," he began. "They be ever
thinking some one will be breaking in; and ever for having some one on
guard. Her ladyship now--surely thou knowest she keepeth the postern
key herself, and will trust no one with it. The grooms and the warder
at the great gate she will trust, but it is the postern she feareth,
because she thinketh an enemy might be secretly admitted there. Knowest
thou where she keepeth the key? I would but know in case my lord
returneth suddenly, and, perchance, pursued, since the king will have
his head or ever he cometh to his home, he hath such an enmity against
him. And all because my lord spake freely on the murder of Arthur and
other like matters. He might be sped to his death awaiting the opening
of the postern while her ladyship was coming with the key."

"Cometh the lord soon, then?" asked Hugo, interestedly.

"That no man can tell," answered Robert Sadler. "He is now safe over
sea in France; but he might be lured back if he knew the young lord
Josceline was in peril."

"In peril, sayest thou?" asked Hugo. He was learning his lesson of
self-control fast.

"Why else are we mewed up here in the castle?" demanded the man-at-arms.
"I be weary of so much mewing-up. If the king will have our young lord
Josceline to keep in his hand so that he may thereby muzzle his father,
why, he is king. And he must have his will. Sooner or later he will have
it. Why, who can stand against the king?"

"And how can that muzzle his father?" asked Hugo.

"Why, if Lord De Aldithely, who is a great soldier, and a great help to
victory wherever he fighteth, should join with King Louis of France to
fight against our king--why, then it would go ill with Josceline if he
were biding in the king's hand. And, knowing this, his father would
forbear to fight, and so be muzzled."

"And Josceline would not otherwise be harmed?" asked Hugo.

"Why, no man knoweth that," admitted the man-at-arms. "The rage of the
king against all who have offended him is now fierce, and he stoppeth
at nothing."

"I know not so much as some of such matters," observed Hugo, quietly.

"Nor needest thou," answered the man-at-arms. "It is sufficient for
such as be of thy tender years to know the whereabouts of the postern
key. I would ask the young lord Josceline, but, merry as he is, he
turneth haughty if one ask what he termeth a meddling question. He
would say, 'What hast thou to do with the whereabouts of the postern
key?' And then he would away to his mother with a tale of me, and the
key would be more securely hidden than before."

"And Lord De Aldithely still further endangered if he came riding and
pursued?"

"Even so. I see that thou art a clever lad. Much cleverer than thy
years warrant. And I warn thee, speak to no one of what I have said to
thee, or it may be worse for thee. But tell me plainly, since we have
gone so far, knowest thou the whereabouts of the key?"

"Nay," answered Hugo. "I know not. I have never before thought of the
postern and its key."

The traitor's frowning face cleared. "I believe thou speakest truly,"
he said. "Thou art so full of being a knight that thou thinkest only of
knightly exercises in the tilt-yard. I will speak a good word for thee,
and it may be thou wilt be admitted a page to the Earl of Hertford."

"And hast thou influence there?" inquired Hugo, with assumed interest.

"Yea, that have I," answered Robert Sadler, falsely. For he had no
influence anywhere. "I will so speak for thee that thou wilt be page
but a short while before thou art made an esquire. Do thou but bide
quiet concerning what hath passed between us, and thou shalt fare never
the worse."

Then he departed to the stables and Hugo was left alone. To be able to
conceal what one feels is a great accomplishment. Rarely do people of
any age succeed in doing so, and it was with a feeling of exultation
over his success that the boy looked after Robert Sadler.

The next day Lady De Aldithely summoned her men-at-arms before her in
the castle hall. She had a missive in her hand. "I must send one of you
on a journey," she said. "More than one I cannot now spare to go to
Chester. Who will take this missive from me to the town of Chester, and
bring back from my aunt what it calleth for?"

A light flashed in the eyes of Robert Sadler which Lady De Aldithely
affected not to see. The opportunity he had been seeking was before
him. He would go out alone, but he would not return alone. When the
drawbridge should be lowered to admit him on his return the king's
messengers with a troop of horse would be at hand. They would make a
rush while he held parley with the old warder. They would gain entrance
to the castle; Josceline would be taken, and the reward for his own
treachery would be gained. He had plenty of time to think of all this,
for the men were slow to offer. Aside from Robert Sadler they were all
true and devoted adherents of the De Aldithelys, and each one imagined
the castle and its inmates safer because of his presence. Therefore
none desired to go.

"No man seemeth willing to do thy ladyship's behest," said Robert
Sadler, with a crafty smile. "I will, by thy leave, undertake it."

Lady De Aldithely looked calmly upon him. "Thou shalt do so, Robert
Sadler," she said courteously, "and thou hast my thanks for the
service. Thou shalt depart to-morrow morn, and thou shouldest return by
the evening of this day week. See that thou bringest safely with thee
what the missive calleth for."

"I will return at eventide of this day week," promised the traitor as
he received the missive.

"And now," he said to himself, when Lady De Aldithely had retired from
the hall, "let her keep the postern key. I care not for it."




CHAPTER III


It was now mid-June. The air was dry and cool. But Robert Sadler
thought not of June nor dryness and coolness of air as in triumph he
made ready for his journey.

"I should have gone," grumbled Humphrey the serving-man when he heard
of it. "Who knoweth this Robert Sadler? My lord had him at the
recommendation of Lord Clifford and he hath been at the castle not yet
a year. Who knoweth that he is to be trusted? I should have gone. I did
dream of serpents last night, and that foretelleth a prison. Robert
Sadler will no doubt be caught by some marauding baron as he cometh
again from Chester, and he will be thrown into the dungeon, and then my
lady will see."

So grumbling he was summoned to the ladies' bower just as the
drawbridge was lowered to permit the departure of Robert Sadler.
Ungraciously he obeyed; and just as ungraciously he continued his
grumbling in her ladyship's presence. "I did dream of serpents last
night," he began, "and that foretelleth a prison."

Lady De Aldithely shivered. "I pray thee, speak not of prisons,
Humphrey," she said firmly, "but attend my words."

"Am I not faithful?" demanded Humphrey.

"Thou art, my good Humphrey," was the reply.

"Was it then for Robert Sadler to do thine errand?"

"I have a greater errand for thee," was the grave answer. "Robert
Sadler is a traitor, and we have much to do ere he return."

Humphrey seemed bewildered. "And wouldst thou trust a traitor?" he at
length demanded.

"Abroad, good Humphrey, and in a small matter, but not within these
walls."

The dense Humphrey showing still by his countenance that he could not
comprehend his mistress, Lady De Aldithely spoke more plainly. "I must
tell thee, Humphrey, that Robert Sadler designeth for a sum of money to
deliver Josceline to the king."

Humphrey stared.

"I have discovered it, and have been almost crazed in consequence. But
a deliverer hath come."

"I saw no one," said Humphrey in a dazed tone.

"Didst thou not see Hugo?" asked Lady De Aldithely with a faint smile.
"My lord will be fain to do much for him when he heareth what Hugo will
do for Josceline."

"And what can a lad like him do?" demanded Humphrey. "Thou hadst better
trust me. I am forty years of age and have served the De Aldithelys all
my life."

"I do trust thee, Humphrey, and I do honor thee by sending thee to
attend on this brave lad, Hugo."

"I will not go," declared Humphrey. "Why should I leave thee and
Josceline to serve a stranger? Here I bide where my lord left me."

"Wilt thou not go at my command, Humphrey?"

There was no reply but a mutinous look, and Lady De Aldithely
continued, "Thou hast doubtless seen how very like in appearance Hugo
is to my son. This good lad, Hugo, this best of lads, Hugo, will, for
my sake and Josceline's, assume to be my son. He will ride forth toward
London as if he made to escape to his father in France. The servants of
the king will hear of it through the spies they keep in the wood near
us. They will pursue him while Josceline and I escape into Scotland."

Humphrey reflected. "I see it, I see it," he said at last. "Hugo is the
good lad."

"He is indeed, Humphrey. So good I cannot see him go unattended. Thou
art the trustiest servant I have; and so I send thee with him to keep
him from what peril thou mayest, and to defend him in what thou canst
not ward off. Thou must serve him as thou wouldst Josceline, on pain of
my displeasure."

"I did dream of serpents," said Humphrey, slowly, "and they foretell a
prison. It were better for thee to abide here, for, perchance, it is
not to foretell the fate of Robert Sadler but the fate of Josceline
that the dream was sent."

"Abide here, and let Robert Sadler take my son? Nay, good Humphrey, we
must away. Hugo and thou to-morrow morn, Josceline and I to-morrow
night." And then Humphrey was dismissed with the command, "Send Hugo to
me."

Almost immediately the boy appeared, and Lady De Aldithely met him with
a smile. "I send thee forth to-morrow morn," she said, "and Humphrey
will go with thee--if thou be still of a mind to go."

"I am still of a mind to go, Lady De Aldithely," was the answer.

"Thou knowest the danger to thyself," she said. "And 'twere not to save
my only son, I could not let thee take such peril. Cross thou to
France, I charge thee, and take this favor to my husband. Tell him,
because thou wouldst do knightly service for me and mine, I give it
thee. Thou wilt not go unrewarded." And she held out a knot of blue
ribbon.

The boy looked from it to her green robe, and back again. Lady De
Aldithely saw the look. "Green is not my color, Hugo," she said. "It is
but the fashion of the time." Suddenly she drew back her hand and laid
the knot against her sleeve. "See how the colors war," she said. "But
not more than truth and constancy with the wickedness of this most
wicked reign." Then she held out the knot of blue to him again.
"Receive it, dear lad," she said. "Whatever knightly service it is
thine to render after thou hast taken thy vow, thou canst render none
greater than thou dost now render to Matilda De Aldithely."

"And what service is that?" inquired Josceline as he came smiling into
the room. "And what solemn manner is this, my mother? There must be
great deeds afoot to warrant it." And he glanced from one to the other.

"Thou hast well come, my son," returned his mother, gravely. "I would
this moment have sent to summon thee. Thou and I must away to-morrow
night to wander through the forest of Galtus and on into the wilds of
Scotland, where we may, perchance, find safety."

At this Josceline stared in astonishment. "We be safe here in the
castle," he said at length.

"Nay, my son," returned his mother. "Here be we not safe. I had told
thee before of the treachery of Robert Sadler but for thy hasty,
impetuous nature which, by knowing, would have marred my plans. Thou
wouldst have dealt with him according to his deserts--"

"Ay, that would I," interrupted Josceline, "if he be a traitor. And
that will I when he returneth."

Lady De Aldithely looked at him sadly. "We be in the midst of grave
perils, my son," she said. "Control thyself. It is not always safe to
deal with traitors according to their deserts, and never was it less
safe than now. When Robert Sadler returneth we must be far away."

But Josceline was hard to convince. "Here is the castle," he said,
"than which none is stronger, and here be good men and true to defend
it. Moreover, Robert Sadler is now outside the walls. Thou canst, if
thou wilt, keep him out, and we have naught to fear. Why should we go
wandering with our all on the backs of sumpter mules, and with only a
few men-at-arms and serving-men to bear us company?"

"My son," said Lady De Aldithely, rising from her seat, "thy father
gave thee into my keeping. And thou didst promise him upon thine honor
to obey me. Thou mayest not break thy pledged word."

"I had not pledged it," rejoined Josceline, sulkily, "had I known of
wanderings through forest and wild."

"Better forest and wild than the king's dungeon, my son," replied Lady
De Aldithely. "We go hence to-morrow night."

During this conversation Hugo had stood a silent and unwilling
listener. Josceline now turned to him. "And whither goest thou, Hugo?"
he asked. "With us?"

"Nay, let me speak," said Lady De Aldithely, holding up her hand to
check Hugo's reply. "Hugo goeth south toward London clad in thy
bravery, and with Humphrey to attend him."

Again Josceline showed astonishment. "I understand not thy riddles," he
said at last petulantly.

"He is thy counterpart, my son, and he will personate thee," said Lady
De Aldithely. "He setteth out to-morrow morn. The king's spies will
pursue him, and thus we shall be able to flee unseen."

"And thou hast planned all this without a word to me?" cried Josceline,
angrily. "But for my pledged word I would not stir. Nay, not even if I
knew Robert Sadler would give me up to the king's messengers."

Lady De Aldithely gave Hugo a sign to leave the room. When he was gone
she herself withdrew, and Josceline was left alone in the ladies'
bower, where he stamped about in great irritation for a while. But he
could not retain his anger long. Insensibly it faded away, and he found
visions of wood and wild taking its place.

Meanwhile Lady De Aldithely had gone to the castle hall, when she sent
a summons to William Lorimer to attend her there. To him, when he
arrived, she unfolded Robert Sadler's treachery and her own meditated
flight with her son.

"Thee," she said, "I leave in charge of these bare walls to deal with
Robert Sadler on his return. Whatever happeneth I hold thee blameless.
Do as seemeth thee best, and when thou art through here, repair with
the others I leave behind, to my lord in France. And if thou shouldst
ever find Hugo to be in need, what thou doest for him thou doest for my
lord and me."

The man-at-arms bowed low. "I will deal with Robert Sadler as I may,"
he answered. "Only do thou leave me the postern key. As for Hugo, I
will not fail him if ever in my presence or hearing he hath need."

Then Lady De Aldithely with a relieved smile gave him the postern key
and he withdrew.

The day was now drawing to a close, and an air of solemnity was upon
the castle. Each man knew he was facing death; each man was anxious for
the safety of Lady Aldithely and her son; and each man cast a sober eye
on Hugo and Humphrey. The effect upon Hugo was visibly depressing,
while upon Humphrey it was irritating.

Humphrey had been thinking: and while he would be ostensibly Hugo's
servant, he had decided that he would be in reality the master of the
expedition. "I like not this obeying of strangers," he said to himself.
"Moreover, it is not seemly that any other lad than our own young lord
should rule over a man of my years. Let the lad Hugo think I follow
him. He shall find he will follow me. And why should these men-at-arms
look at us both as if we went out to become food for crows? Did I not
dream of acorns last night, and in my dream did I not eat one? And what
doth that betoken but that I shall gradually rise to riches and honor?
Let the men-at-arms look to themselves. They will have need of all
their eyes when that rascal Robert Sadler cometh galloping again to the
castle with the king's minions at his back."

Now all this grumbling was not done in idleness. For all the time
Humphrey was busy filling certain bags which were to be swung across
the haunches of the horses he and Hugo were to ride. Brawn, meal for
cakes, grain for the horses, and various other sundries did Humphrey
stow away in the bags which were to supply their need at such times as,
on account of pursuit, they would not dare to venture inside a town.
"And what care I that the interdict forbiddeth us meat as if we were in
Lent," grumbled Humphrey as he packed the brawn. "Were the king a good
king, meat would be our portion as in other years. Since he is the bad
king he is, I will e'en eat the brawn and any other meat to be had. And
upon the head of the king be the sin of it, if sin there be."

And the packing finished, he went early to rest.

The castle stood on a ridge near the river Wharfe, from which stream
the castle moat derived its water. Its postern gate was toward the
east, the great gate being on the northwest. From the postern Hugo and
Humphrey were to set out and follow along down the river toward Selby.
They were to make no effort at concealment on this first stage of their
journey which might, therefore, possibly be the most dangerous part of
it. They had little to fear, however, from arrows, as the king's men
would not so much wish to injure the supposed Josceline as to capture
him. They had shot at him before simply to disable him before he could
reach the shelter of the castle.

But Humphrey was not thinking of the dangers of the way. He was up and
looking at the sky at the early dawn. "I did hear owls whooping in the
night before I slept, which foretelleth a fair day for the beginning of
our enterprise," he said. "The sky doth not now look it, but my trust
is in owls. I will call Hugo. It is not meet that he should slumber
now."

Hugo was not easily roused. He had slept ill: for as night had come
down upon him in the castle for the last time, he had not felt quite so
sure of being able to lead his pursuers a merry chase. And it was
midnight when he fell into an uneasy sleep which became heavy as
morning dawned. Humphrey knew nothing of this, however, nor would he
have cared if he had. By his own arguing of the case in his mind, he
was now firm in the conviction that Hugo had been put into his charge,
and he was quite determined to control him in all things. So he routed
him from his slumbers and his bed without the slightest compunction,
bidding him make haste that they might take advantage of the fair day
prognosticated by the owls.

This duty done, Humphrey betook himself to the walls near the postern
where he had before noticed William Lorimer apparently deeply engaged
in reconnoitring and planning. Now, whatever Humphrey lacked, it was
not curiosity; and he was speedily beside the man-at-arms, who
impatiently, in his heart, wished him elsewhere.

"What seest thou?" began Humphrey curiously as he gazed about him on
all sides.

"The same that thou seest, no doubt," retorted William Lorimer,
gruffly.

"Why, then," observed Humphrey, slowly, "thou seest what I and thou
have seen these many times,--a bare open place beyond the ditch, and
then the wood. I had thought some king's man must have shown himself
from his hiding."

"Not so, good Humphrey, not so," rejoined William Lorimer more
pleasantly as he reflected that he would soon be rid of the prying
serving-man. "Hugo and thou will see king's men before I do."

"Ah, trust me," boasted Humphrey, complacently. "I shall know how to
manage when we see them."

"Thou manage?" said William Lorimer, teasingly. "Bethink thee, thou art
but servant to Hugo. Hast thou not promised Lady De Aldithely to be his
servant?"

Humphrey hesitated a moment and then replied: "Yea, in a measure. But I
take it that there are servants and servants. Besides, I did dream of
acorns of late and of eating one of them, which doth foretell that I
shall gradually rise to riches and honor; and surely the first step in
such a rise is the managing of Hugo. My dream hath it, thou seest, that
Hugo shall obey me. Wherefore I said I shall know how to manage when I
see the king's men."

"Hath Hugo heard of this fine dream?" inquired William Lorimer with
pretended gravity.

"Not he. Why should he hear of it? He is as headstrong as our young
lord Josceline, though not so haughty. I shall but oppose the weight
of my years and experience against him at every turn, and thou shalt
see I shall prevail." So saying, Humphrey, with an air of great
self-satisfaction, turned and descended the wall to the court-yard.

For a moment William Lorimer smiled. "I would I might follow the two,"
he said. "There will be fine arguments between them."




CHAPTER IV


The spies who kept watch on De Aldithely castle were four in number,
and were hired by Sir Thomas De Lany, who had been commissioned by the
king to capture Josceline in any manner that he could. It chanced that
there was but one of them on duty in the wood that morning--a certain
short, stalky little fellow whose name was Walter Skinner, and who was
fond of speaking of himself as a king's man. Formed by nature to make
very little impression on the beholder, it was his practice to eke out
what he lacked in importance by boasting, by taking on mysterious airs,
and by dropping hints as to his connection with great personages and
his knowledge of their plans. He was about the age of Humphrey, and
though he was but a spy hired by Sir Thomas, he persisted in regarding
himself as of great consequence and directly in the employ of the king.
He was mounted in the top of a very tall tree in the edge of the wood,
and he could hardly believe his eyes when, about nine o'clock, he saw
Hugo and Humphrey issue from the postern gate, cross the bridge over
the moat, and ride away into the wood, which they struck a quarter of a
mile south of him.

In great haste he began to come down the tree, muttering as he did so.
"They must all away yesterday morn to York on a holiday," he cried,
"and here am I left to take the young lord in my own person. When I
have done so I warrant they get none of the reward. I will sue to the
king, and we shall see if he who catcheth the game is not entitled to
the reward."

By this time he was on the ground and strutting finely as he hurried
about for his horse. "A plague upon the beast!" he cried. "He hath
slipped halter and strayed. I had come up with the young lord while I
seek my horse."

It was some ten minutes before the animal was discovered quietly
browsing and brought back to the watch-tree, and then a sign must be
made on the tree to let his companions know whither he had gone, so
that they might follow immediately on their return. And all this delay
was fatal to his catching up with the fugitives. For, once in the wood,
Humphrey's authority asserted itself. He pushed his horse ahead of
Hugo's and led the way directly through the thick forest for a short
distance when he emerged into a narrow and evidently little used
bridle-path. "It is well thou hast me to lead thee," he observed
complacently. "There be not many that know this path."

[Illustration: "It is Well That Thou Has Me to Lead Thee"]

Meanwhile Richard Wood, one of the other spies, had unexpectedly
returned, read the sign on the watch-tree, and followed his companion.
It was at this moment that Hugo discovered that Fleetfoot was not with
them. In the excitement of getting under cover of the forest he had not
noticed the dog's absence. "Where is Fleetfoot?" he asked as he stood
in his stirrups and looked about him anxiously.

"Fleetfoot is at the castle," replied Humphrey, calmly.

"By thy command?" asked Hugo, quickly.

"Ay," replied Humphrey. "Why, what young lord would journey about with
a great dog like that in his train? If thou art to play Josceline, thou
must play in earnest. Moreover, the hound would get us into trouble
with half the keepers of the forest. If ever a deer were missing, would
not thy dog bear the blame? So think no more of thy Fleetfoot."

Hugo was silent while the complacent Humphrey jogged on ahead of him.
What the serving-man had said was in large measure true. And he thought
with a swelling heart that it was not so easy, after all, to personate
Josceline when that personating cost him Fleetfoot.

But no less a person than William Lorimer had discovered that Fleetfoot
had been left behind. William was fond of both the dog and his master;
so now, when Fleetfoot made his appeal to William, the man-at-arms at
once responded. He snapped the chain that bound him, and leading him by
the collar to the postern gate opened it and let down the bridge. "Why,
what would become of thee, Fleetfoot," he said, "when that which is to
come to the castle hath come?" Then while the great deerhound looked up
expectantly into his face he added as he pointed to the place where
Hugo and Humphrey had entered the wood, "After thy master, Fleetfoot!
Seek him!"

The deerhound is a dog of marvellous swiftness, and, like an arrow from
the bow, Fleetfoot shot across the open space and gained the wood.
William Lorimer looked after him. "If thy other commands be no better
obeyed, Humphrey, than this which left Fleetfoot behind, I fear thou
wilt have cause to lose a part of thy self-satisfaction," he said. Then
he drew up the bridge and shut the postern gate.

Hugo had taken the loss of Fleetfoot so quietly that Humphrey with
still greater confidence now changed the course slightly, and went down
to the river-bank at a point which was half ford and half deep water.
But at this Hugo was not so obedient.

"What doest thou, Humphrey?" he demanded. "Was not our course marked
out toward Selby? Why wouldst thou cross the river here? We must be
seen once on our road, and that thou knowest, or the king's men will
not pursue us, and perchance Lady De Aldithely and Josceline shall fare
the worse."

"I go not to Selby," declared Humphrey, stubbornly. "And why shouldst
thou think we have not been seen? The king's men have eyes, and it was
their business to watch the castle."

Then Hugo sat up very straight in his saddle and looked at Humphrey
full as haughtily as Josceline himself could have done. "Thou art, for
the time, my servant," he said. "And we go to Selby."

For a moment Humphrey was disconcerted, but he did not relinquish his
own plan. Presently he said: "If we must go to Selby, let us cross the
river here. We can go on the south side of it as well as the north."

Hugo reflected. Then without a word he directed his horse down the bank
and into the water, which was here swimming deep. Well satisfied,
Humphrey followed.

"I did not dream of acorns and of eating one of them for nothing," he
said to himself. "I shall be master yet."

And hardly had the words passed through his mind when _splash_
went a heavy body into the water behind the two swimming horses.
Fleetfoot had come up with his master. Swiftly Hugo and Humphrey turned
their heads, Hugo with a smile and an encouraging motion of the hand
toward his dog, and Humphrey with a frown. "I would I knew who sent the
hound after us," grumbled the disgusted serving-man to himself when,
the shallow water reached, both riders drew rein for the horses to
drink.

Once across the Wharfe Humphrey led the way to a heavy thicket, and
dismounting pushed the growth this way and that and so made a passage
for the horses, Fleetfoot, Hugo, and himself. In the middle of the
thick was a little cleared grassy place where, crowded closely
together, all might find room, and here Humphrey announced that they
would take their midday rest and meal.

Hugo still said nothing, but he looked very determined, as Humphrey
could see. "But I go not to Selby," thought the stubborn serving-man.
"I run not my head into the king's noose so near home."

It was an early nooning they had taken, for it was barely half-past
twelve when Humphrey broke the silence. He rose, tied each horse
securely, and then turning to Hugo said: "Bid the dog stay here. We
will go and have a look over the country."

Hugo rose, laid down his bow and arrows, and, bidding the dog watch
them, followed Humphrey out of the thicket.

The serving-man, who was well acquainted with this part of the country,
now made a little detour into a path which he followed a short distance
till he came out a quarter of a mile away from the thicket into a
grassy glade in the centre of which towered one of those enormous oaks
of which there were many in England at this time. "We will climb up,"
said Humphrey, "and have a look."

Up they went; Hugo nimbly and Humphrey clumsily and slowly, as became
his years and experience, as William Lorimer would have said if he had
seen him. Barely had they reached complete cover, and the rustling they
made had just ceased, when the tramp of two approaching horses was
heard. The sky was now overcast with clouds in spite of the
prognostications of the owls, and the rain began to descend heavily, so
that the two riders sought refuge beneath the tree. Hugo and Humphrey
looked at each other and then down upon the horsemen, who were the two
spies, Walter Skinner and Richard Wood.

"I had thought to have come up with them ere this," said Walter
Skinner. "They had not more than half an hour the start of me."

"Have no fear," replied Richard Wood, who was a tall and
determined-looking man. "They have most like gone on to Selby on the
north side of the river. We shall catch them there."

[Illustration: Humphrey and Hugo in the Oak Tree]

"Thou saidst there is no one to watch the castle?" inquired Walter
Skinner.

"Ay, I said it," returned Richard Wood. "Why, who should there be when
Sir Thomas hath taken the other two and gone off to get a troop
together against Robert Sadler's return? There be thirty men-at-arms
within the castle, and all will fight to the death if need be, and none
more fiercely than William Lorimer. So saith Robert Sadler. He giveth
not so brave an account of the warder and the grooms at the drawbridge,
for, saith he, 'The warder is old and slow, and the grooms stupid.' It
was well we fell in with Robert Sadler as he departed on his journey."

There was a brief silence while the rain still fell heavily, though the
sky showed signs of clearing. Then Walter Skinner in his small cracked
voice laughed aloud. "The troop will be there, and there will be hard
fighting for naught," he said. "For the prize is escaped and we shall
capture it and have the reward."

"What thinkest thou of Selby?" asked Humphrey, when the two spies had
gone on toward the river.

"I think thou art right," answered Hugo, frankly.

Without a word Humphrey climbed still higher in the tree and gazed
after the two till they were hidden from view in the forest.

"Hast thou been before in this wood?" he inquired, when he and Hugo had
descended and stood upon the ground.

"Nay," replied Hugo.

"I thought not. Ask me no questions and I will lead thee through it. I
know it of old."

Hugo at this looked rather resentful. He had regarded himself as the
important personage on the journey just undertaken, and now it seemed
that the serving-man regarded the important personage as Humphrey. And
the boy thought that because Humphrey had been right in his purpose to
avoid Selby was no reason why he should assume the charge of the
expedition. He did not dispute him, however, but followed the
triumphant serving-man back to the thicket, to the horses, his bow and
arrows, and his dog.

In a short time they were out of the thicket and mounted; and then
Humphrey condescendingly said to Hugo: "Follow me, and thou shalt see I
will keep out of sight of keepers and rangers. And keep thy hound
beside thee, if thou canst. He is like to make us trouble."

At this Hugo felt indignant. He was not accustomed to be treated as if
he were a small child.

They now jogged on in silence a few zigzag miles until Humphrey came to
another thicket, in which he announced they would pass the night. "Had
we kept the open path," he observed, "we might have been further along
on our journey, if, perchance, we had not been entirely stopped by a
ranger or a king's man."

"The two spies went down the Wharfe toward the Ouse and Selby,"
remarked Hugo.

"Oh, ay," returned Humphrey. "But the king hath many men, and they all
know how to do a mischief for which there is no redress. Hadst thou
been a Saxon as long as I have been, and that is forty years, thou
hadst found it out before this. And now I will make a fire, for the
night is chill, and, moreover, I would have a cake of meal for my
supper." So saying, he set to work with his flint and soon had a fire
in the small open place in the midst of the thicket.

"Hast thou no fear of the ranger?" asked Hugo.

"Not I. This thick is well off his track. I would have no fear of him
at any time but for thy dog. Moreover, he is a timid man, and the wood
hath many robbers roving around in it. Could he meet us alone with thy
dog, there would be trouble. But here I fear him not."

Hugo laid his hand on Fleetfoot's head. "Thou hast no friend in
Humphrey," he said in a low tone as he looked into the dog's eyes.
Then, while Humphrey baked the oatmeal cake in the coals, Hugo gave the
dog as liberal a supper as he could from their scant supply.

"Be not too free," cautioned Humphrey, as he glanced over his shoulder.
"We have yet many days to journey ere we reach London if we escape the
clutches of the king's men. Could they but look in at the castle now, I
warrant they would laugh louder and longer than they did under the big
oak."

Hugo glanced around him nervously.

"Tush, boy! what fearest thou?" said Humphrey. "Here be no listeners.
Thou knowest this is the hour. I tell thee frankly I had rather be with
her ladyship than to lead thee in safety; yea, even though the way lay,
as her way doth lie, through that robber-infested forest of Galtus.
Hast heard how there be lights shown in York to guide those coming into
the town from that wild place?"

"Yea," answered Hugo, briefly.

Humphrey sighed. "There will be somewhat to do on that journey," he
said. "A train of sumpter mules carry the clothing, the massy silver
dishes, and the rich hangings; and with them go all the serving-men and
half the men-at-arms."

"I pray thee, cease thy speech," said Hugo, still more nervously as he
looked about him apprehensively in the semi-darkness of the fire-lit
enclosure. "Thy prating may mar all."

"Was it for this," demanded Humphrey, "that I did dream of acorns and
of eating one of them, which foretelleth, as all men know, a gradual
rise to riches and honor, that I should be bid to cease prating by a
stranger, and he a mere lad? But I can cease, if it please thee. I had
not come with thee but for her ladyship's commands." And in much
dudgeon he composed himself to sleep.

As for Hugo, he lay on the grass, his eyes on the glimmering fire, and
his ears alert for any sound. But all was still; and he soon fell to
picturing the scene at the castle,--Lady De Aldithely and Josceline,
mounted for their journey, going out at the postern gate at the head of
the train of sumpter mules and attended by the band of serving-men and
men-at-arms. And with all his heart he hoped for their safety. He did
not wonder at their taking their treasures with them. It was the custom
of the time to do so, and was quite as sensible as leaving them behind
to be stolen.

The great deerhound blinked his eyes lazily in the firelight and drew,
after a while, the lad's thoughts away from the castle. What should he
do with Fleetfoot? How should he feed him, and with what? And how
should he get him through the town of Ferrybridge near which they now
were, and which they must pass through in the morning, unless Humphrey
would agree to swim the horses across the Aire above the town and so
avoid it?

And now the wood seemed to awake. Owls insisted to the ears of the
sleeping Humphrey that the morrow would be a fair day. Leaves rustled
in the gentle wind. Far off sounded a wildcat's cry. And with these
sounds in his ears Hugo fell asleep.




CHAPTER V


The fire was plentifully renewed, and Humphrey was preparing breakfast
when, in the morning, Hugo awoke.

With what seemed to the boy a reckless hand, the serving-man flung
Fleetfoot his breakfast. "He may eat his fill if he will," said
Humphrey, noting Hugo's expression of surprise. "He hath already so
lowered our store that more must be bought."

"And where?" inquired Hugo.

"At Ferrybridge," returned Humphrey, complacently, to Hugo's dismay.

"I had thought best to avoid Ferrybridge," said Hugo. "I would swim the
horses across the Aire above the town."

Humphrey seemed to ruminate a short time. Then he put on a look of
stupid wisdom. "Let us have breakfast now," he said.

Hugo looked at him impatiently, and wondered how he could ever have
found such favor with Lady De Aldithely. But in silence he took the
brawn and oat-cake Humphrey gave him. The horses were already feeding,
and, despatching his own breakfast with great celerity, Humphrey soon
had them ready for the day's journey. Still in silence Hugo mounted,
for a glance at the stubborn Humphrey's face told him he might as well
hold his peace.

Straight toward the river-bank rode Humphrey, while Hugo and Fleetfoot
followed.

"There!" said Humphrey, when they had reached the river's brink. "Seest
thou that thick across the stream? Swim thy horse and thy dog across,
and bide there in that thick for me. I go to the town to buy supplies.
Last night I did have two dreams. I had but gone to sleep when I
dreamed I was going up a ladder. Knowest thou what that meaneth?"

"Nay," replied Hugo. "I am not skilled in old woman's lore."

Humphrey frowned. "Thou mayest call it what thou likest," he said, "but
dreams be dreams; and this one signifieth honor. I waked only long
enough to meditate upon it and fell asleep again, and dreamed I climbed
once more the big oak of yesterday. And that meaneth great preferment.
Canst thou see now how I have no cause to fear king's men? For what
honor could it be to be caught by them? or what preferment to be laid
by the heels in the king's dungeon? And canst thou see how it is meet
for me to go into the town, and for thee and the hound to swim the
river? I warrant thee the king's men, though they fill the streets of
Ferrybridge, will be no match for me with such a dream as that."

Then Hugo lost his temper. "Thou art a foolish fellow," he said, "and
moreover thou art but my servant. Where is thy prudence of yesterday? I
am of a mind to forbid thee to go into the town. But this I tell thee;
I know this region by report. We be not so many miles from Pontefract
castle. If thou comest not to the thick by noon, Fleetfoot and I
journey on southward, and thou mayest overtake us as thou canst."

"I know not if I can come by noon," answered Humphrey, more
submissively than he had yet spoken. "Never have I been in Ferrybridge.
I know not what supplies I may find."

"Take care thou find not the king's men," said Hugo. "At noon Fleetfoot
and I journey on." With that he directed his horse into the water,
Fleetfoot followed, and Humphrey was left on the bank.

"Ay," he said to himself, rather ruefully, "thou canst play the master
as haughtily as our young lord Josceline himself when it pleaseth thee.
But for all that, last night I did go up a ladder and climb a tree. No
doubt I shall yet prevail."

Then he galloped off toward the town, where he mingled with the throng
of people quite unnoticed in the number, for, in spite of the interdict
which forbade amusements of all kinds, a tournament was to be held at
Doncaster, and many were on the way to attend it. Since the king
scouted the interdict, many of the people braved it also, and the inns
were already full. Humphrey was riding slowly along with curious eyes
when, in the throng, he caught sight of Walter Skinner, the pompous
little spy, who sat up very straight on his horse, and looked fiercely
around, as if to warn the people of what they might expect if they
unduly jostled him, the king's man. For so he regarded himself,
although he was only the hired spy of Sir Thomas De Lany.

"A plague upon my dreams!" thought Humphrey, his native common sense
getting the better of his superstition. "I had never ventured my head
in this noose but for them. I must now get it out as I can, but that
will never be done by noon."

Almost as soon as Humphrey had seen him, Walter Skinner had seen
Humphrey, and had recognized both man and horse as the same he had seen
from the treetop leaving the castle with Hugo the previous day. Not
finding any trace of the two in the neighborhood of Selby, he had come
on to Ferrybridge, while his companion, Richard Wood, had gone south by
the very way Hugo would start out on at noon. He gave no sign of
recognizing Humphrey, however, and Humphrey seemed not to recognize
him.

Said Walter Skinner to himself, "I will not alarm him, and the sooner
he will lead me to his master."

While Humphrey thought, "I will not seem to see him, and when I can, I
give him the slip."

So up and down the narrow streets rode these two, Walter Skinner
looking fiercely upon the innocent throng, and Humphrey apparently
gazing about him with all a countryman's curiosity. Noon came and
Humphrey managed to find a place for himself and horse at an inn. "I
may as well eat and drink," he said, "for what profit is it to be going
up and down these narrow streets? At every turn is this little cock of
a king's man who, though he croweth not with his mouth, doeth so with
his looks. I know not for whom he is seeking. Not for me, or he would
assail me and capture me and put me to the torture to tell him where
Hugo is, for he thinketh Hugo is Josceline, which he is not, but a
stranger, and a headstrong one. There is nothing in dreaming of going
up a ladder or climbing a tree, if I get not the better of him." And so
he betook him to his dinner.

The little spy followed him, and the innkeeper was obliged to make
room for him also, which, when Humphrey saw, he changed his opinion as
to whom the spy was in search of. "He thinketh," said Humphrey to
himself, with sudden enlightenment, "to follow me quietly and so find
Hugo."

Humphrey was ever a gross eater, and Walter Skinner watched him with
great impatience and dissatisfaction. For Humphrey ate as if no anxiety
preyed upon his mind, but as if his whole concern was to make away with
all placed before him.

[Illustration: The Little Spy and Humphrey]

"It may be," reflected Walter Skinner, "that he hath bestowed his
master, as he thinketh in safety, in a neighboring abbey or priory.
From whence my master will not be long in haling him out. For what
careth the king for abbots or priors? And so let him leave off this
partridge dance he hath been leading me about the streets." And he
scowled upon the apparently unconscious serving-man.

"Ay, let him scowl," thought Humphrey, with his mouth full of savory
viands that filled him with satisfaction. "He may do more scowling ere
evening if he like. I did go up a ladder and climb a tree last night."

His dinner over, Humphrey went out to the stables, whither Walter
Skinner followed him as if to look after the welfare of his own horse,
thus confirming Humphrey's suspicion that he had recognized him. And
the serving-man at once put on an air of self-confidence and pride in
his own wisdom which effectually concealed his anxiety from the
watching Walter Skinner. He entered into conversation with the grooms,
and let fall, in a loud voice, such a weight of opinions as must have
crushed any intelligent mind to consider. And there about the stables
he stayed; for the grooms took to him, and evidently regarded him as
some new Solomon.

The impatient Walter Skinner listened as long as he could, but seeing,
at last, that Humphrey's wisdom was from an unfailing supply, he went
back to the inn, after beckoning one of the grooms to him and giving
him a piece of money, in return for which, as he pompously instructed
him, he was to keep an eye on Humphrey, and on no account to allow him
to escape him; at the same time he threw out hints about the king and
his wrath if such a thing should happen.

The groom, who was himself a Saxon, and who hated all king's men,
listened respectfully, took the coin, said that he had but two eyes,
but he would use them to see all that went on before him, and returned
to the stables, where he at once told Humphrey what had passed. "I have
a hatred to the king and his men," declared the groom.

"And what Saxon hath not?" asked Humphrey. "I have lived forty years,
and in all that time the Normans grow worse, and this John is worst of
all."

"Perchance thy master is oppressed by him," ventured the groom.

"Perchance he is, and his lady and his son likewise," returned
Humphrey.

The groom looked at him. "I ask thee to reveal nothing," he said
significantly. "I have but two eyes, and I must use them, as I said, to
see, all that goeth on before me. Do thou but ask Eric there to show
thee the way out of the town before the curfew ring. He hateth king's
men worse even than I. My master will summon me to the house shortly,
according to his custom. That will be the time for thee, for I can in
no wise see what goeth on behind my back, nor did I promise to do so."

At once Humphrey betook himself to Eric, explained matters so far as he
dared, and received the groom's ready promise to guide him out of the
town, which he did within an hour, while Walter Skinner sat impatiently
waiting for him to reenter the inn from the stables. Eric did more for
him also; for he provided him with provender for the horses and
abundant provisions for himself, Hugo, and the dog, receiving therefor
a good price which he promised to transmit to his master.

"And now," said Humphrey to himself, when he was well quit of the town,
"if the time cometh when Saxon as well as Norman hath preferment, my
device shall be a ladder and a tree. And may the king's man have a good
supper at Ferrybridge and be long in the eating of it."

Straight to the thicket rode Humphrey at a good pace, but he found no
Hugo there. "Here is a snarl to be undone!" he cried. "The lad is too
headstrong. Perchance he hath already run into the noose of the other
king's man. For who knoweth where he is? And I shall be held to answer
for it. This cometh of a man being servant to a boy and a stranger at
that. I will away after him." So saying, he rode to the south, giving
all habitations of men and walks of forest rangers a wide berth, and
hoping sincerely that Hugo before him had done the same. "For the lad,"
said he, "is in the main a good lad. And how can I face my lady if harm
cometh to him? It is no blame to him that he hath not a knack at dreams
to help him on his way."

At the last word his horse shied; for out of the undergrowth at the
side of the little glade through which he was riding fluttered a
partridge, while, after it, floundering through the bushes with a great
noise, came Fleetfoot. In vain Humphrey tried to call the dog from his
prey. In a twinkling the unhappy bird was in the hound's mouth and
Fleetfoot was off again to the thicket to supplement his scant dinner
with a bird of his own catching.

"Here be troubles enough!" cried Humphrey. "King's men on our track,
and now partridge feathers to set the keepers and rangers after us.
Well, I will push through this underbrush to the right. Perchance Hugo
rideth in the bridle-path beyond, since it was from that part the dog
came. And he shall put the hound in leash. I am resolved on it. I have
no mind to have hand or foot lopped off that so a deerhound may have
his fill of partridges."

With a frown he pushed through the underbrush. The sun was setting when
he emerged into a path and, at a little distance, caught sight of Hugo
jogging slowly along and looking warily about him. He dared not signal
him by a whistle, so, putting spurs to his loaded horse, he advanced as
fast as he was able, and shortly after came up with the lad, his anger
at Fleetfoot's trespass rather increased than abated, and, in
consequence, with his manner peremptory.

"Into the thick here to the right," he growled, laying his hand on the
bridle of Hugo's horse. "The sun is now set, and we go no farther
to-night. In this stretch robbers abound, and I have no mind to face
three dangers when two be enough."

Hugo looked at him inquiringly.

"Yea, by St. Swithin!" went on the angry serving-man. "King's men and
partridge feathers be enough without robbers." And giving Hugo's horse,
which he had now headed toward the thicket, a slight cut on the flank
with his whip, he drove Hugo before him, much to the boy's indignation.
"Thou hast been drinking!" he cried, turning in his saddle. "Strike not
my horse again."

They were barely screened from sight when Humphrey, his head turned
over his shoulder, held up his hand warningly. A horse was coming on
the gallop. A second elapsed, and then Walter Skinner went by. He had
discovered Humphrey's flight a half-hour after Eric had led him out of
the city, but the grooms had successfully delayed him half an hour
longer. Then he had started in pursuit, and had gone thundering along
at such a pace that he could hear nothing nor see anything that was not
in full view. This new sight of danger at once pacified both Hugo and
Humphrey. The boy forgot what he had been pleased to regard as the
insubordination of his servant, and Humphrey forgot the anger he had
felt against Fleetfoot and his master.

As soon as they dared, they pushed cautiously farther into the thicket,
and presently Humphrey dismounted and tied his horse. Here was no
grassy spot within enclosing underbrush where comfort might be found.
There was such a place not far off, but Humphrey would not go to it.
With his knife he set to work clearing a place large enough for the
tied horses to lie down in. Cutting every stick into the very ground,
he laid the cut brush in an orderly heap, and thus made a bed for
himself and Hugo. Then without a word he went out on foot and down to
the bank of the Went, peeled a willow, and came back with a long strip
of its bark. "Thou wilt tie this to the collar of thy dog," he said.
"He hath been trespassing, and hath taken a partridge. Should the keeper
discover it and us, thy hand or foot, or mine, must pay for it."

"How knowest thou that Fleetfoot did take a partridge?" asked Hugo,
with disbelief in his tone.

"I did see him," replied Humphrey. "And noting whence he came, I did
find thee, and none too soon."

There was a short silence. Then Hugo said: "A partridge is not much;
and, as thou sayest, if thou hadst not seen Fleetfoot, thou hadst not
found me in time; and so the spy would now have me in custody.
Therefore Fleetfoot should not have too much blame."

"Ay," grumbled Humphrey. "Thou art ready with thy excuses for thy dog."

"He is all I have, Humphrey," returned Hugo, quietly. "But I promise
thee he shall be put in leash on the morrow if he cometh." And he
listened anxiously for some sound of his dog's approach. But he heard
none.

And now Humphrey's good-nature was quite restored, so that he said:
"Think no more of the hound to-night. He hath begun on a partridge. May
he not end on a deer; and, if he doth, may the keeper set its loss down
to these prowling robber bands. It is well with us thus far."

By this time the horses were fed and supper was over, all having been
accomplished in darkness, and Humphrey lay down to sleep.




CHAPTER VI


The part of Yorkshire which they had been traversing abounded in
rivers. The Wharfe and the Aire, the first of which joins the Ouse
eight miles south, and the second eighteen miles southeast of York,
they had already crossed. They were now near the Went, and here, as
Hugo discovered the next morning, it was Humphrey's decision to stay a
day or two.

"I go no further without a dream," he declared. "Last night I slept too
sound to have one. And moreover I wish not to fall in with these
galloping king's men. Let them ride up and down till they think us
securely hid away in some religious house, since they find us not in
the wood. So shall we go the safer on our way to Doncaster."

Hugo had thought much the evening before, and he had resolved to
dispute Humphrey in future no more than was necessary. For he now saw
that, though he was but a serving-man, Humphrey knew more of Yorkshire
woods than his master. He therefore made no objection when Humphrey
announced his decision, much to the serving-man's surprise, for he had
expected opposition. Finding none, he enlarged his air of importance,
and bade Hugo stay where he was while he took the horses down to the
stream for water.

Hugo, putting a strong restraint on himself, obeyed, and was rewarded
on the serving-man's return with the promise that, as soon as the dog
came in and was tied, he might venture forth with Humphrey to explore
the region.

"Thou must know," remarked Humphrey, "that we be on the high bank. On
the other side of the valley sloping coppices abound, and therein can I
show thee many badger holes. Hast ever seen a badger hunt?"

"Nay," answered Hugo.

"I was but twenty years old," continued Humphrey, "when first I came
through these woods, and on the bank across the valley from this point
I did see a badger hunt. Three men and two dogs did I see, and they
five did at length dig out one badger. The old badger was inside the
hole taking his sleep, for it was ten o'clock in the morning. And a
badger not only sleepeth all day in summer, but day and night in
winter. Thou knowest that?"

"Yea," replied Hugo. And added that at his uncle's priory he had
occasionally eaten badger meat, which was very good.

"Cured like ham, was it?" inquired Humphrey.

"Yea," responded Hugo.

Humphrey nodded his head approvingly. "A priest," he said, "for knowing
and having good eating."

The two sat silent a few moments waiting for Fleetfoot, who did not
come, and then Humphrey continued: "The badger hath a thick skin. He
goeth into a wasp's nest or a bees' nest, and the whole swarm may sting
him and he feeleth it not."

"What doth the badger in wasps' nests and bees' nests?" inquired Hugo.

"Why, he will eat up their grubs. The eggs make footless grubs, and
these the badger eateth. My grandsire went a journey through this wood
once on a moonlight night. He rode slowly along, and at a certain place
was a bees' nest beside the path, and there, full in the moonlight, was
a badger rooting out the nest. Out swarmed the bees, and several did
sting the horse of my grandsire at the moment when he had taken good
aim at the badger with his stick. The horse bolted, and my grandsire
found himself lying in the path with his neck all but broken, and the
bees taking vengeance on him for the trespass of the badger. He hath
had no liking to bees or badgers since that day."

"He still liveth, then?" asked Hugo.

"Ay," returned Humphrey, much pleased at the question. "Hale and hearty
he is, and ninety-six years of age."

By common consent both now paused to listen for Fleetfoot. Hearing
nothing Humphrey continued, "Didst ever see a tame badger?"

"Nay," was the reply.

"A badger becometh as tame as a dog, if he be taken young. Report hath
it that there is great sport in London at the public houses baiting the
badger. I know not how it may be."

And now Fleetfoot came. Not joyfully, but slinking, for he knew he had
been doing wrong. Three partridges, a fox, and a badger he had slain
since Humphrey had seen him, and he wore a guilty look.

"Thou wilt do no more than tie him with the willow thong," observed
Humphrey, eyeing Fleetfoot with disfavor. "Were he mine, I should beat
him. The king maketh nothing of lopping off a man's hand or foot for
such a trespass, or even putting out of his eyes. And should the
keepers discover what he hath done, it were all the same as if we had
done it."

"Nay, Humphrey," said Hugo, smoothing the dog's head. "Perchance he
hath taken no more than the partridge thou sawest."

For answer Humphrey struck lightly the dog's rounded-out side. "Tell me
not," he said, "that one partridge hath such a filling power. Else
would I feed only on partridges. Moreover, he is a knowing dog, and see
how he slinketh. He would not be that cast down for one partridge, I
warrant thee."

"It may be thou art right," replied Hugo, as he tied up Fleetfoot.

"Yea, that I may be," returned Humphrey, importantly. "A man that hath
dreams of going up a ladder and climbing a tree in the same night is
most likely to be right when it cometh to measuring up the trespasses
of a straying deerhound. For why should a man be advanced to preferment
and honor except that he hath merit? And to dream of going up a ladder
and climbing a tree is sure warrant that he hath it. And now fare we
forth to see this Brockadale."

Hugo having finished tying Fleetfoot securely with a tether so short
that he could not gnaw through it, followed Humphrey, and the dog
attempted to follow Hugo, much to Humphrey's satisfaction. "Ay, thou
wouldst follow, wouldst thou?" he said. "Bide where thou art with the
horses, and think on thy evil deeds." Then turning to the boy he added,
"If thou wilt not beat him, Hugo, my chiding may do him some good."

It was a most beautiful little valley that the boy saw when he stood on
the edge of a hill on its northern side and gazed down into it, while
Humphrey stood by pointing out its features with the air of a
proprietor. Green and lovely it stretched away to the southeast some
two miles, as Humphrey told him. Through it flowed the Went, bending
and turning, its banks lined with osiers and willows. Wooded hills were
the northern, and sloping coppices the southern boundary of the vale.

The two had not ventured out into the open. They were still in the
shelter of the trees. "The Normans rule, and honest men must skulk and
hide," observed Humphrey, with some bitterness.

"Lord De Aldithely is a Norman," remarked Hugo. "So also am I."

"Ay," rejoined Humphrey, "but all Normans are not alike bad. Thou art
not the king, moreover, nor is my lord, who is an honest man and
standeth bravely by the people, and is opposed to murder and robbery.
Therefore is he fled, and therefore is our young lord Josceline in
danger, and therefore are we skulking and hiding and leading the king's
men this chase. The times be evil; and who knoweth what shall amend
them?"

Hugo did not reply. His eye had caught sight of the flash of sunlight
on steel down the valley, and he pointed it out to Humphrey.

"Up! up!" cried Humphrey. "Up into yon spreading oak at the edge of the
vale. There shall we be concealed, and yet see all."

"They come from toward Doncaster, do they not?" asked Hugo when they
were safely out of sight among the branches.

"Ay," answered Humphrey. "Nor was it for naught that I did sleep too
sound to dream last night, else might we have been on the way to
Doncaster, and so, perchance, have met them."

The party drew nearer, and soon the keen eyes of Humphrey and Hugo
resolved them into three men-at-arms led by Walter Skinner.

"Three soldiers and a king's man to take a boy and a man!" laughed
Humphrey. "It must be that they have a good opinion of our bravery."

"Or of thy cunning," said Hugo, to whom Humphrey had a short while
before revealed all that had befallen him in Ferrybridge.

"Oh, ay," answered Humphrey, complacently. "I have my share, no doubt.
A man doth not live forty years with treachery on all sides of him and
learn nothing. My head had been off my shoulders ere this, had not
some measure of cunning done its part to keep it on. They will beat up
the whole forest hereabout for us, I doubt not. If I get a good dream
to-night, we go on to-morrow."

Hugo smiled. He thought it strange that a man so sensible, in many
respects, as Humphrey should pin such faith to dreams. So he said
teasingly: "How if thou get not the dream to-night, nor yet to-morrow
night? Do we bide here until the dream come, if that be next
Michaelmas?"

The serving-man seemed puzzled. Then he answered: "Nay, to be sure.
Then would the summer be done; and, moreover, I never went so long
without the right dream in my life."

Nearer and nearer drew the horsemen until, in the vale just opposite
and below Hugo and Humphrey, they dismounted. "Here do we stop," said
Walter Skinner. "I warrant you they be hereabouts, else have the fat
priests lied when they denied they were in abbey and priory."

"Ay," answered one of the men-at-arms. "They be hereabouts, no doubt,
if they be not farther to the east, when thy fellow will catch them if
we miss them. I marvel thou hast not come up with them before now. Thou
sayest this is the third day of their flight?"

This seeming to reflect on the ability of the pompous little Walter
Skinner, he frowned. And drawing himself up importantly he said, "The
young lord hath to his servant a Saxon who knoweth well these parts."

"Some deer-stealer, without doubt," observed the man-at-arms.

"And he goeth not straight forward," continued Walter Skinner, "else
had I met him. But he creepeth here, and hideth there, and goeth in
retired paths."

"And all to balk thee!" said the big man-at-arms, regarding with scarce
concealed contempt the little strutting spy.

There was that in the manner of the man-at-arms that nettled Walter
Skinner, so that he became more pompous than before and, resolved to
show the soldier how high he stood in the king's counsel, he said
haughtily: "Why, it were best he balk me, if he knew what will come to
his young master when I find him. King John, as thou knowest, hath a
special hatred toward his father, Lord De Aldithely."

"De Aldithely, sayest thou?" interrupted the man-at-arms.

"Ay, and he is resolved the son shall not live, no more than his own
nephew Arthur."

"And he will put him to death?" asked the man-at-arms.

"Why, not speedily," answered Walter Skinner, importantly, "but cat and
mouse fashion, by which he will be the longer dying, and his father the
more tormented. He will speedily give orders also to raze his castle as
a nest of traitors."

"Whence hadst thou this?" demanded the man-at-arms.

Walter Skinner stood off and looked at him. Then, with an air of great
mystery, he said: "It is whispered about. I may not say more. It
becometh me not."

The man-at-arms now rose from the ground where he had thrown himself
and mounted his horse. "I seek not the young lord," he said. "I betray
no mouse to the cat, least of all the son of the brave De Aldithely. I
will back to my own master from whom thou didst borrow me. I will say
thou needest me not and hast bid me return. When thou art tired of thy
life, say thou otherwise." And he looked meaningly at him.

"I go with thee," said the second man-at-arms, springing from the
ground.

"And I also!" exclaimed the third.

In vain Walter Skinner tried to restrain them. They clattered off down
the valley whence they had come, and were soon out of sight on their
way to Doncaster.

The sound carried well here; the voices of the men were loud; and Hugo
and Humphrey, whose ears were keen, heard with consternation all that
passed. "I fear it meaneth death to thee also if thou be caught," said
Humphrey. "For it is a serious thing to dupe a man of the king's rage.
This calleth for dreams, and that right speedily, if we are not to fall
into his hands."

The disappointed Walter Skinner made no attempt to depart. "Here will I
stay a while," he said, "and berate the folly that did tell them the
purpose of the king and the name of the young lord. I did think to
raise myself in authority over them by showing that I did know the
king's counsel, and, in so doing, I did forget that for murdering of
Arthur all men hate him, and few will help him to his will upon
others." Moodily he threw himself upon the grass, having staked his
horse, and soon left off berating himself by falling into a sound
sleep. The sun reached the meridian, and he still slept. It came to be
mid-afternoon and still he moved not, for he had ridden hard and had
been deprived of his rest the night before. His tethered horse at last
whinnied softly and then loudly. And, to the dismay of Hugo and
Humphrey, he was answered by their own horses in the thicket. But still
the king's man moved not.

"Would that I knew certainly that he sleepeth," said Humphrey,
anxiously. "For then we might come down and escape."

"Nay, nay," objected Hugo, earnestly. "Seest thou not how a little
sound goeth far here? The rustling of the leaves and rattling of the
boughs as we descend might awake him."

Humphrey looked at him. "Ay, poor mouse!" he said. "Mayhap thou art
right."

And now Walter Skinner stirred in his slumber. Once more his horse
whinnied loudly. Once more the horses in the thicket answered; and the
spy, broad awake, sprang to his feet. "Aha, Fortune!" he cried, "thou
art with me."

"Nevertheless," observed Humphrey, softly, "if thou hast not dreamed of
going up a ladder and climbing a tree, all may not go so well with thee
as thou thinkest."

Leaving his horse, the spy climbed the wooded hill, at the top of which
he paused just under the oak in which Hugo and Humphrey were concealed.
The horses whinnied no more, though he waited a few moments hoping to
hear them. "I will on," he cried impatiently. "'Twas from this
direction the answer came." And away he hurried on foot, for he
imagined that those he sought were hidden near at hand, and waiting for
the night to come ere they resumed their journey. He knew that he alone
could not capture them, but if he could get on their trail and dog them
unseen till he could get help he would be sure of them.

As soon as the spy was out of sight Humphrey began to descend the tree.

"Whither goest thou?" asked Hugo.

"Thou shalt see," returned Humphrey.

With speed he ran down the hill, breaking a switch of birch as he ran.
He hastened to Walter Skinner's horse, cut him loose from his tether,
and struck him sharply with the birch rod. Away galloped the horse down
the valley, while Humphrey hastened back to his place in the tree.
"Fortune may be with him," he said to Hugo, "but his horse is not.
Mayhap I need not another dream, for, by the one I had, I think we have
got the better of him. Moreover, there will be no more whinnying for
our horses to answer."




CHAPTER VII


Till the set of sun and the dusk of the evening the spy pursued the
search, now stumbling over a tree root, now catching his foot in a
straggling vine, and every now and then sorely struck in the face by
the underbrush through which he pushed his way. But, although he was
once very near the concealed horses and hound, he found nothing to
reward him. The return to the little vale was even more tiresome than
the journey from it had been. No moon would shine for an hour, and it
was quite dark when he once more reached the oak in which Hugo and
Humphrey had stayed all day, but from which they had a few moments
before descended.

In climbing the tree, after setting Walter Skinner's horse loose,
Humphrey had noticed a hollow in one of the lower branches.
"Perchance," he said, "a hedgehog may lodge therein. Knowest thou the
ways of hedgehogs?"

"Nay," returned Hugo, indifferently.

"The lad hath lost heart," said Humphrey to himself, "and all because
of the words of this little snipe of a king's man and the slowness of
the journey. I will not seem to see it." Then he continued as if Hugo
had displayed the greatest interest: "I will tell thee, then, that
hedgehogs have many ways. I warrant thee this king's man knoweth naught
of them, any more than he knoweth the wood. Had he been some men, we
had been caught ere now. I fear him not overmuch. For do but see how he
is puffed up with undue pride and importance. And let me tell thee that
undue pride and importance and good sense dwell not in the same skull.
We shall therefore have the better of him."

Hugo made no reply, and Humphrey continued cheerfully: "A hedgehog will
find a hollow in a tree, and there he will bide, sleeping all day. At
night he will come forth. But first he must reach the ground. And this
he will do by rolling into a ball and dropping on the ends of his
spines. If the ground is beneath him, no harm is done. If this king's
man should be beneath him, I think not that he would cry out that
Fortune was with him when the spines of the hedgehog stuck into him."

"And how would the king's man be beneath him?" asked Hugo, dully.

"If the hedgehog be in the hollow of that low branch," answered
Humphrey, "and if the king's man should stand under at such time as the
hedgehog was ready to drop, then he would be beneath him."

"Yea," observed Hugo. "Many things might come to pass, if thou couldst
make all the plans."

Humphrey did not hear the sarcasm in Hugo's tones. He heard only what
he was pleased to take as a compliment to his own abilities. "Why, I
believe thou art right," he answered. "Were I to make the plans, some
that are now at the top would be at the bottom. Thou hast well said.
But come. It grows dark. Let us go down ere the king's man come back on
his way to the vale."

Slowly they made their way down. "This perching on trees all day is fit
to make an old man of a boy," said Humphrey, as he stepped clumsily
about on his half-numbed feet.

"Sh!" said Hugo.

Humphrey instantly stood still in the darkness and listened. Weary and
slow steps were approaching. They came nearer, and directly under the
oak they ceased, for the spy, his pompous manner quite gone, had
stopped to rest a little. And now a rustling in the branches above was
heard. Eagerly the spy looked up and strained his eyes to see.
"Josceline! son of Lord De Aldithely!" he called, "I arrest thee in the
king's name. Thou darest not oppose me. Yield thyself, and come down!"

And just then the hedgehog which Humphrey had surmised might be in the
hollow, moved a little farther along on the branch, rustling the leaves
as he did so. In the darkness the face of the spy was still turned
upward. He had forgotten that he was alone and unaided. And he thought
only of getting hold of the boy he sought.

"Come down!" he repeated. "Come down, I say! Make no dallying!"

And then the hedgehog rolled himself into a ball and came down plump
into the face of Walter Skinner.

"Ugh! what have we here?" sputtered the spy, starting back.

Hugo and Humphrey did not wait for him to discover, but stepping softly
away they went to the thicket, where the hungry animals gave them a
warm welcome, and where they thoroughly enjoyed the first meal they had
had since morning. Their supper eaten, Humphrey untied horses and
hound, to lead them to water.

"Thou wilt be caught," objected Hugo, nervously.

"Not I," returned Humphrey, easily. "I fear not the spy to-night. If he
heareth aught, he will think another hedgehog about to drop upon him.
Come thou with me and see."

Hugo obediently rose from the couch of boughs where he had thrown
himself, and took the thong of willow from Humphrey's hand to lead
Fleetfoot. The serving-man was right. So far as Walter Skinner was
concerned they had no more to fear that night. His face was lacerated;
and by the time Hugo and Humphrey started from the thicket he had
discovered the loss of his horse. It had been better for him if his
drinking-horn, from which he now took copious draughts, had been lost
also.

"The kind of fortune that is with him, I should not wish to be with
me," observed Humphrey, when they had returned safely to the thicket.
"I will now to sleep and see what sort of a dream cometh."

Much cheered in spirit, Hugo also lay down to sleep. His courage came
back, and he felt that let the journey take as long as it would he was
equal to it.

The moon had now risen, and by its light Richard Wood, the other spy,
and his borrowed men-at-arms came riding through one of the glades of
the forest southward to the vale. Richard Wood had not the overweening
vanity of Walter Skinner; he had not taken his borrowed men-at-arms
into his confidence concerning the king's plans in order to make it
appear that he stood high in counsel; neither had he revealed the name
of the lad they sought. The men-at-arms had, therefore, all three
remained with him, and were as eager as he on the chase. They were
pushing on now to the vale to camp for the night, because they could
find there both grass and water. And, in the same spot where Walter
Skinner had slept before, they came upon a figure reclining in full
sight in the moonlight.

"There lieth one of them," said a man-at-arms, "but I see not the
other."

"Thou mayest be sure the other is not far off," observed the second.

"Thou shalt see how quickly I will awake him out of sleep," cried the
third, as he spurred his horse toward him and pricked him sharply with
the point of his lance.

"Ugh!" grunted the half-drunken Walter Skinner. "But I have had enough
of hedgehogs for one night." And he sat up sleepily.

"And is it thou, Walter Skinner?" exclaimed Richard Wood.

"Why, who should it be?" answered Walter Skinner, peevishly.

"Thou art a brave pursuer!" said Richard Wood. "Where be thy men-at-arms?
and where is thy horse?"

"My men-at-arms are returned to their master," replied Walter Skinner,
while those of Richard Wood drew near to learn the whereabouts of their
companions. "As for my horse, I wot not what is become of him."

"And wherefore did thy men-at-arms play thee false?" demanded Richard
Wood.

"Softly!" replied Walter Skinner, his small, cracked voice more cracked
than usual. "Ask me not so many questions if thou wouldst not see me
dead before thee."

Richard Wood regarded him sternly. "Thou must be moonstruck," he said
at length. "When ever heard any one of a man dying of the questions
asked of him?"

"Thou mistakest my meaning," returned Walter Skinner, a trace of his
pomposity returning. "Thou askest me questions. If I answer thee false,
I lie. If I answer thee true, I die. And truly, death were not much
worse than this lacerated face of mine."

"Why, how now!" demanded Richard Wood. "How camest thy face lacerated?"

"One Master Hedgehog of this forest hath paid me his attentions too
closely."

For a moment Richard Wood was silent. Then he said: "Answer me truly. It
behooveth me to know the truth in this matter. Why did thy men-at-arms
leave thee?"

"I did but let fall the king's purpose toward the young lord, and name
his father, De Aldithely, and they fell off from me as I had been
myself a murderer. Bade me uphold their lying speech that I had no need
of their services on pain of death, and so left me."

And now one of the men-at-arms spoke. "We be not knaves," he said. "We
had not thought to lead the youth to death, but to honorable captivity
for a brief while. Nor did we know the lad ye seek was son to De
Aldithely. Wherefore we also leave ye, and if ye say why, your lives
shall answer for it. We have no mind to be marks for the king's
vengeance. He that would crush the Archdeacon of Norwich with a cope of
lead will have no mercy on a man-at-arms that thwarted him. Wherefore,
say why we left ye, if ye think best." And, riding a little way off,
all three encamped by themselves for the night.

"It seemeth that the best way to earn hatred and contempt is to serve
this King John," remarked Richard Wood, thoughtfully.

"Ay, and the attention of hedgehogs also," returned Walter Skinner,
thickly. "And the loss of horse and food, and the loss of the quarry
also, if we strike not the trail again. And though we have not the
service of the men-at-arms, be sure we shall pay for it as if we had it
to their master. I would I had a troop of mercenaries to rent out. It
were easier than such scouring of the country as this. Moreover we do
exceed our office. The king said not to me, 'Walter Skinner, scour the
country.' Nay, the king said naught to me on the matter. 'Twas his
favorite, Sir Thomas De Lany, that bade me watch the castle from the
tree; and there might I be now in comfort, if this hare-brained youth
had not run away. He should have stayed at the castle till the coming
of Robert Sadler and the troop. My face had not been thus lacerated had
the youth known his duty and done it."

"Why, how makest thou all this?" demanded Richard Wood, contemptuously.
"The king careth not whose hand delivereth the youth, so that he be
delivered. That we have not already caught him is the fault of thyself
alone. Hadst thou but held thy tongue, we had had with us to-night six
men-at-arms, and had, erelong, run down the game. In the morning I go
to Hubert le Falconer and hire from him six more--three for thee, and
three for me. Then do thou be silent as to the king's purpose, and this
mischief of thy making may be repaired. Thou mayest look as if thou
wert bursting with wisdom, if it please thee, but see that thou give no
enlightening word to thy followers."

"Ay, thou mayest lay the burden of all mishaps on me," returned Walter
Skinner, pettishly. "But I promise not that I will speak no word, if it
seemeth to me best to speak. It is not every one in the king's employ.
Not every one is out scouring the country for a lord's son. And if one
may not speak of his honors, why hath he them?"

"Honors!" exclaimed Richard Wood, with contempt. "There be few would
call such work as thine an honor. To skulk, to spy, to trap another to
his destruction, why, that is what most call knaves' work, and he who
doth it is despised. Yea, even though he do it for a king."

"Thy loss doth set but sourly on thy stomach, Richard Wood," said
Walter Skinner, stubbornly. "It is an honor to serve the king. Ay, even
though he be a bad one like this. And, I say, if one is not to speak of
honors, why hath he them?"

"For other people to see, varlet. What others _see_ of thy
_honors_, as thou callest them, they can mayhap endure. But when
thou pratest of thy honors, thou dost but enrage them. Wilt thou give
me thy word to be silent?"

"Nay, that will I not," retorted Walter Skinner. "I be as good a man as
thou, and not a bear in leading. When I will to speak, I speak; whether
it be of the king's matters or my own."

"Thou hast said," returned Richard Wood, rising. "In the morning I hire
three men-at-arms from Hubert le Falconer for myself. Pursue thou the
chase as seemeth thee best. We hunt no more in company."

With the first morning light the men-at-arms mounted their horses
and rode toward Doncaster, Richard Wood rode north to seek his needed
men-at-arms from Hubert le Falconer, and only Walter Skinner was left
horseless and breakfastless in the vale. He had no mind to remain
there in that condition, and so betook himself to the nearest priory,
confident that, in the king's name, he could there procure both food
and a horse, and perhaps a leech to ease his wounded face.

Hugo and Humphrey were also early astir, the serving-man performing his
morning tasks with such a particularly cheerful air that Hugo smiled
and inquired, "Hadst thou a dream last night?"

"Ay," answered Humphrey, in triumph. "I say not with that little spy,
'Aha, Fortune! thou art with me,' and then go out to meet a hedgehog.
But this I say, that I did dream of bees and of following them, which
betokeneth gain or profit. And therefore go we not toward Doncaster."

"Why not toward Doncaster down this Brockadale?" asked Hugo.

"The vale is well enough," replied Humphrey, "but it extendeth only two
miles after all. We must make haste to-day. I do remember that two
spies did pursue us at the beginning. It may be that the other hath
neither lost his horse nor met a hedgehog to discourage him. And,
moreover, what is to hinder him from having three men-at-arms to his
help like his fellow? Nay, Hugo, we go not through the vale, but make
we what haste we may through short cuts and little used paths."

"And whither do we go?" asked Hugo.

"I will tell thee that we seek the marshy Isle of Axholme to the east
of the river Don. There will be room therein for us to hide away, and
there no king's men will look for us moreover."

"Why?" asked Hugo.

"Why, lad?" repeated Humphrey. "Why, because they will not. Will a
king's man trust himself in such a boggy place? Nay. Moreover, I fell
in with this one that hath so lately followed us at Ferrybridge, which
is a sure sign that we should meet the other at Doncaster."

"But--" began Hugo.

"I tell thee," interrupted Humphrey, "I did dream of bees and of
following them. We go straight to this Isle of Axholme. Vex me no
more."

Hugo opened his mouth to remonstrate still further, but, happening to
remember his determination not to oppose Humphrey except through
necessity, he closed it again. Seeing which, Humphrey regarded him
approvingly, and even went to the length of expressing his approbation
in words.

"Thou art learning to keep thyself under," he said. "Thou hast but just
opened thy mouth to speak and shut it again with thy words unsaid. When
one hath no knack at dreams to help him on, the best thing for him is
the power to shut his mouth. An open mouth maketh naught but trouble.
Thou didst wish to see more of the vale, and so thou shalt. Thou shalt
see so much of it as thou canst while the horses and hound drink their
fill before starting."




CHAPTER VIII


The Isle of Axholme, to which Humphrey was determined to go, was a
marshy tract of ground in the northwest part of what is now
Lincolnshire, and its eastern boundary was the Trent River. It was some
eighteen miles long from north to south, and some five miles wide from
east to west. On its north side was the wide mouth of the Ouse; the
river Idle was south of it, and west of it was the Don. In the time of
the Romans there had been a forest here which they had cut down, and
the low, level land afterward became a marsh. At this time few trees
were to be found there. But there were thickets of underbrush and
patches of rank grass, as well as pools and boggy places; and Humphrey
was right in thinking the place comparatively safe from pursuit.
Especially so as the pursuers would naturally think that the young lord
Josceline would push on as rapidly as possible, that he might get
across to France to join his father.

"I go no more where the crowd goeth," declared Humphrey, when they were
on their way. "How many, thinkest thou, of all that be abroad in these
parts pass through Doncaster? Why, near all. We need not to show
ourselves further to draw pursuit. This is now the fourth day since we
set out, and my lady and Josceline must be well along in their journey.
I would I knew the doings of William Lorimer at the castle. He is a
brave man and a true, though he would never tell me his plans that he
might take my counsel. He ever made naught of dreams and spake lightly
of omens. I hope he may not fare the worse for it."

Hugo made no reply. He, too, was wondering about how things were going
at the castle, but he kept his thoughts to himself.

"Now I will tell thee," said Humphrey, pausing and turning in his
saddle, "when thou seest me draw rein and hold up my hand, do thou stop
instantly. There be many robbers in this wood, and we have them to fear
as well as king's men. And hold Fleetfoot fast. Let him not escape
thee."

Hugo promised to obey in these particulars, and Humphrey, for a short
distance, put his horse to the trot with Hugo following close behind
him. All that day they turned and wound through the forest, going fast
where they dared, and at other times creeping silently along. To Hugo
it seemed they must be lost; but, when darkness fell, they had reached
the edge of the Isle of Axholme, and, putting the horses through the
Don, were safe in its marshy wastes.

"Here be no keepers and rangers," said Humphrey, exultingly. "And here
may we kill and eat what we choose, while Fleetfoot may hunt for
himself. We stir not till the moon rise, and then we seek a place to
sleep," he concluded, patting the wet coat of the horse he rode.

Hugo said nothing. He did not know it, but he was nervous. All day he
had been on the alert, and now to stay perfectly still in this strange,
silent place, not daring to stir in the darkness lest he splash into
some pool, or mire in a bog; with his eyes attempting to see, when it
was too dark to see anything but the glow-worms in the grass and the
will-o'-the-wisp, was an added strain.

Two hours went by, and the curtain of darkness began to lift. The
moonlight made visible a fringe of small trees and the shine of the
water on whose bank they grew. The breeze rose and sighed and whistled
through rush and reed. An owl hooted, and then Humphrey, who had been
nodding on his horse's back, suddenly became very wide awake.

"Hast been here before, Hugo?" he cried cheerily.

"Nay," answered the boy, listlessly.

"No more have I," returned Humphrey. "But what of that? A man who hath
proper dreams may be at home in all places. I will now seek out our
resting-place, and do thou and Fleetfoot follow me." So saying, he
chirruped to his patient horse and led the way carefully; for, however
much Humphrey imagined he depended on dreams, he generally exercised as
good judgment and care as he was able. To-night weary Hugo had
forgotten that Humphrey was his servant, and, as such, bound to obey
him. He felt himself nothing but a tired and homesick boy, and was glad
himself to obey the faithful Saxon, while he thought regretfully of his
uncle the prior, Lady De Aldithely, Josceline, and the valiant William
Lorimer.

It was not Humphrey's intention to go farther that night than
absolutely necessary; and a little later he dismounted and stamped his
feet with satisfaction. "Here be solid ground enough and to spare for
us and the horses and hound," he said, "and here will we rest."

A lone, scrubby tree was at hand, and to that Humphrey made fast the
horses and dog. "No fire to-night. Thy cloak must be thy protection
from the damp," he said. "But the swamp is not so damp as the king's
dungeon, nor so dismal. So let us eat and sleep."

Hugo said nothing. He ate a morsel with a swelling heart, and then, in
silence, lay down. He was beginning to find leading evil men a merry
chase a rather unpleasant business.

In the moonlight Humphrey looked at him. "He is a good lad," he
thought, "and seemeth no more to me like a stranger. I begin to see
that he seemed no stranger to my lady neither. My lord will make him
his page, no doubt, if he getteth safely over to France. France is a
good country when a bad king ruleth at home." Then faithful Humphrey,
the animals fed, himself lay down to sleep.

It was late the next morning when Hugo awoke. Humphrey had been
stirring two hours; and the first thing the boy's eyes rested upon was
a little fire made of bits of punky wood collected by Humphrey; and
spitted above the coals were two small birds roasting.

"Ay, lad!" cried Humphrey. "Open thine eyes now, and we will to
breakfast presently. What sayest thou to a peewit each? Is that not
better than brawn?"

Hugo smiled and arose at once. His despondency of the night before was
gone, together with his fatigue, and he looked about him with interest.
To the left were reeds some twelve feet tall which fringed a pool; to
the right, thick sedge that fringed another; and they seemed to be on a
sort of tiny, grassy isle, though the water which divided them from the
next bit of solid earth could, in some places, be stepped across. The
sun shone with agreeable warmth. There were frequent whirrs of wings in
the air as small flocks of game birds rose from the water and sedge
near by.

[Illustration: Hugo looked about him with interest]

"This is not the wood nor is it Brockadale; but here one may breathe a
little without having his eyes looking on all sides for an enemy," said
Humphrey, with satisfaction. "It is the turn of the peewits to look
out. Knowest thou the peewit?"

"On the table only," answered Hugo, pleasantly.

"Ay," observed Humphrey. "Thine uncle, the prior, hath many a fat feast
in the priory, I warrant thee. But here thou shalt see the peewit at
home. Had we but come in April, we had had some eggs as well as birds
to eat."

Humphrey had made a fresh meal cake in the embers, and the two--boy and
serving-man--now sat devouring birds and cake with great appetites.

"Thou knowest the pigeon?" asked Humphrey.

"Yea," replied Hugo.

"The peewit is the size of a pigeon."

"So I should guess," remarked Hugo.

"There be those that call it the lapwing," pursued Humphrey.

"My uncle, the prior, is of the number," smiled Hugo.

"Ay, priests ever have abundance of names for everything. It cometh, no
doubt, from knowing Latin and other outlandish gibberish."

Hugo smiled indulgently. His feeling toward Humphrey had, during the
last day, undergone a complete change. And, though he was but a Saxon
serving-man, the heart of the boy had now an affection for him.
Humphrey was quick to detect it, and he too smiled.

"Had the peewit short legs like the pigeon," he continued, "and did he
but want what they call the crest on the back of his head, and could
you see only the back of the bird, he might be thought a pigeon, since
he shineth on the back like a peacock in all colors blue and green can
make when mixed together. But when he standeth on his somewhat long
legs, and thou seest that his under parts be white, why, even a
Frenchman would know he was no pigeon, but must be the peewit or
lapwing. And I warrant thee we shall eat our fill of peewits if we
remain here long."

"When thinkest thou of going?" asked Hugo, interestedly.

"Why, that I know not. I would fain have another dream. I know not how
it may be with other men, but when I am right weary I dream not. Which
I take as an omen not to stir till I be rested and ready to use my
wits. Thou hast noticed that weariness dulleth the wits?"

"Yea," replied Hugo.

"Why, I have seen in my time many fall into grievous snares from
nothing more than being weary, and so, dull of sight and hearing. But
here cometh Fleetfoot sleek and satisfied. I did but turn him loose two
hours ago, and I warrant thee he hath had a fine meal. I will make him
fast once more, and then we go farther into the island to seek another
resting-place for the night. This is too near the edge of the marsh,
and too near the Don."

Mounting the horses, and with Fleetfoot once more in leash, they set
out, Humphrey picking his way and Hugo following. And by mid-day they
had come to what Humphrey decided was probably the best location for
them on the island. It was another solid, grassy place, and was graced
with three little scrub trees which gave them a leafy roof under which
to lie. From the fringe of neighboring rushes the two cut enough to
strew their resting-place thickly, and so protect their bodies from the
damp ground. Then Humphrey dug a shallow fire-pit at the north, and,
after their mid-day meal, set diligently about collecting a store of
fuel. Little was to be found solid enough to cook with, and that little
he stored carefully apart, reserving a great heap of dead rushes and
reeds for the blaze which was to ward off the night dampness and make
them comfortable. In all these labors Hugo bore his share, for the two,
by tacit consent, were no longer master and man but comrades in need
and danger.

In collecting the reeds they took few from their immediate
neighborhood, wishing to be as protected from chance observation as
possible. And they found their wanderings in search of fuel full of
interest. At some distance from their camping-place they came upon a
muddy shallow. And there on the bank Hugo saw his first avoset or
"scooper," as Humphrey called him. The bird was resting from his labors
when the two first observed him. Though the ooze was soft the bird did
not sink into it. There he stood, his wide-webbed toes supporting him
on the surface of the ooze, and it seemed a long way from his feet up
his blue legs to his black-and-white body. But the oddest thing about
him was his long, curved, and elastic bill turning up at the end. The
bird had not observed them, and presently set to work scooping through
the mud after worms. Then he waded out a little way into the shallow,
where he did not stay long, for, catching sight of Hugo and Humphrey,
he rose a little in the air and flew swiftly away. Farther on they came
upon a wading crane with an unlucky snake in his mouth. And still
farther away they caught sight of a mother duck swimming with her young
brood upon a pool. And every now and then a frog plumped into the
water. But nowhere did they discover, by sight or sound, another human
being beside themselves.

When darkness fell the glow-worms shone once more, the will-o'-the-wisp
danced, and the owls hooted. The fire of dead rushes and reeds, fed by
the patient Humphrey, blazed brightly and shed a grateful warmth upon
their sheltered resting-place under the three scrub trees. And, lying
at ease upon the rushes, the hours of darkness went by till, when the
moon arose, the fire had died down, Hugo slept, and Humphrey had gone
in search of a favoring dream.

Near Doncaster that night camped Richard Wood with his three newly
hired men-at-arms; while within the town at an inn called the Green
Dragon lay Walter Skinner. He was newly equipped with a horse. "I need
no men-at-arms," he said to himself, "nor will I hire them. I will
catch the young lord and his serving-man with arrow and bow if I but
come up with them again."

And that night, safe out of the forest of Galtus, Lady De Aldithely and
her party encamped on the border of Scotland.

That night also Robert Sadler, pausing to rest on his return journey to
the castle, looked often at the package he carried, and wondered what
it contained.

That night also the valiant William Lorimer and his men-at-arms rested
from their labors well satisfied. For, while the moat at the great gate
held only its usual allowance of water, by means of the new dam they
had constructed, that part of the moat near the postern was level full.

The next morning marked the beginning of the sixth day of their
journey, and Humphrey rose with unimpaired cheerfulness. Once more
Hugo's waking eyes beheld two peewits spitted over the coals and a meal
cake baking in the embers. "I did dream of gold last night," said
Humphrey, by way of a morning greeting. "Knowest thou what that
betokeneth?"

"Nay," responded Hugo, pleasantly.

"It betokeneth success in thy present undertaking after first meeting
with difficulties. We have met with difficulties, and what were they
but the king's men? They be now behind us, and success is to be ours.
But come thou to breakfast now. To-morrow morn we set forth again."




CHAPTER IX


On this, their last day in the Isle of Axholme, Hugo and Humphrey took
up the occupation of the day before, but with more deliberation. And
they went in a different direction,--southeast, toward the Trent.

"It is this way we journey on the morrow with the horses," remarked
Humphrey. "It is as well to see what the way is like while we gather
our store of reeds and rushes. For I did dream of gold, which
betokeneth success in our present undertaking, and success ever resteth
on good care and good judgment. And so let us see where the solid
places be and where the bogs lie. And do thou note well the course so
that we may run it with safety and speed if need be. And we will not
gather the reeds and rushes till we return."

"Meanest thou to walk to the Trent, then, to-day, and back again?"
questioned Hugo. And by this time he had so far forgotten the
difference in their stations that there was respect in his tone, which
Humphrey was quick to notice.

"Yea, lad," answered the serving-man, kindly. "It is only a few miles.
It is not well to risk miring the horses when I did dream of gold last
night."

Hugo smiled. He was beginning to see that, while the superstition of
the age, and particularly of his condition, had, to a certain extent, a
hold on Humphrey, his course was really directed by sturdy
common-sense; and he wondered no more at Lady De Aldithely's trust in
him.

The two were well on their way, and Richard Wood and his men-at-arms
were scouring the forest near Doncaster, when Walter Skinner walked out
to the stables of the Green Dragon to see to his horse. His face was
still painful, and he desired to vent some of his spleen on the unlucky
groom, whoever he might be, who had his horse in charge. He found the
horse tied to a ring in the stable wall, and the groom having a sorry
time of it, since every time the groom touched him with comb or brush
the animal backed, or turned, or laid back his ears and snapped with
his teeth. For the monks at the priory had furnished the king's man, on
his compulsion, with the worst horse in their stables.

"Here be a beast fit for the Evil One and for nobody else," grumbled
the sorely tried groom. "I am like to be killed for my pains in trying
to smooth his coat for him."

The groom was a tall, overgrown fellow of nineteen, with a vacant face
and an ever-running tongue. He now stood stock still upon the approach
of Walter Skinner and gazed at him. He would have done the same if any
creature possessed of the power of locomotion had come into his view.
But of that Walter Skinner was ignorant. To him the gaze of the groom
seemed honor and respect toward himself, and even, perhaps, awe. And he
was at once mollified.

"My horse is a beast of mettle," he observed complacently when the
groom had returned to his work.

"Ay, and I would that his master, the Evil One, had the grooming of
him," was the retort.

"Why, how now, sirrah! Dost thou slander the horse which is a gift from
Mother Church to the king's work? Thou art a knave, and no doubt art
but unfit for thy task this morn through over-late carousing last
night."

"Thou mayest call it carousing, if thou wilt," said the groom, sulkily.
"I did come from Gainsborough yesterday. And in the dark, as I did
come, I saw a flaming fire in the Isle of Axholme."

"And what meanest thou to tell me of that?" demanded Walter Skinner,
sternly. "Thou wert no doubt so drunk that a will-o'-the-wisp in that
boggy place did seem to thee even as a flaming fire. Why dost thou not
stand to my horse and get down with him? He hath already backed and
turned a matter of some miles."

The groom stopped and looked at him indignantly. "I may be but a
groom," he said, "but the Isle of Axholme I know from a child, every
bog in it. And I did go to the fire, which was a bit out of my way,
but, being my only pleasure on the journey, I did take it. And there on
the rushes lay a young lord, and his serving-man did feed the fire with
reeds."

"Thou didst see that?" cried Walter Skinner, in great excitement. "Make
haste with the beast, sirrah. Here is a coin for thee, good groom. I do
now see thou wert never drunken in thy life. Make haste with the
horse."

The groom stared at him foolishly. "Why, who could make haste with such
a beast?" he said at length.

"Then stay not to finish thy work," cried Walter Skinner, impatiently.
"Bring saddle and bridle. I must away instantly. But do thou first
describe to me the place where thou didst see the fire."

"The place," said the groom, deliberately, while he examined the coin
Walter Skinner had given him. "Thou dost go till thou comest to it. A
turn here and a turn there mayhap thou must make, and thou wilt find it
a little solid place with three scrub trees upon it. It is a matter of
a short distance from the south end of the Isle, and thou wilt not fail
to know it when thou seest it."

With this not over-clear direction Walter Skinner was obliged to be
content. Bidding the groom to bring the horse to the door of the inn at
once, he hurried away, paid his reckoning, examined carefully the
string of his bow, and looked over his store of arrows. "And now,
Josceline, son of Lord De Aldithely," he said, "my arrow will bid thee
halt this time, and not my voice. And thou, Richard Wood, who didst
say, 'We hunt no more in company,' what wouldst thou give to know of
this place in the Isle of Axholme? And thou mayst have thy men-at-arms
to bear thee company, and to pay for when thou art done with them. They
cost thee more than a bow and some arrows cost me, nor will they do
thee one half the good."

So thinking he bestrode the vicious beast which backed and plunged
about the inn yard, and from which the grooms and the watching maids
fled in all directions. Walter Skinner, however, was not to be
unseated, and, the horse being headed in the right direction, his next
plunge carried him out of the yard and fairly started him on his way,
the spur of his rider giving him no permission to halt for a moment.

"And now," thought Walter Skinner, when he had crossed the Don and was
free of the town, "what said the knave groom? I must go till I come to
it. Ay, and who knoweth when that shall be, and who knoweth the way in
this pitfall of bogs? Three scrub trees, saith he, and all together on
one little solid place. I would I might see three little scrub trees."

His horse had been over the Isle before and, being given his head,
began to pick his way so cleverly that Walter Skinner was still further
elated. He sat up pompously and pictured himself a courtier at the
palace as a reward for this day's work. "For I lean not to golden
rewards alone," he said. "No doubt it can be managed that from this day
I begin to rise. The king hath advanced baser men than I, let Richard
Wood think as he will in the matter."

And now he descried the three little scrub trees; but he saw not the
horses, they having been taken to another islet for pasture; nor
Fleetfoot, who had gone with Hugo and Humphrey.

"The knave groom spake true," said Walter Skinner, with satisfaction.
"There be the rushes on which they lie, and there the ashes of the
fire. I will seek out a convenient hiding-place in the reeds, and
to-night, when the fire blazeth bright, then shall my arrows sing."

So saying he sought a place of concealment for himself and his horse,
and, having found it, and tied the horse securely, he lay down well
satisfied.

Hugo and Humphrey did not return till toward evening. They had caught
some fish in the Trent and roasted them on the coals for their dinner,
and afterward had come leisurely back, enjoying the scenes and sights
of the marsh.

From his covert Walter Skinner saw them come, each leading a horse
which he had stopped to get from the islet pasture, while Fleetfoot
lagged behind on a little hunting expedition of his own. The spy drew
his bow and sighted. "Yea," he said to himself, "no doubt I can do it.
And what is an arrow wound more or less when one would win the favor of
the king? The lad or his servant may die of it. But what is death? It
is e'en what every man sooner or later must meet. And it is the king's
favor I will have, come what may to these runaways." Then he laid down
the bow and arrow and took a long drink from his horn. "When the flames
shoot high and they be in the strong light of the blaze, then will I
shoot," he said. "And it is their own fault if they be hit. They should
have remained in the castle where Robert Sadler arriveth this same
night."

Hugo and Humphrey had not before been on such thoroughly amicable terms
as they were to-night. The boy, so much like his young master, had,
unconsciously to Humphrey, won his way into the heart of the
serving-man; while Hugo had learned in their few days' companionship to
feel toward Humphrey as his faithfulness deserved. So, while the fire
blazed up and all remained in darkness outside of its circle, Humphrey
entertained Hugo with tales of his early life, to which the boy
listened with appreciation. "Ay, lad," said Humphrey, when half an hour
had gone by and he paused in his story to look at him with approval,
"thou hast the ears of my lady herself, who is ever ready to listen to
what I would say."

And then came a whistling arrow, shot by an unsteady, drunken hand, and
another, and another, none of which wounded either boy or man, since
Hugo was still defended by his shirt of mail, and Humphrey wore a stout
gambeson.

[Illustration: Humphrey started up, snatching a great bunch of long
flaming reeds]

Instantly Humphrey started up and, snatching a great bunch of long,
flaming reeds to serve him for a light, ran in the direction whence the
arrows had come. Hugo, catching up an armful of reeds yet unlighted to
serve when those Humphrey carried should burn out, hurried after him.
Soon they had found the covert and the spy, and, tossing his torch to
Hugo, the serving-man rushed at him.

"And wouldst thou slay my dear lad?" he cried. "Thou snipe!"

"Stand back!" sputtered the spy. "Lay not thy hands upon me. I serve
the king."

"Ay, and thou shalt find what it is to serve the king," cried Humphrey,
seizing him by the shoulders and dragging him along. "Yon is his
horse," he said, turning to Hugo. "Cut him loose."

The boy obeyed and, with a snort, the animal was off.

"Thou shalt be well punished for this deed," threatened the spy. "The
steed was the gift of the prior of St. Edmund's."

"Talk not of punishment," cried the enraged Humphrey; "thou who wouldst
slay my dear lad. Lead to the right, lad!" he cried. "I do know a miry
pool. It will not suck him down, but it will cause him some labor to
get out of it."

Hugo, bearing the torch, obeyed, and shortly they had reached the pool
which Humphrey had discovered the day before. Grasping his shoulders
yet more firmly, and fairly lifting the little spy from his feet, the
stalwart Humphrey set him down with a thud in the sticky mud. "There
thou mayest stand like a reed or a rush," he said. "I would thou wert
as worthy as either."

A moment the spy stood there in water up to his knees while Hugo and
Humphrey, by the light of the ever-renewed torch of reeds, watched him.
Then he began to try to extricate himself. But when he pulled one foot
loose, it was only to set the other more securely in the mud.

"Ay, lad," observed Humphrey, with satisfaction. "He danceth very well,
but somewhat slowly. Leave we him to his pleasure while we go seek for
his bow and arrows. It were not well that he should shoot at us again."

"Thou villain!" cried the half-drunken Walter Skinner; "when I am a
lord in His Majesty's service thou shalt hear of this night's work."

"Ay, Sir Stick-in-the-Mud," responded Humphrey, indifferently. "When
that day cometh I am content to hear of it." Then he led the way back
to Walter Skinner's hiding-place, while Hugo followed. And there they
found the bow, which was of yew with a silken string. And with it was a
goodly store of ash arrows tipped with steel and winged with goose
feathers.

"We be not thieves, lad," said Humphrey, "else might we add these to
our store." So saying, he broke the arrows and flung them away, cut the
bow-string in pieces, and flung the bow far from him into the water.
"Had these been in a steady hand," he said, "it might now be ill with
us. Perchance the spy doth not now cry out, 'Aha, Fortune! thou art
with me.' And now let us back to our couch of rushes, there to wait
till the moon rise, which will be some three hours. And rest we in
darkness. We may not have more fire to make us targets, perchance, for
the other spy."

In silence the two lay down on the rushes, Hugo full of excitement and
nervously listening for the whistle of another arrow. And, much to the
boy's astonishment, in five minutes the faithful Humphrey was sound
asleep.

He continued to sleep until the beams of the rising moon struck him
full in the face, when he awoke. "Hast slept, lad?" he asked.

"Nay," replied Hugo.

"Thou shouldst have done so. Perchance the time cometh shortly when we
dare not sleep; for I did dream of being taken by the constable, which
signifieth want of wit, and so I know not what to do. But we may not
bide here. On we must go, and make the best of what wit we have." He
rose from the rushes and, followed by Hugo, went to the horses and put
Fleetfoot once more in leash. Then, each having mounted, he led the way
toward the track they had marked out the day before.

"If the spy be not too lazy, he will doubtless be free of the miry pool
in the morning," observed Humphrey. "And he might as well have dreamed
of being taken by the constable, for if he lacketh not the wit to keep
him from a worse case, I know not the measure of a man's mind. And that
should I know, having observed not only my lord, but the valiant
William Lorimer also."




CHAPTER X


It was the afternoon of this same day in which Walter Skinner had
ventured into the wilds of the Isle of Axholme, there to try to catch
Hugo and Humphrey. At the same time Robert Sadler was galloping on his
way from the town of Chester to the castle, eager to meet the troop,
for his journey was now almost accomplished. Sir Thomas De Lany had
promised him his reward,--a certain sum of money; he had also promised
the troop he had borrowed to help him a reward in addition to the sum
he was to pay to their master, even a share of the plunder of the
castle. Robert Sadler knew this, and he had quite decided that the
package he carried would properly fall to him when her ladyship should
be left without a son and without treasure. He therefore had bestowed
it carefully out of sight of the king's spies and their borrowed troop,
whom he was now expecting to meet. He had said nothing about the
presence of Hugo at the castle and his great resemblance to Josceline;
for he was of a mind to deliver up Hugo and keep back Josceline, since,
by so doing, he might have hope of winning another reward from the king
in addition to the one he should receive from Sir Thomas.

"It is a long head that I have," he said to himself with pride. "And
these knave spies shall find it not so easy to come to the bottom of my
mind. They think I am but Irish, and so to be despised. And what be
they but English? They shall find I will know how to have the better of
them."

The sun was within half an hour of setting when he drew rein at the oak
which was the scene of their appointed meeting. If he had been eager,
the others had been no less so, and at once Sir Thomas and one of his
aids advanced to meet him, while, at a short distance, halted the troop
of men-at-arms.

"Have ye the troop? And is all well?" asked Robert Sadler, his wide
mouth stretched in a treacherous smile.

"Yea," responded Sir Thomas.

"Walter Skinner and Richard Wood--do they still keep watch from the
tree?" asked Robert Sadler, smiling still more widely.

"Why, what is that to thee?" demanded Sir Thomas, haughtily. "It is we
who do the king's business. Thou doest but ours."

"Ay," answered Robert Sadler, with feigned humility; "I do but yours."

"Thou sayest well. But think not to pry into the king's business as
thou dost into the affairs at the castle. From thine own showing thou
must have been a great meddler there."

"And how could I have done thy business there if I had not meddled, as
thou callst it?"

"I say not that thou couldst," returned Sir Thomas. "I do but warn thee
not to meddle with us. And now, where is the package?"

"Package? Package?" mumbled Robert Sadler, in apparent bewilderment.

"The package, sirrah, thou wert to deliver from Chester to her
ladyship. Hast forgotten the purpose of thy journey?"

"Oh, ay, the package!" returned Robert Sadler, uneasily. "I am like to
be berated by her ladyship for returning without it."

"We would not have thee so berated," said the aid, speaking for the
first time. "And so I come to thine help." And he reached beneath the
short cloak of Robert Sadler and drew forth the package.

"I pray thee, return it to me," said Robert Sadler, humbly. "Without it
I am undone."

"Do thou but parley as thou saidst with the warder on the bridge, and
thou wilt find there will be no upbraiding from her ladyship to cause
thee alarm," returned the aid.

"And when wilt thou pay me the sum of money?" asked Robert Sadler,
anxiously, not liking either his reception or his subsequent treatment
at the hands of Sir Thomas's aid.

"And what is that to thee?" demanded Sir Thomas, fiercely. "If I
withhold the sum altogether it is no more than what hath been done by
mightier men than I. Do thou parley on the bridge as thou saidst, or
thy head shall answer for it. Ride on now before us. We will await our
opportunity in the edge of the wood."

"Thou didst not speak so to me," said the traitor, "when thou wouldst
have me do this deed. It was then, 'Good Robert Sadler,' and 'I will
reward thee well.' Naught didst thou say of my head answering my
failure to obey thy will." Then he rode on as he had been commanded.

He now saw that he had betrayed her ladyship and her son for naught,
and his dejection thereat was plainly visible. But presently he sat
upright in triumph as he remembered his plan, which he had for the
moment forgotten,--to betray Hugo into their hands and keep back
Josceline for himself to deliver to the king. How he was to accomplish
this difficult thing he did not know, but, in his ignorance, he
imagined it might easily be done.

Sir Thomas and his aid were watching him. "The knave meaneth to play us
false," observed the aid. "See how he sitteth and rideth in triumph."

"His head answereth for it if he doth," returned Sir Thomas, fiercely.

And now they had all arrived at the edge of the wood and the sun was
down. "Set forward across the open, sirrah," commanded Sir Thomas, "and
see that thou fail not in thine office."

The traitor ground his teeth in rage, but outwardly he was calm as,
putting his horse to the trot, he advanced toward the great gate and
wound his horn. "Now may the old warder show more than his usual
caution," said Robert Sadler. "My head is likely to fall whether we get
in or whether we be kept out. And it were pleasant to see these
villains foiled in their desires." The old warder, obeying the
instructions of William Lorimer, beyond keeping the traitor waiting a
quarter of an hour, by which delay the darkness desired by William
Lorimer drew so much the nearer, having answered the summons, let down
the bridge with unaccustomed alacrity of motion. In accordance with the
same instructions, he kept his back to the direction from which the
troop were expected to come, and he seemed quite as ready to parley
after the bridge was down as even Sir Thomas could have desired.

"The warder groweth doltish," observed Sir Thomas, as he prepared to
set forward.

"Mayhap," answered the aid.

"What meanest thou by 'mayhap'?" demanded Sir Thomas.

But by this time the whole troop were in motion and making a rush for
the bridge. They gained it; they were across it, sweeping Robert Sadler
before them, and within the walls before the sluggish old warder had
seemed to see what was happening. They were well across the outer court
before they noticed the strange air of emptiness that seemed to have
fallen on the place. They stormed into the inner court; and here, too,
all was silence. And then they turned on Robert Sadler. "Art thou a
double traitor?" demanded Sir Thomas.

But the vacant astonishment of Robert Sadler's face gave true answer.

"He hath been made a dupe," said the aid. "He hath been sent to Chester
that the castle might be rid of him."

"Nay," returned Sir Thomas. "Thou art ever unduly suspicious." Then
turning to Robert Sadler he said: "Where be the men-at-arms of the
castle? Where do they hide themselves because of us? And where bideth
her ladyship and her son?" Then catching sight of the open door of the
stairway tower, without awaiting Robert Sadler's reply, he led the way
thither and up the stair, dragging the reluctant Robert Sadler with
him, and was followed by the troop.

The ladies' bower was empty. The treasure from the chests was also
gone. Down the troop rushed violently, and into the great hall and out
again. Everywhere silence. Darkness had now fallen, and with torches
the troop of men-at-arms, led by Sir Thomas and his aid, ran about the
inner court, peering into the empty stables and offices. Presently to
Robert Sadler the light of a torch revealed the postern gate ajar.
"They must have fled!" he cried. "See!" and he pointed to the postern
gate.

"Mount and follow!" commanded Sir Thomas.

"Nay, not in the darkness," objected the aid. "Wait for the moon to
rise."

"Ay, wait!" exclaimed Sir Thomas, impatiently. "I believe thou wast
born with that word in thy mouth. Wouldst have them get a better start
of us than they have? Dost know that they did leave the treasure chests
empty, and then dost thou counsel us to wait on the tardy moon? 'Twas
rich treasure they took, or report speaketh false. And every moment
maketh our chance to seize it smaller."

Every man was now astride his horse, and Sir Thomas, his hand on Robert
Sadler's bridle, dashed ahead. The rest followed, crowding through the
narrow gate and out into the darkness on the narrow bridge. Here and
there a torch gleamed, and its reflection shone full in the glassy
water of the ditch. Here was no shadowy depth of a ravine, but a broad
plain,--a watery plain, into which the heavily weighted horses and
riders sank, rising to cry for help and catch at straws. The cries of
the drowning only hurried those behind to the rescue, who, supposing
their fellows in advance to be assailed, rushed headlong on to the same
fate. The torches were extinguished, and none knew which way to turn to
escape. So perished the whole troop, Robert Sadler going down in the
grasp of Sir Thomas De Lany.

[Illustration: None knew which way to turn to escape]

Across the moat, ready mounted to ride, were William Lorimer and the
few men-at-arms left him by Lady De Aldithely on her departure. "So may
it be with all traitors and thieves," said he. "And now fare we
southward to France and our lord. We need not the light of the moon to
show us our path."

The clatter of their horses' hoofs soon died away, and when the moon
rose it shone down on the deserted castle, and on the shining water of
the moat near the postern, but it shone not on horse or rider living or
dead. All night William Lorimer and his little troop rode, not
cautiously and shrinkingly, but boldly; and they went into camp in the
early morning in Sherwood Forest, more miles away from home than Hugo
and Humphrey had covered in all their journeying.

And in the swamp Walter Skinner, who had finally extricated himself
from the mire, floundered about from bog to pool, and from pool to bog,
vowing vengeance on Humphrey, while Hugo and the faithful serving-man,
avoiding Gainsborough, pushed on toward Lincoln.

"I did dream of being taken by the constable," said Humphrey, "which
betokeneth want of wit. I know not what were better to do. What sayest
thou?" And he looked questioningly at Hugo.

The boy smiled. He could not help wondering if this were not the first
time in his life that Humphrey had acknowledged himself at a loss what
to do. A dream had caused him to doubt his own possession of sufficient
wit for all purposes,--something which no amount of argument could have
accomplished. But to-day Hugo felt no contempt for him. He smiled only
at the one weakness which was a foil to Humphrey's many excellent
qualities. And he said pleasantly, "Why, how now, Humphrey? Thou dost
need another dream to restore thy courage."

Humphrey eyed him doubtfully. "Dost think so, lad?" he said. "Mayhap
thou art right. But I go not in the lead till I have it. Wit is not the
same at all times. Perchance something hath damaged mine for the time.
Do thou lead till I recover it; for thou art no more a stranger to me
as when we started."

"Nor thou to me, good Humphrey," replied Hugo, with an affectionate
smile. "And I say, let us on with all courage to Lincoln."

"And why, lad?" asked Humphrey. "Because thou wouldst see the place,
even as I would see Ferrybridge a while back?"

"Partly," laughed Hugo. "And partly because it lieth very well in our
way."

"Hast ever been there?" asked Humphrey, anxiously.

"Nay, but mine uncle, the prior, hath often been. And I know the place
by report. We come to it by the north. Came we from the south, we could
see it some twenty miles off, because the country lieth flat around it,
and the city is set on a hill. Why, surely thou dost know the place. It
was a city under the Danes."

"Yea, I have heard of it from my grandsire," acknowledged Humphrey;
"but I know not if king's men be like to flourish there. For us that is
the principal thing."

Hugo laughed. "Ah, my brave Humphrey," he said, "why shouldst thou fear
king's men? Thou who canst lift up a king's man by the shoulders and
plant him like a rush in the miry pool!"

At this Humphrey smiled slightly himself. "Well, lad," he said
presently, "I will not gainsay thee. Go we to Lincoln, and may good
come of it. But we stay not long?"

"Why, that," answered Hugo, "is what no man can tell. We must be
cautious."

"Ay, lad," assented Humphrey, approvingly.

"Thou knowest of Bishop Hugh of Avalon?" inquired Hugo, chatting of
whatever came to his mind in the hope to bring back Humphrey's
confidence in himself.

"Nay, lad," returned the serving-man. "I know no more of bishops than
thou of hedgehogs and other creatures of the wood."

"This was a bishop, I have heard mine uncle say, that loved the birds.
He hath now been nine years dead, and another man is, in his stead,
bishop of Lincoln. But in his time he had many feathered pets, and one
a swan, so hath mine uncle said. And also, he never feared to face the
king."

"Sayest thou so, lad?" responded Humphrey, with some degree of
interest. "Mayhap his spirit still may linger in the place, and so
king's men not flourish there. We will on to see."

So in due time they came to the town, and entered through its old Roman
gate, and, looking down the long hill on the top of which they stood,
saw the city of Lincoln, which, when William the Conqueror came, had
eleven hundred and fifty houses.

"It is a great place," remarked Humphrey, "and maketh a goodly show."




CHAPTER XI


In vain Richard Wood and his men had scoured the forest near Doncaster.
They found no trace of those they sought. "Did I believe, like some, in
witchcraft," declared Richard Wood, "so should I say there was
witchcraft in their escape. Why, what should a Saxon serving-man and a
boy of fourteen know, that they should foil good men on a chase?"

"Ay," responded one of his men-at-arms, "but thou seest they have done
it. In this forest they are not. Mayhap they lie close in the town of
Doncaster."

Richard Wood looked at him reflectively. "I had not thought on that,"
he said. "Mayhap thou art right. Go we into the town and see. We need
rest, and bite, and sup, and the beasts also need the same."

So the weary four entered the town of Doncaster and drew rein before
the Green Dragon Inn. And one of the grooms who took the horses was the
same vacant-faced, foolish fellow who had received the coin from Walter
Skinner. "Here be more king's men," he said to himself, "and mayhap
another coin for me. I will send them also to the Isle of Axholme,
where I judge sorrow hath met the other king's man, since the horseshoe
had of the Evil One did come galloping back without a rider." And he
smiled ingratiatingly at Richard Wood, who took no notice of him.
Whereat, somewhat crestfallen, he was fain to lead the horse away, the
others having been already taken care of by other grooms who had no
thought of the Isle of Axholme, and no hopeful expectation of coins.

The morning that saw Hugo and Humphrey far on their way to Lincoln saw
Richard Wood rise refreshed at the Green Dragon with his determination
to continue the chase well renewed. And that same morning it had
occurred to the vacant-faced groom that he must speak now or never if
he expected any reward for his speech. So the instant Richard Wood
appeared in the inn yard he sidled up to him and began, at the same
time knocking his grooming tools, which he still held in his hands,
nervously together, an accompaniment to his speech, which seemed to
surprise the spy. "I did come from Gainsborough two nights agone," he
said.

"That is naught to me, varlet," interrupted Richard Wood. "Get thee
back to thy grooming."

"Yea, verily," insisted the groom; "but it is somewhat to thee," and he
knocked the tools together in his hands at a great rate. "I did come by
the Isle of Axholme. And the other king's man did accuse me of
drunkenness and revellings when I did begin to have speech with him of
the matter, but he did change his mind, and give me a coin. Do thou but
the same and thou also mayest hear what I did see."

Richard Wood regarded him attentively. "Speak truth," he said, "and say
that I would hear, and thou shalt have two coins."

The vacant-faced groom grinned a broad and foolish grin. "Said I not,"
he cried joyfully, "that thou wert a better man than the other? For he
was but small and fierce and hath met sorrow, or his horse had not come
back riderless."

Richard Wood smiled contemptuously at this reference to Walter Skinner.
Then he said: "Thou didst come by the Isle of Axholme. What sawest thou
there?"

"Why, thou canst talk like an advocate," said the foolish groom, who
had never seen an advocate in his life. "Ay," he continued, "he that
giveth two coins is ever a better master than he that giveth one. And I
did see a young lord and his serving-man lie on a bed of rushes; and
ever and anon the serving-man did rise to feed the blazing fire of
reeds; and it was the fire I first did see, and, going to the fire, I
did see them."

"The Isle of Axholme lieth eighteen miles long and five in breadth,"
said Richard Wood. "Where didst thou see them?" and he held up three
coins.

"Toward the south end on a little solid place which hath on it three
scrubby trees. There did they lie." And the groom left off speaking to
eye the money in ecstasy, for not often did such wealth come his way.

Richard Wood tossed him the coins. "Make haste with the horses," he
said. "Hast thou no other marks to know the place?"

"Why, nay," answered the groom, regretfully. "But thou wilt surely know
it when thou comest to it," and he smiled broadly.

Ten minutes later the party was off, and, crossing the Don at the town,
found themselves in the Isle of Axholme. And then Richard Wood paused
to give his men instructions. "Here do we need caution," he said. "This
fellow is not easily to be caught, for I make naught of the young lord.
He is doubtless some trusty retainer sent with the lad by her ladyship
because he hath wit to hide and double on his track and so baffle
pursuit. But he hath not yet reached port to set sail for France, and
mayhap he will not. It remaineth now for us to hide and creep among the
rushes and reeds and scrubby trees, and so come up with him unseen."

The men-at-arms listened respectfully, and the party separating
themselves so that each man rode alone at a little distance from his
fellows, they took the same general direction, and so advanced slowly
and carefully, taking advantage of every bit of cover in their way, and
often pausing to listen. They had proceeded in this manner some two
hours when Richard Wood saw the three scrub trees, and, waving the
signal to his men, the advance was made with renewed caution. At last
all were near enough to see the couch of rushes and the ashes of the
fire, but they saw nothing of serving-man or boy, who by this time had
reached Lincoln. Silently, at a signal from Richard Wood, the party
drew together. "Ye see," said he, pointing to the place, "that they be
not here. Either they be gone roaming about for the day in search of
food, or they be gone altogether. We may not know of a surety till
evening when, if they be not altogether gone, they will return. If they
be gone, we have lost a day and given them an added start of us.
Wherefore I counsel that we pursue the search warily through the Isle
in the hope that we come up with them. What say ye?"

"We say well," responded the men.

The party now separated again, and, going even more slowly than before
through the silent Isle, sought to be as noiseless as possible. But
every now and then some horse splashed suddenly and heavily into a
pool, or scrambling out of the water crunched and broke the reeds and
scared the water-fowl, which rose shrieking and flew noisily away. At
such mishaps Richard Wood restrained his impatience as well as he was
able, knowing that they were unavoidable and that his men were
faithful. Thus another hour went by and there was no trace of the
fugitives. They were now going due northwest, and a half-hour later one
of the men-at-arms gave the signal. Silently Richard Wood approached
him. "I did see one of them," said the man in a low tone. "He lieth
beneath a tree beyond this fringe of reeds on the next solid place."

And now Richard Wood was all excitement. "Which was it?" he asked; "the
young lord or the serving-man?"

"Why, thou knowest I did never see either," replied the man, "and I
could not draw very near. But the person I did see did seem too small
to be the stout Saxon serving-man of whom thou hast spoken."

Without a word, but with his face expressing great triumph, Richard
Wood waved to the others to approach, which they did slowly and with
care. Having come up with him, he communicated to them the news he had
received, and, bidding them scatter in such a manner as to surround the
little place on which the fortunate man-at-arms had discovered the man
or boy lying, he waited with such patience as he could muster until the
time had elapsed necessary for the carrying out of his commands, and
then advanced to capture the young lord with his own hands. And what
was his disgust, when he came up with the sleeper under the tree, to
find Walter Skinner.

"And is it thou, Walter Skinner?" he demanded when he had roused him.
"And what doest thou here?"

[Illustration: Richard Wood finds Walter Skinner]

"Ay, Richard Wood, it is I. And what I do here is no concern of thine.
Here have I been a day and a night and this second day. Little have I
had to eat, and my drinking-horn is but now empty. And I have been
planted in a miry pool. And I have lost my horse and my way also; and
have floundered into more bogs and out of them than can be found in all
Robert Sadler's Ireland. Were I king, I would have no Isle of Axholme
in all my dominions. Could I do no better, I would pull down the hill
of Lincoln and cart it hither to fill these vile water-holes. Do but
see my doublet and hose. Were I called suddenly to the palace would not
the king and the court despise me as a drunken ruffler from some
revel-rout that had fallen from his horse? When all the blame is to be
laid on this Isle of Axholme, which ought, by right, to belong to
France, since it is full of frogs."

"Thou art crazed, as thou always art when thou drinkest," said Richard
Wood, coldly.

"Dost thou say I have been drinking?" demanded Walter Skinner, starting
up.

"Yea, I say it. Thou sayest it also. For thou didst say thy
drinking-horn was but now empty."

"Yea, verily," answered Walter Skinner. "If thou be a true man do but
fill it for me again. Or lead me from this vile place, where one
heareth naught but the squawk of birds and the croak of frogs. I would
fain see the Green Dragon and the idiot groom that did send me here. I
warrant thee I will crack his pate for him."

"Where is thy horse?" asked Richard Wood.

"Ay, where is he? Who but that vile serving-man did bid the young lord
cut him loose?"

"Thou dreamest," said Richard Wood, incredulously. "Would a serving-man
forget his station and bid his master do a task?"

"Ay, would he, if he were this serving-man. I tell thee he would bid
the king himself do a task if he chose, and, moreover, the king would
obey. 'Twas he did plant me in the miry pool and say I did dance well
but somewhat slowly when I did try to unplant myself, and for every
foot I took up sunk the other deeper in the mire. And he did dub me
'Sir Stick-in-the-Mud,' moreover, for which I do owe him a grudge and
will requite him. I will meet him one day where there be no miry pools,
and then let him beware." This last he uttered with a look which was
intended to be fierce, but which was only silly.

"Didst thou come after them alone with no man to help thee?" asked
Richard Wood, still more incredulously.

"Oh, I did have help enough," was the answer, with a crafty look. "I
did have to my help a yew bow with a silken string that the king
himself need not despise, and a great store of arrows, moreover. And I
did hide and bide my time until the darkness of night came and the fire
blazed high. And then I did let my arrows fly. And what did the
serving-man? He did catch up the very fire and rush upon me. And later
he did break my arrows and cut my bow-string, and fling my bow into the
water, and then departed, I know not where."

"Thou art but a sorry fool," declared Richard Wood, after some thought.
"And yet I cannot find it in my heart to leave thee here. Mount up
behind me, and at Gainsborough I will set thee down. There canst thou
shift for thyself, and chase or forbear to chase as thou choosest."

"Ay, thou sayest truly," said the half-drunken Walter Skinner. "And
should I now forbear to chase, a dukedom would no more than reward me
for the perils I have seen. First in the lofty tree watching the
castle; and thou knowest that now, when, from the interdict, no bells
may ring to disperse the tempests, I might have died from the lightning
stroke, not once but many times. For there might have been a tempest
and lightning every day, and no thanks to the king that there was not.
Then, too, I did encounter perils from the boughs which might have
broken and did not. And wherefore did they not? Because they were too
tough and sound. And this, too, moreover, was no thanks to the king.
And two horses have I lost,--one mine own and one the gift of the prior
of St. Edmund's. And did the prior wish to give me the beast? Nay, he
did not, and would have refused it if he had dared. He made as if he
gave it because of the king, but he did not. He feared before me, as
well he might. For I had met a hedgehog, and when a man is in such a
case he is in no mind to have a horse refused him by a fat prior. And
all this also was no thanks to the king. And then I did meet that
varlet of a groom at the Green Dragon, and he did send me here. And
here have I met such misfortunes as would last a man his lifetime."

To all this Richard Wood had lent but half an ear, being occupied in
turning over in his mind the fact that Hugo and Humphrey had been in
the Isle and had gone, and trying to decide what was best to do. He now
looked at him. "Mount up behind me and cease thy prating," he said.
Then turning to the men-at-arms he continued: "We go hence to
Gainsborough. From thence down to Sherwood Forest. It seemeth this
serving man loveth woods and wilds. Therefore it were waste of time to
seek for him in towns and beaten ways."

All the while he was speaking Walter Skinner, with many groans, was
trying to mount behind his old companion; but, on account of the horse
shying his objections to such a proceeding, and the drunken clumsiness
of Walter Skinner himself, nothing had been accomplished. Richard Wood
therefore called on one of the men-at-arms to dismount and hoist him
up; which he did much as if the fierce little spy had been a bag of
meal, and much to Walter Skinner's discomfort, who suddenly found
himself heavily seated with one leg doubled up under him and with a
bumped face where he had struck against Richard Wood's shoulder. He
soon righted himself, however, and, clinging to his old friend, rode
away to Gainsborough.




CHAPTER XII


As Hugo and Humphrey with Fleetfoot in leash looked about them from the
backs of their horses, it suddenly occurred to the prudent serving-man
that to go to an inn was not the safest thing in the world for them to
do. "Thou art like our young lord Josceline, and Josceline is like his
father," said Humphrey. "And though they be few who would aid the king
against my lord now fled away to France, still there be a few
unprincipled knaves in every place. And though Lincoln had no longer
ago than nine years the good Hugh thou didst speak of for its bishop,
still, if some knave abiding here should look upon thee and say,
'Behold the son of De Aldithely! I will take him!' it might go ill with
thee. Wherefore I know not what were best to do. We be now come here,
and have no place to lay our heads. The woods and the fens be safer."

Then Hugo smiled. "Thou speakest not of thyself, Humphrey," he said.
"How if some knave abiding here should think to take not only the son
of De Aldithely, but his brave serving-man also? Thou art more careful
of me than of thyself, and I shall call it to mind one day."

"Ay, lad," said Humphrey, smiling in his turn. "Thou art as brave as
any De Aldithely thyself. For who but the brave taketh time to think of
another, and he only a serving-man, when himself is in danger? But all
this talk procureth us no safe place to lie, and methinks already there
be some in the streets that gape upon us."

"No more than idlers ever do," responded Hugo, with assurance. "We be
two strangers, and Fleetfoot, moreover, is a fine hound and worth the
looking at."

"Ay," said Humphrey, regretfully. "The hound is yet likely to get us
into trouble. But whither do we go? I would fain be out of the sight of
these gazers."

"Not to an inn, good Humphrey. I have here a ring from mine uncle, the
prior, which, when I show it at certain places, will procure us
lodging, and Lincoln is one of them. We go not down the hill toward the
river. Our place is here near the cathedral in the house of the canon
Richard Durdent."

Humphrey smiled. "It is good that thou hast for thine uncle a prior,"
he said.

"Ay," responded Hugo. "He is a kind uncle. Where I show his ring I get
not only lodging, but certain moneys to help me on my way. He thought
it not best that I should travel far with much gold about me, wherefore
he hath made these arrangements. He knoweth the canon Durdent of old."

"I would see this ring," said Humphrey, curiously.

"And so thou shalt," promised Hugo, "when we be safely lodged."

"How far reacheth the ring?" inquired Humphrey.

"Even to France," was the reply.

"Then I would that thou wouldst trust it in my keeping," said Humphrey,
earnestly.

The boy looked at him; once more he beheld him rushing upon the spy in
the Isle of Axholme; once more heard his indignant cry, "And wouldst
thou slay my dear lad?" His eyes shone, but all he said was, "I will
trust thee with the custody of the ring, Humphrey, save at such times
as I must have it to show."

The serving-man smiled well pleased, though he said nothing; for there
was no time for words, since they had already come to the door of the
house they sought.

"The ring is a powerful one," said Humphrey, when they had been well
received and lodged. "I would fain see it."

Hugo smiled and handed it to him. The serving-man took it in his large
hand and regarded it narrowly. "After all it is but a carved fish on a
red stone," he said.

"Thou dost not ask what it betokeneth?"

Humphrey glanced up quickly. "Thou canst make merry over my dreams," he
said, "and what they betoken. And here thou comest with a circlet of
gold crowned with a red stone having the likeness of a fish on it. And
thou sayest it betokeneth somewhat. Thou mayest no more deride my
dreams."

"Nay, nay, my good Humphrey," laughed the boy. "Thou shalt have thy
dreams if thou wilt. But my uncle's priory is dedicated to St. Wilfrid,
who taught the Sussex people to catch all fish, when before they knew
only how to catch eels. Therefore my uncle putteth a fish on the ring,
that whosoever of his friends that seeth it may know it is the ring of
Roger Aungerville, prior of St. Wilfrid's."

"So doth the fish of thine uncle give us lodging and safety," observed
Humphrey, thoughtfully. "It is a good ring. I will hold it with all
care." And he drew forth the small pouch of gold pieces which Lady De
Aldithely had given him, and put the ring carefully inside it. "It
hangeth about my neck, thou seest," he said, as he replaced the pouch,
"and no man may take it unless he first taketh my head."

"Or disableth thee with an arrow or a sword thrust," said Hugo.

"Ay," answered Humphrey, gravely. "I had not spoken of arrows and sword
thrusts. I have the hope that we may meet with neither. And though the
way is long when one must creep and hide and crawl, and go to the south
one day, to the southwest another, and the southeast another, yet the
end cometh at last, and I have hope it be a good end. And now I ask
thee how long we bide and whence go we from here? Doth the ring
decide?"

"Nay," replied Hugo. "Thou shalt have thy share of the making of plans.
But I would fain learn what we may of the region round about, and of
the safety or danger it holdeth for us ere we sally forth."

"Why, now," said Humphrey, approvingly, "thou art learning craft. For
who but a fool would be careless of danger? Thou art like my lord, who
knoweth when to strike and when to flee. And for that it is that his
men follow him madly in battle. For, if there be risk, they do know it
to be necessary risk, with a certain gain to be obtained at the end of
it, if all go well. But if there be no gain in view, my lord leadeth
them not into unnecessary danger, and so it is that he is a power and
the king hateth him. Thou doest well to look ahead of thee, for there
is no gain to be had from lying in the king's dungeon, but mayhap thou
shalt lose thy head also, as well as thy liberty. But what doest thou
now?"

"Why, I fain would sleep, having had no rest in the night. But the
canon knoweth naught of that, nor may I tell him. He must be busy till
even, and so he sendeth me to view the cathedral; and thou mayest go
with me."

To this Humphrey made no reply, but followed his young master in
silence.

The verger who took them in charge was an ancient man called Paulinus
of Mansfield, having been born in that place. And he soon saw that what
he had to show of the unfinished cathedral was lost on the heavy-lidded
boy who was half asleep, and upon the Saxon serving-man, who felt no
interest in such matters. Wherefore when he came from the chapter-house
into the cloisters he, being old and feeble, was fain to sit down on a
stone bench and rest; and he motioned Hugo to a seat beside him.

Humphrey had the idea that, at all times and in all places, wisdom was
with the aged. Besides, the old verger reminded him, in certain
particulars, of his own grandsire, who was a great talker and who knew
more of all matters concerning the countryside than half a dozen other
men.

And he now cast such an expressive glance upon Hugo and gave such a
meaning nod toward Paulinus, that the boy must perforce have
understood, even if he had not added in a tone too low to catch the
somewhat deaf ears of the old man, "Ask him what thou wouldest know."

At once Hugo threw off his drowsiness and, in the most pleasing manner
he could summon, requested to be informed of the surrounding district.

"It is easy to see thou art a stranger," said the gratified old man.
"And thou wouldest know the region round about Lincoln?" he repeated.
"Thou hast come to him who can tell thee of it, for I was born and
brought up in these parts. It is truly a noble region on all sides save
the east, where lieth the fen country. For here cometh the king
frequently to take his pleasure. And that is oft pleasure to him which
would be none to gentler minds."

At this Hugo turned startled eyes on Humphrey, who stood at a little
distance, but who did not appear to notice his look.

"Hast ever seen the king?" inquired Paulinus.

"Nay," replied Hugo.

"Nor need thou wish so to do," returned the aged Paulinus. "I speak to
thee in confidence, for surely thou art a worthy youth or thou wouldest
not be guest to the Canon Durdent. The king is the youngest and the
worst son of the wicked Queen Eleanor of Aquitaine, who is now, by the
mercy of God, dead. I could tell thee tales of the king's cruelty that
would affright thee, but I will not. He loveth to hunt in the Forest of
Sherwood, and therefore hath he castles and lodges hereabout, which he
doth frequent as it pleaseth him. And he hath ever had a liking for that
castle at Newark which our bishop of Lincoln, Alexander the Magnificent,
did build. I could tell thee tales of the dungeons there--knowest thou
what they be like?" And he paused and looked at Hugo, who was somewhat
pale, for the word "dungeon" had come to have a fearsome meaning to him.

"Nay," answered the boy, "I know not."

"Thou goest in the castle through a passage to the northwest corner,
where is a door which is guarded. Here is the solid rock; and inside
that door be two dungeons scooped out of it. No stair descendeth to
them. Those who occupy them at the king's will are lowered into them by
a rope, and there is no chance by which they may escape. There they
abide in darkness, and no skill, or cunning, or bravery can avail them
so that they may escape." The old man paused.

Presently Hugo asked, "And where lieth this castle from here?"

"It lieth to the southwest, less than a score of miles away."

Hugo said nothing, and, after a short silence, Paulinus began again:
"If thou shouldest journey hence a little south of west, then wouldest
thou come to Clipstone Palace, which lieth not far from Mansfield,
where I was born. Here the king doth sometimes frequent, and from
thence he goeth to hunt in the forest. But better men than he have
frequented it when his father, King Henry, and his brother, King
Richard, did sojourn there. Thinkest thou to journey that way?"

"Nay," replied Hugo. "Methinks our way lieth not toward Clipstone."

"Mayhap it were better to journey by Newark, where be the dungeons I
have told thee of; and so, when thou hast viewed that castle, journey
on southward to Nottingham, where the king hath another castle which
oft holdeth many prisoners. He keepeth there certain children, the
hostages he demandeth of their fathers. And no man knoweth when they
will die, for that is a matter of the king's pleasure."

The old verger now seemed to fall into a reverie, in which he remained
so long that Hugo rose from the stone bench, thus rousing him. Slowly
he raised himself from his seat, having apparently forgotten all that
he had just been saying, and conducted them to the entrance, where he
bade them adieu.

"I fear to bide here longer," said Humphrey, as they returned to the
canon's house. "Let us away to the fens on the east of this place, and,
through their wilds, make our way southward."

Hugo reflected. Then he answered, "Thou art right, Humphrey. It were
not best to journey so near the king's castles and dungeons. We will
away to-morrow morn to the fens."

This, however, they were unable to do. The canon desired not to part
with his friend's nephew so soon. Seeing which, Humphrey consoled
himself for the delay by buying ample stores of provisions, with which
he so loaded the horses that the canon wondered. "There be towns all
the way from hence to London, and inns in all the towns," he said.
"Thou mayest journey without that packhorse load."

But Humphrey was obstinate. "The goods be bought," he said stubbornly.

The canon who knew not that they intended to travel through the fens
and avoid the towns, looked pityingly at Hugo. "I see thou hast a
master in thy man," he observed. "I wonder thine Uncle Roger did not
choose for thee a more obedient servant."

It was on the tip of the boy's tongue to tell him that his uncle's
prudence had furnished him with no servant at all. But, at a warning
glance from Humphrey, he kept silence. And then, with the blessing of
the canon, they set out down the hill through the narrow street toward
the river, which they crossed and found themselves outside the town.




CHAPTER XIII


Having deposited Walter Skinner before the door of the Lion in
Gainsborough, Richard Wood and his men set off for Sherwood Forest in
the strong hope of coming up with the runaways they sought. And, in
nowise cast down by his recent discouraging experiences, Walter Skinner
held his head high and looked around him fiercely, as of yore. His
doublet and hose besplashed with mud and torn by briers seemed not to
give him any concern; neither did the condition of his shoes, which
were foul with the slimy mud of the swamp.

"I will have breakfast, sirrah, and that immediately," he said to the
waiter when he had entered the inn.

The waiter eyed him doubtfully.

"Make haste. I command thee to it. Dally not with me. I serve the
king," said the fierce little man, loftily.

"Thy service hath taken thee in strange paths," observed the innkeeper,
who had drawn near.

"Not so strange as thine will take thee in if thou delay me," retorted
Walter Skinner, haughtily.

There was in the bar a strange man of a crafty and evil face, and he
now drew near the imperious little spy, and humbly besought the honor
of taking his breakfast in Walter Skinner's company.

"And so thou shalt," said the spy, condescendingly. "And mayhap, since
I have lost my horse, thou canst direct me where I can find another. I
have no time to go harrying a prior for one."

The landlord now led the way obsequiously, and soon the strange pair
were seated in one of the several private rooms of the inn, with the
promise that breakfast should be served to them at once.

Then said the stranger: "As to the matter of a horse, I have at this
moment one by me which I would fain dispose of. He is not gentle enough
to my liking."

"I care not for gentleness in a horse," declared Walter Skinner. "I
warrant thee I can ride the beast whether he be gentle or not."

"Thou lookest a bold rider," observed the stranger, craftily.

"He that doeth the king's business hath need to be a bold rider,"
returned Walter Skinner, with a look which was intended to convey the
information that he could unfold mysteries were he so disposed.

"Thou art high in the king's counsels, then?" asked the stranger, with
a covert smile.

"Not so high but I shall be higher when I have finished the business in
hand," returned Walter Skinner, patronizingly. The breakfast being now
brought he said no more, but ate like a starving man, and with a very
unfavorable memory of his late meals of wild berries in the swamp. The
crafty-eyed stranger ate more sparingly, and seemed to be mentally
measuring the fierce little man opposite him. At last he asked, "And
whence goest thou from here?"

"What is that to thee?" demanded Walter Skinner. "Wouldst thou pry into
the king's business? Reach me the bottle."

The stranger obeyed, and after taking a long drink Walter Skinner said:
"I will now tell thee what I would not tell to every man. First, from
here I go to the Green Dragon at Doncaster, there to crack the pate of
the groom that did send me into the Isle of Axholme, where I did have
all sorts of contumely heaped upon me. And after that I shall pursue my
course or not, as it pleaseth me. Richard Wood did give me permission
so to do. Knowest thou Richard Wood?"

"Nay," answered the stranger.

"He is well enough in his place, and that is in the high tree
overlooking the castle. But when he will ride abroad with men-at-arms
behind him to obey his word, then he thinketh that he may tell me also,
his old friend, what I may and may not do. He hath even bid me cease
prating. What thinkest thou of such a man?"

"Why, he must be a bold man that would bid thee cease prating," replied
the stranger.

Walter Skinner took another drink and then looked long and earnestly at
him. "Thou art a man of reason," he said; "yea, and of wisdom,
moreover. And come, now, show me thy ungentle horse. I promise thee I
will back him or--or--" He did not finish his sentence, and the two
went out to the inn yard, where stood a horse which did not seem to be
particularly vicious. And the animal was soon in the possession of the
spy for a very fair sum in exchange.

"I will but fix his bridle for thee," said the man, "while thou payest
the reckoning, and then mayest thou ride with speed and safety. I may
not stay to see thee go, for I must instantly depart."

"Ay, thou hast a hard master, no doubt," observed Walter Skinner, with
a shake of the head.

"Necessity is my master," said the stranger.

"Ay, ay, no doubt," returned Walter Skinner, going toward the bar.
"Necessity is not mine, however."

A half-hour later, when the spy was ready to set out, the stranger had
disappeared. But he did not miss him, for the landlord himself had come
out into the yard to see him off, while all the grooms stood about, and
two or three maids looked on.

"Good people, give back," said Walter Skinner, grandly. "Block not the
way of the king's man. Ye mean well and kindly, no doubt, but I would
have ye withdraw yourselves a little space."

By the help of a groom he was mounted, and a moment later he was out of
the inn yard. But now a strange thing happened. He was no sooner out of
the town than the horse refused to be controlled. In vain the little
spy tried to head him toward Doncaster. The stranger had removed the
bit, putting in its place a wisp of straw, which the horse quickly
chewed to pieces, and then, with a shake of the head, he galloped off
to the south.

[Illustration: Walter Skinner's horse refused to be controlled]

"Thou beast!" cried the spy. "What meanest thou? Thou art held in by
bit and bridle. Dost not know it?"

It seemed that the horse did not, for he went on at a faster pace.

"Thou art worse than the prior's horse!" cried Walter Skinner, dropping
the reins and clinging round the animal's neck. "I would I had the
stranger that did sell thee to me! I would crack his pate also, even as
I will the pate of the groom at the Green Dragon."

Giving no heed to the remonstrances of his rider or the unevenness of
the road, the horse kept on until he entered the gates of Lincoln, and
stopped before the Swan with a loud and joyous neigh.

At the sound two grooms ran out. "Here he be!" cried one. "Here be
Black Tom that was stole but two nights agone," cried the other; while
in great amazement Walter Skinner sat up and gazed from one to the
other.

"What meanest thou, sirrah?" he demanded of the second groom. "Sayest
thou a horse is stolen when I did pay good money for him but this
morning? And, moreover, who would steal such a beast that will mind not
the bridle and only runs his course the faster for the spur?"

"Ay, thou knewest not that he was stolen, no doubt," retorted the
second groom, sarcastically. "But here cometh master, who will soon
pull thee down from thy high perch, thou little minute of a dirty man.
Thou hast slept in the swamp over night, I do be bound, and now comest
to brave it out, seeing thou canst not make way with the horse."

"I would have thee know, villain, that I serve the king, and did buy
the horse in Gainsborough this morn to replace the one which the young
lord did cut loose. And whether I did sleep in the swamp or in a duke's
chamber is naught to thee or to thy master. I have been so shaken up
this morn over thy rough roads and by thy vile beast of a horse that
thou and thy master shall pay for it. What! is the servant of the king
to be sent into the Isle of Axholme by an idiot groom at the Green
Dragon? And, being there, is he to be planted in the mire like a rush
by a Saxon serving-man? And is his horse to be cut loose by the young
lord at the word of that same Saxon serving-man? And is he to be
carried behind Richard Wood to Gainsborough? And is he there to buy a
black horse from a vile stranger? And is he to be run away with to this
place when he would fain go elsewhere about his master's business,
which is to catch this young lord and the Saxon serving-man? And then
is he to be looked at as if he were a thief? Thou shalt repent, and so
I tell thee; yea, in sackcloth and ashes. And if thou canst find no
sackcloth, then thou shalt have a double portion of ashes, ye knaves,
and so I promise you."

At these words the innkeeper and the grooms looked at each other. And
then the innkeeper said civilly that he and the grooms had meant no
offence, but that the horse had certainly been stolen from the Swan two
nights before. The second groom, equally desirous with his master to
conciliate, pressed forward to show him how the bit had been removed by
the rascal who sold the horse so that he would come straight home
again.

"Which I did but now discover," said the second groom.

And the first groom, not to be outdone, said: "If thou really seekest
the young lord and the Saxon serving-man we can put thee on their
track, for surely they did leave here but some three hours agone."

Walter Skinner stared stupidly for a moment, while the innkeeper
reproved the groom for being beforehand with him in giving the
intelligence. Then the little spy sat up straighter and put on a
haughtier air than ever. "Aha, Fortune!" he cried, "thou art bound to
make a duke of me whether I will or not." Then turning to the
innkeeper he said: "I will enter thine inn, and do thou see that dinner
be promptly served. I will then procure a change of raiment. I will then
sleep over night. I will then breakfast. I will then take thy Black
Tom, which I did buy, and withhold him from me if thou darest. And I
will then set out after the young lord and the serving-man. I have now
given thee my confidence, which if thou betray thou shalt answer for
it. Why, they cannot escape me. Hath Richard Wood come up with them
three several times, as I now have? Nay. If he had he would have
captured them, which showeth that I be the abler man of the two; for,
while I have not captured them, he hath not even caught sight of them.
And now make haste with the dinner."

All this time the spy had kept his seat on the horse. He now came down,
and the innkeeper, without a word, led the way to a private room, while
the grooms exchanged glances. "Yon be a madman," said the first, whose
name was Elfric.

"Yea, or a drunken man, which is the same thing," responded the second.

"He will catch not the young lord," declared Elfric.

"I did not dream they fled as they rode down the street to the river,"
observed the second. "They did go slowly enough, and the young lord
looked about him curiously and unafraid."

"By that thou mayest know he was a lord, and this drunken fool speaketh
true," returned Elfric. "The better the blood, the less of fear; so
hath my grandsire said."

Though Walter Skinner had commanded the innkeeper and the grooms to
keep what he called his confidence on pain of his vengeance, what he
had said flew abroad. And wherever the little spy appeared that
afternoon he seemed to arouse much curiosity. "The king must be put to
it for help when he employeth such a one," commented a cooper.

"Tut, man!" was the reply. "What careth the king who doeth his pleasure
so it be done? It looketh not like to be done, though, with this man
for the doer of it. Why, who but a fool seeing those he sought had
three good hours the start of him would give them four and twenty
more?"

The cooper shrugged his shoulders. "I tell thee, Peter of the forge,"
he said, "that I care not if the king's will be never done, for it is a
bad will. Therefore the more fools like yon he setteth to do it the
better."

Meanwhile the innkeeper was thinking ruefully of the guest he had on
his hands. "I may not anger him," he said to Elfric, the groom.

"Nor needest thou," replied Elfric.

"Talk not to me," said the innkeeper, impatiently. "Wouldst have me
lose Black Tom? For whether he did pay the thief for him or not, he
most certainly did not pay me. And thou knowest the value of Black
Tom."

"Yea," answered Elfric, "I know it. But why shouldst thou lose Black
Tom?"

"Why? Art thou gone daft? Didst thou hear him bid me refuse him the
beast if I dared? This it is to have a bad king who will set such
knaves upon his business."

"If there be but one black horse in Lincoln," replied Elfric, "thou
doest well to fret. But if there be Black Dick that is broken-winded
and hath the spring-halt so that he be not worth more than one day's
reckoning at the Swan at the most; and if he looketh tolerably fair;
and if thou mayst buy him for a small sum; and if this drunken fool
knoweth not one horse from another; why needst thou worry?"

The face of the innkeeper at once cleared. "The fraud is justifiable,"
he said. "For why should he take my Black Tom and give me naught? I do
but protect myself when I give him instead Black Dick."

"Ay, and thou doest no unfriendly turn to the young lord neither. I
have been to inquire, and there be those that say he is son to De
Aldithely. And doubtless he fleeth away to his brave father in France.
I did think he had a familiar look this morn. And when I heard, I did
repent that the Swan had put this knave upon his track. But with Black
Dick he cometh not up with him in a hurry."

That night Walter Skinner found the Swan a most pleasant abiding-place,
where all were attentive to serve him. "Thou hast me for thy friend,"
he told the innkeeper as he supped with him. "Thou hast me, I say, and
not Richard Wood. And I will speak a good word for thee to the king.
Not now, indeed, for it were not seemly that I should introduce thy
matters until I had brought mine own to a happy issue. But what sayest
thou? To pursue a young lord for many miles and capture
him,--single-handed,--were that not worth a dukedom? I have here this
good yew bow with a silken string and a goodly store of arrows. Oh, I
will capture him, if ever I come up with him. The serving-man cutteth
not this silken string nor breaketh these arrows, I warrant thee."

And, clad in his new raiment, Walter Skinner sat back in his chair and
gazed pompously around.

The innkeeper listened, and, supper being over, he sought Elfric, to
whom he related what had passed. "I would not that a hair of the young
son of De Aldithely should be harmed," he said. "And what I dare not
do, that thou must perform."

"And what is that?" asked Elfric.

"Thou must fray his bow-string so it will not be true, and thou must
injure his arrows likewise."

"Right willingly will I do so," promised Elfric. "If he hit any mark he
aim at when I am done with the bow and arrows, then am I as great a
knave as he. And the damage shall be so small that he may not see it
neither."




CHAPTER XIV


Although there were those who had looked upon Hugo and Humphrey
curiously in the streets of Lincoln, there were none sufficiently
interested to observe what direction they took after they had left the
town. And none saw them leave the road and betake themselves to the
fens as safer for their journey. So east of the heights, which, to the
east of Lincoln, extend in a southeasterly direction, they rode,
picking their way as they might, and hopeful that now all enemies were
thrown off their track.

"It is a weariness to be pursued so many days," said Hugo. "I would
fain breathe easily once more."

"Ay, lad," returned Humphrey. "But that is what cannot be done in this
world. When thou art forty years old, as I am, thou wilt see that every
man hath his enemies and every bird and beast also, as we may perchance
see in this wild fen country. It is good, therefore, to breathe as
easily as one can and think no more about it. Knowest thou what these
fens be like?"

"Nay; but mine uncle hath told me that they be vast, and that here and
there half-wild people live in huts along the reedy shores; and that
south lieth the goodly town of Peterborough, as well as the abbey of
Crowland."

"Doth the ring avail at Peterborough?"

"Yea, if I have need; but there will be none." And he glanced with a
smile at the heavily loaded horses they rode, and bethought himself of
his plentiful supply of gold pieces. "What hast thou in all these bags
and packs, Humphrey?" he asked.

"Why, the answer to that question is not so simple," was the reply. "I
did but buy somewhat of all I saw, and did bestow it the best I could,
so as to leave room for our legs on the sides of the horses. Should the
spy pursue us, he would soon come up with us, for flee we could not, so
loaded down. But I look not for him. No doubt he still lodgeth in the
Isle of Axholme, and the other spy we have not of late heard from. If
we but keep clear of beaten paths, we be safe enough. I will hope to
have a dream to-night."

Hugo did not reply; he was looking about him in much enjoyment. The day
chanced to be clear, and as far as he could see lay the level of the
fen-lands. Here were trees, some straight, others leaning over the
water; there were islands of reeds, and yonder the water shimmering on
its shallow, winding way, so sluggish as to be almost stagnant. The
whole region was alive with sound,--the cries of water-fowl, the songs
of birds, and the croak of frogs. And when he rode along the water's
brink, an occasional fin flashed out. Humphrey watched him with
approval. "Ay, lad," he said, "thou wilt soon be wise in fen lore, for
thou hast a heart to it. I will tell thee now that I have wherewith to
fish in one of these same packs. Mine ears were not idle in the town,
and I did learn that perch and red-eye and roach and bream frequent the
waters of the fen."

"And didst thou ask what fish were in the fen?" asked Hugo, in alarm.

"Nay, lad, most surely not. But when I did see fish for sale I did
praise their beauty, and they that had them did of themselves tell me
where they did catch them. There be more ways of finding out things
than by asking of questions."

They were now come to a small, grassy isle fringed with reeds. "Here do
we get down," said Humphrey. "I would fain see if we do not catch some
of those same fish for our dinner. And here is grass, moreover, where
the horses can graze."

Slowly and carefully boy and man disengaged themselves from the baggage
that almost encased them and dismounted. "If thou dost get a dream
to-night, Humphrey," said Hugo, laughingly, "I hope thou wilt discover
what we shall do with all this stuff."

"I dream not to find out such a thing as that," returned the
serving-man, good-naturedly.

The horses were soon tied out, and the fishing-lines and hooks
unpacked. Then Humphrey, going out on a fallen log which was half
submerged, carefully plumbed the water to see how deep it was, while
Hugo watched him in wonder. Next he took from another package some
ground bait consisting of meal, and balls made of bread and grain,
worked up in the hand. This he threw into the water, which was here but
two feet deep. Then in a whisper he said, "All this I did learn in
Lincoln." And he bade Hugo hold his line so that the bait on the hook
was about an inch from the bottom.

Hugo obeyed, and in a moment was rewarded with a red-eye about a foot
long. At the same time Humphrey drew out another. And before long they
had half a dozen each, for the red-eye was always sure to be one of a
crowd, and it was so greedy that it took the bait readily.

"No more to-day," said Humphrey, winding up his line, "for we already
have more than we can eat, and I hold it sin to slay what we cannot
eat. This was I taught by my grandsire, who ever said that evil was
sure to befall those who did so. And I would we could put the life back
into half we have taken; but they did bite so readily that we had too
many suddenly. Still, if we eat naught to speak of but fish, we may
make away with most and so be spared evil."

While Humphrey dressed the too numerous fish, Hugo sought sufficient
fuel to cook them, and came back to find the serving-man well
satisfied. "Even as I did begin to dress the fish," he said, "there
came a sound of wings, and I looked up and did behold a glede. And I
did cease to move; so came he nearer, and did snatch a fish. Then came
another and did snatch a fish. In quietness I did wait. Then came the
first glede back and did take a fish, and the second did like-wise.
And, by waiting with patience, the gledes did take two more. And now we
have but six fish, and no evil will befall us, for those we can eat."

Hugo smiled, for the big serving-man had spoken with the faith of a
child.

Their noon rest taken, they went on again toward the south and came by
nightfall to what Humphrey decided to be a suitable place to pass the
night. "I mean not," he said, "that the place would please me were we
out of the fen. But being in the fen, why, there be worse places than
this to be found; for it is not a bog nor a slough, and there be reeds
in plenty near by."

"Do we make a fire?" asked Hugo, mindful of their experience in the
Isle of Axholme.

"Yea," answered the serving-man. "If we make the fire perchance some
evil person seeth us, perchance not. If we make not the fire, the chill
of the fen doth get into our bones. Seest thou how the mist arises? And
we be not like the holy hermits of these haunts to withstand chill and
vapors."

Hugo looked at him in surprise. "How knowest thou of holy hermits?" he
asked.

"I did even learn of them in Lincoln. It was the canon's servant who
did tell me of St. Guthlac and St. Godric. He did know more of the holy
hermits than of his master's service, I warrant thee. And that is an
evil knowledge for a servant that bids him talk to the neglect of his
master's good."

The fire alight, the two lay down, Hugo to fall asleep and Humphrey to
rise at intervals through the night and throw on reeds that so the fen
mists might work no harm to the boy, to whom he was now as devotedly
attached as ever he was to Josceline. The morning's breakfast was from
the packs which Humphrey acknowledged were too full for prudent
carrying; and by the time Walter Skinner arose at the Swan they were
off again, still southward. They were now nearer the coast, and a great
fen eagle flew screaming over their heads. "To dream that eagles do fly
over your head doth betoken evil fortune," remarked Humphrey, gravely.
"But I think we need not fear those eagles which do not fly in dreams."

And now in the yard of the Swan all was astir. Elfric had taken Black
Dick out and gently exercised him so that his spring-halt need not be
at once apparent, and there was no little anxiety on the part of the
host to get rid of his guest expeditiously. The spy, however, with his
usual dulness, did not perceive it, but took all this effusive service
as his rightful due. "I will requite thee later, worthy host," he said
grandly. "I will not fail to set thee before the king in the light of a
trusty innkeeper." With this farewell he rode pompously out of the yard
and slowly down the hill street to the river, and so passed out of the
town. And, being out, he paused to consider his course.

"Shall I go to the fen in pursuit of them, or shall I go down
Nottingham way?" he said. "I will go Nottingham way. I will be no more
planted in mire like a rush. Nay, verily. Not to find all the young
lords and Saxon serving-men in creation. I serve the king; and will go
not into bogs and fens suitable for Saxon outcasts and no others. And
if they be wise they will do the same."

Having come to this decision, he put spurs to Black Dick and was off
southwest, while slowly Hugo and Humphrey journeyed on southeast.
Presently the horse began to heave. "Why, where is thy speed of
yesterday, Black Tom?" cried Walter Skinner. "Thou didst not heave when
I clung round thy neck on the way to Lincoln town." He gave the bridle
a sharp jerk, suddenly turning the horse which now began to show the
spring-halt with which he was afflicted. "Why, what sort of a dance is
this?" cried Walter Skinner. "Thou art a strange beast. Verily, thou
art like some people--one thing yesterday and another to-day. I can say
this for thee--thou wert black yesterday, and thou art still black
to-day."

He had not gone far when he came up with a man riding slowly along, and
decided to take him into his confidence so far as to ask if he had seen
those he sought. Accordingly he crowded Black Dick close alongside of
the stranger's horse, and, giving him a meaning glance, said, "Hast
thou seen a young lord this morn?"

The stranger looked astonished, as well he might.

"Ay," said Walter Skinner, much gratified. "I said a young lord. Mayhap
thou art not used to consort with such, but a young lord is not much
more to me than his Saxon serving-man. And that remindeth me--hast seen
the serving-man also?"

"Nay," answered the stranger, mildly. "I have seen neither."

"And that is strange, too," said Walter Skinner. "Why, bethink thee,
man! Thou must have seen them. They did leave Lincoln but yester morn.
And if they came not this way, which way did they go? Answer me truly,
for I warn thee, I serve the king."

The stranger reaffirming that he had seen neither the young lord nor
his serving-man, Walter Skinner was obliged to be content. "They be as
slippery as eels," he cried. "And that remindeth me, I did eat eels for
breakfast at the Swan this morn."

Then, without a word of leave-taking, he rode off, Black Dick doing his
afflicted best, and Walter Skinner wondering how he could have been so
mistaken in the animal. "The thief that stole him did well to be rid of
him," he said. "And that he should put him off on me is but another
indignity I have suffered on this chase. The king hath ever a
lengthening score to pay, and nothing but a dukedom will content me.
And why should I not be a duke? Let Richard Wood say what he likes,
worse men than I have been dukes. Ay, and more basely born."

By noon he had come to Newark. "And here will I pause and search the
town for them," he said. "If they know not of them, why, their
ignorance is criminal. A loyal subject should know what concerneth his
king. And it concerneth the king that these two be found."

Now it chanced that the king was then at Newark and about to set off
for Clipstone Palace. Which, when Walter Skinner heard, he declared
proudly, "I will have speech of him."

"Thou have speech of him!" exclaimed an attendant. "Thou art mad."

"Nay, verily, I am not mad. Am I not Walter Skinner, hired by the
king's minister to bide in a high tree that overlooketh De Aldithely
castle? I tell thee, I will see the king." And, the party now
approaching, he broke through all restraint and rode close up beside
the king. "May it please thy Majesty," he began, "there be those that
do keep me back from speech with thee. Ay, even though I do tell them
that I serve thee."

The king looked at him, laughed rudely, and motioned one of his
attendants to remove him. But the little man waved the attendant off,
and cried out so that all might hear, "Didst not thy minister hire me
to bide in the tall tree that overlooketh De Aldithely Castle?"

At the mention of the name De Aldithely the king paused, and seemed to
listen. Seeing which, Walter Skinner went on: "And, when all the rest
were gone to York, did I not see the young lord and his Saxon
serving-man ride forth? And did I not give chase? And do I not now seek
them on this wind-broken and spring-halt horse as best I may?"

The king beckoned the little man nearer.

"Where hast thou sought?" he asked.

"In the wood, in the swamp, and in the town," was the proud answer. "I
be not like Richard Wood, who did set out to help me. For I have come
up with them three several times, and he not once."

The king turned to one of his attendants. "Take thou the madman into
custody," he said. "We will presently send to De Aldithely castle to
see if these things be so."




CHAPTER XV


Richard Wood and his men had searched the forest of Sherwood thoroughly
enough to lead them to conclude that those they sought had taken
another route. And on this, the tenth day of his chase, Richard Wood
said decidedly: "We try the fen now to the east. They be not spirits to
vanish in the air. Here in this wood they are not, nor do I think they
would bide in any town. Therefore in the fen they must be." Thereupon,
leaving the forest, they rode southeast by the way of Grantham, and so
on into the fen country, striking it a few miles from where Hugo and
Humphrey were making their camp for the night, almost within sight of
Peterborough. The two were quite cheerful, and entirely unsuspicious
that danger might be nearer to them than usual.

"Thinkest thou to stop at Peterborough?" asked Humphrey.

"Nay," replied Hugo; "there is no need."

"And yet," urged Humphrey, "a good lodging, were it but for one night,
were a happy change from the fens. Who is the canon that is thine
uncle's friend at Peterborough?"

"Canon Thurstan," replied Hugo.

"In the Canon Thurstan's house--" began Humphrey.

"But the canon hath no house," interrupted Hugo, with a smile.

"And how is that?" demanded Humphrey, with a puzzled air.

"It happeneth because this cathedral is on another foundation, and the
canons here be regular and not secular, as they be in Lincoln."

Humphrey reflected. "I understand not," he said at length.

"At Peterborough the canons live all together in one house," explained
Hugo. "Were we to go there we should be taken to the hospitium, where
we should be lodged."

"And there see the Canon Thurstan?"

"Yea."

Again Humphrey reflected. Then he said: "The ways of priests be many.
Mayhap I had known more of them, but in my forty years I have had to do
with other matters, like serving my lord and lady in troublous times.
The priest at the castle I did know, but not much of the ways of
priests in priests' houses. And now cometh the evening mist right
early. I will but make up the fire and then lead away the horses."

The fire made, although it was not dark, Humphrey departed, leaving
Hugo to feed it. This the boy did generously, for he felt chilled. The
smoke did not rise high and the odor of it penetrated to some distance.

In a little while Humphrey returned laden with a new supply of fuel
partly green and partly dry. He then spread out their evening meal, and
gave Fleetfoot his supper. And, all these things accomplished and the
supper eaten, he announced his intention to go again for fuel.

"Have we not here enough?" asked Hugo. "Thou knowest we journey on in
the morning."

"Mayhap," answered Humphrey. "I like not the look of this mist. My
grandsire hath told me of a mist that lay like a winding-sheet on
everything for two days, and this seemeth to me to be of that kind. It
were not wise to stir, mayhap, to-morrow morn."

"Lest we encounter the other spy?" laughed Hugo.

"Jest not, dear lad," replied Humphrey, soberly. "We may not know how
or whence danger cometh."

"And dost thou fear, then?" asked Hugo.

"Nay, I fear not. I cannot say I fear. But this moment a feeling hath
come to me which I had not before. I will away for more fuel."

"I go with thee," said Hugo.

"Ay, lad, come," was the reply.

Two trips they made, each time returning heavily laden, and then Hugo
laughingly said, "Surely we have enough, even if the mist last two
days, for we had good store before thou didst look upon the mist with
suspicion."

Humphrey smiled. "Yea, lad," he answered, "the fuel now seemeth
enough."

While he spoke a wind sprang up and the mist grew lighter. It blew
harder, and the mist was gone. One might see the stars. Two hours this
lasted, during which Richard Wood and his men, as if guided, rode
straight for the small camp, picking their way with great good fortune
and making few missteps. Then the wind died down, the mist came back
enfolding everything, and the pursuers encamped where they were. But of
that Hugo and Humphrey knew nothing.

It might have been two o'clock when the serving-man awoke with a shiver
and rose to renew the fire. He found it quite extinguished. As he felt
about in the darkness for his flint and steel he glanced anxiously
toward Hugo, though he could not see him. "I know not," he muttered, "I
know not. But I did dream of eagles and they did scream above our
heads. Some danger draweth near, or some heavy trouble."

The fire now blazed, and the faithful serving-man saw that Hugo was
still asleep, resting as easily on his couch of reeds as he could have
done on the canon's bed. "It is a good lad," said Humphrey. "Were he a
De Aldithely he could not be better."

Humphrey lay down no more that night. Restlessly he moved about, now
replenishing the fire, and now listening for some hostile sound. But he
heard nothing.

It was late in the morning when Hugo awoke. "Surely this must be thy
grandsire's mist, Humphrey," he said. "It is heavy enough."

"Yea," answered Humphrey, looking up from the breakfast he was
preparing. "It were best not to stir abroad to-day."

And at that moment Richard Wood was saying: "I smell smoke within half
a mile of me. Ride we to see what that meaneth." Again, as if to aid
him, the wind sprang up so that through the lifting mist one might
easily pick his way, and Humphrey had just departed to look after the
horses when Richard Wood and his men-at-arms arrived at the camp.

"Yield thee, Josceline De Aldithely!" commanded Richard Wood. "Yield
thee in the king's name!" and, dismounting, he laid his hand on the
astonished lad's arm.

[Illustration: "Yield Thee in the King's Name"]

A little later Humphrey, returning to the camp, paused in amazement,
for he heard voices. He crept around a fringe of reeds and peered, but
could not see clearly. He advanced further, still under cover, and then
he saw.

"I did dream of eagles," he muttered, "and they did scream above our
heads."

He listened, and from what he heard he learned that Hugo had not
revealed himself as Hugo, but that he allowed the spy to think him to
be Josceline. "Well did my lady trust in him!" exulted Humphrey. "And
my lord shall know of this when we be come to France, as we shall come,
though all the eagles in the fens do scream above our heads. And now I
will away to the Canon Thurstan, and see of what avail is the fish on
the circlet of gold."

Creeping back as silently as he could, he mounted his horse and set out
for Peterborough. "May the spy and his men-at-arms be too weary to stir
till I come back," he said. "And if they be not weary, may the mist
come lower down and hold them. And now, horse, do thy best. Splash into
pools, wade, swim, do all but stick fast till we come to Peterborough
town."

The horse, thus urged, did his sagacious best, and very shortly the
serving-man was knocking at the gate of the porter's lodge. Now
Humphrey knew nothing of how he ought to proceed. He only knew that he
was in haste and that his need was urgent. He therefore determined to
employ boldness and assurance, and push his way into the canon's
presence.

"Canon Thurstan!" he cried boldly, attempting to push past the porter.
"Canon Thurstan, and at once! My lord demandeth it."

"Thou mayest not push in past me thus," said the porter, stopping him.
"Hast thou no token to show?"

"Yea, verily," answered Humphrey, hastily taking out his pouch and
producing the prior's ring. "Take this, and bid the canon see me
instantly."

The porter, calling an attendant, sent the ring by him. And presently
an order came bidding Humphrey come into the presence of the canon.

"Where is the prior's nephew?" asked the canon, with the ring in his
hand.

"In the custody of knaves who did surprise our camp."

"Knaves, sayest thou?" said the canon. "Wherefore hast thou a camp?
Wherefore lodgest thou not in towns? What doest thou wandering through
the fens?"

"We be pursued," answered Humphrey.

"Pursued? and by whom? Why, who should pursue the nephew of Roger
Aungerville?"

"It is a king's man, and he hath with him three men-at-arms," answered
Humphrey.

"A king's man, sayest thou? Nay, then, I meddle not in the king's
matters." And he made as if to hand back the ring.

"And wilt thou not, then, aid me to rescue my young master?"

"Nay," answered the canon. "I may not do such a thing except upon
compulsion. The dean is now absent, and I am in his place."

Beside himself with impatience over what seemed to him needless delay,
and with disappointment over what seemed to promise failure altogether,
Humphrey cried out roughly: "Compulsion, sayest thou? Then, since 'tis
compulsion thou lackest, compulsion thou shalt have." And he laid hands
on him.

At this two servants came running in. "Ye see," said the canon, turning
to them. "This is the ring of my friend, Roger Aungerville, prior of
St. Wilfrid's. It bindeth me to do all in reason for his nephew. This
is his nephew's servant, who hath come to me to seek my aid to rescue
his young master from the clutches of a king's man and three
men-at-arms. I tell him I may not do such a thing except upon
compulsion, and he layeth hands upon me." And he smiled upon them
whimsically.

They understood the canon and his smile, and the first said: "If thou
be compelled to aid this fellow, were it not best that I call up
Herebald and Bernulf also? They be two, as thou knowest, swift of foot,
and long of wind, and strong of arm; and they have two good staves,
moreover."

"Why," said the canon, whimsically, "it were doubtless wholly evil that
I should undergo compulsion in mine own domain by a strange
serving-man, and be compelled to render aid even against the king's
men. Still, since I be compelled to render aid, it were good to render
the best possible, and so take with ye Herebald and Bernulf; and spare
not for blows, so that ye bring off the young man safe."

Then he handed the prior's ring to Humphrey, who returned it to its
pouch with great satisfaction. "I will ne'er say aught against a fish,"
he thought, "when it surmounteth a circlet of gold and doth belong to a
prior. Methinks this canon liketh not the king nor his men, or he would
not be so easily compelled to go against them, and so all shall yet be
well with us."

The two servants now withdrew from the canon's presence, taking
Humphrey with them, and, calling up Herebald and Bernulf, all four made
speed to depart with the impatient serving-man.

"If the mist hold, we have them," said the first servant, as he rode
beside Humphrey. "And it be heavier now than it was two hours agone."

"Ay, if we lose not our way," was the response.

"That we cannot do with Herebald and Bernulf," was the confident
answer. "They were born and bred in these fens. And because they do
hate the king and all his men they will be swift on the track this
morn. If the king's man come not off with a broken pate, it will be a
wonder. And the same is like to be the fate of the three men-at-arms."

The mist held, and, gleaming through it, as they neared the camp, they
saw the red fire. Cautiously they approached. Richard Wood and his
hungry men-at-arms had been making free with the packs so liberally
provided by Humphrey at Lincoln, and were now resting on the rushes,
with Hugo in their midst. They were in no mood to journey farther in
the dimness of the mist, and Richard Wood was putting question after
question to Hugo in the hope of eliciting some information which might
be valuable to him, while the men-at-arms listened. They were Le
Falconer's men, and they cared nothing for the fate of De Aldithely's
son.

"Where hideth away thy mother?" asked Richard Wood.

"Even in the tomb," answered Hugo, truthfully, for his mother was dead.

For a moment Richard Wood was taken aback. "I had not heard of it," he
said at length. "I knew not that thy mother was dead. The king had
hoped to capture her also. But it seemeth death hath been beforehand
with him."

And then the four servants of the canon, who had surrounded the little
group unseen, lifted their staves and struck as one man. Over rolled
Richard Wood and his three men-at-arms, stunned and unconscious.
Humphrey at once brought up Hugo's horse and Fleetfoot, and the
rescuers departed, leaving the four unconscious men to come to
themselves at their leisure.

"Thou art to return to the hospitium," said the first servant to
Humphrey. "It is the canon's order. He will see this nephew of the
prior's and inquire more narrowly concerning his journey. And say thou
naught of this rescue to any man. We four do the canon's bidding at all
times, but our tongues wag not of the matter."

"When the canon is compelled, thou doest his bidding?" asked Humphrey.

"Ay, when he is compelled. He hath those of his kin who have suffered
wrong at the king's hands. Therefore is he often compelled, as thou
sayest, but he sayeth naught, and so the king knoweth naught. May he be
long ignorant."

The first servant now withdrew himself from Humphrey's side, and in due
time, still under cover of the friendly mist which spread its curtain
over the streets of the town, the little party regained the hospitium
unseen. As soon as their arrival was known Hugo was summoned to the
presence of the canon; and the handsome, fearless youth, as he entered
the room where the canon awaited him, seemed to strike his host with
surprise.

"Thou the nephew of Roger Aungerville!" he exclaimed, when they were
alone. "Thou shouldst be a De Aldithely."

"I am Hugo Aungerville," answered the boy. And then, drawing nearer, he
half whispered something further to the canon, who seemed to find the
explanation satisfactory.

"Why dost thou skulk and hide in this manner through the fens?" asked
the canon. "And why art thou pursued?"

"I personate Josceline, son of Lord De Aldithely, and so draw pursuit
from him. When I am come to Lord De Aldithely in France, then I shall
make myself known, if need be."

"There will be no need," said the canon, decidedly. "And now, though I
am glad to have succored the nephew of my friend, the prior, I am twice
glad to do a service to Lord De Aldithely. Thou hast my blessing. Go
now to thy rest, even though it be day. To-morrow morn I will send thee
forth, if it seem best."




CHAPTER XVI


The king and his party rode on to Clipstone Palace. The attendant to
whom the spy had been consigned hastily summoned a bailiff, to whom he
made over his charge, and then galloped off to overtake the party. And
Walter Skinner, hardly understanding what had come to pass, was left
behind in Newark.

The king had thought to spend a week of pleasure at Clipstone, but the
intelligence brought by the spy changed his plans. Of all his barons he
hated Lord De Aldithely most. He would have struck at him more quickly
and forcibly but for Lord De Aldithely's great popularity, and his own
somewhat cowardly fear. And now here was the son escaped. And suddenly
the evil temper of the king blazed forth so that his attendants, in so
far as they dared, shrank from him.

The king waited not to reach Clipstone, but turning to two of his
attendants he said: "Go thou, De Skirlaw, and thou, De Kellaw, to De
Aldithely Castle. Put spurs to your horses and tarry not. See what is
come to pass and bring me word again."

De Skirlaw and De Kellaw galloped off; and the king, shortly after
coming to Clipstone, entered his private apartments and excluded the
party from them.

"There is treachery somewhere," he said to himself, aloud, "and the
guilty shall not escape me. Why, what is this Josceline but a boy of
fourteen? And what is his mother but a woman? And do they both bid
successful defiance to me, the king? I will have their castle down over
their heads, and no counsels shall longer prevent me from doing it.
Without the boy and his mother the father is sure aid to Louis. And
where De Aldithely goeth, there goeth victory."

"Nay, not alway, my liege," responded a voice.

The king started, and turned to see one of his courtiers, more bold
than the rest, who had quietly entered the chamber.

"I knew not of thy presence, De Kirkham," he said. "What sayest thou?"

"I say that victory is not alway with De Aldithely since he is a
fugitive and his son a wanderer, and his castle in thy power."

"True. Thou sayest true," responded the king, after a pause. "Thou dost
ever bolster up my failing courage. And I will have this silly boy, if
the madman I did put in custody spake true. Yea, I will have him,
though I set half England on the chase. His father is my enemy. And
shall the son defy me? I will hale him to a dungeon, and so I tell
thee, De Kirkham."

It was not a long ride to De Aldithely castle for those who need
neither skulk nor hide, and the messengers of the king were at Selby
ere nightfall. Here they determined to rest and go on the next morning.
They heard no news in the town; nor did they see anything until they
came to the castle itself. Birds of prey were screaming above the moat
near the postern, and there was a stillness about the place that would
have argued desertion if the flag had not still floated from one of the
towers.

"I like not this stillness," said De Skirlaw.

"It hath a menacing air," observed De Kellaw.

A while the two waited in the outskirts of the wood near the cleared
place about the castle. Then said De Skirlaw, "I go forward boldly to
the bridge and summon the warder in the king's name."

"I go with thee," agreed De Kellaw.

So briskly the two rode forth from the shelter of the wood and up to
the entrance, where De Skirlaw loudly wound his horn. But there was no
response. He wound it again. And still there came no answer.

"Seest thou no man upon the walls?" asked De Skirlaw, scanning the
heights with eyes somewhat near-sighted.

"I see no one," responded the hawk-eyed De Kellaw.

"Let us skirt the castle," proposed De Skirlaw, after a short pause.

"I am ready," responded De Kellaw.

Then together the two began their tour of examination. And the first
thing they noted was the dam which William Lorimer and his men had
constructed, and which the old warder had broken before he himself
wandered forth from the castle, thus letting the water which had filled
the rear part of the moat escape. From this point they rode back toward
the entrance and, looking down into the moat, saw that it was dry.
Turning again toward the postern, they noted the drawbridge there, and
wondered to see it down. "The postern gate is also ajar," observed De
Kellaw. The two now drew nearer and came even to the edge of the moat.
They looked in, but saw only bones and armor; for kites and eagles had
been at work, and nothing more remained of those who had perished there
in the waters.

"Some strange thing hath happened here, and wind of it is not yet gone
abroad," said De Skirlaw.

"Yea," agreed De Kellaw. "Darest thou venture across this bridge and in
at the postern gate?"

"I dare," responded De Skirlaw. Dismounting, the two secured their
horses by stakes driven into the earth, and then, on foot, crossed the
bridge.

Inside the baileys all was deserted. The stables were empty. No
footsteps but their own could be heard. No guard paced the walls. No
warder kept watch. There was only silence and emptiness in the great
hall, and no living creature was anywhere.

"Here be a mystery," said De Skirlaw. "I will not be the one to try to
unravel it. Let us away to the king and say what we have seen."

"Ay, and brave his wrath by so doing," returned De Kellaw; "for, since
he cannot lay hands on those that have disappointed him, he will lay
hands on us that bring him word of the matter. To be near to the king,
if thou be not a liar or a cajoler, is to stand in a dangerous place."

"Yea," answered De Skirlaw, "thou art right; but we needs must return.
So let us set out."

While the king raged, Walter Skinner, left behind at Newark in charge
of the bailiff, had speedily recovered his complacency.

"I have seen the king and spoken with him," he thought. "True, he did
laugh right insultingly in my face, but that may be the way of kings;
and even so will I laugh in the face of Richard Wood when next I see
him, for he hath no hope of preferment and seeketh only his money
reward. Therefore is he a base cur and fit only to be laughed to
scorn."

When the scullions served him his dinner in the room where he was held
prisoner, he looked upon them haughtily, and bade them mind what they
did and how they did it. "For I shall not alway be served here by such
as ye," he said.

"Nay, verily," replied the first scullion, "thou sayest true. Thou art
more like to be served in one of the dungeons, if so be thou be served
at all."

"Why, what meanest thou by that last, sirrah?" demanded the little man,
strutting up and down and frowning.

"I did but mean that thou mayest shortly journey to that land where
there is neither eating nor drinking," was the reply.

"Thou meanest that I may shortly die?" asked Walter Skinner,
contemptuously.

"Yea," was the answer.

"Why, so must thou. So must Richard Wood. So must the king himself,"
said Walter Skinner. "But thou hast learned here so near the court to
speak Norman fashion, and go round about the matter; and so thou
speakest of journeys, and a land where there is neither eating nor
drinking. Moreover, thou didst speak of dungeons. I would have thee
know that they be no fit subjects of conversation in my presence. Have
I not served the king? And shall I not therefore have preferment? Speak
not of dungeons, and the country where there is neither eating nor
drinking to me." And, seating himself, the pompous little man began to
eat his dinner heartily. When he had finished, the first scullion came
alone to take away the dishes.

"Thou art a very big little fool," he said, with a compassionate
glance, "and so I bid thee prepare thyself for any fate. Thou must know
that what thou saidst to the king did anger him. Thou didst bring him
ill news, and the bearer of ill news he will punish."

Walter Skinner now showed some alarm; but he soon recovered himself.
"Why, how now, sirrah?" he said. "I did not bid the young lord
Josceline flee; but when he did flee I did give chase. And wherefore
should I be punished for that? Had I remained in the tree near the
castle, then indeed the king had had cause for anger."

The scullion still looked at him pityingly. "By thine own showing," he
said, "thou art but the king's spy, hired by Sir Thomas De Lany, no
doubt. Spies have not preferment when their task is done, because,
though the king doth take their work, he hateth them that perform it."

And now Walter Skinner stared in bewilderment. "Thou art but a
scullion," he said at last. "And how knowest thou of Sir Thomas?"

"I am not what I seem," replied the scullion. "Wert thou sound in thy
wits I would have said naught to thee, because then thou wouldst not
have been here; but I like not to see one infirm of intellect run into
calamity."

"And dost thou say of me that I be not sound in my wits?" demanded
Walter Skinner, indignantly.

"Why, thou art either unsound of wit or a knave," was the calm
response. "Only fool or knave doeth dirty work for another, even though
that other be the king. And now, if thou wilt escape, I will help thee
to it."

"I have had great toils," said Walter Skinner, with a manner which
would have been ponderous in a man twice his size. "I have met a
hedgehog. I have lost two horses. I have been planted in the mire like
a rush. I have now come hither on a wind-broken and spring-halt horse,
for which I did pay a price to a thief. And now thou sayest that for
all this which I have undergone in the service of the king I shall have
not preferment but a dungeon or death."

"Yea," was the calm rejoinder, "I say it; for where is the young lord?
Knowest thou?"

"Nay," answered Walter Skinner, slowly.

"That is all that the king careth for of thee. That thou hast let him
escape thee is all that he will note. And thy life will, mayhap, answer
for it. All will depend on the greatness of his rage."

The little man looked in fright at the scullion, whom even his
inexperienced eyes could now see was no scullion as he stood there in
dignity awaiting the decision of the prisoner. "I will go with thee,"
he said, in a tremble. "But do I go on the wind-broken and spring-halt
Black Tom of Lincoln?"

"That, Black Tom of Lincoln!" cried the mysterious scullion, laughing.
"Thou hast once more been made a fool of. I have many times seen Black
Tom. But thou shalt not go on the beast thou camest on. I will furnish
thee another, for it must seem that thou didst escape on foot. Seek no
more for the young lord. Flee into hiding and remain there. Dost thou
promise me so to do?"

"Yea," was the prompt answer. "I promise."

He in the disguise of the scullion smiled, and bidding Walter Skinner
follow him, led the way by secret passages until they came out unseen
into a small court, where stood a horse ready saddled and bridled. The
little man's guide bade him mount, and, opening a small door in the
wall, motioned him to ride through it and away.

"My liege, the king," he said, as he watched the spy making all speed
on his way, "thou wilt learn nothing of the flight of Josceline De
Aldithely from thy late prisoner. And may confusion wait on all thy
plans."

Walter Skinner had been gone over night, and the second day of his
flight was well begun when the king, impatient over the slowness of De
Skirlaw and De Kellaw, sent from Clipstone to Newark to have the spy
brought before him. In haste the bailiff went to the room where he had
placed him, and no prisoner was there. No prisoner was anywhere in the
castle or in the town, as the frightened officer discovered after a
diligent search. Only the afflicted horse upon which he had arrived
remained in one of the stables. And with this word the unfortunate
officer hastened on his way to the king. Near the gate, as he went out
of Newark, he met one of the courtiers who bore a strong resemblance to
him who had, in the guise of a scullion, set Walter Skinner at liberty.
"Thou art frightened, worthy bailiff," he said. "But do thou only put a
brave front on it and all may yet go well. Be careful to say and ever
repeat that the man was mad, and not only mad, but cunning, and so hath
made off, leaving his horse behind him."

The bailiff responded with a grateful look. "Thou art ever kind, my
lord," he said. "And mayhap the man is dead. If he knew not the way, he
may be dead, or caught by robbers. I will say that he may be dead also,
and I hope he may be."




CHAPTER XVII


On the morning when Hugo and Humphrey were to start, the canon summoned
them to his presence, and his face was grave. "I have but now learned,"
he said, "that the king is at Clipstone Palace. When the knaves thou
didst leave stunned in the fen discover it also, they will at once
repair thither, and that maketh a new complication of troubles. Let us
consult together. I include the serving-man because he is such a
valiant compeller." And the canon, forgetting his gravity, laughed
heartily. And again he laughed. Then he grew grave again. "Pardon me,"
he said to Hugo; "but one may laugh so seldom in these troublous times.
And erstwhile I was fond of laughing, and glad to have a merry heart.
Now merry hearts be few in England, for they who have not already
grief, have anxiety and dread for their portion." He paused and then
went on: "The same hand that did send me news of the king's
neighborhood did add something more thereto. A fierce little
swaggering, strutting man did come upon the king at Newark and did tell
him that Josceline, meaning thee, had fled, and that he had been
pursuing thee. Didst thou know of it?"

"Yea," replied Hugo, with a smile. Then turning to the serving-man he
said, "Humphrey, since the canon loveth to be merry, tell thou him of
the hedgehog and the Isle of Axholme."

Humphrey did as he was requested, and was amply rewarded by the
appreciation of his listener. "I see thou art worth a troop, my good
Humphrey," he said, when the serving-man had finished. "Lady De
Aldithely did well to trust thee with this lad. But now to my news once
more. The king, in his wrath, will scour the country roundabout, and
thou mayest not escape from him as thou didst from thine other
pursuers. What dost thou elect to do?" And he looked at Hugo.

Hugo considered, and as he considered he grew pale. "I know not," he
said at last. "It seemeth not safe to move."

"True," returned the canon. "Nor is it safe to remain here. The king
respecteth no religious foundation. And when these stunned knaves in
the fen make report to him, it will be known that thou wert seen close
to Peterborough, and not an inch of the town will be left unsearched. I
would my friend at Newark--but nay, I must not speak of that."

There was a brief silence, and Humphrey's was the most anxious face in
the room. Not for himself did he feel anxiety, but for Hugo. If the
canon hardly knew what to do, how could he hope to succeed in
protecting the lad?

The canon was the first to speak. "If it can be done," he said, "the
knaves in the fen must be kept from the king. I will have in to our
conference Herebald and Bernulf." And rising, he summoned them.

They came in very promptly, and stood with cheerful faces before their
master. "I know thee, Herebald; I know thee, Bernulf," said the canon,
shaking his head at them in pretended reproof. "Ye be sad knaves both.
What! would ye leave the monastery and go forth into the fen on ponies
and armed with your staves? And would ye seek out once more the knaves
ye did stun, and try to lead them astray, even down into the Broads?
And all to keep them from the king?"

The two servants grinned.

"And would ye make believe to be on the trail of Hugo and Humphrey
here? And would ye lead them far from the trail? I see that ye would,
knaves that ye are. I have discovered ye. And there is no restraining
ye when once ye have set your minds upon a thing. Therefore get ye gone
to the fen. No man can say that I did send ye thither. And here be
coins for ye both, which, no doubt, ye will deserve later, if not now."

The two joyfully withdrew and shortly afterward were in the streets of
the town jogging slowly along as if bent on a most unwelcome journey.
"See the Saxon sluggards!" commented a bystander. "Naught do they do
but eat, unless compelled."

But once outside the town, the ponies were put to a good pace as the
two hastened eagerly into the fen to trace, if they might, Richard Wood
and his men-at-arms. The camp where they had come up with them before
was deserted, and Herebald and Bernulf now had for their task the
discovery of the direction the party had taken. Had they not been
fen-men they might not have succeeded. But by night they felt that they
were really on their trail. They had passed Peterborough and continued
on to the south, evidently going slowly, as became broken heads; and
Herebald and Bernulf came up with them by the side of Whittlesea Mere
early on the following day. As they came into view Richard Wood
evidently regarded the two Saxons with suspicion; but the men-at-arms
looked at them with nothing but indifference.

Herebald and Bernulf appeared not to notice; but, withdrawing to a
little distance, seemed to confer together and examine narrowly the
leaves and twigs and rushes to see if they were bent or broken by the
passage of a recent traveller. As they went earnestly about on all
sides of the camp at the Mere, and keeping ever in sight of it, the
curiosity of Richard Wood overcame his suspicion, and he beckoned them
to approach. His summons they at first seemed inclined to disregard,
but, as he continued beckoning, they at last went toward him with
apparent reluctance.

[Illustration: Richard Wood Beckoned the Saxons to Approach]

"What seek ye?" demanded Richard Wood.

The two Saxons kept silence, but exchanged a crafty look, as if to say
that they were not to be caught so easily.

"What seek ye?" repeated the spy.

"Hast thou seen aught of two runaways?" asked Herebald, gruffly. "Even
a young lord who hath to his serving-man a Saxon?"

Then Richard Wood himself looked crafty. He did not like finding other
pursuers so near him who might claim part of the reward, at least, when
the search was successfully ended. But reflection came to his aid and
told him that these Saxons were ignorant hinds who might be made useful
on the search, and afterward cheated of their share of the reward. So
he said, "Ye be fen-men, I know, or ye would not look so narrowly for a
trail nor would ye find it. Which way do ye go?" And he looked at them
keenly.

"Through the Broads toward Yarmouth," answered Herebald, slowly, after
a short pause, and speaking in a surly tone.

"And wherefore?" demanded Richard Wood.

"There is shipping to be got to France from thence, is there not?"

"Yea, verily," cried Richard Wood. "It had not before entered my mind.
Thinkest thou they have gone thither?"

Herebald frowned. "Thou art too ready with thy questions," he growled.
"But this I will say, we go thither."

"Then we go with thee," said Richard Wood, firmly. "The way is open to
us as well as to thee, and thou mayest not gainsay it."

"Oh, ay," returned Herebald, indifferently.

All that day Richard Wood kept a sharp eye on his new acquaintances.
"Watch them narrowly," he said to his men. "They will seek to make this
catch without us and so obtain the reward. Therefore all that ye see
them do, do ye likewise, and I will also do the same."

Herebald and Bernulf saw and understood, and laughed together unseen.
"They have not good wit, or they would not be so led by us when we be
strangers," observed Herebald.

"It is ever thus with knaves," said Bernulf. "Though they seem sharp,
there is a place where they be dull, and an honest man can often find
it, and so outwit them."

Then they turned back to Richard Wood and his companions. "Go ye slowly
and softly," growled Herebald. "Ye go lunging and splashing so that ye
may be heard a long way off. Moreover, ye have scared up all the
water-fowl hereabouts, and they go screaming over our heads. What think
ye? If there be travellers near will they not hide close in the reeds
till ye and your noise be past?"

At this rebuke Richard Wood drew rein suddenly and gazed sharply about
him on all sides. Then he said, "Your caution shall be obeyed." And he
gave the command to his followers to be careful.

Herebald now returned to the side of Bernulf, and the two, gazing with
mirthful eyes into each other's faces, separated themselves a little
distance and pretended to examine the way narrowly. It was not for
nothing that they had served the merry Canon Thurstan for seven years.

That night, when all the camp was still, Bernulf slipped quietly forth
in the darkness. He was gone three hours, and in that time he blazed
such a trail as a madman might have taken. A bit of every fringe of
rush or reed he came to he broke; and he stamped with his foot in the
slimy mud on the edges of ponds and pools. "These fools," said he,
"know naught of the fens or the Broads, and they will believe all that
they see; for the broken bits and the footprints will speak to them of
the young lord and his serving-man, and they will listen and hasten on.
It is easy to lead a fool a chase."

The next morning Richard Wood was early awake, and, while all the rest
were apparently asleep, he, in his turn, stole forth to look about him.
"I trust not these knave Saxons entirely," he said to himself. "Though
we all ride together now, they will seek to outwit us at the end, and
gain the reward for themselves."

He had not gone far when he came upon the evidences of a recent passage
along that way, and, in great excitement, he returned to the camp and
roused up his followers, and, incidentally, the two Saxons. "Lie not
here sleeping," he said, "when we be close on the trail. Let us be off
speedily!" His men rose eagerly, and the Saxons also seemed to be
stirred up at his words. And very soon, after half a breakfast, they
all mounted and rode off, Richard Wood keeping in the advance. Soon he
struck the trail blazed the night before by Bernulf, and eagerly he
followed it, though he was obliged to do so slowly; for the trail went
on ahead for three miles, then doubled, then zigzagged, then went
straight east three miles, and bent round till it went due west again.

"The young lord is lost," declared Richard Wood, positively, "else
would he never ride such a crazy track as this."

At last, when it was too late to travel further that day, the track
turned eastward again, and the party went into camp for the night about
one mile from where they had camped the night before. But to Richard
Wood it seemed that they must be at least ten miles advanced on their
way, for, to him, all the marsh looked the same.

"Did I not do well, Herebald?" asked Bernulf. "Here have we kept them
busy in the marsh for a whole day, and that giveth the lad with the
canon so much the better a start."

"Yea," said Herebald. "To-night rest thou, and I will start the trail
for them to-morrow."

Accordingly, as soon as the weary Richard Wood and his men had sunk
into a heavy sleep, which they did almost as soon as they lay down,
Herebald set out. He was extremely swift of foot and knew the region
well. He was gone four hours. "The knave king's man and his followers
will sleep soundly to-morrow night also if they follow my trail," he
said, when he had returned and lay down.

The next morning a late awakening of the men gave a late start. The
enthusiasm of the day before was gone; but it came back when Richard
Wood, riding in advance, struck the trail once more. This was more
difficult to follow than the one of the day before. It led through
places where the party almost mired, but not quite; through places
where the horses splashed heavily along, scaring the water-fowl up in
all directions; through patches of reeds; through tangles of tough
grass; through shallow water; through deep water; and ever on with few
seeming deviations. But the course was much slower than that of the day
before, and that had been slow enough.

Night came and the fagged party in disappointment once more lay down.

"Thou hast done well, Herebald," said Bernulf. "To-night it is my turn.
But think ye not it were better now to lead straight on to Yarmouth?"

"Yea," answered Herebald.

"It seemeth to me that it were best to put them there to search the
town. What thinkest thou?"

"Even as thou thinkest," returned Herebald, grinning.

"And then," continued Bernulf, "methinks it would be seemly to entice
them aboard a fishing-vessel and ship them off for France, and so be
rid of them."

"Yea," agreed Herebald. "I would all the knaves in England were shipped
off to France, and it were a good beginning to ship these four."

Another morning dawned, and slowly and heavily the men arose. Such
weary days followed by nights spent in the marsh had sapped their
energy. For the first time the men-at-arms looked sullen, and one went
to Richard Wood and spoke for all. "We be neither fish nor water-fowl,"
he said, "to spend our days in the marsh. We go this one day more with
thee; then, if we come not out of the marsh and into the town of
Yarmouth, we leave thee and return to our master."

The heavy-eyed Richard Wood counselled patience. "Would ye have these
Saxon knaves get the better of us just when the quarry is all but run
to earth? They be not so weary as we, and a plague upon their
endurance. If ye stand not by me, the game is lost."

But the man-at-arms answered sullenly: "I have said. Lead us out of
this vile marsh."




CHAPTER XVIII


"And now," said the canon, when Herebald and Bernulf had gone, "thou
mayest remain no longer here. It is too near the king, and moreover,
delay taketh thee not forward toward France. Since thou knowest not
what to do, Hugo, I will plan for thee. And first, thou must leave here
with me thy dog, Fleetfoot."

Hugo opened his mouth to object, seeing which the canon at once
continued, "Nay, do not speak. It must be done. Thee I can disguise and
thy man Humphrey I can disguise, but what disguise availeth for thy
dog? To take Fleetfoot is to endanger thy life unnecessarily. Shouldst
thou take him, even if thou didst win safely through, which is a very
doubtful thing, thou wouldst find him but an unwelcome encumbrance to
Lord De Aldithely. Leave the dog, therefore, with me, and I will care
for him."

Hugo reflected. Then he looked up into the canon's face, and he saw
that, though he might have a merry heart, he had also a determined
will. He yielded, therefore, and consented to leave Fleetfoot behind.
At this decision the canon smiled well satisfied, and Humphrey's face
also showed the relief he felt at being rid of the dog's company.

"And next," continued the canon, "I counsel thee to go no more through
the fens, for there will they seek for thee. Thou hast gone skulking
and hiding so far on thy course, and they that pursue thee will be too
dull to think that thou mayest change. The time is come for thee to
proceed boldly and on the highway. I will send thee first to Oundle,
which lieth southwest from hence, and with a token I will procure thee
safe lodging there. From thence I can do no more for thee till thou
come to St. Albans, twenty miles away from London. But from Oundle thou
must take thy course still southwest till thou come to the Watling
Street. Then follow that southeast down to St. Albans. And in this
jaunt Humphrey must lead, and thou must follow; for I shall make of
Humphrey a priest, and of thee a novice."

He ceased, and there was no reply to what he had said. Both Hugo and
Humphrey would have preferred to ride clad as they were, and to choose
their own route and stopping-places. But they were sensible of how much
they already owed the canon, and dangers were now so thick about them
that they feared to refuse to do as he bade them. Therefore they
permitted themselves to be properly robed, and took meekly the
instructions he gave them as to their speech and manner of behaviour.

"This I do not for thee only, but for my friend, Roger Aungerville, and
for the brave Lord De Aldithely," he said in parting from them. "Forget
not to call me to their minds when thou dost meet them, and say that I
be ever ready to serve them as best I may."

Hugo promised, and thanked the canon on the part of himself and
Humphrey for the cheer and aid they had received at his hands; and,
with a heavy heart, rode away behind the serving-man, who was now
turned into a priest. He thought not on the dangers of the way, but on
Fleetfoot, left at Peterborough.

"Fret not, dear lad," said Humphrey. "In the king's dungeon there would
be no room for Fleetfoot, and mayhap he would be put to death. Now is
he in good hands, even in the merry-hearted canon's hands, and no evil
will befall him. He hath such a care to please thine uncle and my lord
that he will look well to thy dog."

By nightfall the two were safely lodged at Oundle.

"Ye be safe," said the priest of the parish when he had received them.
"Here will no man seek for ye this night, and, on the morrow, ye shall
speed away. I may not suffer ye to tarry longer."

Meanwhile the unlucky bailiff had proceeded to Clipstone with the news
that Walter Skinner was fled, and no man knew what had become of him.
He had just delivered it and the king was still in his rage when De
Skirlaw and De Kellaw arrived. "Admit them," he gave order. "I will
hear what hath come to pass there. Mayhap the castle hath stolen away,
even as this prisoner hath done."

As De Skirlaw and De Kellaw entered, the king, scanning their faces,
read that they bore him no welcome news, and his rage broke out afresh.
"What land is this that I be king of?" he exclaimed. "A land of rebels
and disobedience. A land of dull skies and duller fortunes. What saw ye
that ye come before me with glum faces and serious looks? Speak, if ye
can. Is the castle gone?"

"Nay, Your Majesty," said De Skirlaw. "The castle we found, but--"

"Ye mean that the prisoner spake true," burst out the king, "and that
the young lord is escaped?"

"Yea," answered De Skirlaw. "No human being inhabiteth the castle. And
in the moat at the rear kites and eagles have fed."

"What mean ye? What hath chanced there?"

"Your Majesty, no man knoweth," was the answer.

"But there be only bones and armor in the dry moat, and no living thing
in the castle."

For a little the king stared straight before him. Then he said, "Bring
the rascal bailiff before me."

With haste the unhappy officer was brought.

"Wretch!" broke out the king. "Go find me the prisoner that thou hast
let escape thee. If thou find him not, thy life shall answer for it."
In great fear the bailiff retired from the royal presence, and the king
went on as if to himself: "Mayhap he knew what hath chanced. Mayhap he
knoweth now the whereabouts of the young lord."

As the bailiff reentered Newark he met again the courtier by the gate.
"What news, worthy bailiff?" he asked.

"Why, this," answered the bailiff, in despair. "The prisoner must be
found or my life is forfeit. And I know not where to look."

The courtier kept silence for a few moments. "The prisoner must not be
found," he thought, "or mayhap the young lord, Josceline De Aldithely,
will be undone; and for the friendship I do bear his father, this may
not be. But neither must the worthy bailiff die." Then he spoke.

"Worthy bailiff," he said, "what is done cannot be undone. The prisoner
is gone, no man knoweth whither. Thy only hope is in flight. And to
that, seeing thou art a worthy man, I will help thee. Go thou
apparently to seek for the prisoner, but flee for thy life, and tell me
not where. Thou knowest a place of safety, I warrant thee."

"Yea," replied the bailiff, after a little thought, "I know."

"Proceed, then, with thine helpers to the search for the prisoner;
contrive shortly to give them the slip, and thou art saved. I will do
what I can in baffling pursuit of thee. For this our king is, as thou
knowest, a tyrant who, though he greatly feareth death for himself,
doth not hesitate to measure it out to us his subjects. Therefore are
we bound to help each other. When thou canst protect another, do so;
and so farewell." Speaking in these general terms he not only gained
from the bailiff a belief in his own benevolence, but effectually
concealed from him the real reason of his helping him, which was to
protect, so far as possible, the young Josceline De Aldithely.

"It is well for a lad when his father hath many friends," mused the
courtier. "For then, even the malice and hatred of the king may be
foiled. I will now away to Clipstone and see what passeth there." And,
summoning two attendants, he set out.

Upon arriving, he found but a gloomy air about the place. The king's
rage was not yet spent and no man knew upon whom he would take occasion
to visit his displeasure. But the courtier who, in the guise of a
scullion, had himself set the prisoner free, moved calmly about, and
alone of all seemed to feel no anxiety. Toward nightfall the word was
whispered about that, on the morrow, the king would himself proceed
with a party to De Aldithely castle.

The morrow came and at an early hour there was everywhere bustle and
confusion, for all that the royal party would need for their brief
absence from Clipstone must be taken with them: food, dishes, bedding,
and servants.

At length all was ready and the train set out. It was a gloomy ride,
for the king's temper was not yet recovered and no man ventured to say
aught in his presence.

Leaving the baggage and servants far in the rear, the impatient king
with his attendants rode on and on until they came to Cawood castle
beyond Selby and but a few miles distant from De Aldithely castle. Here
the king stopped for the night, and the servants and baggage not having
yet come up, his temper was not improved by the lack of their service.
It was a great castle to which he had come, being one of the largest
and strongest in the north of England.

"And Cawood shall have no more for a neighbor the castle of De
Aldithely," said the king the next morning, when, after a somewhat
uncomfortable night owing to the late arrival of the servants, he rode
forth from its gate on his way to the home of the great and popular
baron.

Artisans from Selby who had been sent by the king's order, were already
on their way thither also. And these having risen very early and made
good speed, John found already arrived when he himself appeared. But no
one had ventured to set foot within the walls without the royal word.

As John drew near, he looked upon the castle in scowling silence. Still
in silence he rode to the edge of the moat and looked down. And there
he saw the armor and the bones as De Skirlaw had said. An attendant now
spoke to him, and he nodded his head in assent. At once three of the
artisans were hurried across the postern bridge and through the gate
with instructions to hasten to the front entrance and let down the
bridge and open the great gate for the king.

[Illustration: He rode to the edge of the moat and looked down]

Still speaking no word the monarch rode to the great gate, crossed the
bridge, and entered, and once within the outer bailey, looked about
him. He rode into the inner bailey, and, dismounting, began a personal
examination of the castle; and as he proceeded his frown grew blacker
and blacker, for everywhere he saw evidences of premeditated and
deliberate flight. The treasure chests were empty, and everything of
value removed.

At last he spoke. "What hath chanced here I know not," he said. "But
this I know, these traitor walls shall stand no longer. Bid the
artisans in to begin their destruction." Then turning to De Skirlaw he
added: "Go thou to the moat and examine the armor. See, if thou canst,
to what troop it belongeth."

But before De Skirlaw could execute this commission there appeared upon
the scene two men-at-arms from Hubert le Falconer, in search of certain
of their companions, and they were at once brought before the king. To
him they related how, for a certain sum, a certain knight in the
service of the king had hired them to assist him in entering the
castle, through the treachery of one Robert Sadler, and in carrying off
the young lord, Josceline De Aldithely, to the direct custody of the
king.

"And this knight was--" interrupted John.

"Sir Thomas De Lany," said the man-at-arms.

"Came thy companions to the castle here?" demanded the king.

"Yea, Your Majesty, some ten days now agone. My master having need of
them hath sent us to call them to him again."

"It is a call they will not answer," said John. "Nor will the brave
knight, Sir Thomas De Lany, answer to my call. De Kirkham, take these
men-at-arms to view the moat by the postern. Now know we who sleep
there. Could we but know the whereabouts of the wife of this traitor,
De Aldithely, and the whereabouts of his son, we were better satisfied.
And now depart we from this place. Raze the walls. Let not one stone
remain upon another.

"And thou, De Skirlaw, and thou, De Kellaw, haste ye both to Newark and
see if the rascal bailiff hath yet found the prisoner. He can speak if
he will, and he must be found."

With feigned zeal the two set out, but, once beyond the view of the
king, their fiery pace lagged to a slow one as they rode toward Selby,
where they were determined to halt for a night's rest. "I care not if
the prisoner be not found," said De Kellaw. "I be tired of this
tyranny; this imprisoning and slaying of children taken as hostages
from their fathers; this razing of castles. John will not be king
forever, and it behooveth us not to make ourselves odious to all men by
helping him to his desires too much. I haste not on this enterprise,
and so I tell thee."

"Nor I neither," declared De Skirlaw.

The king now set out on his return to Cawood, from whence, on the
morrow, he would go on to Clipstone again.

"Yea, and I will go even to Newark," he said to himself as he rode
along. "I will be at hand to put heart into this search, which seemeth
to lag. But have the prisoner I will; and when I have found him, I will
open his mouth for him to some purpose."




CHAPTER XIX


To the great joy of Richard Wood, the way seemed to lead across the
wide, flat, marshy country straight in the direction of Yarmouth. "If
the young lord and his serving-man be as weary of the marsh as I and my
companions be," he said, "they have gone directly out of it to
Yarmouth, and there shall we catch them."

But though the way seemed not to deviate in direction, that of the day
before was easy in comparison with it.

"Were I but journeying through this vile stretch of country I could
pick a better course," grumbled Richard Wood as he went forward. "But
being on chase of these two, I must even be content to follow. Behold
me now when the day is but half gone, slopped with water and besplashed
with mud till no man may know the color of my garments. It must be that
the young lord hath small wit to take such a course. Or mayhap he
looketh more behind him than before as he rideth, fearing pursuit."

And now they were come to the Yare; and it seemed that they would be
obliged to swim across it. "Never swam I in my life," declared Richard
Wood, "and I will not now begin."

"Canst thou not swim on thy horse's back?" demanded one of the
men-at-arms, impatiently.

"Ay; but how if the beast goeth down in the stream?" said Richard Wood.
"I tell thee, I fear water."

Then came one of the Saxons to the rescue. "Near here dwelleth a fen-man,"
he said, "and he hath a boat. I will e'en call him to take thee
over, and thou canst let thy horse swim."

Upon hearing this all three of the weary men-at-arms clamored for
places in the boat which Herebald, after a conference with Bernulf,
promised them.

"Hearest thou not, Herebald," said Bernulf, "that the king's man
feareth the water? We must put him and his men across softly and
bolster up their valor, else shall we fail to entice them aboard the
fishing-vessel, and so fail to ship them off to France; and thus
England is so much the worse off by having still here the vile knaves."

"Yea, Bernulf, thou art right," was the answer. "And surely we have led
them through toils enough, for they be weary to fainting. This it is
for a vile spy to go round the country with some lumbering men-at-arms,
seeking to entrap a poor young lad to his destruction."

"Yea," replied Bernulf; "but thou hast left out one thing. Thou
shouldst have said, 'This it is when two Saxons get him and them in the
toils.' They had not been one-half so weary without us. Do but remember
that."

"Ay," agreed Herebald. "I do think we have some blame for their aching
bones; but they can rest when they be tossing on that good old North
Sea, for I promise them it will take more than a load of herring to
hold the ship steady."

All this time Richard Wood and his men were impatiently waiting. "Why
tarry ye so long?" called the spy in a loud voice, as he looked in
their direction.

"We did but talk of what 'twere best to do and a few other matters,"
replied Herebald, advancing. "And we think we may promise places to ye
all in the boat. Run, Bernulf; make speed and bring the man and his
boat."

Away went Bernulf, leaping lightly across a pool here, picking his way
skilfully over long grass and among reeds there, to the amazement of
Richard Wood, who watched. "I would my horse had but the nimbleness and
speed of the knave's legs," he said. "But our toils be almost over, and
so I complain not. I make no doubt we lay hold of the young lord and
the serving-man in Yarmouth."

At this Herebald looked sceptical.

"What meanest thou by that look?" asked Richard Wood.

"Why, nothing," returned Herebald. "Only I did call to mind that there
be many fishing-vessels in the harbor."

"And what hath that to do with it?" asked Richard Wood.

"And through the North Sea one may go to France."

"Why, thou didst say that long ago when we were toiling through the
marsh. Thinkest thou I shall forget to search the ships when I have
searched the town? I forget not so easily, I promise thee."

The fen-man seemed not to be readily persuaded to bring his boat, for
an hour elapsed before he was seen rowing toward them with Bernulf
lolling lazily in the stern.

At last he reached the little party, and Richard Wood and his men were
safely embarked. Then the two Saxons, mounting their ponies, directed
them into the stream, and they were off, the fen-man glancing curiously
every now and then at his passengers. He made no remarks, however, but
managed his boat so skilfully that Richard Wood hardly realized that he
was on the water, and, in due time, found himself set ashore with his
men on the other side.

"And yonder be Yarmouth," said Herebald, cheerfully. "We come to it
surely by set of sun."

There was no more marks of passage before them, and Richard Wood,
picking his own path, travelled more easily than he had before, and had
also to help him an enlarged appreciation of his own powers, to which
he speedily added a large increase of hope that now the end of his
troubles had come. He therefore went forward with renewed animation,
and when, at set of sun, he stopped before a little Yarmouth inn, he
was well satisfied with himself.

"Do ye also lodge here?" he asked the Saxons.

Herebald affected to be uncertain.

"Surely it were better that ye do so," urged Richard Wood, "that we may
search the town and the ships together on the morrow."

"Nay," put in Bernulf. "We lodge not here. I do know a cheaper place;
and we be not Normans that we have money to waste."

Richard Wood frowned. "Speak not against the Normans," he said. "The
king is a Norman."

"Oh, ay," answered Bernulf, indifferently. And then he added with
determination in his tone, "We lodge not here."

Herebald now drew Richard Wood aside.

"Heed him not," he said, "lest he turn surly on our hands and get us
into trouble. I will go with him elsewhere to lodge, and to-morrow morn
will I bring him back to help thee on thy search."

"Thou art not so sad a knave as he," returned Richard Wood, "and I
thank thee. See that ye both come, and that right early."

Herebald reiterated his promise to do so, and then went away with
Bernulf, while Richard Wood followed his men into the bar, where they
were already drinking.

"What meanest thou, Bernulf? Why wouldst thou not lodge here?" asked
Herebald as they rode along.

"Why, this, Herebald," was the answer. "We have much to do ere we go to
rest. We must find the ship that is loaded and ready to weigh anchor
to-morrow toward noon when the wind and tide will serve. And we must
bespeak the help of the captain to get these knaves aboard."

"True, Bernulf," responded Herebald. "Thou hast a wit that would match
with the canon's."

"Yea, I be not so dull as some Normans, though I be counted but a
slow-witted Saxon," returned Bernulf, with complacency. "And now let us
first to our supper and the putting away of the ponies, and then do we
take boat and visit the ships."

They found an inn suited to their tastes in one of the Rows, and before
the dark had really come down over the harbor they were out on a tour
of the ships. The tour, however, was destined to be a short one, since
the second ship they visited proved to have among her sailors two men
that they knew. And, moreover, they discovered the captain to be one
Eric, whose mother was cousin to Bernulf's father.

"Here have we luck," said Bernulf. "To Eric may I speak freely."

"Yea, verily," answered Herebald. "And she is loaded with herring also
and saileth on the morrow toward noon. Go, then, and speak freely, as
thou sayest."

Bernulf did so; and the Captain Eric entered heartily into his plans as
Bernulf laid them before him. "The loons!" he exclaimed with a hearty
laugh, as he heard of the journey through the fens. "The witless geese!
And thou hast not once told them that the young lord and his serving-man
came in this direction?"

"Nay, not once. We did but break branches, and make tracks on the edges
of the pools, and ruffle the long grass, and they did read for
themselves that those they sought were just ahead of them. We have hope
that the young lord be, by this time, well and safely sped on his
journey."

"Ay, and by to-morrow at this time will his pursuers be upon their
journey," said Eric. "I am to refuse to let them come aboard, sayest
thou, until they demand permission in the king's name? And then the
moment they be down the companionway I am to hoist the anchor and be
off?"

"Yea," answered Bernulf, "that is it."

"So be it," returned Eric. "And it is a small thing to do for a kinsman
also moreover."

"And now go we ashore," said Bernulf. "To-morrow morn we aid the king's
spy to search the town. He will have a merry run up and down the Rows,
he and his men." And, with a hearty farewell to the skipper, Herebald
and Bernulf climbed down the side of the vessel to their little boat
gently rocking alongside.

"The business in hand hath an early end when luck goeth with a man,"
observed Bernulf, with satisfaction.

"Yea," responded Herebald. "And luck most often goeth with the man that
hath good wit of his own."

Their strong arms made light of the short distance they had to row, and
they were soon back at the little inn and at rest.

As for Richard Wood, weary as he was, he was long in finding sleep. For
ever he would be wondering in which part of the little town it were
best to begin the search. And how it were best to conduct it so that no
outsider could manage to claim part of the reward when the runaways
were captured. At last, undecided, he fell asleep, and Herebald and
Bernulf were awaiting him when he awoke rather late in the morning. In
haste he and his men ate their breakfast, and in still greater haste
they set off on the search, only to be brought to a standstill before
it was well begun; for there fronting the sea were one hundred and
forty-five little narrow streets called the Rows, and their combined
length made a distance of seven miles.

"This be a foolish way to build a town," grumbled Richard Wood, "and
none but Saxons would have done it. Why, here be a street only two feet
wide at one end of it. And up and down one hundred and forty-five
streets we must chase, to say nothing of looking in the better parts of
the town."

"Thou hast well said," observed Herebald, gravely. "It is not an easy
thing, this search. But where dost thou begin? And how wilt thou go
about it?"

"Why, why," stammered Richard Wood, "I did never search a town before,
and that is but the truth."

"Were it not best to proceed boldly?" asked Herebald, slyly.

"Boldly, sayest thou? And what meanest thou by boldly?"

"Why, by boldly, I mean boldly. Surely thou knowest what boldly is?
Walk into the house with a 'by your leave,' which is, after all, no
leave, since it is done without leave; there look through all, and then
out and away again into the next house, or the next but one, as it
pleaseth thee."

Richard Wood looked at him in displeasure. "It is easy to see thou art
but a Saxon churl," he said. "And moreover, where is thy sense of time?
This day were gone; ay, and the next before we had entered every house
in one hundred and forty-five little streets."

"Ay, thou art right. Perchance it were better not to take so much time,
for there be the ships, and some of them do sail to-day."

"To-day!" exclaimed Richard Wood, in alarm. "And when?"

"Toward noon," was the reply; "for then wind and tide will serve."

A look of resolution came over the face of Richard Wood. He turned to
his men-at-arms.

"Take each of thee a street," he said, "and I will take another. Search
as well and thoroughly as ye can for one hour, and then come to this
point to go with me to the ships. We have had many toils to catch them.
They must not escape us now."

"And what do we?" asked Herebald.

Now Richard Wood was quite determined that the Saxons should not share
in the reward, so he answered: "Stand ye here, and watch all who pass.
Let none escape ye."

"That were an easy task," growled Bernulf. "But why may we not also
take each man his street, and knock and 'by-your-leave' with the rest
of ye? It is because we be Saxons that ye put this slight upon us." And
he affected to be greatly displeased.

"Peace, man!" said Richard Wood, more pacifically. "It is true ye be
Saxons, but that is by the will of heaven. And ye be in nowise to blame
therefor. So should ye bear with patience the lot of Saxons."

"Which is to wait on Normans, as ye would say," retorted Bernulf,
scornfully. "But we bide here, as thou hast said."

"The hinds be jealous," said Richard Wood, as he hastened up the little
street he had chosen, looking narrowly about him for the house, in his
judgment, most likely to be the hiding-place of the runaways. About
half-way up the street he espied it, but when, in the king's name, he
entered, he found nothing to reward him for his pains. Wherever he
stopped he fared no better, and he was fain to believe, at last, the
asseverations of the inhabitants that there were not only no runaways
in that street, but that none were to be found in all Yarmouth,--a town
which, according to them, was a most proper place, where those who
could not give a good account of themselves never ventured. Unless,
indeed, it might be a few Frenchmen now and then, and, as they told him
with much garrulity, every Englishman knew what to expect from the
French. And then they asked him if those he sought were French. And
when he said that they were not, they began at the beginning and went
all over the subject again, telling him what a discreet and proper
place Yarmouth was, and how none such as he was seeking ever ventured
there, until he was like to go distracted, and had not completed the
search of even that one little Row when the hour was up, and he
hastened to the place appointed to meet his men-at-arms. He found that
his experience had been theirs, and, in his disappointment and disgust,
he said some harsh things about Yarmouth tongues, which he estimated as
entirely too nimble.

The two Saxons heard his comments with covert smiles, and followed
along toward the ships.

That morning the ship of Eric had slightly changed her position, and
Bernulf so managed that, when the small row-boat he was bidden to hire
was about to put off from land, Eric's ship would naturally be the
first one boarded.

"Do we go with thee?" asked Herebald.

"Nay," answered Richard Wood. "Here be two men who will row for us. Do
ye stay where ye be and watch."

Then they all climbed into the small row-boat and were pulled away
toward Eric's ship.

"Ay, we will watch," said Herebald to Bernulf.

A little later the boat went alongside, and the spy and his men-at-arms
climbed heavily and clumsily aboard, after a brief parley with skipper
Eric, in which he had at first refused them permission to do so.

"They be here!" exulted Richard Wood in his thought, "else why should
we be forbidden to come aboard?"

"What seek ye?" demanded the skipper, in a gruff tone when they were
safely on deck.

"Two runaways," answered Richard Wood, loudly, for already the anchor
was being lifted.

"There be no runaways here," returned the skipper, positively.

"We will see, we will see," returned Richard Wood. And laying firm hold
of the rail he lunged down the steep companionway, followed by his
men-at-arms and one of the seamen, whom the captain by a nod of his head
bade to follow them. Once down, they gazed about them and knew not
which way to turn.

"Where is the captain?" said Richard Wood, sternly. "Bid him come down
and show us all parts of the ship at once."

"Skipper may not come. He is busy," answered the seaman. "But I can
show thee. Thou wilt see all?"

"Yea, all."

Then the seaman very obligingly began to do as he was bid. There was
very little to see in the close quarters; but he, being loquacious, was
a long time in showing it, and more than half an hour had elapsed
before Richard Wood was thoroughly persuaded that there was nobody
secreted on board. And all this time, in his eagerness, he had not
noticed that the ship was moving. He now turned to the companionway.

"What motion is this?" he asked, turning pale. "Hath the ship gone
adrift from her moorings?"

"Nay," answered the seaman; "the ship is not gone adrift."

Laying fast hold on the rail, the spy managed to climb up to the deck.
He looked about him, but no row-boat was alongside. He then turned to
the skipper.

"Surely we be gone adrift from our moorings," he said.

"Nay," answered the skipper, calmly. "I did forbid thee to come aboard,
but thou wouldst come. Now are we under sail."




CHAPTER XX


The priest of the parish at Oundle had Hugo and Humphrey up and off
betimes the next morning, as he had said. "It must be he liketh not our
company over well," observed Humphrey, as they jogged on after a very
brief and hasty leave-taking.

"Perhaps he taketh thee for a wolf in sheep's clothing," said Hugo,
with a meaning glance at the priest's habit in which the stalwart
Humphrey was engulfed.

"And thee for the cub, dear lad," retorted Humphrey. "But it may be
after all that he looketh but to his own safety, and desireth not to
fall into disgrace with the king by harboring us. But hark! Let us
withdraw ourselves into the wood. Here come travellers this way. And I
cannot feel safe in the priest's garb. The wood, methinks, were a
better protection."

With the celerity of practice the two concealed themselves in the wood
in such a position that they could see the path. And presently there
came into view a small party of knights on their way northward.

"They look not so dangerous," commented Hugo.

"Nay," agreed Humphrey. "I would liefer see them than king's spies. But
bide we here a bit and see if more will come."

It was very still in the wood that morning and a little sound seemed a
great one. So the two, while they waited, talked together in low tones.
"The merry-hearted canon is in most things wise, I do suppose,"
observed Humphrey. "But I feel not like a priest though I wear his
garb. And I fear to do something which will betray me to be but the
Saxon serving-man which I am. Still, I must wear it?" And he looked
inquiringly at Hugo.

"Yea," replied the boy. "The land is so full of priests that few scan
them closely. And, moreover, there be Saxons among them. He was born
but a Saxon serf who was the great pope Adrian IV."

"Sayest thou so?" said Humphrey. "I will e'en take courage and wear the
priest's garb as well as I can. I suppose thou knowest all this from
thine uncle, the prior?"

[Illustration: Humphrey in Priest's Garb]

"Yea," answered Hugo, with a smile.

A while there was silence, while both listened. Then Humphrey said,
"But I like not the canon's plan that we go to St. Albans."

"And wherefore?" asked Hugo.

"That I cannot tell. I do but know that I like it not. It were better
to go straight to London. So think I, and so do I say."

Hugo reflected. He knew that the way was not particularly safe for them
anywhere. "If it should be discovered that we have been at
Peterborough," he said at length.

"Yea, lad," broke in Humphrey. "I had not thought of that. But would
they not straight seek for us at St. Albans, where the merry-hearted
canon hath sent us? And neither did I like the parish priest at Oundle.
He did speed us too gladly. And he knoweth that we go to St. Albans."

"Thou mayest be right, Humphrey," said Hugo. "It will doubtless cost
the monks at St. Albans small grief if they do not see us. We will go
to London as thou sayest."

Humphrey regarded him approvingly. "It is easy to see that thou art far
from being a fool," he said. "Hiding and skulking through wood and fen
are making thee wary."

The two now resumed their journey, and Humphrey asked, "Hast ever been
on this Watling Street?"

"Nay," replied Hugo. "I was bred up, as thou knowest, by mine uncle,
the prior, and all my travels have been by ear. What I did hear him
speak of I know, but not much else."

"And he did never speak of the Watling Street?"

"Yea, he hath oft spoken of it. But it is a long road, and here in
England since the time of the Romans. I know that it goeth to London."

"Then we go to St. Albans after all?"

"Why, St. Albans lieth on the Watling Street. So said the Canon
Thurstan. But we need not stop long there."

"Unless we be stopped," said Humphrey. "I would we need not go nigh the
place." He now halted and looked about him carefully. "Said the priest
at Oundle where we should first come to the Watling Street?" he asked.
"Nay," replied Hugo. "He did say only, 'Go till thou come to it,' even
as the Canon Thurstan said."

"I hope we be on the right way," observed Humphrey. "I would fain find
not only the Watling Street, but a town and an inn also. For the
breakfast of the priest at Oundle was more of a fast than a feast."

They were now traversing an undulating country and going in a southerly
direction.

"We may not ask our way," said Humphrey, decidedly. "It is as much as I
can do to wear the priest's garb and speak when I be spoken to. Were I
to speak of myself, it would speedily be known that I was no priest,
for I have not the mind of a priest."

Hugo smiled. He had already learned that, although one might turn the
mind of Humphrey for a little from its accustomed track, yet it
speedily turned back. He had taken a little courage at the mention of
the Saxon pope, Adrian IV, but now he was as fearful as ever.

"I wear this garb only till we be through London," resumed Humphrey.
"The Canon Thurstan bid me wear it only so far. He said naught of what
should be done later. And once we leave London I will be again Humphrey
the serving-man, and no make-believe priest. I like not make-believes."

Hugo smiled again. "How likest thou my being a make-believe Josceline,
and no Hugo?" he asked.

"That be a different matter," was the decided answer. "Thou hast saved
our young lord's life, and thou art a brave lad. But I would rather
skulk and hide in the fen than in the priest's garb. How likest thou to
be a novice?"

"Why, very well," replied Hugo, "so that it serve my turn and help me
on my way in safety. I should have been a true novice had I heeded my
uncle. But, as thou knowest, I will be a knight."

"Ay, and a bold one thou wilt be," was the response; "as bold as our
lord who is in France."

All day they held slowly on their way, and, though they frequently met
other travellers, they attracted no more attention than an occasional
curious glance. And toward sundown they came to the town of Dunstable.

"Now," cried Humphrey, joyfully, "here be a town. Let us make haste to
enter before the curfew and find an inn. We have had a long fast."

"Shall we not rather go to the priory?" asked Hugo.

"Nay, verily," answered Humphrey. "I go to no priory to-night. I will
go to an inn, and I will have there a mighty supper, and a good bed,
and no priestly duties to perform. I know not how to perform them if I
would. And I proclaim to no man that we be counterfeits. And moreover,
the priests here may be even as the parish priest of Oundle. Mayhap he
will not set the pursuers on our track, but I trust him not. I trust no
man who sendeth forth travellers with such a breakfast." So saying, he
rode boldly down the main street which he had entered till he came to
where it intersected another main street at right angles. There he
stopped. "Here be inns in plenty," he said. "It must be this town is on
the Watling Street." And he questioned the groom who came to take their
tired horses.

"Yea," answered the groom. "This be the town of Dunstable. And here it
is that the Watling Street crosseth the Icknield Street."

"_Pax vobiscum_," said Humphrey. "I will in to the fire and my supper.
Do thou care well for the beasts." And, followed by Hugo, he strode off
with a gait which was not often seen on a priest.

The inn which Humphrey had chosen displayed the sign of the Shorn Lamb,
and was one of the smallest in the neighborhood; it made its patrons at
home in its large kitchen while they waited for the meal to be served.
There was but one other guest in the room when Hugo and Humphrey
entered, and the moment the faithful serving-man saw him he was
grateful for his priest's garb; for the fierce little man who was
giving orders in a peremptory manner was none other than Walter
Skinner.

In great fear he had fled from Newark at the instance of the courtier,
but his courage, after three days of wandering, had returned to him;
for his hope of one day being a duke died hard. "Though I be the king's
spy no longer," he had said to himself, "I have been the king's spy.
Therefore I have had a certain measure of preferment and may hope for
more." And in this humor he had come into Dunstable by way of the
Icknield Street, and by chance had chosen the very inn Humphrey had
selected. That he had fled from Newark and was no longer in pursuit of
them Humphrey did not know; and he, accordingly, withdrew deeper into
the concealment of his hood, while Hugo did the same.

As for Walter Skinner, he looked at them with contempt. "Here cometh a
beggarly priest and a novice," he thought, "to keep company at the
table with me. I will none of it." And he said haughtily to the
innkeeper: "Worthy host, I have no liking to priests. Seat them not at
the table with me. Give me thy company, if it please thee, but serve
the priest and his novice elsewhere."

The innkeeper happened to be in a surly humor. Certain affairs had gone
contrary and vexed him. Therefore he made answer: "I keep but one table.
There may ye all feed or ye may look elsewhere. There be other inns."
And he added slowly and impressively, "They--be--all--full--also."

"Why, here be a circumstance!" cried Walter Skinner. "The inns of this
town be full, sayest thou? Why, all the inns in London be not full, I
warrant thee. And why should they be full here in this bit of a town,
with one street running this way, and one another way, like a cross? I
would have thee to know that I have been servant to the king, and am
used to be served accordingly."

"And what service hast thou done the king?" demanded the surly
innkeeper, unbelievingly.

"I did watch from the top of the high tree the De Aldithely castle,"
was the boastingly given answer. "I did see the young lord and his
serving-man flee through the postern and enter the wood." He was about
to rehearse all the particulars of his pursuit of the runaways when the
innkeeper interrupted him.

"Thou must, then," said he, "be the spy for whom the king is looking,
and I will give thee to him."

"Nay, nay," said Walter Skinner, his fierceness all gone as he suddenly
remembered the warning given him in Newark by the courtier who had set
him free. "That thou mayest not do. I do journey toward the south. Thou
mayest not delay me."

"I could if I would," returned the innkeeper, his surly mood vanishing
as he saw before him the opportunity of enjoying himself by tormenting
somebody. "But thou art such a sprat of a man that my compassion
forbids me. The king looketh for thee to hear thee tell what thou
knowest of the whereabouts of the young lord and his companion. If thou
canst not tell, he will have thy head; so hath he sworn. For he is in
an evil rage, and heads are as nothing to him when he rageth, as thou
knowest. He searcheth also for the bailiff who had thee in charge and
let thee escape. I warrant thee the bailiff hath a wit too sound to go
proclaiming how he was some great man, even a bailiff in the town of
Newark."

All this was lost on Walter Skinner, however, who grasped but one
thought, that he was in danger, and had but one anxiety, how to escape
it. He turned now with some degree of humility to Humphrey.

"What!" said the innkeeper. "Dost thou turn to the beggarly priest whom
thou erstwhile didst despise? But it shall not avail thee. It is with
me that thou must deal. Knowest thou that I might lose my head for
harboring thee, if I give thee not up? But I will hide thee, my little
sprat, so that the king himself would not know thee. Come with me."

The little spy, his importance all gone, did as the burly innkeeper
bade him, and Hugo and Humphrey were left alone in the kitchen with the
servants.

"What do we?" asked Humphrey, in a low tone. "Flee?"

"Nay," replied Hugo. "That were to invite pursuit."

"This innkeeper is a knave," said Humphrey.

"The more reason for caution," answered Hugo.

"I have heard that some priests be great sleepers and great eaters,"
said Humphrey a few moments later.

"Some priests be," agreed Hugo.

"Then I be one of them. I do now drowse in my chair, and naught but the
call to supper shall awake me. And then will I play so busily with my
food that no words can escape me save _pax vobiscum_. This rascal
innkeeper learns naught of me."

Presently back came the innkeeper with Walter Skinner in his turn
playing scullion. "Here, sir priest," cried the innkeeper. "Here is he
who shall serve thee at thy meal."

But there was no response. The priest's head was sunk on his breast,
and he seemed asleep. His novice also appeared to sleep.

The innkeeper, emboldened, now gazed openly and curiously at the two.
"They have not come far," he said to himself. "Their garments be not
travel-stained enough for that. They be some dullards of small wit on
their first journey, for the groom did say they knew not that this was
Dunstable."

His observations were here cut short by the appearance of three other
travellers; but their entrance failed to arouse the priest and his
novice, who remained, as before, apparently asleep.

"Yea, verily," thought the innkeeper, as he slowly advanced to meet the
newcomers, "they be but two dullards. There is neither game nor gain to
be made of them as there is of this Walter Skinner, from whom I will
take his horse before I let him go. I will e'en bid priest and novice
pack to make room for these newcomers, from whom I may win something,
and to save room for others who may come."

Accordingly he set to work, but it was with great difficulty that he
roused the two. "_Pax vobiscum_," murmured Humphrey, sleepily. "Is the
supper ready?"

"Yea, but at some other inn," returned the innkeeper. "Here be three
worthy people just come in. There is not room for them and ye. The
groom bringeth your horses, and ye must go." Without a word of
objection Hugo and Humphrey rose to do the innkeeper's bidding and
depart. But they walked like men half awake, and followed the innkeeper
stumblingly; and mounted their horses clumsily, to the great merriment
of the groom. It was now dark, and they knew not which way to turn. "I
choose not another inn," said Humphrey, "though we bide supperless in
the streets."

"Then choose I," returned Hugo. And he rode off down the street with
Humphrey close beside him.

"Lad, lad!" cried the serving-man, "thou must not lead. It will betray
us."

At once Hugo fell behind, and the two rode on until, at a little inn
called the Blue Bell, the boy bade the serving-man stop. The two
alighted, gave their horses to the groom, went in, were promptly served
a good supper, and, in due time, were shown to their beds.

"There be dangers on the Watling Street as well as in the fen," said
Humphrey.

In the meanwhile the keeper of the Shorn Lamb was having his enjoyment
at the expense of Walter Skinner. He bade him serve the three strangers
and fear nothing, as no one would recognize him in the guise of a
scullion.

"Why, here didst thou come strutting it finely," said the innkeeper, in
a mocking tone. "And dost thou strut now? Nay, verily; but thou art as
meek as any whipped cock. And since it was by thy strut that men did
recognize thee, how shall they make thee out when thy fine strut is
gone? Wherefore serve the strangers, and be not afraid."

In spite of this exhortation the manner of Walter Skinner still
betrayed doubt, and even timidity. And at last he made the innkeeper
understand that it was he whom he feared and not the strangers.

The innkeeper laughed. "Dost fear me?" he said. "Why, thou needst
not--that is, thou needst not if thou observest my conditions. Thou
hast a horse that thou needest not, since thou hast legs of thine own.
Somewhat short they be, and somewhat stiff in the joints, being more
made to strut with than for the common gait of mankind. Still I doubt
not they will carry thee whither thou wouldst go after I have dismissed
thee. Serve the strangers, therefore, and afterward thou shalt sup."

In great meekness Walter Skinner obeyed, and the innkeeper, observing
him, sat down later with satisfaction to his own meal.

Now it chanced that the strangers had ordered liquor, and Walter
Skinner paused in the bringing of it long enough to take a drink of it
and fill up the measure again with water. And in a few moments his
fears were gone. He surreptitiously drank again, and yet again, for the
strangers were convivial. And, by the time they were served and his
task done, he had forgotten his danger and remembered only the
injustice of the innkeeper.

"What!" he said to himself. "Here be a degradation! Here be a putting
of fine metal to base uses! I who have been servant to the king am made
a scullion to traveling strangers who be drunken, moreover, and fit
only to be served by this rascal innkeeper who hath made a scullion of
me. And shall he have my horse also? Nay, he shall not. I will away to
the stables this moment and set out and gain my liberty."

Nobody noticed him as he went out the kitchen door, and nobody saw him
as he entered the stable and prepared his horse for the journey. And,
still unnoticed, he mounted, after many a crazy lurch, and set off down
the street. In due time he came to the gate, and the watchman
challenged him.

"Dost stop me, sirrah!" demanded the half-drunken Walter Skinner. "I be
the servant of the king; and, moreover, I be but just come from the inn
of the Shorn Lamb. Pass me outside the walls."

The watchman, at the mention of the Shorn Lamb, made haste to lead the
horse through the narrow side gate, for he and the innkeeper were
confederates in villany; and away went Walter Skinner at a great pace
toward London.




CHAPTER XXI


Knowing nothing of the escape of their old enemy, Hugo and Humphrey
arose the next morning and, after paying their reckoning, departed
without having incurred the suspicion of any one in the town.

"This cometh of leaving the inn of the Shorn Lamb in good season,"
observed Humphrey, with satisfaction.

"I did think we were put out of the inn," said Hugo, demurely.

"Ay, lad," agreed Humphrey; "thou art right. If all who go to the Shorn
Lamb were thus put out, and so did leave in good season, there would be
fewer lambs abroad without their fleece. Didst see Walter Skinner in
the guise of the scullion?"

"Yea," answered Hugo.

"If I be so good a priest as he is a scullion, I fear detection from no
man. Why, he doth look to be a good scullion, whereas when he is clad
as the king's spy, he looketh a very poor spy; and he doth act the part
moreover very lamentably. We had come badly off had he been as good a
spy as he is a scullion."

"Ay, and had he been less drunken," said Hugo.

"Thou hast well said, lad," agreed Humphrey. "Let a man that would have
ill success in what he undertaketh but befuddle his wit with drink, and
ill success he will have, and that in good measure. And the scorn and
contempt of his fellows, moreover, even as hath this little spy."

"And yet," observed Hugo, thoughtfully, "it were hard to find a man who
is not at some time drunken."

"Hadst thou that from thine uncle, the prior?" asked Humphrey, quickly.
"Or didst thou gain it from thine own very ancient experience?"

"Now I have angered thee," said Hugo, frankly.

"Yea, lad, thou hast. This is a time of great drinking, that I know;
but never have I seen my lord drunken. And never hath any man seen me
drunken, nor my father, nor my grandsire. There be ever enough sober
ones in the worst of times to keep the world right side uppermost. And
that thou wilt find when thou hast lived to be forty years old. But
thou art but fourteen, and I am foolish to be angered with thee for
what is, after all, but lack of experience. How soon come we to this
St. Albans?"

"Why, it is but thirteen miles from Dunstable," answered Hugo,
pleasantly.

"Then may we pass it by without stopping," cried Humphrey, joyfully.
"And how much farther on lieth London?"

"Twenty miles," replied Hugo.

"Then do we rest in London to-night, if we may," said Humphrey. "Our
horses be not of the best, but neither are they of the worst; and it
were an ill beast that could not go thirty-three miles before sunset on
the Watling Street."

"Ay," agreed Hugo. "But we may not ride too fast, else shall we arouse
wonder."

Humphrey sighed. "Thou art right, lad," he said. "And wonder might lead
to questions, and questions to a stopping of our journey. For how know
I what answer to make to questions that I be not looking for? I will
therefore go more slowly."

The road was now by no means empty of passengers. Trains of packhorses
were going down to London. And just as they reached St. Albans came a
nobleman with his retinue, going down to his town house in London. "So
might my lord ride, but for the wicked king," said Humphrey, in a low
tone, as they stood aside. Then passing into the city of St. Albans,
they at once sought an inn and made the early hour suit them for dinner
that so they might journey on the sooner.

They had entered St. Albans in the rear of the nobleman's party. They
passed out of it an hour later unnoticed in a throng of people. "And
now," said Humphrey, looking back at the town on the slope, "let the
priest at Oundle play us false if he like; we be safely through the
town."

"It was near here that the Saxon pope, Adrian IV, was born," observed
Hugo.

"Ay, lad," answered Humphrey, indifferently. "But I be nearing the
place where I be a priest no longer. If we may not make too much haste,
let us turn aside in the wood and find a hut where they will take us in
for the night, and where, perchance, I may get a dream. 'Tis a mighty
place, this London, and I would fain see what 'twere best to do."

Hugo made no objection, and when they were within ten miles of the
great city they turned their horses to the left and sought shelter in
Epping Forest.

"I like the wood," observed Humphrey, with satisfaction. "It seemeth a
safer place than the Watling Street; for who knoweth what rascals ride
thereon, and who be no more what they seem than we be ourselves?"

"Why, so they be no worse than we, we need not fear," returned Hugo,
with a smile.

But Humphrey was not to be convinced. "I be forty years old," he said,
"and what be safer than a tree but many trees? And the grass is under
foot, and the sky above, and naught worse than robbers and wardens to
be feared in the wood."

Hugo laughed. "And what worse than robbers on the Watling Street?" he
asked.

"King's men, lad, king's men. A good honest robber of the woods will
take but thy purse or other goods; but the king's man will take thee,
and the king will take, perchance, thy life. I like not the Watling
Street, nor care to see it more."

They were now going slowly through the wood in a bridle-path, one
behind the other. Presently they came out into a glade, and across it,
peeping from amid the trees, they descried a hut. "That be our inn for
the night, if they will take us," said Humphrey, decisively. And,
crossing the glade, he rode boldly up to the door and knocked.

The hut was very small and was made of wattle and daub. A faint line of
smoke was coming from a hole in the roof. The knock with the end of
Humphrey's stick was a vigorous one. Nevertheless it went so long
without answer that he knocked again, and this time with better
success. The door opened slowly a little way, and through the aperture
thus made an old and withered face looked out.

"What wilt thou?" asked a cracked, high voice.

"Entrance and shelter for the night," replied Humphrey, promptly and
concisely.

The door opened a little wider and the man within stepping outside, his
person was revealed. He was of medium height and spare, and he wore a
long gray tunic of wool reaching to his knees. Beneath this garment his
lean legs were bare, while on his feet he wore shoes of skin which
reached to the ankle, and which were secured by thongs. Such as he Hugo
and Humphrey had often seen, but never before a face like his, in which
craftiness and credulity were strangely mingled. For several minutes he
stood there, first scrutinizing Humphrey and then Hugo.

At last Humphrey grew impatient. "Do we come in, or do we stay out?" he
demanded.

"Why, that I hardly know," was the slow answer. "There be many rogues
about; some in priests' robes and some not."

"Yea, verily," responded Humphrey, fervently; "but we be not of the
number. _Pax vobiscum_," he added, hastily. "I had well nigh forgot
that," he said in an aside to Hugo.

But the old man's ears were keen, and he caught the aside meant for
Hugo's ears alone. "Thou be but a sorry priest to forget thy _pax
vobiscum_," he said with a crafty look. "Perchance thou art no priest,"
he added, coming closer and peering into Humphrey's face.

He looked so long that Humphrey again grew impatient. "What seest thou
on my face?" he asked.

"Why, I do see a mole on thy nose. It is a very small one, and of scant
size, but because thou hast it thou mayest come down from thy horse,
thou and the lad with thee, and I will give thee lodging for the
night."

Instinctively Humphrey raised his hand and touched a tiny mole on the
side and near the end of his nose. The man of the hut watched him. "I
see thou knowest that a mole near the end of the nose is lucky," he
said.

"Not I," declared Humphrey. "I had not before heard of such a thing."

The man of the hut regarded him pityingly. Then he said: "Come down
from thy horse, thou unwitting lucky one, and come thou and the lad
within while I do hide thy horses in a thick, for I would share thy
luck. Dost not know that to show kindness to a lucky one is to share
his fortune? Thou hadst not come within the hut but for thy mole, I
warrant thee. For I do know that thou art the false priest and the
young lord from Oundle that stopped not at St. Albans as ye were bid."

Hugo and Humphrey looked at each other. Then Humphrey said, "I know
not, after all, whether to come in or not."

"Come in! come in!" cried the old man, eagerly. "I must share thy luck,
and that could I not do if I played thee false. Come in!"

Still hesitating, Humphrey glanced about him. He knew not who might be
on his track. And then he decided to go in.

"No matter who knocketh while I be gone," said the old man, earnestly,
"give heed to none. Only when I come and knock four times: one for
thee, one time for the lad, and two times for the two horses, which
signifieth that I know ye; listen close. And when I say 'mole,' open
the door softly and not over wide."

Humphrey, who with Hugo was now within the hut, promised to obey, and
the old man, closing the door after him, departed with the horses.

At once Humphrey put out the smoking embers of the fire burning on the
earthen floor in the centre of the hut. "If any knock and see the smoke
and hear no answer, will they not break in the door?" he said.

The old man had been gone but a short time when a tramp of horses was
heard. The riders paused before the door of the hut as Humphrey had
done, and one of them knocked heavily upon it with his stick. But there
was no answer. Again there came a knock and a cry, "Open, old
Bartlemy!"

Meanwhile, old Bartlemy had come creeping cautiously back, and from
behind a screen of vines which hung from an oak beheld them. "Ay, ye
may knock and cry," he muttered craftily; "but which one of ye hath a
mole near the end of his nose? Not one of ye. Therefore I will have
none of ye. And ye may be gone."

"The old rascal groweth deaf," said one of the riders.

"Nay," answered the second. "There cometh no smoke out of the roof. He
is doubtless from home for the night."

Old Bartlemy hastily glanced toward the roof of the hut. He had left a
smouldering fire, and now no fire was there. "The false priest hath put
it out," he said joyfully. "Now know I that he hath luck with him, and
I will serve him faithfully. Ay, knock!" he continued. "Knock thy fill.
I did but now hear thee call me 'old rascal,' though I have helped thee
to thy desires many times, for which thou didst pay me by ever
threatening to bring the ranger upon me for the game I take to keep me
alive. Thou wantest naught of old Bartlemy but to further thine own
schemes."

There was silence a moment, and then the first speaker said, "The
priest of Oundle hath cheaply bought his altar cloth if we find not
these two. We know they be between St. Albans and London. And we do
know they be, for the present, gone from the Watling Street, for the
carter from London whom we did meet did tell us that he had met them
not on the way. Therefore go thou to London by way of the Ermine
Street, while I go down by the Watling Street. They may be now straying
about in the wood, but we shall have them on one road or the other as
they go into the city. The false priest rideth a gray, and the young
lord a black. We shall have them without Bartlemy's aid, fear not."

Then the riders withdrew, each going his way, and Bartlemy a few
moments later knocked on the door of the hut and was admitted by
Humphrey. At once the old man made up the fire in the centre of the hut
again.

"What doest thou?" demanded Humphrey. "Wouldst have other visitors?"

"Do not thou fear," responded Bartlemy. "Am I not here? And can I not
hide thee and the lad beneath yon heap of rushes if a stranger come? No
man will look for thee here. They that seek thee think that Bartlemy
will aid them; and so he would but for thy mole. I be an old man, and
never yet hath fortune come my way, and all because I did not before
meet thee. For it hath been foretold me that a man having a mole near
the end of his nose would bring me fortune. Wherefore I cleave to thee,
and will protect thee with my life, if need be." So saying, he threw
another fagot on the fire and, from a hidden cupboard, brought out a
substantial meal of venison and bread. When the meal was finished he
commanded: "Lie down and rest now, thou and the lad, while I keep
watch. Thou wilt need thy wits on the morrow."

Humphrey reflected. Then he turned to Hugo. "Lie down, lad," he said
kindly. "The old man is crazed when he talketh of moles, but he is
right when he saith we have need of our wits on the morrow. And that
meaneth we must rest in faith to-night."

The old man smiled triumphantly. "I be not so crazed as thou thinkest,
neither," he said. "Thy mole is not only thy good fortune, but mine
also." With that he put the remains of the meal back in the cupboard,
shut the door, and replenished the fire. He then threw himself down on
the earthen floor beside it, and lay there grinning and grimacing at
the flames till Hugo and Humphrey fell asleep. A dozen times before
dawn old Bartlemy rose to bend over the two, grinning and grimacing as
he did so, and clasping his hands in ecstasy. But when the two awoke he
was gone.

Humphrey, when he discovered Bartlemy's absence, started up in alarm.
"I did get no dream, lad," he said to Hugo, whom his movements had
aroused; "and the old man is gone. I know not what to do."




CHAPTER XXII


An hour went by and still old Bartlemy did not come; an hour of silence
broken only by occasional whispers between Hugo and Humphrey.

Then the old man softly opened the door and stood smiling before them.

"Thou didst think me false, is it not so?" he said, addressing Humphrey
and casting an affectionate glance as he did so on the small mole near
the end of the Saxon's nose.

Great as was his anxiety, Hugo could but laugh to see how the serving-man
was placed before himself, and all on account of an unfortunate
blemish on his countenance. And his enjoyment was heightened by the
embarrassment and half-concealed irritation it occasioned Humphrey.

But old Bartlemy paid no attention to Hugo and his merry mood. He
proceeded with despatch to set out the morning meal from the hidden
cupboard. "Eat well and heartily," he exhorted both his guests; "for so
shall ye be able to set your enemies at defiance. A full stomach giveth
a man courage and taketh him through many dangers. But why," he
continued, addressing Humphrey solicitously, "why shouldest thou have
many dangers? Why dost thou not let the young lord ride forth alone?"

Humphrey's answer was a look so full of indignation that the old man
ventured to say nothing more, except, "I see that thou art not to be
persuaded, and I will e'en help ye both."

So saying, he went outside and brought in a bundle or pack which he
had, on his return to the hut, secreted in a convenient hiding-place.
"I have been to a spot I wot of," he began, "and there did I borrow
this raiment. I did borrow it, I say, and ye must put it on. When ye
have no further need of it, then I will return it to its owner."

[Illustration: Bartlemy Bore Garments for Disguise]

Humphrey gazed at him in astonishment. At last he said, "Thou knowest
that we journey hence this morn and shall see thee no more. What
meanest thou?"

"Why, this," was the response. "I go with thee."

"Thou goest with me!" repeated Humphrey.


"Ay," was the stubborn answer. "Thinkest thou I will lightly part with
him who is decreed to make my fortune? Thou art the man the
fortune-teller spake to me of. 'Cleave to him that hath a mole near the
end of his nose,' saith the fortune-teller, and I will of a surety do
so. But tell me truly, should the young lord be captured, would thy
ability to make my fortune be diminished?"

"Yea, verily," answered Humphrey, positively. "Were my dear lad
captured, I could do nothing for thee."

"Thou needst say no more," said the old man, for the first time that
morning looking full at Hugo. "He seemeth a good lad. I will protect
him also with my life, if need be. For what will a man not do if he may
thereby escape the marring of his fortune?"

Old Bartlemy now ceased speaking and devoted all his energies to
hastily undoing the bundle he had brought in, and sorting out a portion
of what it contained.

"What hast thou there?" asked Humphrey, contemptuously, as he pointed
to a woman's robe, tunic, and hood of green. "Here be no fine ladies."

"Nay, speak not so fast," replied old Bartlemy, stubbornly. "Thy young
lord will don these things, and then shalt thou see a fair lady on a
journey bent."

Hugo flushed. "I wear no woman's dress," he said with determination.

"Why, how now?" demanded old Bartlemy. "Art thou better than Longchamp,
bishop of Ely? When he did flee he fled as a woman, and in a green
tunic and hood, moreover. When thou art as old as thou now art young,
thou wilt welcome the means that helpeth thee safely on." The old man's
manner was so changed from that of the night before, and he displayed
so much energy, foresight, and knowledge, that Hugo and Humphrey looked
at each other in wonder. He was still old, but he was no longer senile.

"Knowest thou not," he continued, "that the king's men look for thee
either as the young lord or as the false priest's novice? Dally no
longer, but put on this woman's garb."

"Yea, lad," counselled Humphrey, "put it on. It will suit thee better
than the king's dungeon."

Thus urged, Hugo obeyed, and presently was stepping about the hut most
discontentedly in the guise of a woman. "Stride not so manfully or we
be undone," cried old Bartlemy. "Canst thou not mince thy gait? There!
That hath a more seemly look."

The pack he had brought in was very large, and from it he now took the
garments and armor of an esquire, which he handed to Humphrey. "When
thou shalt don these," he said, "it will come to pass that thou hast
been sent to bring thy young lady safe to London town."

With alacrity Humphrey tossed aside his priest's robe and clad himself
in what old Bartlemy offered him. "Now may I forget my _pax vobiscum_
and no harm be done," he exclaimed joyfully.

Hugo could but smile at the pride and pleasure of Humphrey's manner as
he arrayed himself. "Ah, my good Humphrey!" he cried; "I have found
thee out. Thou wouldst be an esquire, even as I would be a knight."

Humphrey sighed. "Yea, lad," he confessed, "but I am but a Saxon
serving-man."

Like a hawk the little old man was watching both. "And I have found
thee out," he said, turning to Hugo. "The mole on his nose doth signify
the good fortune thou wilt bring him, even as it signifieth what he
will do for me. Be sure, gentle lady, I shall serve thee well."

Hugo laughed and, in his character of lady, inclined his head
courteously.

Humphrey, who could not for a moment forget the business in hand,
ignored this pleasantry and inquired curtly: "But how goest thou with
us, Bartlemy? Will not the men who were here last night know thee?"

"Nay, verily," replied Bartlemy. "I have a friend to my counsel that
they know not of. 'Tis he who did lend these disguises, and did
instruct me, moreover, in many matters. He did bid me overcome the
young lord's objections to wearing woman's dress by naming Longchamp
and his green tunic and hood. And many other matters he hath helped me
to, even the whole conduct of the journey, as thou shalt presently
see." With one last look at Humphrey's nose he backed out of the hut
and made off in a surprisingly agile manner for one of his age.

"Now a plague upon his foolishness!" exclaimed Humphrey. "I had all but
forgotten my nose, but he will be ever bringing it to my mind. Yet, if
the mole on it take us safely through London, I complain not. And I do
hope he forget not his instructions and become again upon our hands the
witless old man of last night." He advanced to the door and glanced
out. "But here come two horses and a mule," he continued. "Whose they
be, I know not, nor what hath been done with ours."

Hugo at this also looked out the door. "In size and in gait these
horses be ours," he said.

"Yea, lad; but what should be thy black is a rusty brown with a star in
his forehead and one white foot. And what should be my gray is that
same rusty brown with two white feet and a patch on his side. And the
tails of both be bobbed, and the manes cropped, and the saddles and
housings be different. This is more of Bartlemy's 'friend to his
counsel,' perchance. And I hope his friend be not the Evil One." He
paused a moment. "Seest thou the old woman on the mule that leadeth the
horses?" he continued.

"That is Bartlemy," replied Hugo.

"Ay," agreed Humphrey. "But we had not known it had we not been made
ready for mysteries. He looketh like an ancient crone, and will be thy
old nurse, no doubt, going with thee on thy journey. Well, they be wise
men that would know the five of us."

"Five?" questioned Hugo.

"Ay, lad. Thou and Bartlemy and I and the two horses. Perchance the
mule is honest and what he seemeth to be."

Bartlemy, having tied the animals, now came up to the door of the hut
in great exultation. "What thinkest thou of these strange horses,
Humphrey?" he asked.

"I do think they lack their tails," answered Humphrey, gravely, "which
is a sad lack in summer."

The old man grinned. "And what more thinkest thou?" he asked.

"I do think they have need of manes also," was the reply.

With an air of pride the old man, clad in his woman's dress, consisting
of a long, loose, blue robe surmounted by a long, red head-rail which
reached to his knees, walked back to the horses. "Come hither," he said
to Humphrey. "It were not well to cut off what one may need before it
grow again. Seest thou how only the outside of the tail is cut so as to
bush out over what is braided fine in many strands and caught up
cunningly beneath? And come hither. Seest thou how the mane is
cunningly looped and gummed, so that it seemeth to be short, when a dip
in the stream will make it long again? And this brown is but a stain,
and the white patches a bleach that will last but till the horse sheds
again."

"This is the work of thy friend?" inquired Humphrey, gravely.

"Yea," answered old Bartlemy, jubilantly.

"And he is an honest man?"

Old Bartlemy frowned. "He is my friend. And he hath served thee well,
if he hath kept thee and the lad from the hands of the king. Ask no
more. He had not done so much, but that I did tell him it was to make
my fortune. And now mount, my esquire! mount, my gentle lady! and I,
thy nurse, will mount. And we will all away to London town."
"By which road?" asked Humphrey, reining in his stained and bleached
horse.

"By the Watling Street," was the confident answer.

Humphrey seemed dissatisfied. Seeing which the old man said: "Why, we
must e'en go by the Watling Street or the Ermine Street, since we have
the young lady here in charge. Such is the custom of travellers to go
by one or the other."

"I like not the Watling Street," objected Humphrey.

"Didst hear the men at the door of my hut?" asked old Bartlemy,
earnestly.

"Yea," replied Humphrey, briefly.

"Didst note how he who watcheth for us on the Watling Street did tell
his plans in a voice that all might hear?"

"Yea."

"Therefore I go by the Watling Street and not by the Ermine Street,"
said old Bartlemy, with determination. "He that hath so little
discretion that he telleth his plans in the ears of all who may listen
is less to be feared than he that sayeth little. He that watcheth for
us on the Ermine Street hath keen eyes and a silent tongue. Therefore
go we by the Watling Street and, moreover, the friend to my counsel
hath bid me so to do. I warrant thee more than one priest will be
stopped there, while the esquire and the young lady and the nurse
escape notice."

"Mayhap thou art right," agreed Humphrey, after some reflection.

Bartlemy did not wait to answer, but, giving his mule a slap with the
reins, set forward, and in a moment all three were crossing the glade,
whence they followed the same bridle-path by which Hugo and Humphrey
had come the day before, and so gained the Watling Street. Many people
were upon it, and Bartlemy, following the instructions of him who had
planned for him, managed to ride near enough to a merchant's party to
be mistaken as members of it by an unthinking observer.

In his garb of esquire Humphrey was more at home than in that of the
priest, and he looked boldly about him. "Here be a strange thing, lad,"
he said. "As we did come upon this road I did see a priest with his
novice pass by. Seest thou that other near at hand? And looking back I
see yet another. He that watcheth for us is like to have his hands
full."

"Many priests be abroad," replied Hugo, with a smile. "It was to that
the Canon Thurstan trusted when he sent us forth."

"He should, then, not have sent us to that rascally one at Oundle,"
growled Humphrey. "Speak not o'er much with the lady," cautioned old
Bartlemy, riding up. "It is not seemly. Let her stay by me, her nurse.
So hath the friend to my counsel instructed me."

At once Hugo fell back, reining his horse alongside the mule and a half
pace in advance; whereat old Bartlemy smiled in approbation.

"Where go we in London?" asked Hugo, curiously.

"Thou shalt see in good time," answered Bartlemy. "It may be one place,
it may be another. I can tell when we have passed him who watcheth for
us. I know many places."

The old man, turning his face away, Hugo saw that he did not wish to
talk further, so he contented himself by seeing as much as he could
with his keen young eyes of what went on before him, old Bartlemy
having previously cautioned him against gazing about over much.

As they drew nearer the city the crowd became more dense, being swelled
by those who were coming out of it on their way north. A little party
of knights, esquires, pages, and ladies travelling at a faster pace
overtook them, and so they were still better protected from observation
than before, as the new party were now obliged, by the throng, to go
forward slowly. So on they went till they came to the church of St.
Andrew, and the Fleet River, and, crossing the bridge, found
themselves, as old Bartlemy said, not far from the New Gate, through
which they must enter the city. They had no sooner entered than old
Bartlemy said to Hugo,

"Thou didst not see the man at the hut?"

"Nay," answered Hugo, with a nervous start.

"Yon at the entrance to the meat market opposite the Grey Friars is he.
Seem not to notice him, but mark him well. He hath a bailiff to his
help, and it will go hard with somebody."

"He stoppeth not that priest and his novice," observed Hugo.

"That is because the bailiff knoweth both and hath instructed him,"
answered Bartlemy. "Look downward now right modestly till we be safely
past, for thou hast a speaking eye. Thou art not lucky like the good
Humphrey, to have a dull eye, which seeth much and seemeth to see
naught."

Hugo glanced down as he was bid, and soon they were past in safety. But
Humphrey, half turning in his saddle and gazing back, saw a priest and
his novice stopped. "And the priest rideth a gray and the novice a
black," mused Humphrey, "which is a wonderful thing, and not to be
accounted for except by chance."

[Illustration: Humphrey Half Turning in His Saddle Saw the Priest]




CHAPTER XXIII


The pace at which Walter Skinner had left Dunstable for London he kept
up for some two miles, when he slackened his rein at the bidding of his
half-drunken fancy.

"I be for London town," he said to himself with a serious look. "And
other men than I have been there before now. Yea, verily, and have got
them safe home again into the bargain. But not so will I do. For in
London will I bide, either till the king make a duke of me or till I
become the Lord Mayor. For I be resolved to rise in the world. And the
first step toward it is to be resolved; yea, and to be determined; and
to look Dame Fortune full in the face and to say to her, 'Play no
tricks on me.'"

By this time he was come up with a belated carrier who, since his cart
was empty and he upon his return journey, dared to be upon the road at
night. There was no moon, and in the starlight Walter Skinner could see
but imperfectly. "And who art thou?" he demanded loftily, "that thou
shouldest creak and rumble along over the road and block the way of a
rising man? The sun doth rise, and why not I? Only the sun riseth not
in the middle of the night, and neither will I. Nay, verily, but I will
wait to rise till I be come to London town. And so I bid thee, whoever
thou art, make place for me that I may pass thee upon the road."

The carter, wondering much who this drunken madman might be, made no
answer but drove his creaking vehicle forward slowly as before, and in
the middle of the highway. Behind him, and at the tail of the cart,
followed Walter Skinner with equal slowness. For some moments he said
nothing more as, with closed eyes and heavily nodding head, he rode
along. Then he roused himself. "Stop!" he called fiercely. "Stop, I
say. I will go to bed in thy wagon or cart or whatever it may be, which
I cannot see for want of light."

"I carry not passengers for naught," observed the carter, civilly.

"Yea, but thou wilt carry me," retorted Walter Skinner. "I tell thee I
serve the king. Why, the prior of St. Edmund's did give me a horse when
mine own was gone, and wilt thou refuse me a bed? It shall go hard with
thee, varlet that thou art, if thou dost. I be ready to sink from
weariness. Lend me a hand down and into thy cart; lead thou my horse,
and so shall we proceed, I at rest as becometh the king's man, and thou
serving me, thy proper master."

The carter was slow of wit, and, as most men did, he trembled at the
mention of the king. He therefore did as he was requested, and Walter
Skinner was soon bumping along the road, oblivious to all his
surroundings. In the cart he might have remained until he reached St.
Albans, but that, just at dawn, he had a frightful dream. He was again
at Dunstable, and the landlord of the Shorn Lamb was about to deliver
him to the king who stood, in his dream, a hideous monster with horns
upon his head. In a shiver of dread he awoke. The cart was standing
still, and, at the side of the road, reposed the carter overcome by
sleep. By his side lay his drinking-horn. With trembling limbs Walter
Skinner climbed down from the cart. Then, seizing the carter's horn, he
untied his horse, which was fastened to the tail of the cart, and
mounted; took from the horn a long drink, and once more set out at a
furious pace which shortly became once more a slow one. Pausing only
long enough at St. Albans to procure breakfast for himself and a feed
for his horse, he continued on to London which he reached late in the
afternoon. But he did not go in at New Gate, for, making a sharp turn
at St. Andrew's, he went south till he came to Fleet street, when,
turning to the left, he entered the city through Lud Gate. Clad in his
scullion's garb, and with his face flushed from drink he presented a
strange appearance as he permitted his horse to carry him whither he
would through the narrow streets.

"Here be people enough," he said to himself, "and yea, verily, here be
noise enough. But I will stop all that when I be Lord Mayor. What!
shall mine ears ring with vile din? If so be I would speak to my horse
could he hear me? Nay, that he could not. When I be Lord Mayor no smith
shall strike on anvil in my presence. And when I pass by, let the
carpenters cease to drive their nails; let all the armorers cease their
hammering; let the coopers forbear to hoop their casks; and then can I
gather my wits together, which is more than I can now do."
He was right as to the din; for here in these narrow lanes the
craftsmen lived and worked. Each one had his tenement of one room above
and one below. In the one below he worked, or in the street, and in the
room above he dwelt with his family.

As he went uncertainly up one of these narrow lanes and down another,
leading north or south out of Cheapside, as the case might be, the
rabble began to gather about him and to bait him with jeers of various
sorts.

"Why, how now!" he exclaimed, when he had once more come into
Cheapside. And he put on his fiercest air, which sat strangely enough
on one clad as a scullion. "Do ye gibe and jeer at me who am servant to
the king? What know ye of young runaway lords and Saxon serving-men?
And the perils of a long way, and the keeper of the Shorn Lamb? I could
open your eyes for ye, if I thought it worth my while. But ye be all
base-born knaves--"

The last words were but out of his mouth when a strong hand jerked him
to the ground. And, not seeing what he did, as he struck fiercely out,
his clenched fist landed on the chest of the warden who was passing,
and Walter Skinner was promptly seized and about to be haled off to
punishment.

Cheapside was the principal market-place of London. It was broad, and
bordered on each side by booths or sheds for the sale of merchandise. A
sudden disturbance attracted the attention of the bailiff who held
Walter Skinner. And, even as he turned his head to look, the very man
that had dragged Walter Skinner from his horse detached the little man
from the grasp of the careless officer, and bade him flee. "Flee away,
thou half-drunken scullion," said his liberator. "Thou dost lack thy
wits, and so I would not have thee also lack thy liberty."

Now Walter Skinner was in that condition when, although he could not
walk straight, he could run. And away he went, his first impetus
carrying him well down into Bow Lane, which opened from Cheapside to
the south, where he speedily brought up against a curb post and fell
into the gutter. His appearance was not improved when he rose, but he
started again, and took this time, not the curb post, but a stout
farmer. The farmer instinctively bracing himself to meet the shock of
Walter Skinner's fall against him, no harm was done; but he whirled
round, grasped the little terrified rascal by the shoulder, and hurried
him into the adjacent inn yard. "Had I been an old woman or a young
child I might have been sprawling in the gutter," he began severely,
"and all because of thee. What account givest thou of thyself?"

"Thou art but a yeoman," returned Walter Skinner, disdainfully. "And
dost thou ask me to account to thee? Account thou to me, sirrah. What
didst thou in the street standing there like a gutter post to obstruct
the way of passengers in haste? But for thee I had been well sped on my
way."

The farmer heard him in amazement. Then he said: "I do perceive that
thou art a fool; and with fools I never meddle." And seizing him once
more by the shoulder, he thrust him into the street. "Speed on thy way,
little braggart," he said, "even till thou comest to thy master, who
must be the Evil One himself."

Walter Skinner sped away, by degrees slacking his pace till, after much
wandering, he came to a low public house on Thames Street, where he
slipped in, hid himself in a corner, and went fast asleep. It was noon
of the next day before he was discovered and routed out by a tapster.
"This be no place for a scullion," said the tapster. "Get to thy
duties."

"I be no scullion," retorted Walter Skinner, indignantly. "Till now I
was the king's man with good hope to be a duke or the mayor of London."

"I go to tell master of thee," returned the tapster. "And he will set
thee to scour knives in a trice."

The tapster was as good as his word, and Walter Skinner, much against
his will, was soon at work. "Here be another degradation," he muttered
over his knife blades, "and I stand it not. I be not so mean-spirited
as to labor, nor to do the bidding of other men who should do mine." So
saying, he stole from the kitchen and the house into the streets, where
he became a vagabond, and so remained, along with thousands of others
like unto him.

Meanwhile Hugo and Humphrey and old Bartlemy were having troubles of
their own. The places in London suitable for them to stop at which old
Bartlemy knew proved to be known to him by report only. And, lacking
the present help of him whom Humphrey was pleased to call Bartlemy's
"friend to his counsel," the whole party soon knew not where to go; for
the old man had lost the energy with which he had escorted them to
London, and seemed to have sunk back into the semi-helpless mixture of
shrewdness and credulity which he appeared when Hugo and Humphrey had
first met him. One thing, and one only, seemed to engross most of his
attention, and that was Humphrey's mole. And he was ever prating of the
fortune it was sure to bring him.

"Lad," said Humphrey at last, when they had been two days in the town,
"if we are to come safely off we must be rid of him. The gumming up of
the horses' manes and the braiding of their tails have already made the
innkeeper look strangely at us. Had he not set it down as the trick of
some malicious groom, it had been worse for us. And I do fear the old
man's babbling tongue. I will sound him to see how much will content
him, and perchance from thy pouch and mine the sum may be made up."

Old Bartlemy was growing weary of his woman's dress, and weary of
hovering around Hugo in the assumed capacity of his nurse. He was not
in his apartment when Humphrey went to seek him, and further search
revealed the fact that he was not in the house. So, somewhat disturbed,
Humphrey went forth to find him, taking with him in his bosom Hugo's
pouch as well as his own. The inn where they were now stopping was the
White Horse in Lombard Street, and as Humphrey issued forth into the
street he knew not which way to turn. "The old nurse did go south
toward the waterside," volunteered a groom, who observed Humphrey's
hesitation. "She seemeth like one that lacketh wit, and so I did keep a
watch upon her till she went beyond my sight."

Humphrey flung the groom a penny and went south himself at a good gait.
"If he be not at some public house I shall find him at a cock-fighting,
no doubt," said Humphrey to himself. It was now the second day of July
and clear and warm. The streets were full of hucksters having for sale,
besides their usual wares, summer fruits and vegetables. But to all
their cries Humphrey turned a deaf ear as he pushed impatiently on,
keeping a sharp lookout for old Bartlemy. And what was his amazement to
come upon him at last at the river side clad, not as the nurse, but in
his own proper character.

"How now!" exclaimed Humphrey, with a frown. "Where is thy woman's
garb? And what meanest thou to cast it aside in this manner?"

The old man peered up at him with a sly look on his face. "Ay, thou
mayest storm," he said; "but if I be tired of woman's garb, what is
that to thee?"

"Why, this," returned Humphrey. "Thou dost endanger our heads by this
change."

The old man shook his head and smiled a silly smile. "Nay," he made
answer. "I would not endanger thy head, for that would endanger the
mole upon thy nose, and so my fortune. Thou doest me wrong."

Humphrey looked at him attentively and saw that a temporary weakness of
mind due to his age had overtaken him. So he said in a soothing tone:
"Where didst thou leave thy nurse's garb? I pray thee put it on again."

Again there came the sly look over the old man's withered face. "I do
know where I did leave it," he said; "but I put it not on again. The
friend I have to my counsel did bid me put it on, and I did obey him,
for he is a magician. But I like it not, and I will wear it no more.
Why, look thou," he continued earnestly. "When I wear it I must remain
with the young lord, and be not free to consort with other men, and see
and hear all that goeth on. Wherefore I will wear it no more."

Humphrey looked at him in despair. Then he said with assumed
cheerfulness: "I will now make thy fortune for thee. So mayest thou
return to the wood while we journey on."

Old Bartlemy, as he listened, smiled with the delight of a child. "Said
not the fortune-teller truly?" he cried. "And how much is my fortune
that thou wilt make?"

"Why, that I hardly can tell," returned Humphrey. "What callest thou a
fortune?"

Old Bartlemy looked at him craftily. "The friend to my counsel did say
one hundred and fifty gold pieces, and that will pay for the
disguises."

"No less?" asked Humphrey.

"Nay," returned old Bartlemy. "If thou dost leave me, I may never see
the mole upon thy nose again. Therefore pay to me the one hundred and
fifty gold pieces before I ask thee more. For the friend to my counsel
did say, 'Take no less, and as much more as thou canst get.'"

"Thou art hard to content," said Humphrey. "But come thou to the
nearest reputable inn, where we may be unwatched, and I will pay to
thee the one hundred and fifty gold pieces which thou dost require.
Should they of the street see thee receive it, thou wouldst not keep it
long."

The old man, with a crafty shake of the head, followed along in
Humphrey's wake. "I have the wit to keep my fortune," he said. "No man
may wrest it from me."

Without further words Humphrey led the way, his mind full of anxious
thoughts as to how he was to get himself, Hugo, and the horses away
from the White Horse in Lombard Street without rousing suspicion when
the mule of old Bartlemy was left behind and the old man himself in his
character of nurse was missing. He was still busily thinking when they
came to a respectable little inn called the Hart. Turning to old
Bartlemy, who was following close behind, he said, "Here do we stop
till I pay thee what thou hast asked."

Old Bartlemy said nothing, but he rubbed his hands together in delight,
and kept so close to Humphrey that he almost trod on his heels.

"Now," said Humphrey, when they were alone and the old man had been
paid, "I ask thee this grace, Bartlemy. Wilt thou not once more put on
the nurse's garb and come back with me to the White Horse till I can
pay the reckoning and get away? After that thou mayest cast it aside
and wear it no more."

"Nay," replied old Bartlemy, jingling the gold pieces and looking at
them with gloating eyes. "Nay, I will put on woman's dress no more."

"Not if I pay thee to do so?"

"Nay. I have here my fortune. What have I need of more?" And he sat
down obstinately and became at once absorbed in counting over his gold
pieces.

Humphrey, seeing that nothing was to be gained, and anxious for Hugo's
welfare, at once left the room and the house and set out for the White
Horse.




CHAPTER XXIV


Through the same crowded streets, and entirely unmindful of the people
who jostled him, Humphrey mechanically pushed his way on his return
journey. How should he and Hugo get away from the White Horse? He knew
very little of the world, but this much he knew, that for them to
attempt to leave with the old nurse missing would be to thoroughly
arouse the suspicion which, so far, was half dormant.

"I will pay the reckoning now," he said to himself as he entered the
inn yard. "And then we must do as we can to give them the slip. I know
not why, but dreams be slow to come in this town. I would we were
safely out of it."

He had but just paid it, and the innkeeper was about to inquire
concerning his departure, when a great excitement arose. One of the
frequent fires, for which the London of that day was noted, had broken
out.

"A fire, sayest thou?" cried Humphrey.

"Yea," answered a groom, bursting into the bar. "A fire, master! a
fire!"

Away ran the groom followed by the master. And Hugo coming down at this
moment, Humphrey hurried to him. "Make haste, lad!" he cried. "Come
with me to the stables. We must e'en serve ourselves and get out the
horses and be off, ere the fire abate and the innkeeper and the grooms
come back."

Hugo wondered, but said nothing, for he saw that Humphrey was greatly
excited. And with despatch the horses were saddled and led out. "I
would not that people lose their homes unless they must," said
Humphrey, when they were safely away; "but the fire hath saved us, and
I warrant thee we pay not one hundred and fifty gold pieces for the
saving neither."

"Didst pay so much?" asked Hugo.

"Yea, lad," answered Humphrey. "It seemeth the 'friend to his counsel'
did set the price he was to ask, and nothing less would content him. He
did even hint at more."

"And how much remaineth?" asked Hugo.

"But fifty gold pieces, lad. We be now near our journey's end. Mayhap
they be enough."

"Yea," replied Hugo, thoughtfully. "I must not go to the priory of the
Holy Trinity unless I have great need. So said my uncle to me."

"And where is that, lad?"

"Here in London. It is a powerful and wealthy priory, but my uncle did
say it is as well to pass it by if I can."

"Mind thou thine uncle, lad. But whither go we now?"

"To Dover. Then do we take ship to France."

They had now come to the new London bridge which was of stone. Over it
they went, and had just started on their journey from its southern end
when, in haste, old Bartlemy, clad as the nurse, arrived at the White
Horse. He had slowly and laboriously counted his gold pieces three
times before it occurred to him that one hundred and fifty of these
treasures was no great sum. And that, if he did as Humphrey had
requested, he would be able to add other gold pieces to his store. Thus
thinking, he had repaired to the hiding-place of his disguise, put it
on, and set out.

At the same moment of his arrival the innkeeper came back, and a little
later the grooms began to straggle in.

Old Bartlemy, however, paid no attention to who came in or who went
out. His sole concern was to find Humphrey. Not succeeding, he appealed
to the innkeeper to know what was become of him.

"Why, that I know not," replied the innkeeper, indifferently. "Most
like he hath not yet returned from the fire."

Impatiently old Bartlemy, forgetting that he was a woman, and nurse to
a young lady of the better sort, sat down in the inn yard upon a bench.
And ever and anon as no Humphrey appeared he got up and mingled with
the knots of other men standing about, only to return to his seat.
Finally he could restrain himself no longer, but eagerly began to
inquire of all newcomers as to the whereabouts of Humphrey. Now while
his were questions which no man could answer, they were put in such a
manner as to make men stare curiously upon him. For they were such
questions as one man would ask of another, and not the timid inquiries
of an ignorant old woman. Finally, one of the bystanders more daring
than the rest advanced, and boldly turned back the hood of the head-rail,
letting it hang down over his shoulders, and the head of an old
man was revealed. A murmur of surprise and expectation now ran through
the crowd, and the same bold hand bodily removed the head-rail and the
robe beneath it; and there stood old Bartlemy in his gray woollen
tunic, his legs bare from the knees down, and his feet encased in skin
shoes reaching to his ankles.

"Well done, mother!" cried the bold revealer of his identity. "And now
do thou tell us speedily who is this esquire Humphrey whom thou
seekest. Mayhap he is as little an esquire as thou art an old woman."

Bartlemy looked from face to face, but he answered nothing.

At this moment a groom came running from the stables. "Master! master!"
he cried, addressing the innkeeper, "the horse of the esquire Humphrey
be gone."

"Gone, sirrah!" repeated the innkeeper. "And whither is he gone?"

"Why, that I know not, master. I only know that the horse of the young
lady did bear him company. But the mule of the nurse is still there,
wherefore there is no thievery, since he did take but his own."

The bystanders now crowded more closely around Bartlemy, with the
innkeeper at the front as questioner. "Tell us truly, old man," said
the innkeeper, threateningly; "who is this esquire Humphrey, and who
is the young lady that beareth him company? Make haste with thine
answer, or it shall be worse for thee."

"Why," replied old Bartlemy, slowly, as his gaze wandered from face to
face, "the esquire is the false priest from Oundle, and the young lady
is his novice."

At this reply a man from the rear elbowed his way to the side of the
innkeeper. "I know not how it may please thee," he said, "but, on the
Watling Street by the meat market two days and more agone, a man with a
bailiff to his help did stop a priest and his novice. And he did act
like a madman when he did discover that he had stopped the wrong
persons, and prated of a reward from the king which he must lose."

Old Bartlemy grinned as he listened. Seeing which the innkeeper pounced
upon him. "Were these the priest and his novice?" he asked fiercely.

"Yea, verily," answered old Bartlemy, proudly. "And they would have
been caught but for me. And now I know not whither they be gone," he
added disconsolately. "And perchance I shall see them no more; nor
shall I see the mole on the nose of the good Humphrey more; and so,
farewell to the fortune it might bring me."

"And who is the young lady?" said the innkeeper, with a fierce look.

"Why, she be a fine lad," replied old Bartlemy.

The innkeeper reflected amid a low hum of comment. Then he turned on
the man who had told him of the priest and his novice. "Thou sayest the
king hath a reward for this priest and his novice?" he asked.

"Yea."

"And who be they?" asked the innkeeper.

"They are like to be as little priest and his novice as they be esquire
and young lady. Who be they, I say?"

"I had speech later with the bailiff, and he did say that the priest
was a Saxon serving-man, and the novice was the young lord, Josceline
De Aldithely, escaping to his father."

"After them! after them!" cried the innkeeper, furiously. "They be a
prize!"

In the hurly-burly and din that now arose old Bartlemy slipped out to
the stables, got possession of his mule, and rode off unnoticed.

There were in the London of this time many great town houses of the
nobles. And that of Lord De Launay was situated in Lombard Street, not
far from the White Horse. To it he went riding, at this moment, with a
small retinue in livery. He looked in surprise at the commotion before
the White Horse, and beckoning a retainer he said, "Find me the meaning
of this uproar." Then he rode slowly on to his home.

He had but entered the great square courtyard when the retainer came in
on a gallop. "Your lordship, it be this," he said. "They have but just
struck the trail of the young Lord De Aldithely and will presently run
him to earth, hoping for the reward offered by the king. He rideth now
disguised as a lady, and the serving-man rideth as his esquire."

Now Lord De Launay was he who in the guise of a scullion had set Walter
Skinner free, and all for the friendship he bore Josceline's father. So
calling up twenty of his men-at-arms he sent them in pursuit. "No doubt
they ride to Dover," he said. "Make haste to come up with them. Bid the
young lord cast aside his woman's garb, and stay ye by them as an
escort on the road. Leave them not till they be safely aboard ship and
off to France."

The men-at-arms of Lord De Launay were of the best of that time, being
both bold and faithful, and their master stood but little in awe of the
king. Not that he openly flouted the king's authority, but that, at all
times, he dared to pursue the course that seemed to him best. And this
he could do for two reasons; he pursued it quietly, and the king felt a
little fear of him. Moreover, the king did not discover how much he
owed to him for the thwarting of his plans. Else, powerful noble though
he was, Lord De Launay would have been punished.

Meanwhile, Hugo and Humphrey were making the best of their way, and
stopping not to look to the right hand nor to the left. After them
galloped the men-at-arms, and not many miles out of the city they
overtook them.

Upon their approach the fugitives gave themselves up as lost. "Lad,"
said Humphrey, despairingly, "we have done our best, and we be taken at
last. No doubt these be the king's men-at-arms that ride so swiftly
upon our track. See how they be armed, and how their horses stride!"

Hugo looked over his shoulder, and his face was pale. But there was no
regret in his heart for the attempt he had made to save Josceline, even
though the king's dungeon seemed now to open before him. He said
nothing, and a moment later the men-at-arms swept up and surrounded
them, their leader saluting Hugo, much to the boy's surprise. "My lord
bids thee cast aside thy woman's dress," said he, "and ride in thine
own character."

"And who art thou? And who is thy lord? And wherefore art thou come?"
demanded Humphrey, bravely, as he spurred his horse between Hugo and
the man-at-arms who had spoken.

The man-at-arms laughed. "I see thou hast cause to dread pursuit," he
said. "And, in truth, we did pass some vile knaves riding fast to
overtake ye. One and all they do hope for the king's reward, for the
old man at the White Horse hath betrayed ye."

Closer to Hugo's side Humphrey reined his horse, and the captain of the
men-at-arms laughed louder than before. "Why, what couldst thou do for
the lad against us?" he said. "And yet, thou art brave to try. But put
away thy fears. Lord De Launay is, as thou shouldst know, the sworn
friend of Lord De Aldithely, and he hath sent us to overtake ye and to
carry ye safe to the ship at Dover. So let us on and set a merry pace
for these knaves that would follow us. But first, off with that woman's
robe, my young lord Josceline."

"Willingly!" cried Hugo, who did not even now betray the secret that he
was not Josceline, not knowing what might come of it. And he threw off
hood, cloak, and robe while Humphrey looked from the captain to the boy
and back again. But without a word to the faithful serving-man, the
captain gave the command to the troop, and immediately all were in
swift motion.

A mile was left behind them,--two miles,--and now Humphrey looked at
Hugo amazed. Among these men-at-arms who treated him with a respect
which was like an elixir to him, the boy sat transformed. He held
himself proudly, and seemed, as he sat, a part of his horse. His
handsome eyes shone, and a genial smile parted his lips.

"Who art thou, dear lad?" thought Humphrey. "And though that I cannot
tell, yet this I know, thou art the equal of any De Aldithely." And
then Hugo's eyes fell upon him, and they filled with a most kindly
light.

Meanwhile the motley crowd that had started in pursuit from the White
Horse had become appreciably thinned upon the road. For one was no
rider, and was promptly pitched over his horse's head. Another, in his
haste, had but imperfectly saddled his horse, so that he was speedily
at the side of the road with his horse gone. Others had chosen poor
mounts that could go but slowly, being waggoners' horses and not
accustomed to any but a slow motion.

All these, with disappointment, saw the hope of the king's reward
slipping from them, and looked with envy upon the few who passed them
and vanished from their sight, with determination written on their
faces. Yet even these were destined to failure and, before Rochester
was reached, were fain to turn back, having seen nothing of those whom
they sought.

But the troop of men-at-arms with Hugo and Humphrey still sped, halting
for the night in a safe spot, and rising betimes in the morning to
hurry on, until, their duty done, and the two safely aboard, they
turned back at their leisure.

And all this time, upon the sea going down from Scotland was a ship
which bore Lady De Aldithely and Josceline. Even in the wilds of
Scotland she could not rest, knowing that no spot would remain
unsearched if it should be discovered that it was Hugo Aungerville and
not Josceline who had fled to France. So she and her son had embarked,
and, two days before Hugo and Humphrey, they reached Lord De Aldithely.
And there they found William Lorimer and his men-at-arms, but, to Lady
De Aldithely's distress, no Hugo nor tidings of him.

"What lad is this thou speakest of?" asked Lord De Aldithely.

And then Lady De Aldithely told him all. "And his name," she ended, "is
Hugo Aungerville. Knowest thou aught of him?"

"I should," replied Lord De Aldithely. "Though I have never seen him, I
do know he must be the son of my cousin, Eleanor De Aldithely; for he
hath her brave spirit, and her husband was Hugo Aungerville. And the
lad shall be knighted or ever he arrive. For if he elude the king
successfully and on such an errand, risking his own life to save that
of another, he hath won his spurs."

Thus it was that when Hugo came welcome was waiting for him in the warm
hearts of his kinsfolk. And when he had received his spurs, and Lord De
Aldithely asked him what reward he could give him for saving Josceline
from the king's hands, the boy smiled archly upon the faithful Humphrey
who stood by. "I do ask thee," he said, "that Humphrey may be my
esquire."

And from that day Humphrey, a serving-man no longer, followed his dear
lad, not only in France, but later in England, when Magna Charta had
been signed, and it was safe for them all to return.

THE END










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Boy's Ride, by Gulielma Zollinger

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BOY'S RIDE ***

***** This file should be named 7806.txt or 7806.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/8/0/7806/

Produced by Patricia L. Ehler, Suzanne L. Shell, Charles
Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
