The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Happy End, by Joseph Hergesheimer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Happy End

Author: Joseph Hergesheimer


Release Date: April, 2005  [EBook #7843]
This file was first posted on May 22, 2003
Last Updated: May 21, 2013

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAPPY END ***




Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Tiffany Vergon, Joshua
Hutchinson, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team








THE HAPPY END

By Joseph Hergesheimer



Books By Joseph Hergesheimer

  The Happy End
  Java Head
  Gold And Iron
  The Three Black Pennys
  Mountain Blood
  The Lay Anthony




THE HAPPY END



DEDICATION


These stories have but one purpose--to give pleasure; and they have been
made into a book at the requests of those I have fortunately pleased. It
is, therefore, to such friends of my writing that they are addressed and
dedicated. However, this is not an effort to avoid my responsibility:
but to whom? Not to critics, not middlemen, nor the Academies of which
I am so reprehensibly ignorant; not, certainly, to my neighbor. They
brought me, in times of varying difficulty, food; and for that excellent
reason I am forced to conclude that, then as now, I am responsible to my
grocer.




CONTENTS

  Lonely Valleys
  The Egyptian Chariot
  The Flower of Spain
  Tol'able David
  Bread
  Rosemary Roselle
  The Thrush in the Hedge




LONELY VALLEYS


The maid, smartly capped in starched ruffled muslin and black, who
admitted them to the somber luxury of the rectory, hesitated in
unconcealed sulky disfavor.

"Doctor Goodlowe has hardly started dinner," she asserted.

"Just ask him to come out for a little," the man repeated.

He was past middle age, awkward in harsh ill-fitting and formal clothes
and with a gaunt high-boned countenance and clear blue eyes.

His companion, a wistfully pale girl under an absurd and expensive hat,
laid her hand in an embroidered white silk glove on his arm and said in
a low tone: "We won't bother him, Calvin. There are plenty of ministers
in Washington; or we could come back later."

"There are, and we could," he agreed; "but we won't. I'm not going to
wait a minute more for you, Lucy. Not now that you are willing. Why, I
have been waiting half my life already."

I

A gaunt young man with clear blue eyes sat on the bank of a mountain
road and gazed at the newly-built house opposite. It was the only
dwelling visible. Behind, the range rose in a dark wall against the
evening sky; on either hand the small green valley was lost in a blue
haze of serried peaks. The house was not imposing; in reality small,
but a story and a half, it had a length of three rooms with a kitchen
forming an angle, invisible from where Calvin Stammark sat; an outside
chimney at each end, and a narrow covered portico over the front door.

An expiring clatter of hoofs marked the departure of the neighbor who
had helped Calvin set the last flanged course. It seemed incredible that
it was finished, ready--when the furniture and bright rag carpet had
been placed--for Hannah. "The truck patch will go in there on the
right," he told himself; "and gradually I'll get the slope cleared out,
corn and buckwheat planted."

He twisted about, facing the valley. It was deep in grass, watered with
streams like twisting shining ribbons, and held a sleek slow-grazing
herd of cattle.

The care of the latter, a part of Senator Alderwith's wide possessions,
was to form Calvin's main occupation--for the present anyhow. Calvin
Stammark had larger plans for his future with Hannah. Some day he would
own the Alderwith pastures at his back and be grazing his own steers.

His thoughts returned to Hannah, and he rose and proceeded to where
a saddled horse was tied beside the road. He ought to go back to
Greenstream and fix up before seeing her; but with their home all built,
his impatience to be with her was greater than his sense of propriety,
and he put his horse at a sharp canter to the left.

Calvin continued down the valley until the road turned toward the
range and an opening which he followed into a steeper and narrower rift
beyond. Here there were no clearings in the rocky underbrush until he
reached Richmond Braley's land. A long upturning sweep ended at the
house, directly against the base of the mountain; and without decreasing
his gait he passed over the faintly traced way, by the triangular sheep
washing and shearing pen, to the stabling shed.

Hannah's mother was bending fretfully over the kitchen stove, and
Richmond, her father, was drawing off sodden leather boots. He was a
man tall and bowed, stiff but still powerful, with a face masked in an
unkempt tangle of beard.

"H'y, Calvin," he cried; "you're just here for spoon licking! Lucy was
looking for company." Mrs. Braley's comment was below her breath, but
it was plainly no corroboration of her husband's assurance. "You'll find
Hannah in the front of the house," Richmond added. Hannah was sitting on
the stone steps at the side entrance to the parlor. As usual she had
a bright bow in the hair streaming over her back, and her feet were
graceful in slippers with thin black stockings. She kissed him willingly
and studied him with wide-opened hazel-brown eyes. There wasn't another
girl in Greenstream, in Virginia, with Hannah's fetching appearance, he
decided with a glow of adoration. She had a--a sort of beauty entirely
her own; it was not exactly prettiness, but a quality far more
disturbing, something a man could never forget.

"She's done," he told her abruptly.

"What?" Hannah gazed up at him with a dim sweetness in the gathering
dusk.

"What!" he mocked her. "You ought to be ashamed to ask. Why, the
house--our home. We could move in by a week if we were called to. We can
get married any time."

She now looked away from him, her face still and dreaming.

"You don't seem overly anxious," Calvin declared.

"It's just the idea," she replied. "I never thought of it like this
before--right on a person." She sighed. "Of course it will be nice,
Calvin."

He sat below her with an arm across her slim knees. "I'm going to dig
right into the truck patch; there's a parcel of poles cut for the beans.
It won't be much the first year; but wait and we'll show people how to
live." He repeated his vision in connection with the present Alderwith
holdings.

"I wonder will we ever be rich like the senator?"

"Certainly," he answered with calm conviction. "A man couldn't be
shiftless with you to do for, Hannah. He'd be obliged to have everything
the best."

"It'll take a long while though," she continued.

"We will have to put in some hard licks," he admitted. "But we are
young; we've got a life to do it in."

"A man has, but I don't know about girls. It seems like they get old
faster; and then things--silk dresses don't do them any good. How would
ma look in fashionable clothes!"

"You won't have to wait that long," he assured her. "Your father has
never hurt himself about the place, there's no money in sheep; and as
for Hosmer--you know well as me that he is nothing outside of the bank
and his own comfort. Store clothes is Hosmer all through."

"I wish you were a little like him there," Hannah returned.

He admitted that this evening he was more untidy than need be. "I just
couldn't wait to see you," he declared; "with our place and--and all so
safe and happy."

II

The Braley table, spread after the Greenstream custom in the kitchen,
was surrounded by Richmond and Calvin--Hosmer had stayed late at the
bank--Hannah and Susan, the eldest of the children, prematurely aged and
wasted by a perpetual cough, while Lucy Braley moved carelessly between
the stove and the table. At rare intervals she was assisted by Hannah,
who bore the heavy dishes in a silent but perceptible air of protest.

Calvin Stammark liked this; it was a part of her superiority to the
other girls of the locality. He made up his mind that she should never
lose her present gentility. Whenever he could afford it Hannah must
have help in the house. No greater elegance was imaginable. Senator
Alderwith, at his dwelling with its broad porch, had two servants--two
servants and a bathtub with hot water running right out of a tap. And he
Calvin Stammark, would have the same, before Hannah and he were too old
to enjoy it.

He had eleven hundred dollars now, after buying the land about
his house. When the right time came he would invest it in more
property--grazing, a few herd of cattle and maybe in timber. Calvin had
innumerable schemes for their betterment and success. To all this the
sheer fact of Hannah was like the haunting refrain of a song. She was
never really out of his planning. He might be sitting on his rooftree
squaring the shingling; bargaining with Eli Goss, the stone-cutter;
renewing the rock salt for Alderwith's steers; but running through every
occupation was the memory of Hannah's pale distracting face, the scarlet
thread of the lips she was continually biting, her slender solid body.

He had heard that her mother was like that when she was young; but
looking at Mrs. Braley's spent being, hearing her thin complaining
voice, it seemed impossible. People who had known her in her youth
asserted that it was so. Phebe too, they said, was the same--Phebe who
had left Greenstream nine years ago, when she was seventeen, to become
an actress in the great cities beyond the mountains. This might or
might not be a fact. Calvin always doubted that any one else could have
Hannah's charm.

However, he had never seen Phebe; he had moved from a distant part of
the county to the principal Greenstream settlement after she had gone.
But the legend of Phebe's beauty and talent was a part of the Braley
household. Mrs. Braley told it as a distinguished trait that Phebe would
never set her hand in hot dishwater. Calvin noted that Hannah was often
blamed for domestic negligence, but this and far more advanced conduct
in Phebe was surrounded by a halo of superiority.

After supper, in view of the fact of their courtship, Calvin and Hannah
were permitted to sit undisturbed in the formality of the parlor. The
rest of the family congregated with complete normality in the kitchen.
The parlor was an uncomfortable chamber with uncomfortable elaborate
chairs in orange plush upholstery, a narrow sofa, an organ of highly
varnished lightwood ornamented with scrolled fretwork, and a cannon
stove with polished brass spires.

Calvin sat on the sofa with an arm about Hannah's waist, while she
twisted round her finger the ring he had given her, a ring of warranted
gold clasping a large red stone. Her throat was circled by a silver
chain supporting a mounted polished Scotch pebble, his gift as well.
Their position was conventional; Calvin's arm was cramped from its
unusual position, he had to brace his feet to keep firm on the slippery
plush, but he was dazed with delight. His heart throbs were evident in
his wrists and throat, while a tenderness of pity actually wet his eyes.
At times he spoke in a hushed voice, phrases meaningless in word but
charged with inarticulate emotion; Hannah replied more coherently; but
for the most they were silent. She accepted the situation with evident
calm as an inevitable part of life. Drawn against him she rested her
head lightly on his shoulder, her gaze speculative and undisturbed.

Once he exclaimed: "I don't believe you love me! I don't believe you're
interested in the things for the kitchen or the bedroom suite I saw in a
catalogue at Priest's store!"

"Don't be silly!" she murmured. "Why shouldn't I be when it's my own,
when it's all I'm going to have."

He cried bravely. "It's only the beginning! Wait till you see our cattle
herded over the mountain to the railroad; wait till you see a spur come
up the Sugarloaf and haul away our hardwood. Just you wait----"

There was the clip-clip of a horse outside, and the creaking of wheels.

"I believe that's Hosmer." Hannah rose. "It's funny, too, because he
said he'd have to stay at the hotel to-night, there was so much settling
up at the bank."

It was, however, Hosmer Braley. He paused at the parlor door, a man in
the vicinity of thirty, fat in body and carefully clad, with a white
starched collar and figured satin tie.

"I didn't want to drive out," he said, at once bland and aggrieved; "but
it couldn't be helped. Here's a piece of news for all of you--Phebe is
coming home to visit She wrote me to say so, and I only got the letter
this evening. Whatever do you suppose took her?"

Hannah at once flushed with excitement--like, Calvin Stammark thought,
the parlor lamp with the pink shade, turned up suddenly. An instant
vague depression settled over him; Hannah, only the minute before in his
arms, seemed to draw away from him, remote and unconcerned by anything
but Phebe's extraordinary return. Hosmer made it clear that the event
promised nothing but annoyance for him.

"She's coming by to-morrow's stage," he went on, untouched by the
sensation his information had wrought in the kitchen; "and it's certain
I can't meet her. The bank's sending me into West Virginia about some
securities."

Richmond Braley, it developed further, was bound to a day's work on the
public roads. They turned to Calvin.

"Take my buggy," Hosmer offered; "I'll have to go from Durban by rail."

There was no reason why he shouldn't meet Phebe Braley, Calvin realized.
He lingered, gazing with silent longing at Hannah, but it was evident
that she had no intention of returning to the parlor.

III

Waiting in Hosmer's buggy for the arrival of the Greenstream stage and
Phebe Braley, Calvin was conscious of the persistence of the depression
that had invaded him at the announcement of her visit. He resented,
too, the new element thrust into the Braley household, disrupting the
familiar course of his love. Hannah had been unreasonably distracted by
the actuality of Phebe's return--the Phebe who had gone away from the
mountains and become an actress.

The buggy was drawn to one side of the principal Greenstream road,
at the post-office. Before him the way crossed the valley and lifted
abruptly to the slope of the eastern range. At his back the village--the
brick Methodist church and the white painted Presbyterian church, the
courthouse with its dignified columns, the stores at the corners of the
single crossroads, and varied dwellings--was settling into the elusive
May twilight. The highest peaks in the east were capped with dissolving
rose by the lowering sun, and the sky was a dusty blue.

Calvin Stammark heard the approaching stage before he saw it; then the
long rigid surrey with its spare horses rapidly rolled up over the open
road to the post-office. He got down and moved diffidently forward,
seeing and recognizing Phebe immediately. This was made possible by her
resemblance to Hannah; and yet, Calvin added, no two women could be more
utterly different.

Phebe Braley had a full figure--she was almost stout--a body of the
frankest emphasized curves in a long purple coat with a collar of soiled
white fur. A straw hat with the brim caught by a short purple-dyed
ostrich feather was pinned to a dead-looking crinkled mass of
greenish-gold hair, and her face--the memorable features of Hannah--was
loaded with pink powder.

Calvin said: "You must be Phebe Braley. Well, I'm Calvin Stammark. Your
father or Hosmer couldn't meet the stage and so they had to let me get
you. Where's your bag?"

She adopted at once an air of comfortable familiarity. "I don't remember
your name," she said, settling beside him in the buggy.

He told her that he had come to this vicinity after she had gone and
that he was about to marry her sister.

"The hell you say!" she replied with cheerful surprise. "Who'd thought
Hannah was old enough to have a fellow!"

They were out of the village now and she produced a paper pack of
cigarettes from a leather hand bag with a florid gilt top. Flooding her
being with smoke she gazed with a shudder at the mountain wall on either
hand, the unbroken greenery sweeping to the sky.

"It's worse than I remembered," she confided, resting against him. "A
person with any life to them would go dippy here. Say, it's fierce! And
yet, inside of me, I'm kind of glad to see it. I used to dream about the
mountains, and this is like riding in the dream. I'm glad you came for
me and let me down easy into things. I suppose they live in the kitchen
home and pa'd lose a currycomb in his beard. Does Hosmer still beller if
he gets the chicken neck?

"Do you sit in the holy parlor for your courting, and ain't that plush
sofa a God-forsaken perch for two little love birds? It's funny how I
remember this and that. I reckon ma's temper don't improve with age.
They kid me something dreadful about saying 'reckon,' in the talent. But
it's all good and a dam' sight better than 'I guess.' That's all they
get off me."

Calvin Stammark's vague uneasiness changed to an acute dislike, even a
fear of Phebe. Her freedom of discourse and person, the powdered hard
fare close to his, the reek of scent--all rasped the delicacy of his
love for Hannah. The sisters were utterly different, and yet he
would have realized instantly their relationship. Phebe, too, had the
disturbing quality that made Hannah so appealing. In the former it was
coarsened, almost lost; almost but not quite.

"I'll bet," she continued, "that I'm the only female prodigal on the
bills. Not that I've been feeding on husks. Not me. Milwaukee lager and
raw beef sandwiches. I have a passion for them after the show. We do
two a day and I want solid refreshment. I wonder if you ever saw me. Of
course you didn't, but you might have. Ned Higmann's Parisian Dainties.
Rose Rayner's what I go by. That's French, but spelled different, and
means brightness. And I'm bright, Casper.

"My, what are you so glum about--the dump you live in or matrimony?
There was a gentleman in an orchestra in Harrisburg wanted to marry
me--he played the oboe--but I declined. Too Bohemian.... This is where
we turn," she cried instinctively, and they swung into the valley where
the Braleys had their clearing.

Phebe crushed the cigarette in her fingers. Suddenly she was nervous.

"It's natural I have changed a lot," she said. "If you hear me saying
anything rough pinch me."

Richmond Braley was standing beside his house in the muddy clothes
in which he had labored on the roads, and Mrs. Braley and Hannah came
eagerly forward. Behind them sounded Susan's racking cough. Sentimental
tears rolled dustily over Phebe's cheeks as she kissed and embraced her
mother and sisters.

"H'y," Richmond Braley awkwardly saluted her; and "H'y," she answered in
the local manner.

"Well," he commented, "you hain't forgotten that anyway."

Calvin was asked to stay for the supper that had been delayed for
Phebe's return, but when he declined uncertainly he wasn't pressed.
Putting up Hosmer's rig and saddling his own horse he rode slowly and
dejectedly on.

Instead of going directly back to Greenstream he followed the way that
led to his new house. The evening was silvery with a full brilliant
moon, and the fresh paint and bright woodwork were striking against the
dark elevated background of trees. The truck patch would be dug on the
right, the clearing widen rod by rod. From Alderwith's meadows came the
soft blowing of a steer's nostrils, while the persistent piping of the
frogs in the hollows fluctuated in his depressed consciousness.

Calvin had drawn rein and sat on his horse in the road. He was trying to
picture Hannah standing in the door waiting for him, to hear her calling
him from work; but always Phebe intervened with her travesty of Hannah's
clear loveliness.

IV

Again at the Braleys' he found the family--in the kitchen--listening
with absorbed interest to Phebe's stories of life and the stage.
Richmond Braley sat with an undisguised wonderment and frequent
exclamations; there was a faint flush in Mrs. Braley's dun cheeks; Susan
tried without success to strangle her coughing. Only Hosmer was
unmoved; at times he nodded in recognition of the realities of Phebe's
narratives; his attitude was one of complacent understanding.

Calvin, at last succeeding in catching Hannah's attention, made a
suggestive gesture toward the front of the house, but she ignored his
desire. She, more than any of the others, was intent upon Phebe. And he
realized that Phebe paid her a special attention.

"My," she exclaimed, "the healthy life has put you in the front row. Ned
Higmann would rave about your shape and airs. It's too bad to bury
them here in the mountains. I reckon you love me for that"--she turned
cheerfully to Calvin--"but it's the truth. If you could do anything at
all, Hannah, you'd lead a chorus and go in the olio. And you would draw
at the stage door better than you would on the front. Young and fresh as
a daisy spells champagne and diamond garters. I don't believe they'd let
you stay in burlesque but sign you for comic opera."

The blood beat angrily in Calvin Stammark's head. Whatever did Phebe
mean by talking like that to Hannah just when she was to marry him!
He cursed silently at Richmond Braley's fatuous face, at Mrs. Braley's
endorsement of all that her eldest daughter related, at Hosmer's
assumption of worldly experience. But Hannah's manner filled him with
apprehension.

"It's according to how you feel," Phebe continued; "some like to get
up of a black winter morning and fight the kitchen fire. I don't. Some
women are happy handing plates to their husband while he puts down a
square feed. Not in mine."

"The loneliness is what I hate," Hannah added.

"It's hell," the other agreed. "Excuse me, ma."

Hannah went on: "And you get old without ever seeing things. There
is all that you tell about going on--those crowds and the jewels and
dresses, the parties and elegant times; but there is never a whisper
of it in Greenstream; nothing but the frogs that I could fairly scream
at--and maybe a church social." As she talked Hannah avoided Celvin
Stammark's gaze.

"Me and you'll have a conversation," Phebe promised her recklessly.

Choking with rage Calvin rose. "I might as well move along," he
asserted.

"Don't get heated," Phebe advised him. "I wouldn't break up your happy
home, only I want Hannah to have an idea of what's what. I don't doubt
you'll get her for a wife."

"There's nothing but slaving for a woman round here," Mrs. Braley put
in. "I'm right glad Phebe had so much spirit."

Richmond Braley evidently thought it was time for certain reservations.
"You mustn't come down so hard on Calvin and me," he said practically.
"We're both likely young fellows."

"I'll be here evening after to-morrow," Calvin told Hannah in a low
voice.

She nodded without interest. They must be married at once, he decided,
his wise horse following unerringly the rocky road, stepping through
splashing dark fords. If there was a repetition of the past visit he
would have something to say. Hannah was his, she was promised to him. He
felt the coolness of her cheeks, her bright mouth against his. A tyranny
of misery and desire flooded him at the sudden danger--it was as much as
that--threatening his happiness and life.

It was a danger founded on his entire ignorance of what he must combat.
He couldn't visualize it, but it never occurred to him that Hannah would
actually go away--leave him and Greenstream. No, it was a quality in
Hannah herself, a thing that had always lurked below the surface, beyond
his knowledge until now. Yet he realized that it formed a part of her
appeal, a part of her distinction over the other girls of the county.

Maybe it was because he was never in his heart absolutely certain of
her--even when she was closest to him she seemed to slip away beyond his
power to follow. His love, he acknowledged for the first time, had never
been easy or contented or happy. It had been obscure, like the night
about him now; it resembled a fire that he held in his bare hands.
Hannah's particularity, too, was allied to this strange newly-awakened
peril. In a manner it was that which had carried Phebe out of the
mountains. Now the resemblance between them was far stronger than their
difference.

There was more than a touch of all this in the girls' mother, in her
bitterness and discontent. He felt that he hated the elder as much as he
did Phebe. If the latter were a man----

He dressed with the greatest care for his next evening with Hannah.
Hosmer wore no stiffer nor whiter collar, and Calvin's necktie was a
pure gay silk. He arrived just as the moon detached itself from the
fringe of mountain peaks and the frogs started insistently. His heart
was heavy but his manner calm, determined, as he entered the Braley
kitchen. No one was there but Susan; soon however, Phebe entered in an
amazing slovenly wrapper with a lace edge turned back from her ample
throat; and Hannah followed.

Phebe made a mocking reference to the sofa in the parlor, and Hannah's
expression was distasteful; but she slowly followed Calvin into the
conventional chamber.

He made no attempt to embrace her, but said instead: "I came to fix the
day for our wedding."

"Phebe wants me to go with her for a little first," she replied
indirectly. "She says I can come back whenever I like."

"Your Phebe has no say in it." He spoke harshly. "We're honestly
promised to each other and don't need outside advice or interference."

"Don't you go to call Phebe 'outside,'" she retorted. "She's my sister.
Perhaps it's a good thing she came when she did, and saved me from being
buried. Perhaps I'm not aiming to be married right off."

V

Hannah was standing, a hand on the table that held the pink-shaded lamp,
and the light showed her petulant and antagonistic. A flare of anger
threatened to shut all else from Calvin's thoughts; but suddenly he was
conscious of the necessity for care--care and patience. He forced back
his justified sense of wrong.

"I wasn't referring direct to Phebe," he told her. "I meant that between
us nobody else matters, no one in the world is of any importance to
me but you. It's all I think about. When I was building the house, our
house, I hammered you into it with every nail. It is sort of made out of
you," he foundered; "like--like I am."

He could see her relenting in the loss of the rigidity of her pose.
Hannah's head drooped and her fingers tapped faintly on the table. He
moved closer, urging his advantage.

"We're all but married, Hannah; our carpet is being wove and that suite
of furniture ordered through Priest. You've been upset by this talk of
theaters and such. You'd get tired of them and that fly-by-night life in
a month."

"Phebe hasn't."

"What suits one doesn't suit all," he said concisely.

"It would suit more girls than you know for," she informed him. "Take it
round here, there's nothing to do but get married, and all the change
is from one kitchen to another. You don't even have a way to match up
fellows. Soon as you're out of short skirts one of them visits with you
and the rest stay away like you had the smallpox. Our courting lasted a
week and you were here four times."

"We haven't much time, Hannah," he reminded her. "It was right hard for
me to see you that often. There was a smart of things you were doing,
too."

"The more fool!" she exclaimed.

Again his resentment promised to leap beyond control. He clenched his
hands and stared with contracted eyes at the floor.

"Well," he articulated finally, "we're promised anyhow; that can't be
denied. I have your word."

"Yes," she admitted, "but chance that I went with Phebe doesn't mean I'd
never come back."

"It would mean that you'd never come back," he paraphrased her.

"Maybe I would know better," she answered quickly. "I'm sorry, Calvin.
I didn't go to be so sharp. Only I don't know what's right," she went on
unhappily.

"It isn't what's right," he corrected her, "but what you want. I wish
Phebe had stayed away a little longer."

"There you go again at Phebe!" she protested.

He replied grimly; "Not half what I feel."

In a dangerously calm voice she inquired, "What's the rest then?"

"She's a trouble-maker," he asserted in a shaking tone over which he
seemed to have no command; "she came back to Greenstream and for no
reason but her own slinked into our happiness. Your whole family--even
Hosmer, pretending to be so wise--are blind as bats. You can't even
see that Phebe's hair is as dyed as her stories. She says she is on the
stage, but it's a pretty stage! I've been to Stanwick and seen those
Parisian Dainties and burlesque shows. They're nothing but a lot of
half-naked women cavorting and singing fast songs. And the show only
begins--with most of them--when the curtain drops. If I even try to
think of you in that I get sick."

"Go on," Hannah stammered, scarcely above her breath.

"It's bad," Calvin Stammark went on. "The women are bad; and a bad woman
is something awful. I know about that too. I've been to the city as
well as Phebe. Oh, Hannah," he cried, "can't you see, can't you!" With
a violent effort he regained the greater part of his composure. "But it
won't touch you," he added; "we're going to be married right away."

"We are?" Hannah echoed him thinly, in bitter mockery. "I wouldn't have
you now if you were the last man on earth with the way you talked about
Phebe! I don't see how you can stand there and look at me. If I told pa
or Hosmer they would shoot you. You might as well know this as well--I'm
going back with her; it'll be some gayer than these lonely old valleys
or your house stuck away all by itself with nothing to see but Senator
Alderwith's steers."

There flashed into Calvin Stammark's mind the memory of how he had
planned to possess just such cattle for Hannah and himself; he saw in
the elusive lamplight the house he had built for Hannah. His feeling,
that a second before had been so acute, was numb. This, he thought, was
strange; a voice within echoed that he was going to lose her, to lose
Hannah; but he had no faculty capable of understanding such a calamity.

"Why, Hannah," he said impotently--"Hannah--" His vision blurred so that
he couldn't see her clearly; it was as if, indistinct before him,
she were already fading from his life. "I never went to hurt you,"
he continued in a curious detachment from his suffering. "You were
everything I had."

Calvin grew awkward, confused in his mind and gestures. At the same time
Hannah's desirability increased immeasurably. Never in Greenstream or
any place else had he seen another like her; and he was about to lose
her, lose Hannah.

Automatically he repeated, "If Phebe were a man----"

He was powerless not only against exterior circumstance but to combat
what lay with Hannah. Phebe would never set her hands in hot dishwater.
He recalled their mother, fretful and impatient. He shook his head as
if to free his mind from so many vain thoughts. She stood, hard and
unrelenting.

He tried to mutter a phrase about being here if she should return, but
it perished in the conviction of its uselessness. Calvin saw her with
green-yellow hair, a cigarette in painted lips; he heard the blurred
applause of men at the spectacle of Hannah on the stage, dressed like
the women he had seen there. Then pride stiffened him into a semblance
of her own remoteness.

"It's in you," he said; "and it will have to come out. I'm what I am
too, and that doesn't make it any easier. Kind of a fool about you.
Another girl won't do. I'll say good night."

He turned and abruptly quitted the room and all his hope.

VI

When the furniture Calvin had ordered through the catalogue at Priest's
store arrived by mountain wagon he placed it in the room beside the
kitchen that was to have been Hannah's and his. Hannah had gone three
weeks before with Phebe. This done he sat for a long while on the
portico of his house, facing the rich bottom pasturage and high verdant
range beyond. It was late afternoon and the rift was filling with a
golden haze from a sun veiled in watery late-spring vapors. An old apple
tree by the road was flushed with pink blossoms and a mocking bird was
whistling with piercing sweetness.

Soon it would be evening and the frogs would begin again, the frogs
and whippoorwills. The valley, just as Hannah had said, was lonely.
He stirred and later found himself some supper--in the kitchen where
everything was new.

On the following morning he left the Greenstream settlement; it
was Friday, and Monday he returned with Ettie, his sister. She was
remarkably like him--tall and angular, with a gaunt face and steady blue
eyes. Older than Calvin, she had settled into a complete acquiescence
with whatever life brought; no more for her than the keeping of her
brother's house. Calvin, noting the efficient manner in which she
ordered their material affairs, wondered at the fact that she had not
been married. Men were unaccountable, but none more than himself, with
his unquenchable longing for Hannah.

This retreated to the back of his being. He never spoke of her. Indeed
he tried to put her from his thoughts, and with a measure of success.
But it never occurred to him to consider any other girl; that
possibility was closed. Those he saw--and they were uniformly kind, even
inviting--were dull after Hannah.

Instead he devoted himself to the equivalent, in his undertakings,
of Ettie's quiet capability. The following year a small number of the
steers grazing beyond the road were his; in two years more Senator
Alderwith died, and there was a division of his estate, in which Calvin
assumed large liabilities, paying them as he had contracted. The timber
in Sugarloaf Valley drew speculators--he sold options and bought a place
in the logging development.

It seemed to him that he grew older, in appearance anyhow, with
exceptional rapidity; his face grew leaner and his beard, which he
continued to shave, was soiled with gray hair.

He avoided the Braleys and their clearing; and when circumstance drew
him into conversation with Richmond or Hosmer he studiously spoke of
indifferent things. He heard nothing of Hannah. Yet he learned in the
various channels of communication common to remote localities that
Richmond Braley was doing badly. Hosmer went to bank in one of the
newly prosperous towns of West Virginia and apparently left all
family obligations behind; Susan died of lung fever; and then, at the
post-office, Calvin was told that Richmond himself was dangerously sick.

He left the mail with Ettie at his door and rode on, turning for the
first time in nine years into the narrow valley of the Braleys' home.
The place had been neglected until it was hardly distinguishable from
the surrounding tangled wild. Such sheep as he saw were in wretched
condition, wild and massed with filth and burrs.

Mrs. Braley was filling a large glass flask with hot water for her
husband; and to Calvin's surprise a child with a quantity of straight
pale-brown hair and wide-opened hazel-brown eyes was seated in the
kitchen watching her.

"How is Richmond?" he asked, his gaze straying involuntarily to the
girl.

"Kingdom Come's how he is," Lucy Braley replied. "Yes, and the poorhouse
will end us unless Hosmer has a spark of good feeling. I sent him
a postal card to come a long while back, but he hasn't so much as
answered. Here, Lucy"--she turned to the child--"run up with this."

"Lucy?" Calvin Stammark asked when they were alone.

"Been here two weeks," Mrs. Braley told him. "What will become of her's
beyond me. She is Hannah's daughter, and Hannah is dead."

There was a sharp constriction of Calvin's heart. Hannah's daughter, and
Hannah was dead!

"As far as I know," the other continued in a strained metallic voice,
"the child's got no father you could fix. Her mother wrote the name was
Lucy Vibard, and she'd called her after me. But when I asked her she
didn't seem to know anything about it.

"Hannah was alone and dog poor when she died, that's certain. Like
everything else I can lay mind on she came to a bad end--Lord reckons
where Phebe is. I always thought you were weak fingered to let Hannah
go--with that house built and all. I suppose maybe you weren't, though;
well out of a slack bargain."

Calvin Stammark scarcely heard her; his being was possessed by the
pitiable image of Hannah dying alone and dog poor. He had always
pictured her--except in the fleet vision of debasement--as young and
graceful and disturbing. Without further speech he left the kitchen and
crossed the house to the shut parlor. It was screened against the day,
dim and musty and damp. The orange plush of the chairs and the narrow
uncomfortable sofa, carefully dusted, was as bright as it had been when
he had last seen it--was it ten years ago?

Here she had stood, her fingers tapping on the table, when he had made
the unfortunate remark about Phebe; the lamplight had illuminated her
right cheek. Here she had proclaimed her impatience with Greenstream,
with its loneliness, her hunger for life. Here he had lost her. A
sudden need to see Hannah's daughter invaded him and he returned to the
kitchen.

The child was present, silent; she had Hannah's eyes, Hannah's hair.
Seated by Richmond Braley's bed he realized instantly that the old man
was dying; and mentally he composed the urgent message to be sent to
Hosmer. But that failed to settle the problem of Lucy's safety--Hannah's
Lucy, who might have been his too. The solution of that difficulty
slowly took form in his thoughts. There was no need to discuss it with
Ettie--his duty, yes, and his desire was clear.

He took her home directly after Richmond's funeral, an erratic wind
blowing her soft loose hair against his face as he drove.

VII

There had been additions to Calvin Stammark's house--the half story
raised, and the length increased by a room. This was now furnished as
the parlor and had an entrance from the porch extended across the face
of the dwelling; the middle lower room was his; the chamber designed
for his married life was a seldom used dining room; while Ettie and Lucy
were above. A number of sheds for stabling and implements, chicken coops
and pig pen had accumulated at the back; the corn and buckwheat climbed
the mountain; and the truck patch was wide and luxuriant.

A narrow strip, bright, in season, with the petunias and cinnamon pinks
which Ettie tended, separated the dwelling from the public road; and
the flowers more than anything else attracted Hannah's daughter. Calvin
talked with her infrequently, but a great deal of his silent attention
was directed at the child.

Already Lucy had a quality of appeal to which he watched Ettie respond.
The latter took a special pride in making Lucy as pretty as possible;
in the afternoon she would dress her in sheer white with a ribbon in
her hair. She spared Lucy many of the details of housework in which the
latter could have easily assisted her; and when Calvin protested she
replied that she was so accustomed to doing that it was easier for her
to go ahead.

Calvin's feelings were mixed. At first he had told himself that Lucy
would be, in a way, his daughter; he would bring her up as his own;
and in the end what he had would be hers, just as it should have been
Hannah's. However, his attitude was never any that might be recognized
as that of parenthood. He never grew completely accustomed to her
presence, she was always a subject of interest and speculation. He
continued to get pleasure from her slender graceful being and the little
airs of delicacy she assumed.

He was conscious, certainly, that Lucy was growing older--yet not so
fast as he--but he had a shock of surprise when she informed him that
she was fifteen. Calvin pinched her cheek, and, sitting on the porch,
heard her within issuing a peremptory direction to Ettie. The elder made
no reply and, he knew, did as Lucy wished. This disturbed him. There
wasn't a finer woman living than Ettie Stammark, and he didn't purpose
to have Lucy impudent to her. Lucy, he decided, was getting a little
beyond them. She was quick at her lessons, the Greenstream teacher said.
Lucy would have considerable property when he died; he'd like her to
have all the advantages possible; and--very suddenly--Calvin decided to
send her away to school, to Stanwick, the small city to and from which
the Greenstream stage drove.

She returned from her first term at Christmas, full of her experiences
with teachers and friends, to which Ettie and he listened with absorbed
attention. Now she seemed farther from him than before; and he saw that
a likeness to Hannah was increasing; not in appearance--though that
was not dissimilar--but in the quality that had established Hannah's
difference from other girls, the quality for which he had never found
a name. The assumptions of Lucy's childhood had become strongly marked
preferences for the flowers of existence, the ease of the portico rather
than the homely labor of the back of the house.

Neither his sister nor he resented this or felt that Lucy was evading
her just duties; rather they enjoyed its difference from their own
practical beings and affairs. They could afford to have her in fresh
laundered frills and they secretly enjoyed the manner in which she
instructed them in social conventions.

At her home-coming for the summer she brought to an end the meals in the
kitchen; but when she left once more for Stanwick and school Ettie and
Calvin without remark drifted back to the comfortable convenience of the
table near the cooking stove.

This period of Lucy's experience at an end she arrived in Greenstream on
a hot still June evening. Neither Calvin nor his sister had been able to
go to Stanwick for the school commencement, and Calvin had been too late
to meet the stage. After the refreshing cold water in the bright tin
basin by the kitchen door he went to his room for a presentable necktie
and handkerchief--Lucy was very severe about the latter--and then walked
into the dining room.

The lamp was not yet lit, the light was elusive, tender, and his heart
contracted violently at the youthful yet mature back toward him. She
turned slowly, a hand resting on the table, and Calvin Stammark's senses
swam. An inner confusion invaded him, pierced by a sharp unutterable
longing.

"Hannah," he whispered.

She smiled and advanced; but, his heart pounding, Calvin retreated. He
must say something reasonable, tell her that they were glad to have her
back--mustn't leave them again. She kissed him, and, his eyes shut, the
touch of her lips re-created about him the parlor of the Braleys,--the
stiffly arranged furniture with its gay plush, the varnished fretwork of
the organ, the pink glow of the lamp.

She was Hannah! The resemblance was so perfect--her cheek's turn,
her voice, sweet with a trace of petulance, her fingers--that it was
sustained in a flooding illumination through the commonplace revealing
act of supper. It was as if the eighteen years since Hannah, his Hannah,
was a reality were but momentary, the passage of the valley. His love
for her was unchanged--no, here at least, was a difference; it was
greater, keener; exactly as if during the progress of their intimacy he
had been obliged to go away from her for a while.

She accompanied Ettie to the kitchen and Calvin sat on the porch in
a gathering darkness throbbing with frogs and perfumed with drifting
locust blooms. Constellation by constellation the stars glimmered into
being. Hannah, Lucy! They mingled and in his fiber were forever one. He
gave himself up to the beauty of his passion, purified and intense from
long patience and wanting, amazed at the miracle that had brought back
everything infinitely desirable.

He forgot his age, and, preparing for the night, saw with a sense of
personal outrage his seamed countenance reflected in the mirror of the
bureau. Yet in reality he wasn't old--forty-something--still, not fifty.
He was as hard and nearly as springy as a hickory sapling. There was
a saying in which he found vast comfort--the prime, the very prime of
life.

VIII

His enormous difficulty would be to bring Lucy to the understanding
of his new--but it was the old--attitude toward her. If she had never
become completely familiar to him association had made him a solid
recognized part of her existence; if not exactly a father, an uncle at
the very least. Calvin realized that she would be profoundly shocked
by any abrupt revelation of his feeling. Yet he was for the time in no
hurry to bring about the desired change in their relationship. His
life had been so long empty that it was enough to dwell on the great
happiness of his repossession.

This, he knew, could not continue, but at present, today, it was almost
enough. Before he was aware, the summer had gone, the mountains were
sheeted in gold; and he was still dreaming, putting off the actuality
before them.

The logging in Sugarloaf Valley had grown to an operation of importance,
and a great deal of his time was spent watching the spur of railroad
creep forward and the clearing of new sections; sawmills and camps were
in course of erection; and what had been a still green cleft in the
mountains was filled with human activity. He had secured an advantageous
position for a young man from the part of the county inhabited by the
Stammark family, Wilmer Deakon, and consulted with him frequently in
connection with his interests.

Wilmer was to the last degree dependable; a large grave individual who
took a serious interest in the welfare of his fellows and supported
established customs and institutions. He sang in a resounding barytone
with the Methodist Church choir; his dignified bearing gave weight to
the school board; and he accumulated a steadily growing capital at the
Greenstream bank. An admirable individual, Calvin thought, and extended
to him the wide hospitality of his house.

Lucy apparently had little to say to Wilmer Deakon; indeed, when he
was not present, to their great amusement she imitated his deliberate
balanced speech. She said that he was too solemn--an opinion with which
Calvin privately agreed--and made an irreverent play on his name and the
place he should occupy in the church. It seemed that she found a special
pleasure in annoying him; and on an occasion when Calvin had determined
to reprove her for this he was surprised by Winner's request to speak to
him outside.

Wilmer Deakon said abruptly: "Lucy and I are promised to each other."

Calvin stood gazing at him in a lowering complete surprise, at a loss
for words, when the other continued with an intimation of his peculiar
qualifications for matrimony, the incontrovertible fact that he could
and would take care of Lucy. He stopped at the appropriate moment and
waited confidently for Calvin Stammark's approval.

The latter, out of a gathering immeasurable rage, almost shouted: "You
get to hell off my place!"

Wilmer Deakon was astounded but otherwise unshaken. "That's no way to
answer a decent man and a proper question," he replied. "Lucy and I want
to be married. There's nothing wrong with that. But you look as if I had
offered to disgrace her. Why, Mr. Stammark, you can't keep her forever.
I reckon it'll be hard on you to have her go, but you must make up your
mind to it some day. She's willing, and you know all about me. Then Lucy
won't be far away from you all. I've cleared the brush up and right now
the bottom of our house is laid in Sugarloaf."

Calvin's anger sank before a sense of helplessness at this latter fact.
Wilmer was building a house for her just as he had built one for Hannah.
He remembered his delight and pride as it had approached completion; he
remembered the evening, nearly twenty years ago, when he had sat on the
bank across the road and seen it finished. Then he had ridden, without
waiting to fix up, to the Braleys'; Hannah had scolded him as they sat
in the parlor.

"I must talk to Lucy," he said in a different weary tone. Bareheaded he
walked over into the pasture, now his. The cattle moved vaguely in the
gloom, with softly blowing nostrils, and the streams were like smooth
dark ribbons. When he returned to his house the lights were out, Wilmer
Deakon was gone and Lucy was in bed.

He again examined his countenance in the mirror, but now he was
surprised that it was not haggard with age. It seemed that twenty more
years had been added to him since supper. He wondered whether there had
ever been another man who had lost his love twice and saw that he had
been a blind fool for not speaking in the June dusk when Lucy had come
back from school.

Lucy, it developed, had spoken to Ettie, and there was a general
discussion of her affair at breakfast.

Calvin carried away from it a persistent feeling of dissatisfaction,
but for this he could find no tangible reason. Of course, he silently
argued, the girl could not be expected to show her love for Wilmer
publicly; it was enough that he had been assured of its strength; the
fact of her agreement to marry him was final.

He went about his daily activities with a heavy absent-mindedness, with
a dragging spirit. A man was coming from Washington to see him in the
interest of a new practically permanent fencing, and he met him at
the post-office, listened to a loud cheerful greeting with marked
inattention.

The salesman was named Martin Eckles, and he was fashionably dressed in
a suit of shepherd's check bound with braid, and had a flashing ring--a
broad gold band set with a mystic symbol in rubies and diamonds. After
his supper at the hotel he walked, following Calvin's direction, the
short distance to the latter's house, where Calvin and Ettie Stammark
and Lucy were seated on the porch.

Martin Eckles, it developed, was a fluent and persuasive talker, a man
of the broadest worldly experiences and wit. He was younger than Calvin,
but older than Wilmer Deakon, and a little fat. He had a small mustache
cut above his lip, and closely shaved ruddy cheeks with a tinge of
purple about his ears. Drawing out his monologue entertainingly he gazed
repeatedly at Lucy. Calvin lost the sense of most that the other said;
he was immersed in the past that had been made the present and then
denied to him--it was all before him in the presence of Lucy, of Hannah
come back with the unforgetable and magic danger of her appeal.

IX

In the extension of his commercial activity Martin Eckles kept his
room at the Greenstream hotel and employed a horse and buggy for his
excursions throughout the county. It had become his habit to sit through
the evenings with the Stammarks where his flood of conversation never
lessened. Lucy scarcely added a phrase to the sum of talk. She rocked in
her chair with a slight endless motion, her dreaming gaze fixed on the
dim valley.

Wilmer Deakon, on the occasion of his first encounter with Eckles at the
Stammarks', acknowledged the other's phrase and stood waiting for Lucy
to proceed with him to the parlor. But Lucy was apparently unaware of
this; she sat calm and remote in her crisp white skirts, while Wilmer
fidgeted at the door.

Soon, however, she said: "For goodness' sake, Wilmer, whatever's the
matter with you? Can't you find a chair that suits you? You make a
person nervous."

At the same time she rose ungraciously and followed him into the house.

Wilmer came out, Calvin thought, in an astonishingly short time.
Courting was nothing like it had been in his day. The young man
muttered an unintelligible sentence that, from its connection, might be
interpreted as a good night, and strode back to the barn and his horse.

Martin Eckles smiled: "The love birds must have been a little ruffled."

And Calvin, with a strong impression of having heard such a thing
before, was vaguely uneasy. Eckles sat for a long space; Lucy didn't
appear, and at last the visitor rose reluctantly. But Lucy had not gone
to bed; she came out on the porch and dropped with a flounce into a
chair beside Calvin.

"Wilmer's pestering me to get married right away," she told him; "before
ever the house is built. He seems to think I ought to be just crazy to
take him and go to that lonely Sugarloaf place."

"It's what you promised for," Calvin reminded her; "nothing's turned up
you didn't know about."

"If I did!" she exclaimed irritably. "What else is a girl to do, I'd
like to ask? It's just going from one stove to another, here. Only it'll
be worse in my case--you and Aunt Ettie have been lovely to me. I hate
to cook!" she cried. "And it makes me sick to put my hands in greasy
dishwater! I suppose that's wicked but I can't help it. When I told
Wilmer that to-night he acted like I'd denied communion. I can't help it
if the whippoorwills make me shiver, can I? Or if I want to see a person
go by once in a while. I--I don't want to be bad--or to hurt you or
Wilmer. Oh, I'll settle down, there's nothing else to do; I'll marry him
and get old before my time, like the others."

Calvin Stammark leaned forward, his hands on his knees, and stared at
her in shocked amazement--Hannah in every accent and feeling. The old
sense of danger and helplessness flooded him. He thought of Phebe with
her dyed hair and cigarette-stained lips, her stories of the stage and
life; he thought of Hannah dying alone and dog poor. Now Lucy----

"Do you remember anything about your mother," he asked, "and before you
came here?"

"Only that we were dreadfully unhappy," she replied. "There was a
boarding house with actresses washing their stockings in the rooms and
a landlady they were all afraid of. There was beer in the wash-stand
pitcher. But that wouldn't happen to me," she asserted; "I'd be
different. I might be an actress, but in dramas where my hair would be
down and everybody love me."

"You're going to marry Wilmer Deakon and be a proper happy wife!"
he declared, bringing his fist down on a hard palm. "Get this other
nonsense out of your head!"

Suddenly he was trembling at the old catastrophe reopened by Lucy. His
love for her, and his dread, choked him. She added nothing more, but
sat rigid and pale and rebellious. Before long she went in, but Calvin
stayed facing the darkness, the menace of the lonely valley. Except for
the lumbermen it would be worse in the Sugarloaf cutting.

Damn the frogs!

Martin Eckles appeared in the buggy the following evening and offered
to carry Lucy for a short drive to a near-by farm; with an air of
indifference she accepted. Wilmer didn't call, and Calvin sat in silent
perplexity with Ettie. The buggy returned later than they had allowed,
and Lucy went up to bed without stopping on the porch.

The next morning Ettie, with something in her hand, came out to Calvin
at the stable shed.

"I found this in Lucy's room," she said simply.

It was Martin Eckles' gold ring, set with the insignia in rubies,
suspended in a loop of ribbon.

A cold angry certitude formed in his being. What a criminal fool he had
been! What a blind booby! His only remark, however, brought a puzzled
expression to Ettie's troubled countenance. Calvin Stammark exclaimed,
"Phebe Braley." He was silent for a little, his frowning gaze fixed
beyond any visible object, then he added: "Put that back where you found
it and forget everything."

Ettie laid a hand on his sleeve. "Now, Calvin," she begged, her voice
low and strained, "promise me----"

"Forget everything!" he repeated harshly.

His face was dark, forbidding, the lines deeply bitten about a somber
mouth, his eyes were like blue ice. He walked into Greenstream, where he
saw the proprietor of the small single hotel; then, back in his room, he
unwrapped from oiled leather a heavy blued revolver; and soon after he
saddled his horse and was clattering in a sharp trot in the opposite
direction from the village.

It was dark when, having returned, he dismounted and swung the saddle
from the horse to its tree. Familiar details kept him a long while, his
hands were steady but slow, automatic in movement. He went in through
the kitchen past Ettie to his room, and after a little he re-wrapped the
revolver and laid it back in its accustomed place. Supper, in spite of
Lucy's sharp comment, was set by the stove, and Ettie was solicitous
of his every possible need. He ate methodically what was offered, and
afterward filled and lit his pipe. It soon went out. Once, on the porch,
he leaned toward Lucy and awkwardly touched her shoulder.

X

Wilmer came. He was late, and Lucy said wearily, "I've got a headache
to-night. Do you mind if we stay out here in the cool?"

He didn't, and his confident familiar planning took the place of Martin
Eckles' more exciting narratives.

The next day, past noon, the proprietor of the Greenstream hotel left
an excited group of men to stop Calvin as he drove in from Sugarloaf
Valley.

He cried: "Eckles has been shot and killed. First they found the horse
and buggy by the road, and then Martin Eckles. He had fallen out. One
bullet did it."

"That's too bad," Calvin replied evenly. "Lawlessness ought to be put
down." He had known Solon Entreken all his life. The level gaze of two
men encountered and held.

Then: "I'll never say anything against that," the other pronounced.
"It's mighty strange who could have shot Eckles and got clear away.
That's what he did, in spite of hell and the sheriff."

Turning, after inevitable exclamations, toward home, Calvin found Lucy
sitting moodily on the porch.

"I've got a right ugly piece of news," he told her, masking the painful
interest with which he followed her expression. "Martin Eckles was
killed yesterday; shot out of the buggy."

She grew pale, her breast rose in a sudden gasp and her hands were
clenched.

"Oh!" she whispered, horrified.

But there was nothing in her manner beyond the natural detestation of
such brutality; nothing, he saw, hidden.

"He wanted me to go away with him," she swept on; "and get married in
Stanwick. Martin wanted me to see the world. He said I ought to, and not
stay here all my life."

The misery that settled over her, the hopelessness dulling her youth
filled him with a passionate resentment at the fate that made her what
she was and seemingly condemned her to eternal denial. His love for
her--Lucy, Hannah, Hannah, Lucy--was intolerably keen. He went to her,
bending with a riven hand on the arm of her chair.

"Do you want Wilmer?" he demanded. "Do you love him truly? Is he
enough?"

"I don't know." Slow tears wet her cheeks. "I can't say. I ought to;
he's good and faithful, and with some of me that's enough. But there's
another part; I can't explain it except to say it's a kind of excitement
for the life Mr. Eckles told us about, all those lights and restaurants
and theaters. Sometimes I think I'll die, I want it so much; then it
comes over me how ungrateful I am to you and Aunt Ettie, and I hate
myself for the way I treat Wilmer."

"Do you love him?" he insisted.

"Perhaps not like you mean."

All that had been so long obscured in his mind and heart slowly cleared
to understanding--Lucy Braley, Richmond's wife; Phebe; Hannah; and again
Lucy, Lucy Vibard had this common hunger for life, for brightness; they
were as helpless in its grasp as he had been to hold Hannah. Phebe's
return, Martin Eckles--were only incidents in a great inner need. In
itself it wasn't wicked; circumstance had made it seem wrong; Phebe's
greenish hair, the mark of so much spoiled, Hannah's unhappy death--were
the result of aspirations; they fretted and bruised, even killed
themselves, like gay young animals, innocent animals, in a dark lonely
enclosure.

They were really finer than the satisfied women who faded to ugliness
in the solitary homes of the Greenstream mountains; not better, for
example, than Ettie--it might be that they weren't so good, not so high
in heaven; but they were finer in the manner of blooded horses rebelling
against the plow traces. They were more elegant, slimmer, with a greater
fire. That too was the secret of their memorable power over him; he
wanted a companion different from a kitchen drudge; when he returned
home at evening, he wanted a wife cool and sweet in crisp white with
a yellow ribbon about her waist, and store slippers. He loved Lucy's
superiority--it was above ordinary things. "Like a star," Calvin
Stammark told himself.

He, with everything else that had combated their desire, depriving them
of the very necessities for his adoration, had been to blame.

"Lucy," he said, bending over her and speaking rapidly, "let's you and
me go and learn all this life together. Let's run away from Greenstream
and Wilmer Deakon and even Ettie, what we ought to hold by, and see
every theater in the country. I've got enough money----"

The radiance of the gesture by which she interrupted his speech filled
him with pounding joy.

"Oh, shall we!" she cried; and then hugged him wildly, her warm young
arms about his neck.

"Of course we will," he reassured her; "and right away, to-morrow. You
and me."

He felt her lips against his, and then more cautiously she took up the
immediate planning of their purpose. It would be ridiculously easy; they
would drive to Stanwick in the buggy.

"The hotels and all," she continued with shining eyes; "and nobody will
think it's queer. I'll be your daughter, like always."

Calvin turned abruptly from her and faced the valley saturated with
slumberous sunlight. Lucy hesitated for a moment and then fled lightly
into the house. After a little he heard her singing on the upper floor.
People wouldn't think it was queer because she would be his daughter,
"like always."

Yet he wasn't old beyond hope, past love--as strong and nearly as
springy as a hickory sapling. He had waited half his life for this.
Calvin slowly smiled in bitterness and self-contempt; a pretty figure
for a young girl to admire, he thought, losing the sense of mere
physical fitness. Anyhow Lucy was supremely happy and safe, and he
had accomplished it. He was glad that he had been so industrious and
successful. Lucy could have almost anything she wanted--pretty clothes
and rings with real jewels, necklaces hung with better than Scotch
pebbles.

Perhaps when she had seen the world--its bigness and noise and
confusion--after her longing was answered, she would turn back to him.
Already he was oppressed by a feeling of strangeness, of loss at leaving
the high valleys of home.




THE EGYPTIAN CHARIOT


Lemuel Doret walked slowly home from the prayer meeting with his being
vibrating to the triumphant beat of the last hymn. It was a good hymn,
filled with promised joy for every one who conquered sin. The long
twilight of early summer showed the surrounding fields still bright
green, but the more distant hills were vague, the sky was remote and
faintly blue, and shadows thickened under the heavy maples that covered
the single street of Nantbrook. The small frame dwellings of the village
were higher than the precarious sidewalk; flights of steps mounted to
the narrow porches; and though Lemuel Doret realized that his neighbors
were sitting outside he did not look up, and no voices called down
arresting his deliberate progress.

An instant bitterness, tightening his thin metallic lips and narrowing a
cold fixed gaze, destroyed the harmony of the assured salvation. Lemuel
Doret silently cursed the pinched stupidity of the country clods. The
slow helpless fools! If instead of muttering in groups one of the men
would face him with the local hypocrisy he'd sink a heel in his jaw. The
bitterness expanded into a hatred like the gleam on a knife blade;
his hands, spare and hard, grew rigid with the desire to choke a thick
throat.

Then the rage sank before a swift self-horror, an overwhelming
conviction of his relapse into unutterable sin. He stopped and in a
spiritual agony, forgetful of his surroundings, half lifted quivering
arms to the dim sky: "O Christ, lean down from the throne and hold me
steady."

He stood for a moment while a monotonous chatter on a porch above
dropped to a curious stillness. It seemed to him that his whisper was
heard and immediately answered; anyhow peace slowly enveloped him
once more, the melody of hope was again uppermost in his mind. He went
forward, procuring a cigarette from a mended ragged pocket.

His house, reached by a short steep path and sagging steps, was dark;
at first he saw no one, then the creak of a rocking-chair in the open
doorway indicated Bella, his wife.

"Give me a cigarette," she demanded, her penetrating voice dissatisfied.

"You know I don't want you to smoke anywhere you can be seen," he
answered. "Since we've come here to live we have to mind the customs.
The women'll never take to you smoking cigarettes."

"Ah, hell, what do I care! We came here, but it ain't living. It makes
me sick, and you make me sick I Can't you sing and pray in the city as
well as among these hicks?"

"I'm afraid of it," he said, brief and somber. "And I don't want
Flavilla brought up with any of the gang we knew. Where is she?"

"I sent her to bed. She fussed round till she got me nervous."

"Did she feel good?"

"If she didn't a smack would have cured her."

He passed Bella, rocking sharply, into the dank interior.

On the right was the bare room where he had his dilapidated barber's
chair and shelf with a few mugs, brushes and other scant necessities.
There had been no customers to-day nor yesterday; still, it was the
middle of the week and what trade there was generally concentrated on
Saturday. Beyond he went upstairs to Flavilla's bed. She was awake,
twisting about in a fragmentary nightgown, dark against the disordered
sheet.

"It's dreadful hot," she complained shortly; "my head's hot too. The
window won't go up."

Lemuel Doret crossed the narrow bare floor and dragged the sash open;
then he moved his daughter while he smoothed the bed and freshened a
harsh pillow. She whimpered.

"You're too big to cry without any reason," he informed her, leaving to
fetch a glass of water from the tap in the kitchen.

Usually she responded to his intimations of her increasing age and
wisdom, but to-night she was listless. She turned away from him, her
arms flung above her head and wispy hair veiling her damp cheek.

"Keep still, can't you?" and he gathered her hair into a clumsy plait.

The darkness about him seeped within, into his hope and courage and
resolution; all that he had determined to do seemed impossibly removed.
The whole world resembled Nantbrook--a place of universal condemnation,
forgiving nothing. He felt a certainty that even the few dollars he had
honestly earned would now be stopped.

The air grew clearer and deeper in color, and stars brightened. Lemuel
Doret wondered about God. There was no doubt of His power and glory or
of the final triumph of heaven established and earth, sin, destroyed.
 wickedness was equally plain; it was the ways of the righteous that
bewildered him--the conduct of the righteous and, in the face of his
supreme recognition, the extreme difficulty of providing life for
Flavilla--and Bella.

He consciously added his wife's name. Somehow his daughter was the sole
objective measure of his determination to build up, however late, a home
here and in eternity.

It was not unreasonable, in view of the past, to suppose that he had no
chance of succeeding. Yet religion was explicit upon that particular; it
was founded on the very hopes of sinners, on redemption. But he could do
nothing without an opportunity to make the small living they required;
if the men of Nantbrook, of the world, wouldn't come to him to be
barbered, and if he had no money to go anywhere else to begin again,
he was helpless. Everything was conspiring to thrust him back into the
city, of which he had confessed his fear, back----

He rose and stood above the child's thin exposed body--suddenly frozen
into a deathlike sleep--chilled with a vision, a premonition, the
insidious possibility of surrender. He saw, too, that it was a solitary
struggle; even his devotion to Flavilla, shut in the single space of
his own heart, helped to isolate him in what resembled a surrounding
blackness rent with blinding flashes of lightning.

The morning sun showed him spare, with a curious appearance of being
both wasted and grimly strong; he moved with an alert, a watchful ease,
catlike and silent; and his face was pallid with gray shadows. He stood
in trousers and undershirt, suspenders hanging down, before the small
dim mirror in the room where he had the barber chair, pasting his hair
down with an odorous brilliantine. This was his intention, but he saw
with sharp discomfort that bristling strands defied his every effort.
The hot edge of anger cut at him, but, singing, he dissipated it:

  "_Why should I feel discouraged?
    Why should the shadows fall?
  Why should my heart be lonely,
    And long for heaven_----"

He broke off at the thought of Flavilla, still in bed, her head, if
anything, hotter than last night. Lemuel Doret wished again that he had
not allowed Bella to call their child by that unsanctified name.
Before the birth they had seen a vaudeville, and Bella, fascinated by a
golden-and-white creature playing a white accordion that bore her
name in ornamental letters, had insisted on calling her daughter,
too, Flavilla. In spite of the hymn, dejection fastened on him as he
remembered this and a great deal more about his wife.

If she could only be brought to see the light their marriage and
life might still be crowned with triumph. But Bella, pointing out the
resulting poverty of his own conviction and struggle, said freely that
she had no confidence in promises; she demanded fulfillment now. She
regarded him as more than a little affected in the brain. Yet there had
been no deep change in him--from the very first he had felt a growing
uneasiness at the spectacle of the world and the flesh. The throb of
the Salvation Army drum at the end of an alley, the echo of the fervent
exhortations and holy songs, had always filled him with a surging
emotion like homesickness.

Two impulses, he recognized, held a relentless warfare within him; he
pictured them as Christ and Satan; but the first would overthrow all
else. "Glory!" he cried mechanically aloud. He put down the hairbrush
and inspected the razors on their shelf. The bright morning light
flashed along the rubbed fine blades; they were beautiful, flawless,
without a trace of defilement. He felt the satin smoothness of the steel
with an actual thrill of pleasure; his eyes narrowed until they were
like the glittering points of knives; he held the razor firmly and
easily, with a sinewy poised wrist.

Finally, his suspenders in position over a collarless striped shirt, he
moved out to the bare sharp descent before his house and poured water
onto the roots of a struggling lilac bush. Its leaves were now coated
with dust; but the week before it had borne an actual cluster of scented
blossom; and he was still in the wonder of the lavender fragrance on the
meager starved stem.

The beat of hoofs approached, and he turned, seeing Doctor Frazee in his
yellow cart.

"Oh, doctor!" he called instinctively.

The other stopped, a man with a lean face, heavy curved nose and
penetrating gaze behind large spectacles. He was in reality a
veterinary, but Lemuel Doret, out of a profound caution, had discovered
him to be above the narrow scope of local prejudice.

"I wish you'd look at Flavilla," Doret continued.

The doctor hesitated, and then turned shortly in at the sidewalk.
"It will hurt no one if I do that." Above Flavilla's flushed face, a
tentative finger on her wrist, Frazee's expression grew serious. "I'll
tell you this," he asserted; "she's sick. You had better call Markley
to-day. And until he comes don't give her any solids. You can see she's
in a fever."

"Can't you tend her? I'd put more on you than any fresh young hospital
stiff."

"Certainly not," he responded.

When the latter had gone Lemuel Doret found his wife in the kitchen. She
wore a pale-blue wrapper with a soiled scrap of coarse lace at her full
throat, her hair was gathered into a disorderly knot, and already there
was a dab of paint on either cheek. She had been pretty when he married
her, pretty and full of an engaging sparkle, a ready wit; but the charm
had gone, the wit had hardened into a habit of sarcasm. They had been
married twelve years, and in itself, everything considered, that was
remarkable and held a great deal in her favor. She had been faithful. It
was only lately, in Nantbrook, that her dissatisfaction had materialized
in vague restless hints.

"Frazee says Flavilla is sick," he told her. "He thinks we ought to get
Markley."

She made a gesture of skepticism. "All those doctors send you to each
other," she proclaimed. "Like as not he'll get half for doing it."

"She don't look right."

Bella's voice and attitude grew exasperated. "Of course you know all
about children; you've been where you could study on them. And of course
I have no sense; a woman's not the person to say when her child is sick
or well. Have a doctor if you can pay one, and buy a lot of medicine
too. There's some calomel upstairs, but that's no good. I'd like to know
where you have all the money! God knows I need a little, to put inside
me and out."

"It's right scarce," he admitted, resolutely ignoring her tone. "Perhaps
Flavilla will be better later in the day; I'll wait."

He spoke without conviction, denying the impulse to have her cared for
at once, in an effort to content and still Bella. However, he failed in
both of these aims. Her voice swept into a shrill complaint and abuse
of Nantbrook--a place, she asserted, of one dead street, without even a
passing trolley car to watch. She had no intention of being buried here
for the rest of her life. Turning to a cigarette and yesterday's paper
she drooped into a sulky shape of fat and slovenly blue wrapper beside
the neglected dishes of their insufficient breakfast.

He went through the empty house to the front again, where at least the
sun was warm and bright. The air held a faint dry fragrance that came
from the haymaking of the deep country in which Nantbrook lay. Lemuel
Doret could see the hotel at a crossing on the left, a small gray block
of stone with a flat portico, a heavy gilt beer sign and whitewashed
sheds beyond. The barkeeper stood at a door, a huge girth circled by
a soiled apron; nearer a bundle of brooms and glittering stacked paint
cans marked the local store. It was, he was forced to admit, far
from gay; but he found a great contentment in the sunny peace, in the
limitless space of the unenclosed sky; the air, the fields, the birds in
the trees were free.

As he stood frowning in thought he saw the figure of a strange man
walking over the road; Lemuel knew that he was strange by the formality
of the clothes. He wore a hard straw hat, collar and diamond-pinned tie,
and a suit with a waistcoat. At first Doret's interest was perfunctory,
but as the other drew nearer his inspection changed to a painful
absorption. Suddenly his attitude grew tense; he had the appearance of
a man gazing at an enthralling but dangerous spectacle, such--for
example--as a wall that might topple over, crushing anything human
within its sweep.

The object of this scrutiny had a pale countenance with a carefully
clipped mustache, baggy eyes and a blue-shaved heavy jaw. An indefinable
suggestion of haste sat on a progress not unduly hurried. But as he
caught sight of Lemuel Doret he walked more and more slowly, returning
his fixed attention. When the two men were opposite each other, only a
few feet apart, he almost stopped. For a moment their sharpened visions
met, parried, and then the stranger moved on. He made a few steps,
hesitated, then directly returned.

"Come inside," he said in a slightly hoarse voice.

"It suits me here," Doret replied.

The other regarded him steadily. "I've made no mistake," he asserted. "I
could almost say how long you were up for, and a few other little things
too. I don't know what you're doing in this dump, but here we both are."

He waited for nothing more, ascending quickly to the hall. The two made
their way into the improvised barber shop.

"You've got me wrong," Doret still insisted.

"Who is it, Lem?" Bella demanded at the door.

As she spoke an expression of geniality overspread her face, daubed with
paint and discontent.

"Why, I'll tell you--I'm June Bowman."

"That don't mean anything to us," Lemuel continued. "The best thing you
can do is keep right on going."

"Not that Fourth Ward stew?" Bella asked eagerly.

He nodded.

"Lem's kind of died on his feet," she explained in a palpable excuse of
her husband's ignorance; "he don't read the papers nor nothing. But of
course I've heard of you, Mr. Bowman. We're glad to see you."

"Keep right along," Lemuel Doret repeated. His face was dark and his
mouth hardly more than a pinched line.

"Now, who are you?" Bowman inquired.

"I'll tell you," Bella put in, "since his manners have gone with
everything else. This is Snow Doret. If you know the live men that name
will be familiar to you."

"I seem to remember it," he admitted.

"If Snow went in the city it's Lemuel here," Doret told him. His anger
seethed like a kettle beginning to boil.

"Well, if Snow ever went I guess I'm in right. The truth is I got to
lay off for a little, and this seems first-rate. I can explain it in a
couple of words: Things went bad----"

"Wasn't it the election?" Bella asked politely.

"In a way," he answered with a bow. "You're all right. A certain party,
you see, was making some funny cracks--a reform dope; and he got in
other certain parties' light, see? Word was sent round, and when a
friend and me come on him some talk was passed and this public nuisance
got something. It was all regular and paid for----"

"I read about it," Bella interrupted. "He died in the ambulance."

"Then I was slipped the news that they were going to elect me the pretty
boy, and I had to make a break. Only temporary, till things are fixed.
Thus you see me scattered with hayseed. I was walking through for a lift
to Lancaster, where there are some good fellows; but when I saw Snow
here taking the air I knew there was one nearer."

"Lemuel; and I'm no good fellow."

"That's the truth," his wife added thinly. "Here is the only one in this
house." She touched her abundant self.

"Then I can put up?"

"No," Lemuel Doret told him. "This is a house of God's."

Bella laughed in a rising hysterical key.

"Listen to him," she gasped; "listen to Snow Doret. It's no wonder you
might have forgotten him," she proclaimed; "he's been in the pen for ten
and a half years with a bunch off for good conduct. But fifteen years
ago--say! He went in for knifing a drug store keeper who held out on a
'coke' deal. If this here's a house of God's I'd like to know what he
called the one he had then. I couldn't tell you half of what went on,
not half, with fixing drinks and frame-ups and skirts. Why, he run a hop
joint with the Chinese and took a noseful of snow at every other breath.
That was after his gambling room broke up--it got too raw even for the
police. It was brandy with him, too, and there ain't a gutter in his
district he didn't lay in. The drug store man wasn't the first he cut
neither."

She stopped from sheer lack of breath.

Curiously all that filled Lemuel Doret's mind was the thought of the
glory of God. Everything Bella said was true; but in the might of the
Savior it was less than nothing. He had descended into the pit and
brought him, Snow, up, filling his ears with the sweet hymns of
redemption, the promise of Paradise for the thieves and murderers who
acknowledged His splendor and fought His fight. This marvelous charity,
the cleansing hope for his blackened soul, swept over him in a warm rush
of humble praise and unutterable gratitude. Nothing of the Lord's was
lost: "His eye is on the sparrow."

"Certainly, lay off your coat," Bella was urging; "it's fierce hot. Lem
can rush a can of beer from the hotel. Even he wouldn't go to turn out
one of the crowd in a hard fix. I'm awful glad you saw him."

With June Bowman in his house, engaged in verbal agreements with Bella
and spreading comfortably on a chair, Lemuel was powerless. AH his
instinct pressed him to send the other on, to refuse--in the commonest
self-preservation--shelter. But both the laws of his old life and the
commands of the new were against this act of simple precaution. Bowman
eyed him with a shrewd appraisement.

"A clever fellow," he said, nodding; "admire you for coming out here for
a while. Well, how about the suds?"

He produced a thick roll of yellow-backed currency and detached a small
bill. "I'll finance this campaign."

Lemuel Doret was confused by the rapidity with which the discredited
past was re-created by Bowman's mere presence. He was at the point of
refusing to fetch the beer when he saw that there was no explanation
possible; they would regard him as merely crabbed, and Bella would
indulge her habit of shrill abuse. It wasn't the drink itself that
disturbed him but the old position of "rushing the can"--a symbol of
so much that he had left forever. Forever; he repeated the word with a
silent bitter force. The feel of the kettle in his hand, the thin
odor of the beer and slopping foam, seemed to him evidences of acute
degeneration; he was oppressed by a mounting dejection. God seemed very
far away.

His wife was talking while Bowman listened with an air of sympathetic
wisdom.

"It wasn't so bad then," she said; "I was kind of glad to get away, and
Lem was certain everything would open right out. But he's awful hard to
do with; he wouldn't take a dollar from parties who had every right to
stake him good, and borrowed five from no more than a stranger to buy
that secondhand barber chair. What he needed was chloroform to separate
these farmers from their dimes and whiskers." Bowman laughed loudly, and
a corresponding color invaded Bella. "Of course no one knew Lem had done
time, then. They wouldn't have either, but for the Law and Order. Oh,
dear me, no, your child ain't none of your own; they lend it to you like
and then sneak up whenever the idea takes them, to see if it's getting
a Turkish bath. I guess the people on the street wondered who was our
swell automobile friend till they found out."

"I suppose," Bowman put in, "they all came round and offered you the
helping hand, wanted to see you happy and successful."

She laughed. "Them?" she demanded. "Them? The man that owns this
house said that if he'd known, Lem would never had it; they don't want
convicts in this town. This is a moral burg. That's more than the women
said to me though--the starved buzzards; if they've spoke a word to me
since I never heard it." Her voice rose in sharp mimicry: "You, Katie,
come right up on the porch, child! Don't you know--! See, I'm going by."

"I could have warned you of all that," June Bowman asserted; "for the
reason they're narrow, don't know anything about living or affairs;
hypocritical too; long on churchgoing----"

Doret regarded him solemnly. How blind he was, a mound of corruptible
flesh! He put the beer down and turned abruptly away, going up to
Flavilla. She seemed better; her face was white but most of the fever
had gone. He listened to her harsh breathing with the conviction that
she had caught a cold; and immediately after he was back from the store
with a bottle of cherry pectoral. She liked the sweet taste of the thick
bright-pink sirup and was soon quiet. Lemuel sniffed the mouth of the
bottle suspiciously. It was doped, he finally decided, but not enough
to hurt her; tasting it, a momentary desire for stinging liquor ran like
fire through his nerves. He laughed at it, crushing and throwing aside
the longing with a sense of contempt and triumph.

He could hear occasionally Bowman's smooth periods and his wife's eager
enjoyment of the discourse. His sense of worldly loneliness deepened;
Flavilla seemed far away. All life was inexplicable--yes, and
profitless, ending in weariness and death. The hunger for perfection,
for God, that had been a constant part of his existence, the longing for
peace and security, were almost unbearable. He had had a long struggle;
the devil was deeply rooted in him. He could laugh at the broken tyranny
of drugs and drink, but the passion for fine steel cutting edges
was different, and twisted into every fiber. The rage that even yet
threatened to flood him, sweeping away his painfully erected integrity,
was different too. These things had made him a murderer.

"... not the righteous, but sinners to repentance."

He had a sudden muddled vision of another world, a world where sturdy
men gave him their hands and in reality fulfilled June Bowman's mocking
words. There the houses, the streets of his youth would have been
impossible. Ah, he was thinking of another kind of heaven; it was a hop
dream.

There was a stir below and he heard the clatter of plates. Dinner was in
preparation. "Lem!" his wife called. "Mr. Bowman wants you to go to the
butcher's."

"Call me June," he put in; adding: "Sure, Lem; the butcher's; we want
a tenderloin, cut thick. You can't get any pep on greens; we ain't
cattle."

Doret felt that he would have been infinitely happier with his own thin
fare. In a manner he got comfort from a pinch of hunger; somehow the
physical deprivation gave him a sense of purification. The other man,
purple with the meat and beer, shook out a cigarette from a paper pack.

"Always smoke caporal halves," he proclaimed.

The blue vapor from the three burning cigarettes rose and mingled.
Bella was quiet, reflective; Bowman sat with half-shut speculative eyes;
Lemuel Doret was again lost in visions.

"How long are you taking the milk cure?" Bowman asked.

Lemuel made no reply, but his wife smiled bitterly.

"I had an idea," the other continued; "but it's a little soon to spring
anything. And I don't know but you might prefer it here."

"Try me," Bella proclaimed; "that's all I want!"

Doret still said nothing of his determination to conquer life in
Nantbrook. A swift impulse seized him to take June Bowman by the collar
and fling him into the street.

"Just try me!" Bella repeated.

He would be helpless in his, Doret's, hands. It was hard enough to be
upright without an insinuating crook in the place. There was a heavy
movement of feet in the front of the house, and he went out to meet a
customer.

Sliding the sensitive razor blade over a young tanned cheek he pondered
moodily on the undesirable fact of June Bowman.

Returning from this exercise of his trade he saw Bella descending the
stair with a plate.

"With all your going on over Flavilla," she told him, "it never came to
you that she'd like a piece of steak."

"But Doctor Frazee told us nothing solid. I took her up two eggs in the
morning."

"Yes, and you'd had two dollars to pay as well if I hadn't showed you
different. Flavilla's probably as well as any of us. I wish you would
fix yourself a little, Lem. I'm tired of having you about the house in
your suspenders."

He viewed her silently. Bella had on a dress he had never seen before,
thin red-spotted yellow silk drawn tightly over a pronounced figure, a
red girdle, and high-heeled patent-leather slippers.

"If you're going to look like this," he admitted, "I'll have to get a
move on."

When they were first in Nantbrook she had worn a denim apron, and that,
too, with all the other differences had seemed to express their new
life; but now in yellow silk she was back in the old. Lemuel Doret
studied his wife with secret doubt; more than the dress had changed.
She seemed younger; rather she was adopting a younger manner. In the
presence of June Bowman it intensified.

"That idea I spoke about," the latter advanced: "I've been sizing
you up, the both of you, and you look good. Well, I've got hold of
a concession on the Atlantic Boardwalk and the necessary cash is in
sight." He turned to Lemuel. "How would you like to run a bowling game?
It's on the square and would give you a lead into something bigger.
You're wise; why, you might turn into a shore magnate, with Bella here
dressed up in stones."

Doret shook his head. "Treasure on earth," he thought; "moth and rust."
But it would be hopeless to attempt any explanation. "No," he said;
"we'll play it out here."

"We will?" Bella echoed him. "Indeed! We will?" Now the emphasis was
sharply on the first word. "What's going to keep me?"

"You're my wife," he replied simply; "we have a child."

"Times have changed, Snow," Bowman interrupted. "You ought to read the
papers. This is ladies' day. The old harem stuff don't go no longer.
They are emancipated."

"Lemuel," Doret insisted, a narrowed hard gaze on the other man; "Lemuel
Doret."

"He thinks nobody'll remember," his wife explained. "Lem's redeemed."

"Your name's what you say," Bowman agreed, "but remember this--you can't
throw any scare into me. I'm no Fauntleroy, neither. Behave."

The anger seethed again beneath Lemuel's restraint. It began to be
particular, personal, focused on Bowman; and joined to it was a petty
dislike for the details of the man's appearance, the jaunty bearing and
conspicuous necktie, the gloss of youth over the unmistakable signs of
degeneration, the fatty pouches of his eyes and loose throat.

"I wouldn't bother with scaring you," he told him. "Why should I? You've
got no kick. I took you in, didn't I? And all I said was my name. Snow
Doret's dead; he died in prison; and this Lemuel's all different----"

"I've heard about that too," Bowman returned; "but somehow I don't take
stock in these miracles."

"If you ever see me looking like I might be Snow, go quiet," Lemuel
advised. "That's all."

With clenched hands he abruptly departed. The cords of his neck were
swollen and rigid; there was a haze before his eyes. He went up to the
refuge of his daughter's room. She was lying still, breathing thickly,
with a finger print of scarlet on each cheek.

She was so thin, so wasted, the bed and room so stripped of every
comfort, that he dropped forward on his knees, his arms outflung across
her body in an inarticulate prayer for faith, for strength and patience.

It was not much he wanted--only food for one child and help for a woman,
and a grip on the devil tearing at him in the form of hatred.

He got only a temporary relief, for when he went down Bella and June
Bowman were whispering together; he passed the door with his silent
tread and saw their heads close. Bella was actually pretty.

An astonishing possibility occurred to him--perhaps Bella would go away
with Bowman. An unbidden deep relief at such a prospect invaded him; how
happy he could be with Flavilla. They would get a smaller house, which
Flavilla would soon learn to keep for him; they would go to church and
prayer meeting together, her soprano voice and his bass joined in the
praise of the Lord, of the Almighty who raised the dead and his Son, who
took the thief to glory.

This speculation was overcome by a troubled mind; both his innate pride
in his wife as an institution of his honor, the feeling that he would
uphold it at any cost, and his Christianity interrupted the vision of
release. He must not let her stumble, and he would see that June Bowman
didn't interfere in his home. More beer made its appearance, and the
other man grew louder, boastful. He exhibited the roll of money--that
was nothing, four times that much could be had from the same source. He
was a spender, too, and treated all his friends liberally. Lemuel was
to see if there was any wine in the damned jumping-off place; and when
would they all go to Atlantic?

"Never," Doret repeated.

Bowman laughed skeptically.

The rage stirred and increased, blinding Lemuel Doret's heart, stinging
his eyes. Bella, watching him, became quieter, and she gave June--she
called him June--a warning pressure of her fingers. Her husband saw it
with indifference; everything small was lost in the hot tide enveloping
him. His hands twitched, but there was no other outward sign of his
tumult. He smoked his cigarettes with extreme deliberation.

It was evening again, and they were sitting on the narrow porch. The
west was a serene lake of fading light against which the trees made dark
blots of foliage. Nantbrook seemed unreal, a place of thin shadow, the
future unsubstantial as well; only the past was actual in Lemuel Doret's
mind--the gray cold prison, the city at night, locked rooms filled with
smoke and lurid lights, avaricious voices in the mechanical sentences of
gambling, agonized tones begging for a shot, just a shot, of an addicted
drug, a girl crying.

He tried to sing a measure of praise beneath his breath but the tune and
words evaded him. He glanced furtively at Bowman's complacent bulk, the
flushed face turned fatuously to Bella. Under the other's left arm his
coat was drawn smoothly on a cushion of fat.

Later Lemuel stopped at Flavilla's bed, and though she was composed he
was vaguely alarmed at what seemed to him an unreal rigidity. She was
not asleep, but sunk in a stupor with a glimmer of vision and an elusive
pulse. He should not have listened to Bella but had a doctor as Frazee
had advised. It appeared now that--with all Flavilla held for him--he
had been strangely neglectful. At the same time he was conscious of
the steady increase of his hatred for Bowman. This was natural, he told
himself; Bowman in a way was the past--all that he, Doret, had put out
of his life. At least he had believed that accomplished, yet here it
was back again, alive and threatening; drinking beer in his rooms,
whispering to his wife, putting the thought of Flavilla from his head.

In the morning even Bella admitted that Flavilla might be sick and a
doctor necessary. He took one look at his daughter's burning face, heard
the shrill labor of her breathing, and hurried downstairs with a set
face. He was standing with Bella in the hall when June Bowman descended.

"Flavilla ain't right," she told him.

The latter promptly exhibited the wad of money. "Whatever you need," he
said.

"Put it away," Lemuel replied shortly. "I don't want any of that for
Flavilla."

Bowman studied him. Doret made no effort to mask his bitterness, and the
other whistled faintly. Bella laughed, turning from her husband.

"He's cracked," she declared; "you'll get no decency off him. A body
would think I had been in jail and him looking out for her all those ten
years and more. I can say thank you, though; we'll need your help, and
glad."

"Put it away," Lemuel Doret repeated. He was more than ever catlike,
alert, bent slightly forward with tense fingers.

Bowman was unperturbed. "I told you about this flash stuff," he
observed. "Nobody's forcing money on you. Get the bend out of you and
give me a shave. That'll start you on the pills."

Lemuel Doret mechanically followed him into the rude barber shop; he was
fascinated by the idea of laying the razor across Bowman's throat.
The latter extended himself in the chair and Doret slowly, thoroughly,
covered his lower face with lather, through which the blade drew with a
clean smooth rip. A fever burned in the standing man's brain, he fought
constantly against a stiffening of his employed fingers--a swift turn,
a cutting twist. Subconsciously he called noiselessly upon the God that
had sustained him and, divided between apprehension and the increasing
lust to kill, his lips held the form in which they had pronounced that
impressive name. He had the sensation of battling against a terrific
wind, a remorseless force beating him to submission. His body ached from
the violence of the struggle to keep his hand steadily, evenly, busied,
following in a delicate sweep the cords of June Bowman's neck, the
jugulars.

The other looked up at him and grinned confidently. "Little children,"
he said, "love one another."

Lemuel stopped, the razor suspended in air; there was a din in his
ears, his vision blurred, his grip tightened on the bone handle. A sweat
started out on his brow and he found himself dabbing June Bowman's face
with a wet cold towel.

"Witch hazel?" he asked mechanically.

Suddenly he was so tired that his legs seemed incapable of support.
He wiped the razor blade and put it away with a lax nerveless hand.
He realized that he had been again at the point of murder. He had been
saved by the narrowest margin in the world. For a moment the fact that
he had been saved absorbed him, and then the imminent danger of his
position, his weakness, filled him with the sense of failure, a
heavy feeling of hopelessness. His prayers and singing, his plans for
redemption, for a godly life, had threatened to end at the first assault
of evil.

He temporarily overcame his dejection at the memory of Flavilla. Doctor
Markley lived in a larger town than Nantbrook, a dozen miles beyond the
fields and green hills, and he must get him by telephone. Then there was
the problem of payment. The doctor, he knew, would expect his fee, two
dollars, immediately from such an applicant as himself; and he had less
than a dollar. He explained something of this over the wire, adding that
if Markley would see Flavilla at the end of the day the money would be
forthcoming. That, the crisp, disembodied tone replied, was impossible;
he must call in the middle of the morning, but no difficulty would be
made about his bill; Doret could send the amount to him promptly.

He hurried back to the house with this information, and found Bella
seated in the kitchen, the inevitable cigarette throwing up its ribbon
of smoke from her fingers, and June Bowman at her shoulder. Lemuel
ignored the latter.

"The doctor'll be here at about eleven," he announced. "Mind you listen
to all he says and get Flavilla into a clean nightgown and sheets."

"What's the matter with your tending to her?" Bella demanded.

"I won't be here; not till night. I'm going to put up hay with one of
the farmers. I hear they're in a hurry and offering good money."

Bella's expression was strange. She laughed in a forced way.

"We got to hand it to you," Bowman admitted genially; "you're there. I
guess I'd starve before ever it would come to me to fork hay."

Lemuel's wife added nothing; her lips twisted into a fixed smile at once
defiant and almost tremulous. Well, he was late now; he couldn't linger
to inquire into Bella's moods. Yet at the door he hesitated again to
impress on her the importance of attending the doctor's every word.

It seemed to him an hour later that he was burning up in a dry
intolerable haze of sun and hay. He awkwardly balanced heavy ragged
forkfuls, heaving them onto the mounting stack of the wagon in a paste
of sweat and dust. His eyes were filmed and his throat dry. He struggled
on in the soft unaccustomed tyranny of the grass, the glare of sun, with
his mind set on the close of day. He thought of cool shadows, of city
streets wet at night, and a swift plunge into a river where it swept
about the thrust of a wharf. He wondered what Doctor Markley would say
about Flavilla; probably the child wasn't seriously sick.

The day drew apparently into a tormenting eternity; the physical effort
he welcomed; it seemed to exhaust that devil in him which had so
nearly betrayed and ruined him forever in the morning; but the shifting
slippery hay, the fiery dust, the incandescent blaze created an inferno
in the midst of which his mind whirled with monotonous giddy images and
half-meaningless phrases spoken and re-spoken. Yet the sun was not, as
he had begun to suppose, still in the sky; it sank toward the horizon,
the violet shadows slipped out from the western hills, and Lemuel
finished his toil in a swimming gold mist. It was two miles to
Nantbrook, and disregarding his aching muscles he hurried over the
gray undulating road. The people of the village were gathered on their
commanding porches, the barkeeper at the hotel bulked in his doorway.
The lower part of Lemuel's own house was closed; no one appeared as he
mounted the insecure steps.

"Bella!" he cried in an overwhelming anxiety before he reached the hall.

There was no reply. He paused inside and called again. His voice echoed
about the bare walls; he heard a dripping from the kitchen sink; nothing
more.

"I'd better go up," he said aloud with a curious tightening of his
throat. He progressed evenly up the stairs; suddenly a great weight
seemed to bow his shoulders; the illusion was so vivid that he actually
staggered; he was incapable of breaking from his measured progress. He
turned directly into Flavilla's room. She was there--he saw her at
once. But Bella hadn't put a fresh nightgown on her, and the sheets were
disordered and unchanged.

Lemuel took a step forward; then he stopped. "The fever's gone," he
vainly told the dread freezing about his heart at a stilled white face.

"Yes," he repeated with numb lips; "it's gone."

He approached the bed and standing over it and the meager body he cursed
softly and wonderingly. The light was failing and it veiled the sharp
lines of the dead child's countenance. For a moment his gaze strayed
about the room and he felt a swift sorrow at its ugliness. He had wanted
pretty things, pictures and a bright carpet and ribbons, for Flavilla.
Then he was conscious of a tearing rage, but now he was unmindful of it,
impervious to its assault in the fixed necessity of the present.

Later----

He was sitting again on his porch, after the momentary morbid stir of
curiosity and small funeral, when the unrestrained sweep of his own
emotion overcame him. His appearance had not changed; it was impossible
for his expression to become bleaker; but there was a tremendous change
within. Yet it was not strange; rather he had the sensation of returning
to an old familiar condition. There he was at ease; he moved swiftly,
surely forward in the realization of what lay ahead.

Bella and June Bowman had left the house almost directly after him, and
Markley, finding it empty, with no response to his repeated knocking,
had turned away, being as usual both impatient and hurried. Yes, Bella
had gone and left Flavilla without even a glass of water. But Bella
didn't matter. He couldn't understand this--except where he saw at last
that she never had mattered; yet it was so. June Bowman was different.

There was no rush about the latter--to-morrow, next week would do
equally. There was no doubt either. Lemuel Doret gave a passing thought,
like a half-contemptuous gesture of final dismissal, to so much that had
lately occupied him. The shadow of a smile disfigured his metallic lips.

The following noon he shut the door of his house with a sharp impact and
made his way over the single street of Nantbrook toward the city. His
fear of it had vanished; and when he reached the steel-bound towering
masonry, the pouring crowds, he moved directly to a theater from which
an audience composed entirely of men was passing out by the posters of a
hectic burlesque.

"Clegett?" he asked at the grille of the box office.

A small man with a tilted black derby came from the darkened auditorium.

"Where have you been?" he demanded as he caught sight of Lemuel Doret.
"I asked two or three but you might have been dead for all of them."

"That's just about what I have," Doret answered. "Mr. Clegett, I'd like
a little money."

"How little?"

"A hundred would be plenty."

The other without hesitation produced a fold of currency, from which he
transferred an amount to Lemuel Doret. It went into his pocket without a
glance. He hesitated a moment, then added: "This will be all."

Clegett nodded. "It might, and it might not," he asserted; "but you
can't jam me. You're welcome to that, anyhow. It was coming to you. I
wondered when you'd be round."

It was not far from the theater to a glittering hardware store, a place
that specialized in sporting goods. There were cases of fishing reels,
brilliant tied flies and varnished, gayly wrapped cane rods, gaffs and
coiled wire leaders, and an impressive assortment of modern pistols,
rifles and shotguns.

"Something small and neat," Doret told the man in charge of the weapons.

He examined a compact automatic pistol, a blunted shape no larger than
his palm. It was a beautiful mechanism, and as with his silken razors,
merely to hold it, to test the smooth action, gave him a sense of
pleasure.

Later, seated in a quiet cafe, an adjunct of the saloon below, he could
not resist the temptation of taking the pistol in its rubber holster
from his pocket, merely to finger the delicate trigger. There was no
hurry. He knew his world thoroughly: it was a small land in which the
inhabitants had constant knowledge of each other. A question in the
right place would bring all the information he needed. Lemuel was
absolutely composed, actually he was a little sleepy; longing and inner
strife, dreams, were at an end; only an old familiar state, a thoroughly
comprehensible purpose remained.

A girl--she could have been no more than fourteen--was hurriedly
slipping a paper of white crystalline powder into a glass of
sarsaparilla. She smiled at him as she saw his indifferent
interrogation.

"It's better rolled with a pencil first," he said, and then returned to
the contemplation of his own affair.

The result of this was that, soon after, he was seated in the smoking
car of an electric train that, hurtling across a sedgy green expanse of
salt meadow, deposited him in a colorful thronging city built on sand
and the rim of the sea. It was best to avoid if possible even a casual
inquiry, and Bowman had spoken of Atlantic City. The afternoon was
hot and bright, the beach was still dotted with groups of bathers;
and Lemuel Doret found an inconspicuous place in a row of swing chairs
protected by an awning ... where he waited for evening. Below him a
young woman lay contentedly with her head in a youth's lap; a child in a
red scrap of bathing suit dug sturdily with an ineffectual tin spade.

The day declined, the water darkened and the groups vanished from the
beach. An attendant was stacking the swing chairs, and Lemuel Doret
left his place. The boardwalk, elevated above him, was filled with a
gay multitude, subdued by the early twilight and the brightening
lemon-yellow radiance of the strung globes. Drifting, with only his gaze
alert, in the scented mob, he stopped at an unremarkable lunch room
for coffee, and afterward turned down a side avenue to where some
automobiles waited at the curb. A driver moved from his seat as Lemuel
approached, but after a closer inspection the former's interest died.

Doret lighted a cigarette. "How are they hitting you?" he asked
negligently.

"Bad; but the season ain't opened up right yet. It'll have to soon,
though, if they want me; gas has gone to where it's like shoving
champagne into your car."

"The cafes doing anything?"

"None except the Torquay; but the cabaret they got takes all the
profits. That's on the front. Then there's the World, back of the town.
It's colored, but white go. Quite a place--I saw a sailor come out last
night hashed with a knife."

He found the Torquay, a place of brilliant illumination and color,
packed with tables about a dancing floor, and small insistent orchestra.
He sat against the wall by the entrance, apparently sunk in apathy, but
his vision searched the crowd like the cutting bar of light thrown on
the intermittent singers. He renewed his order. Toward midnight a fresh
influx of people swept in; his search was unsatisfied.

The cigarette girl, pinkly pretty with an exaggerated figure, carrying a
wooden tray with her wares, stopped at his gesture.

"Why don't you hang that about your neck with something?" he inquired.

"And get round shouldered!" she demanded. Her manner became
confidential. "I do get fierce tired," she admitted; "nine till
two-thirty."

He asked for a particular brand of cigarette.

"We haven't got them." She studied him with a memorizing frown. "They
are hardly ever asked for; and now--yes, there was a man, last night, I
think----"

"He must have made an impression."

"Another move and I'd slapped him if I lost my job. They got to be some
fresh when they disturb me, too."

"Alone, then?"

"That's right. Wanted me to meet him, and showed me a roll of money.
Me!" her contempt sharpened.

"He was young?"

"Young nothing, with gray in his shoebrush mustache."

By such small things, Lemuel Doret reflected, the freshness that had
fixed June Bowman in the girl's memory, men were marked and followed.

"I told him," she volunteered further, "he didn't belong on the
boardwalk but in the rough joints past the avenue."

Paying for his drink Doret left the Torquay; and following the slight
pressure of two suggestions and a faint possibility he found himself in
a sodden dark district where a red-glass electric sign proclaimed the
entrance to the World. An automobile stopped and a chattering group of
young colored girls in sheer white with vivid ribbons, accompanied
by sultry silent negroes, preceded him into the cafe. He was met by a
brassy racket and a curiously musty heavy air.

The room was long and narrow, and on one wall a narrow long platform was
built above the floor for the cabaret. There was a ledge about the other
walls the width of one table, and below that the space was crowded by
a singular assembly. There were women faintly bisque in shade, with
beautiful regular features, and absolute blacks with flattened noses and
glistening eyes in burning red and green muslins. Among them were white
girls with untidy bright-gold hair, veiled gaze and sullen painted
lips; white men sat scattered through the darker throng, men like Lemuel
Doret, quiet and watchful, others laughing carelessly, belligerent, and
still more sunk in a stupor of drink.

Perhaps ten performers occupied the stage, and at one end was the
hysterical scraping on strings, the muffled hammered drums, that
furnished the rhythm for a slow intense waltz.

Yet in no detail was the place so marked as by an indefinable oppressive
atmosphere. The strong musk and edged perfumes, the races, distinct and
subtly antagonistic or mingled and spoiled, the rasping instruments,
combined in an unnatural irritating pressure; they produced an actual
sensation of cold and staleness like that from the air of a vault.

Doret ordered beer in a bottle, and watched the negro waitress snap
off the cap. He had never seen a cafe such as this before, and he was
engaged, slightly; its character he expressed comprehensively in the
word "bad."

A wonderfully agile dancer caught the attention of the room.
The musicians added their voices to the jangle, and the minor
half-inarticulate wail, the dull regular thudding of the bass drum were
savage. The song fluctuated and died; the dancer dropped exhausted into
her chair.

Then Lemuel saw June Bowman. He was only a short distance away,
and--without Bella--seated alone but talking to the occupants of the
next table. Lemuel Doret was composed. In his pocket he removed the
automatic pistol from its rubber case. Still there was no hurry--Bowman
was half turned from him, absolutely at his command. The other twisted
about, his glance swept the room, and he recognized Doret. He half
rose from his chair, made a gesture of acknowledgment that died before
Lemuel's stony face, and sank back into his place. Lemuel saw Bowman's
hand slip under his coat, but it came out immediately; the fingers
drummed on the table.

The careless fool--he was unarmed.

There was no hurry; he could make one, two steps at Bowman's slightest
movement.... Lemuel thought of Flavilla deserted, dying alone with
a parched mouth, of all that had gone to wreck in the evil that had
overtaken him--the past that could not, it appeared, be killed. Yet
where Bowman was the past, it was nearly over. He'd finish the beer
before him, that would leave some in the bottle, and then end it.
With the glass poised in his hand he heard an absurd unexpected sound.
Looking up he saw that it came from the platform, from a black woman in
pale-blue silk, a short ruffled skirt and silver-paper ornaments in her
tightly crinkled hair. She was singing, barely audibly:

  _"Oh, children ... lost in Egypt
  See that chariot....
  ... good tidings!"_

Even from his table across the room he realized that she was sunk in
an abstraction; her eyes were shut and her body rocking in beat to the
line.

"Good tidings," she sang.

A negro close beside Doret looked up suddenly, and his voice joined in a
humming undertone, "See that chariot, oh, good tidings ... that Egyptian
chariot."

A vague emotion stirred within Lemuel Doret, the singing annoyed him,
troubled him with memories of perishing things. Another joined, and the
spiritual swelled slightly, haltingly above the clatter of glasses and
laughter. The woman who had begun it was swept to her feet; she
stood with her tinsel gayety of apparel making her tragic ebony face
infinitely grotesque and tormented while her tone rose in a clear
emotional soprano:

  _"Children of Israel, unhappy slaves,
  Good tidings, good tidings,
  For that chariot's coming,
  God's chariot's coming, ... coming,
  ........... chariot out of Egypt."_

The magic of her feeling swept like a flame over the room; shrill mirth,
mocking calls, curses were bound in a louder and louder volume of hope
and praise. The negroes were on their feet, swaying in the hysterical
contagion of melody, the unutterable longing of their alien isolation.

"God's chariot's coming." The song filled the roof, hung with bright
strips of paper, it boomed through the windows and doors. Sobbing cries
cut through it, profound invocations, beautiful shadowy voices chimed
above the weight of sound.

It beat like a hammer on Lemuel Doret's brain and heart. Suddenly he
couldn't breathe, and he rose with a gasp, facing the miracle that had
overtaken the place he called bad. God's chariot--was there! He heard
God's very tone directed at him. Borne upward on the flood of exaltation
he seemed to leave the earth far, far away. Something hard, frozen, in
him burst, and tears ran over his face; he was torn by fear and terrible
joy. His Lord....

He fell forward on his knees, an arm overturning the bottle of beer;
and, his sleeve dabbled in it, he pressed his head against the cold edge
of the table, praying wordlessly for faith, incoherently ravished by the
marvel of salvation, the knowledge of God here, everywhere.

The harmony wavered and sank, and out of the shuddering silence that
followed Lemuel Doret turned again from the city.




THE FLOWER OF SPAIN

I

From the window of the drawing-room Lavinia Sanviano could see, on the
left, the Statue of Garibaldi, where the Corso Regina Maria cut into the
Lungarno; on the right, and farther along, the gray-green foliage of the
Cascine. Before her the Arno flowed away, sluggish and without a wrinkle
or reflection on its turbid surface, into Tuscany. It was past the
middle of afternoon, and a steady procession of carriages and mounted
officers in pale blue tunics moved below toward the shade of the
Cascine.

Lavinia could not see this gay progress very well, for the window--it
had only a narrow ledge guarded by an iron grille--was practically
filled by her sister, Gheta, and Anna Mantegazza. Occasionally
she leaned forward, pressed upon Gheta's shoulder, for a hasty
unsatisfactory glimpse.

"You are crushing my sleeves!" Gheta finally and sharply complained.
"Do go somewhere else. Anna and I want to talk without your young ears
eternally about. When do you return to the convent?"

Lavinia drew back. However, she didn't leave. She was accustomed to her
sister's complaining, and--unless the other went to their father--she
ignored her hints. Lavinia's curiosity in worldly scenes and topics was
almost as full as her imagination thereof. She was sixteen, and would
have to endure another year of obscurity before her marriage could be
thought of, or she take any part in the social life where Gheta moved
with such marked success.

But, Lavinia realized with a sigh, she couldn't expect to be pursued
like Gheta, who was very beautiful. Gheta was so exceptional that she
had been introduced to the Florentine polite world without the customary
preliminary of marriage. She could, almost every one agreed, marry very
nearly whomever and whenever she willed. Even now, after the number of
years she had been going about with practically all her friends wedded,
no one seriously criticized the Sanvianos for not insisting on a match
with one of the several eligibles who had unquestionably presented
themselves.

Gheta was slender and round; her complexion had the flawless pallid
bloom of a gardenia; her eyes and hair were dark, and her lips an
enticing scarlet thread. Perhaps her chin was a trifle lacking in
definition, her voice a little devoid of warmth; but those were
minor defects in a person so precisely radiant. Her dress was always
noticeably lovely; at present she wore pink tulle over lustrous gray,
with a high silver girdle, a narrow black velvet band and diamond clasp
about her delicate full throat.

Anna Mantegazza was more elaborately gowned, in white embroidery, with
a little French hat; but Anna Mantegazza was an American with millions,
and elaboration was a commonplace with her. Lavinia wore only a simple
white slip, confined about her flexible waist with a yellow ribbon; and
she was painfully conscious of the contrast she presented to the two
women seated in the front of the window.

The fact was that a whole fifth of the Sanvianos' income was spent
on Gheta's clothes; and this left only the most meager provision for
Lavinia. But this, the latter felt, was just--still in the convent,
she required comparatively little personal adornment; while the other's
beauty demanded a worthy emphasis. Later Lavinia would have tulle and
silver lace. She wished, however, that Gheta would get married; for
Lavinia knew that even if she came home she would be held back until the
older sister was settled. It was her opinion that Gheta was very silly
to show such indifference to Cesare Orsi.... Suddenly she longed to have
men--not fat and good-natured like the Neapolitan banker, but austere
and romantic--in love with her. She clasped her hands to her fine young
breast and a delicate color stained her cheeks. She stood very straight
and her breathing quickened through parted lips.

She was disturbed by the echo of a voice from the cool depths of the
house, and turned at approaching footfalls. The room was so high and
large that its stiff gilt and brocade furnishing appeared insignificant.
Three long windows faced the Lungarno, but two were screened with green
slatted blinds and heavily draped, and the light within was silvery and
illusive. A small man in correct English clothes, with a pointed bald
head and a heavy nose, entered impulsively.

"It's Bembo," Lavinia announced flatly.

"Of course it's Bembo," he echoed vivaciously. "Who's more faithful to
the Casa Sanviano----"

"At tea time," Lavinia interrupted.

"Lavinia," her sister said sharply, "don't be impertinent. There are so
many strangers driving," she continued, to the man; "do stand and tell
us who they are. You know every second person in Europe."

He pressed eagerly forward, and Anna Mantegazza turned and patted his
hand.

"I wish you were so attentive to Pier and myself," she remarked,
both light and serious. "I'd like to buy you--you're indispensable in
Florence."

"Contessa!" he protested. "Delighted! At once."

"Bembo," Gheta demanded, "duty--who's that in the little carriage with
the bells bowed over the horses?"

He leaned out over the grille, his beady alert gaze sweeping the way
below.

"Litolff," he pronounced without a moment's hesitation--"a Russian
swell. The girl with him is----" He stopped with a side glance at
Lavinia, a slight shrug.

"Positively, Lavinia," Gheta insisted again, more crossly, "you're a
nuisance! When do you go back to school?"

"In a week," Lavinia answered serenely.

With Bembo added to the others, she could see almost nothing of the
scene below. Across the river the declining sun cast a rosy light on the
great glossy hedges and clipped foliage of the Boboli Gardens; far to
the left the paved height of the Piazzale Michelangelo rose above the
somber sweep of roofs and bridges; an aged bell rang harshly and mingled
with the inconsequential clatter on the Lungarno. An overwhelming sense
of the mystery of being stabbed, sharp as a knife, at her heart; a
choking longing possessed her to experience all--all the wonders of
life, but principally love.

"Look, Bembo!" Anna Mantegazza suddenly exclaimed. "No;
there--approaching! Who's that singular person in the hired carriage?"

Her interest was so roused that Lavinia, once more forgetful of
Gheta's sleeves, leaned over her sister's shoulder, and immediately
distinguished the object of their curiosity.

An open cab was moving slowly, almost directly under the window, with a
single patron--a slender man, sitting rigidly erect, in a short, black
shell jacket, open upon white linen, a long black tie, and a soft narrow
scarlet sash. He wore a wide-brimmed stiff felt hat slanted over a thin
countenance burned by the sun as dark as green bronze; his face was as
immobile as metal, too; it bore, as if permanently molded, an expression
of excessive contemptuous pride.

Bembo's voice rose in a babble of excited information.

"'Singular?' Why, that's one of the most interesting men alive. It's
Abrego y Mochales, the greatest bullfighter in existence, the Flower of
Spain. I've seen him in the ring and at San Sebastian with the King; and
I can assure you that one was hardly more important than the other. He's
idolized by every one in Spain and South America; women of all classes
fall over each other with declarations and gifts."

As if he had heard the pronouncement of his name the man in the cab
turned sharply and looked up. Gheta was leaning out, and his gaze
fastened upon her with a sudden and extraordinary intensity. Lavinia
saw that her sister, without dissembling her interest, sat forward,
statuesque and lovely. It seemed to the former that the cab was an
intolerable time passing; she wished to draw Gheta back, to cover
her indiscretion from Anna Mantegazza's prying sight. She sighed with
inexplicable relief when she saw that the man had driven beyond them and
that he did not turn.

A bull-fighter! A blurred picture formed in Lavinia's mind from the
various details she had read and heard of the cruelty of the Spanish
national sport--torn horses, stiff on blood-soaked sand; a frenzied
and savage populace; and charging bulls, drenched with red froth. She
shuddered.

"What a brute!" she spoke aloud unintentionally.

Gheta glanced at her out of a cool superiority, but Anna Mantegazza
nodded vigorously.

"He would be a horrid person!" she affirmed.

"How silly!" Gheta responded. "It's an art, like the opera; he's an
artist in courage. Personally I find it rather fascinating. Most men are
so--so mild."

Lavinia knew that the other was thinking of Cesare Orsi, and she agreed
with her sister that Orsi was far too mild. Without the Orsi fortune--he
had much more even than Anna Mantegazza--Cesare would simply get
nowhere. The Spaniard--Lavinia could not recall his name, although it
hung elusively among her thoughts--was different; women of all classes,
Bembo had said, pursued him with favors. He could be cruel, she
decided, and shivered a little vicariously. She half heard Bembo's rapid
high-pitched excitement over trifles.

"You are going to the Guarinis' sale to-morrow afternoon? But, of
course, every one is. Well, if I come across Abrego y Mochales before
then, and I'm almost certain to, and he'll come, I'll bring him. He's as
proud as the devil--duchesses, you see--so no airs with him. The
Flower of Spain. A king of sport sits high at the table--" He went on,
apparently interminable; but Lavinia turned away to where tea was being
laid in a far angle.

Others approached over the tiled hall and the Marchese Sanviano entered
with Cesare Orsi. The window was deserted, and the women trailed
gracefully toward the bubbling minor note of the alcohol lamp. Both
Sanviano and Orsi were big men--the former, like Bembo, wore English
clothes; but Orsi's ungainly body had been tightly garbed by a Southern
military tailor, making him--Lavinia thought--appear absolutely
ridiculous. His collar was both too tight and too high, although
perspiration promised relief from the latter.

A general and unremarkable conversation mingled with the faint rattle of
passing cups and low directions to a servant. Lavinia was seated next to
Cesare Orsi, but she was entirely oblivious of his heavy kindly face and
almost anxiously benevolent gaze. He spoke to her, and because she had
comprehended nothing of his speech she smiled at him with an absent and
illuminating charm. He smiled back, happy in her apparent pleasure; and
his good-nature was so insistent that she was impelled to reward it with
a remark.

She thought, she said, that Gheta was particularly lovely this
afternoon. He agreed eagerly; and Lavinia wondered whether she had been
clumsy. She simply couldn't imagine marrying Cesare Orsi, but she knew
that such a match for Gheta was freely discussed, and she hoped that her
sister would not make difficulties. She wouldn't have dresses so
fussy as Gheta's--in figure, anyhow, she was perhaps her sister's
superior--fine materials, simply cut, with a ruffle at the throat and
hem, a satin wrap pointed at the back, with a soft tassel....

Orsi was talking to Gheta, and she was answering him with a brevity
that had cast a shade of annoyance over the Marchese Sanviano's large
features. Lavinia agreed with her father that Gheta was a fool. She must
be thirty, the younger suddenly realized. Bembo was growing hysterical
from the tea and his own shrill anecdotes. He resembled a grotesque
performing bird with a large beak. Lavinia's mind returned to the silent
dark man who had passed in a cab. She wished, now, that she had been
sitting at the front of the window--the object of his unsparing intense
gaze. She realized that he was extremely handsome, and contrasted his
erect slim carriage with Orsi's thick slouched shoulders. The latter
interrupted her look, misinterpreted it, and said something about candy
from Giacosa's.

Lavinia thanked him and rose; the discussion about the tea table became
unbearably stupid, no better than the flat chatter of the nuns at
school.

Her room was small and barely furnished, with a thin rug over the stone
floor, and opened upon the court about which the house was built. The
Sanvianos occupied the second floor. Below, the _piano nobile_ was
rented by the proprietor of a great wine industry. It was evident that
he was going out to dinner, for his dark blue brougham was waiting
at the inner entrance. The horse, a fine sleek animal, was stamping
impatiently, with ringing shoes, on the paved court. A flowering
magnolia tree against one corner filled the thickening dusk with a heavy
palpitating sweetness.

Lavinia stayed for a long while at the ledge of her window. Her hair,
which she wore braided in a smooth heavy rope, slid out and hung free.
The brougham left, with a clatter of hoofs and a final clang of the
great iron-bound door on the street; above, white stars grew visible in
a blue dust. She dressed slowly, changing from one plain gown to another
hardly less simple. Before the mirror, in an unsatisfactory lamplight,
she studied her appearance in comparison with Gheta's.

She lacked the latter's lustrous pallor, the petal-like richness of
Gheta's skin. Lavinia's cheeks bore a perceptible flush, which she
detested and tried vainly to mask with powder. Her eyes, a clear bluish
gray, inherited from the Lombard strain in her mother, were not so much
fancied as her sister's brown; but at least they were more uncommon and
contrasted nicely with her straight dark bang. Her shoulders and arms
she surveyed with frank healthy approbation. Now her hair annoyed
her, swinging childishly about her waist, and she secured it in an
instinctively effective coil on the top of her head. She decided to
leave it there for dinner. Her mother was away for the night; and she
knew that Gheta's sarcasm would only stir their father to a teasing
mirth.

Later, Gheta departed for a ball, together with the Marchese
Sanviano--to be dropped at his club--and Lavinia was left alone. The
scene in the court was repeated, but with less flourish than earlier in
the evening. Gheta would be nominally in the charge of Anna Mantegazza;
but Lavinia knew how laxly the American would hold her responsibility.
She wished, moving disconsolately under high painted ceilings through
the semi-gloom of still formal chambers, that she was a recognized
beauty--free, like Gheta.

The drawing-room, from which they had watched the afternoon procession,
was in complete darkness, save for the luminous rectangle of the window
they had occupied. Its drapery was still disarranged. Lavinia crossed
the room and stood at the grille. The lights strung along the river,
curving away like uniform pale bubbles, cast a thin illumination over
the Lungarno, through which a solitary vehicle moved. Lavinia idly
watched it approach, but her interest increased as it halted directly
opposite where she stood. A man got quickly out--a lithe figure with a
broad-brimmed hat slanted across his eyes. It was, she realized with
an involuntary quickening of her blood, Abrego y Mochales. A second
man followed, tendered him a curiously shaped object, and stood by
the waiting cab while the bull-fighter walked deliberately forward. He
stopped under the window and shifted the thing in his hands.

A rich chord of strings vibrated through the night, another followed,
and then a brief pattern of sound was woven from the serious notes of
a guitar. Lavinia shrank back within the room--it was, incredibly, a
serenade on the stolid Lungarno. It was for Gheta! The romance of the
south of Spain had come to life under their window. A voice joined
the instrument, melodious and melancholy, singing an air with little
variation, but with an insistent burden of desire. The voice and the
guitar mingled and fluctuated, drifting up from the pavement exotic and
moving. Lavinia could comprehend but little of the Spanish:

  _"I followed through the acacias,
  But it was only the wind.
  .... looked for you beyond the limes----"_

The thrill at her heart deepened until tears wet her cheeks. It was for
Gheta, but it overwhelmed Lavinia with a formless and aching emotion;
it was for Gheta, but her response was instant and uncontrollable. It
seemed to Lavinia that the sheer beauty of life, which had moved her
so sharply, had been magnified unbearably; she had never dreamed of the
possibilities of such ecstasy or such delectable grief.

The song ended abruptly, with a sharp jarring note. The man by the
carriage moved deferentially forward and took the guitar. She could
see the minute pulsating sparks of cigarettes; heard a direction to the
driver. Abrego y Mochales and the other got into the cab and it turned
and shambled away. Lavinia Sanviano moved forward mechanically, gazing
after the dark vanishing shape on the road. She was shaken, almost
appalled, by the feeling that stirred her. A momentary terror of living
swept over her; the thrills persisted; her hands were icy cold. She had
been safely a child until now, when she had lost that small security,
and gained--what?

She studied herself, clad in her coarse nightgown with narrow lace, in
her inadequate mirror. The color had left her cheeks and her eyes shone
darkly from shadows. "Lavinia Sanviano!" she spoke aloud, with the
extraordinary sensation of addressing, in her reflection, a stranger.
She could never, never wear her hair down again, she thought with an odd
pang.

II

Gheta invariably took breakfast in her room. It was a larger chamber by
far than Lavinia's, toward the Via Garibaldi. A thick white bearskin was
spread by the canopied bed, an elaborate dressing table stood between
long windows drawn with ruffled pink silk, while the ceiling bore a
scaling ottocento frescoing of garlanded cupids. She was sitting in bed,
the chocolate pot on a painted table at her side, when Lavinia entered.

A maid was putting soft paper in the sleeves of Gheta's ball dress, and
Lavinia, finding an unexpected reluctance to proceed with what she had
come to say, watched the servant's deft care.

"Mochales was here last night," Lavinia finally remarked abruptly--"that
is he stood on the street and serenaded you."

Gheta put her cup down with a clatter.

"How charming!" she exclaimed. "And I missed it for an insufferable
affair. He stood under the window--"

"With a guitar," Lavinia proceeded evenly. "It was very beautiful."

"Heavens! Bembo's going to fetch him to the Guarinis' sale, and I forgot
and promised Anna Mantegazza to drive out to Arcetri! But Anna won't
miss this. It was really a very pretty compliment."

She spoke with a trivial satisfaction that jarred painfully on Lavinia's
memory of the past night. Gheta calmly accepted the serenade as another
tribute to her beauty; Lavinia could imagine what Anna Mantegazza and
her sister would say, and they both seemed commonplace--even a little
vulgar--to her acutely sensitive being. She suddenly lost her desire
to resemble Gheta; her sister diminished in her estimation. The elder,
Lavinia realized with an unsparing detachment, was enveloped in a petty
vanity acquired in an atmosphere of continuous flattery; it had chilled
her heart.

The Guarinis, who had been overtaken by misfortune, and whose household
goods were, being disposed of at public sale, occupied a large gloomy
floor on the Via Cavour. The rooms were crowded by their friends and the
merely curious; the carpets were protected by a temporary covering; and
all the furnishings, the chairs and piano, pictures, glass and bijoux,
bore gummed and numbered labels.

The sale was progressing in one of the larger salons, but the crowd
circulated in a slow solid undulation through every room. Gheta and Anna
Mantegazza had sought the familiar comfortable corner of an entresol,
and were seated. Lavinia was standing tensely, with a laboring breast,
when Bembo suddenly appeared with the man whom he had called the Flower
of Spain.

"The Contessa Mantegazza," Bembo said suavely, "Signorina Sanviano, this
is Abrego y Mochales."

The bull-fighter bowed with magnificent flexibility. A hot resentment
possessed Lavinia at Bembo's apparent ignoring of her; but he had not
seen her at first and hastened to repair his omission. Lavinia inclined
her head stiffly. An increasing confusion enveloped her, but she forced
herself to gaze directly into Mochales' still black eyes. His face, she
saw, was gaunt, the ridges of his skull apparent under the bronzed skin.
His hair, worn in a queue, was pinned in a flat disk on his head, and
small gold loops had been riveted in his ears; but these peculiarities
of garb were lost in the man's intense virility, his patent brute
force. His fine perfumed linen, the touch of scarlet at his waist,
his extremely high-heeled patent-leather boots under soft uncreased
trousers, served only to emphasize his resolute metal--they resembled an
embroidered and tasseled scabbard that held a keen, thin and dangerous
blade.

Anna Mantegazza extended her hand in the American fashion, and Gheta
smiled from--Lavinia saw--her best facial angle. The Spaniard regarded
Gheta Sanviano so fixedly that after a moment she turned, in a species
of constraint, to Anna. The latter spoke with her customary facility and
the man responded gravely.

They stood a little aside from Lavinia; she only partly heard their
remarks, but she saw that Abrego y Mochales' attention never strayed
from her sister. Vicariously it made her giddy. The man absolutely
summed up all that Lavinia had dreamed of a romantic and masterful
personage. She felt convinced that he had destroyed her life's
happiness--no other man could ever appeal to her now; none other could
satisfy the tumult he had aroused in her. This, she told herself,
desperately miserable, was love.

Gheta spoke of her, for the three turned to regard her. She met their
scrutiny with a doubtful half smile, which vanished as Anna Mantegazza
made a light comment upon her hair being so newly up. Lavinia detested
the latter with a sudden and absurd intensity. She saw Anna, with a
veiled glance at Gheta, make an apology and leave to join an eddy of
familiars that had formed in the human stream sweeping by. Mochales
stood very close to her sister, speaking seriously, while Gheta
nervously fingered the short veil hanging from her gay straw hat.

A familiar kindly voice sounded suddenly in Lavinia's ears, and Cesare
Orsi joined her. He was about to move forward toward Gheta; but, before
he could attract her attention, she disappeared in the crowd with the
Spaniard.

"Who was it?" he inquired. "He resembles a juggler."

Lavinia elaborately masked her hot resentment at this fresh stupidity.
She must not, she felt, allow Orsi to discover her feeling for Abrego
y Mochales; that was a secret she must keep forever from the profane
world. She would die, perhaps at a terribly advanced age, with it locked
in her heart. But if Gheta married him she would go into a convent.

"A bull-fighter, I believe," she said carelessly.

"In other words, a brute," Orsi continued. "Such men are not fit for the
society of--of your sister. One would think his mere presence would make
her ill.... Yet she seemed quite pleased."

"Strange!" Lavinia spoke with innocent eyes.

It was like turning a knife in her wound to agree apparently with Cesare
Orsi--rather, she wanted to laugh at him coldly and leave him standing
alone; but she must cultivate her defenses. There was, too, a sort of
negative pleasure in misleading the banker, a sort of torment not unlike
that enjoyed by the early martyrs.

Cesare Orsi regarded her with new interest and approbation.

"You're a sensible girl," he proclaimed; "and extremely pretty in the
bargain." He added this in an accent of profound surprise, as if she had
suddenly grown presentable under his eyes. "In some ways," he went on,
gathering conviction, "you are as handsome as Gheta."

"Thank you, Signor Orsi," Lavinia responded with every indication of a
modesty, which, in fact, was the indifference of a supreme contempt.

"I have been blind," he asseverated, vivaciously gesticulating with his
thick hands.

Lavinia studied him with a remote young brutality, from his fluffy
disarranged hair, adhering to his wet brow, to his extravagantly pointed
shoes. The ridiculous coral charm hanging from his heavy watch chain, a
violent green handkerchief, an insufferable cameo pin--all contributed
pleasurably to the lowering of her opinion of him.

"I must find Gheta," she pronounced, suddenly aware of her isolation
with Cesare Orsi in the crowd, and of curious glances. Orsi immediately
took her arm, but she eluded him. "Go first, please; we can get through
sooner that way."

They progressed from room to room, thoroughly exploring the dense throng
about the auctioneer, but without finding either Gheta, Anna Mantegazza
or the bull-fighter.

"I can't think how she could have forgotten me!" Lavinia declared with
increasing annoyance. "It's clear that they have all gone."

"Don't agitate yourself," Cesare Orsi begged. "Sanviano will be
absolutely contented to have you in my care. I am delighted. You shall
go home directly in my carriage." He conducted her, with a show of form
that in any one else or at another time she would have enjoyed hugely,
to the street, where he handed her into an immaculately glossy and
corded victoria, drawn by a big stamping bay, and stood with his hat off
until she had rolled away.

It was comfortable in the luxuriously upholstered seat and, in spite of
herself, Lavinia sank back with a contented sigh. There was in its case
a gilt hand mirror, into which she peered, and a ledge that pulled out,
with a crystal box for cigarettes and a spirit lighter. The Sanvianos
had only a landaulet, no longer in its first condition; and Lavinia
wondered why Gheta, who adored ease, had been so long in securing for
herself such comforts as Orsi's victoria.

They swept smoothly on rubber tires into the Lungarno and rapidly
approached her home. The carriage stopped before the familiar white
facade, built of marble in the pseudo-severity of the early nineteenth
century, and the porter swung open the great iron gate to the courtyard.
Lavinia mounted the square white shaft of the stairs to the Sanvianos'
floor with a deepening sense of injury. She would make it plain to Gheta
that she was no longer a child to be casually overlooked.

A small room, used in connection with the dining room for coffee and
smoking, gave directly on the hall; there she saw her father sitting,
with his hat still on, his face stamped with an almost comical dismay,
and holding an unlighted cigar.

"Gheta left me at the Guarinis'," Lavinia halted impetuously. "If it
hadn't been for Signor Orsi I shouldn't be here yet; I was completely
ignored."

"Heavens!" her father exclaimed, waving her away. "Another feminine
catastrophe! Go to your sister and mother. My head is in a whirl."

Her mother, then, had returned. She went forward and was suddenly
startled by hearing Gheta's voice rise in a wail of despairing misery.
She hurried forward to her sister's room. Gheta, fully dressed, was
prostrate, face down, upon her bed, shaken by a strangled sobbing that
at intervals rose to a thin hysterical scream. The Marchesa Sanviano,
still in her traveling suit and close-fitting black hat, sat by
her elder daughter's side, trying vainly to calm the tumult. In the
background the maid, her face streaming with sympathetic tears, was
hovering distractedly with a jar of volatile salts.

"Mamma," Lavinia demanded, torn by extravagant fears, "what has
happened?"

The marchesa momentarily turned a concerned countenance.

"Your sister," she said seriously, "has found some wrinkles on her
forehead."

Lavinia with difficulty restrained a sharp giggle. Gheta's grief and
their mother's anxiety at first seemed so foolishly disproportionate
to their cause. Then a realization of what such an occurrence meant to
Gheta dawned upon her. To an acknowledged beauty like Gheta Sanviano
the marks of Time were an absolute tragedy; they threatened her on every
plane of her being.

"But when--" Lavinia began.

"They--Anna Mantegazza and she--went to the dressing room at the
Guarinis', where, it seems, Anna discovered them--sympathetically, of
course."

Gheta's sobbing slowly subsided under the marchesa's urgent plea that
unrestrained emotion would only deepen her trouble. She did not appear
at dinner; and afterward the marchese, his wife and Lavinia sat wrapped
in a gloomy silence. The marchesa was still handsome, in spite of
increasing weight. The gray gaze inherited by Lavinia had escaped the
parent; her eyes were soft and dense, like brown velvet. She was a woman
of decision and now she brought her hands smartly together.

"We have waited too long with Gheta; we should not have counted so
confidently on her beauty; time flies so treacherously. She must marry
as soon as possible."

"Thank God, there's Cesare Orsi!" her husband responded.

Lavinia was gazing inward at the secretly enshrined image of the Flower
of Spain.

III

Gheta Sanviano often passed a night at the Mantegazzas' villa on the
Height of Castena, a long mile from the city.

Lavinia, too, knew the dwelling well, for Sanviano and Pier Mantegazza
had been intimate from their similar beginnings, and she had played
there as a child. However, she had never been regularly asked with
Gheta; and when that occurred--Gheta indifferently delivered Anna
Mantegazza's message--and her mother acquiesced, Lavinia had a renewed
sense of her growing importance.

She went out early, in the heat of midday, a time that fitted best with
the involved schedule of the Sanvianos' single equipage--Anna would take
her sister directly from a luncheon at the Ginoris'. Lavinia looked with
mingled anticipation and relief at the approaching graceful facade added
scarcely a hundred and fifty years before to the otherwise somber abode
of the Mantegazzas, first established in the twelfth century.

The villa stood on an eminence, circled by austere pines, and terraced
with innumerable vegetable gardens and frugally planted olives. The road
mounted abruptly, turned under a frowning wall incongruously topped with
delicately painted urns, and doubled across the massive iron-bound door
that closed the arched entrance. Within, an immensely high timbered hall
was pleasantly cool and dark after the white blaze without. It was bare
of furnishing except for a number of rude oak settles against the naked
stone walls. It had been a place of fear to Lavinia when a child; and
even now she left it with a sense of relief for the modernized interior
beyond.

Pier Mantegazza was standing before a high inclined table, which bore
a number of blackened and shapeless medallions. He was a famous
numismatic--a tall stooping man, slightly lame, and enveloped in a
premature gray ill health that resembled clinging cobwebs. He bent and
brushed Lavinia's forehead with his crisp mustache, and then returned to
the delicate manipulation of a magnifying glass and a small blue bottle
of acid. She left him for a deep chair and a surprising French romance
by Remy de Gourmont. At a long philosophical dialogue the book drooped,
and she thought of Anna Mantegazza and her husband.

She wondered whether they were happy. But she decided, measuring
that condition solely by her own requirement, that such a state was
impossible for them. It had certainly been a marriage for money and
position; prior to the ceremony the Casa Mantegazza had been closed
for years, and Pier Mantegazza occupied a small establishment near the
Military Hospital, on the Via San Gallo. Anna Cane had arrived in Rome,
without family or credentials, and unknown to the American Embassy
other than by amazing deposits at the best banks. But she did have, in
addition to this, a pungent charm and undeniable force and good taste.
It was said that the moment she had seen Mantegazza's villa she had
decided to possess it, even at the price of its sere withdrawn holder.

She had gone at once into the best Florentine and Roman society.
That was ten years before, but Lavinia realized that she had never
successfully assimilated the Italian social formula. She mixed the
most diverse elements of their world willfully and found enjoyment in
bringing about amusing situations. She seemed devoid of the foundations
of proper caution; in fact, she mocked at them openly. And if she
had not been a model Catholic, and herself above the slightest moral
question, even Mantegazza could not have carried her among his own
circles. As it was, people flocked to her elaborate parties, torn
between the hope of being amazed and the fear that they should furnish
the hub of the occasion.

Gheta and her hostess arrived later. The former, it appeared to Lavinia,
looked disconcerted; and it was evident that she had been remonstrating
with Anna Mantegazza. The other laughed provokingly.

"Nonsense!" she declared. "It was too good to miss; besides, you're an
old campaigner."

A stair of flagging, turning sharply round a stone pillar, led
incongruously from the light French furnishings to the chamber where
Lavinia was to sleep. A Renaissance bed, made of thick quilting directly
upon the floor, was covered with gilt ecclesiastical embroidery; and a
movable tub stood in a stone corner. The narrow deep windows overlooked
Florence, a somber expanse of roofing; and, coming rapidly toward
the villa, Lavinia could see a tall dogcart, with a groom and two
passengers. They were men; and, as they drew nearer, Lavinia--with a
sudden pounding of her heart--realized the cause of the slight friction
between the two women. The cart bore Cesare Orsi, and Mochales the
bull-fighter, the Flower of Spain. It was a part of Anna Mantegazza's
humor that the men, so essentially antagonistic, should arrive together
clinging precariously on the high insecure trap.

Tea was served at five on the terrace, and Lavinia dressed with minute
care. Gheta, she knew, had brought a new lavender lawn with little gold
velvet buttons and lace; while she had nothing but the familiar coarse
white mull. But she had fresh ribbons and she gazed with satisfaction at
her firm, faintly rosy countenance. She would have no wrinkles for years
to come. However, she thought, with a return to her sense of tragic
gloom, such considerations were of little moment, as Abrego y Mochales
would scarcely be aware of her existence; he would never know....
Perhaps, years after--

She purposely delayed her appearance on the terrace until the others
had assembled, and then quietly took possession of a chair. Cesare Orsi
greeted her with effusive warmth, the Spaniard bowed ceremoniously.
A wide prospect of countryside flowed away in innumerable hills and
valleys, clothed in the silvery smoke of olives and in green-black
pines; below, a bank of cherry trees were in bloom. The air was sweet
and still and full of a warm radiance.

Lavinia luxuriated in her unhappiness. Mochales, she decided, must
be the handsomest man in existence. His unchanging gravity fascinated
her--the man's face, his voice, his dignified gestures, were all steeped
in a splendid melancholy.

"I am a peasant," he said, apparently addressing them all, but with his
eyes upon Gheta, "from Estremadura, in the mountains. The life there was
very hard, and that was fortunate for me; the food was scarce, and that
was good too. If I ate like the grandees a bull would end me in the hot
sun of the first _fiesta_; I'd double up like a pancake. I must work all
the time--run for miles and play _pelota_."

Lavinia was possessed by a new contempt for her kind, which she centered
upon Orsi, clumsy and stupidly smiling. It was clear that he couldn't
run a mile; in fact, he admitted that he detested all exercise. How
absurd he looked in his tight plaited jacket! It appeared that he was
always perspiring; a crime, she felt sure--with entire disregard of its
fatal consequences--that Mochales never committed.

"A friend of ours--it was Bembo--said that he saw you at San Sebastian
with your King," Anna Mantegazza put in.

"Why not? But Alphonso is a fine boy; he understands the business of
royalty. Every year I dedicate a magnificent bull to the King on his
name day."

"Will you dedicate one to me?" Gheta asked carelessly.

"The best in Andalusia," he responded with fire.

Cesare Orsi made a slight sharp exclamation, and Lavinia's heart beat
painfully. The former turned to her with sudden determination.

"Were you comfortable in my carriage," he demanded, "and fetched home at
a smart pace?" Lavinia thanked him.

"You are always so quiet," he complained. "I'm certain there's a great
deal in that wise young head worth hearing."

"Lavinia is still in the schoolroom," Gheta explained brutally.
"Yesterday she put up her hair, to-day Anna Mantegazza invites her, and
we have an effect."

Anna Mantegazza turned to the younger with a new veiled scrutiny. Her
gaze rested for an instant on Orsi and then moved contemplatively to
Gheta and Abrego y Mochales. It was evident that her thoughts were very
busy; a faint sparkle appeared in her eyes, a fresh vivacity animated
her manner. Suddenly she included Lavinia in her remarks; she put
queries to the girl patently intended to draw her out. Gheta grew uneasy
and then cross.

"I'm sick of sitting here," she declared; "let's walk about. It's
cooler, and Pier Mantegazza's place is always worth investigation."
She rose and waited for Cesare Orsi, then led the small procession from
under the striped tea kiosk down the terrace. The way grew steep and
she rested a hand on Orsi's arm. Anna, Lavinia and the Flower of Spain
followed together, until the first moved forward to join the leaders.
Lavinia's gaze was obscured by a sort of warm mist; she clasped her
hands to keep them from trembling. In a narrow flagged turn Mochales
brushed her shoulder. He scarcely moved his eyes from Gheta's back. Once
he gazed somberly at the girl beside him and she responded with a pale
questioning smile. "I have had a great misfortune," he told her.

"Oh, I'm terribly, terribly sorry!"

"I've lost a blessed coin that interceded for me since the first day I
went in the bull ring. I'd give a thousand wax candles for its return.
Now--when I need everything," he continued as if to himself. "Your
sister is beautiful," he added abruptly. "Everybody thinks so," Lavinia
replied in a voice she endeavored to make enthusiastic. "She has had
tens of admirers here and at Rome and Lucca." There she knew she
should stop; but she continued: "Cesare Orsi is very persistent and
tremendously rich."

Mochales made a short unintelligible remark in Spanish. He twisted a
cigarette with lightning-like rapidity and only one hand. Together
they looked at Orsi's broad ungainly back, and the bull-fighter's lips
tightened, exposing a glimmer of his immaculate teeth. They passed a
neat whitewashed cottage, where an old couple stood bowing abjectly, and
came on a series of long pale-brown buildings and walls.

"The stables and barn," Lavinia explained.

Anna Mantegazza turned. "You may see something of interest here," she
called to Mochales.

A series of steps, made by projecting stones, rose to the top of an
eight-foot wall, up which Anna unexpectedly led the way. The wall was
broad, afforded a comfortable footing, and enclosed a straw-littered
yard. A number of doors led into a barn, and into one some men were
urging refractory cattle. In a corner a small compact bull, with the
rapierlike horns of the mountain breeds, was secured by a nose ring and
a short chain; and to the latter the men turned when the other animals
had been confined. Two threatened the animal with long poles, while a
third unfastened the chain from the wall; and then all endeavored to
drive him within. Abrego y Mochales stood easily above, watching these
clumsy efforts.

Suddenly the bull stopped, plunged his front hoofs into the soft mold
of the stable yard and swept his head from side to side with a broken
hoarse bellow. The men prodded him with urgent cries; but the bull
suddenly whirled, snapping the poles, and there was an immediate
scattering.

The sight of the retreating forms apparently enraged the animal, for he
charged with astonishing speed and barely missed horning the last man
to fall over the barricade of a half door. Mochales smiled; he called
familiarly to the bull. Then he stooped and vaulted lightly down into
the yard. Lavinia gave a short exclamation; she was cold with fear. Orsi
looked on without any emotion visible on his heavy face. Anna Mantegazza
leaned forward, tense with interest. "_Bravo!_" she called.

Gheta Sanviano smiled.

The bull did not see Mochales at first, then the man cried tauntingly.
The bull turned and stood with a lowered slowly-moving head, an uneasy
tail. The Spaniard found a small milking stool and, carrying it to the
middle of the yard, sat and comfortably rolled another cigarette. He was
searching for a match when the bull moved forward a pace; he had found
and was striking it when the bull increased his pace; he was guarding
the flame about the cigarette's end when the animal broke into a
charging run.

The Flower of Spain inhaled a deep breath of smoke, which he expelled in
deliberate globes.

"Oh, don't! Oh----" Lavinia exclaimed, an arm before her eyes.

Mochales shifted easily from his seat and apparently in the same instant
the bull crushed the stool to splinters.

"_Bravo! Bravo!_" Anna Mantegazza called again, and the man bowed until
his extended hat rested on the ground.

He straightened slowly; the bull whirled about and flung himself
forward. Abrego y Mochales now had one of the discarded poles; and,
waiting until the horns had almost encircled him, he vaulted lightly
and beautifully over the running animal's shoulder. He waited again,
avoiding the infuriated charge by a scant step; and, when the bull
stopped he had Mochales' hat placed squarely upon his horns. Lavinia
watched now in fascinated terror; she could not remove her gaze from the
slim figure in the short black jacket and narrow crimson sash. At the
moment when her tension relaxed, Mochales, with a short running step,
vaulted cleanly to the top of the wall. His cigarette was still
burning. She wanted desperately to add her praise to Anna Mantegazza's
enthusiastic plaudits, Gheta's subtle smile; but only the utmost
banalities occurred to her.

They descended the stone steps and slowly mounted toward the house.
Cesare Orsi resolutely dropped back beside Lavinia.

"You are really superb!" he told her in his highly colored Neapolitan
manner. "Most women--Anna Mantegazza for example--are like children
before such a show as that back there. Your sister, too, was pleased; it
appealed to her vanity, as the fellow intended it should. But you
only disliked it.... I could see that in your attitude. It was the
circus--that's all."

Lavinia gazed at him out of an unfathomable contempt. She thought: What
a fool he is! It wasn't Abrego y Mochales' courage that appealed to
her most, although that had afforded her an exquisite thrill, but his
powerful grace, his absolute physical perfection. Orsi was heated again
and his tie had slipped up over the back of his collar.

She recalled the first talk she had had with him about Mochales and the
manner in which she had masked her true feeling for the latter.

How easy Orsi had been to mislead! Now she was seized by the desire to
show him the actual state of her mind; she wanted, in bitter sentences,
to tell him how infinitely superior the Spaniard was to such fat easy
grubs as himself. She longed to make clear to him exactly what it was
that women admired in men--romance and daring and splendid strength.
It might suit Gheta, who had wrinkles, to encourage such men as Cesare
Orsi; their wealth might appeal to cold and material minds, but they
could never hope to inspire passion; no one would ever cherish for them
a hopeless lifelong love.

"Do you know," Orsi declared with firm conviction, "you are even
handsomer than your sister!"

"Fool! fool! fool!" But she could not, of course, say a word of what was
in her thoughts. She met his admiring gaze with a blank face, conscious
of how utterly her exterior belied and hid the actual Lavinia Sanviano.
She felt wearily old, sophisticated. In her room, dressing for the
evening, she made up her mind that she must have a black dinner
gown--later she would wear no other shade.

IV

Anna Mantegazza knocked and entered just as Lavinia had finished with
her hair and was slipping into the familiar white dress. There had been,
within the last few hours, a perceptible change in the former's attitude
toward her. Lavinia realized that Anna Mantegazza regarded her with a
new interest, a greater and more personal friendliness.

"My dear Lavinia!" she exclaimed, critically overlooking the other's
preparations. "You look very appealing--like a snowdrop; exactly.
I should say the toilet for Sunday at the convent; but no longer
appropriate outside. Really, I must speak to the marchesa--parents are
so slow to see the differences in their own family. Gheta has been a
little overemphasized.

"I wonder," she continued with glowing vivacity, "if you would allow
me--I assure you it would give me the greatest pleasure in the world....
Your figure is a thousand times better than mine; but, thank heaven, I'm
still slender.... A little evening dress from Vienna! It should really
do you very well. Will you accept it from me? I'd like to give you
something, Lavinia; and it has never been out of its box."

She turned and was out of the room before Lavinia could reply. There was
no reason why she shouldn't take a present from Anna--Pier Mantegazza
and her father had been lifelong friends, and his wife was an intimate
of the Sanvianos. It would not, probably, be black. It wasn't. Anna
returned, followed by her maid, who bore carefully over her arm a
shimmering mass of glowing pink.

"Now!" Anna Mantegazza cried. "Your hair is very pretty, very
original--but hardly for a dress by Verlat. Sara!"

The maid moved quietly forward and directed an appraising gaze at
Lavinia. She was a flat-hipped Englishwoman, with a cleft chin and
enigmatic greenish eyes. "I see exactly, madame," she assured Anna; and
with her deft dry hands she took down Lavinia's laboriously arranged
hair.

She drew it back from the brow apparently as simply as before, twisted
it into a low knot slightly eccentric in shape, and recut a bang.
Lavinia's eyes seemed bluer, her delicate flush more elusive; the shape
of her face appeared changed, it was more pointed and had a new willful
charm.

"The stockings," Anna commanded.

Dressed, Lavinia Sanviano stood curiously before the long mirror; she
saw a fresh Lavinia that was yet the old; and she was absorbing her
first great lesson in the magic of clothes. Verlat, a celebrated
dressmaker, was typical of the Viennese spirit--the gown Lavinia wore
resembled, in all its implications, an orchid. There was a whisper here
of satin, a pale note of green, a promise of chiffon. Her crisp round
shoulders were bare; her finely molded arms were clouded, as it were,
with a pink mist; the skirt was full, incredibly airy; yet every
movement was draped by a suave flowing and swaying.

Lavinia recognized that she had been immensely enriched in effect; it
was not a question of mere beauty--beauty here gave way to a more subtle
and potent consideration. It was a potency which she instinctively
shrank from probing. For a moment she experienced, curiously enough, a
gust of passionate resentment, followed by a quickly passing melancholy,
a faint regret.

Anna Mantegazza and the maid radiated with satisfaction at the result of
their efforts. The former murmured a phrase that bore Gheta's name, but
Lavinia caught nothing else. The maid said:

"Without a doubt, madame."

Lavinia lingered in her room, strangely reluctant to go down and see her
sister. She was embarrassed by her unusual appearance and dreaded the
prominence of the inevitable exclamations. At last she was obliged
to proceed. The rest stood by the entrance of the dining room. Anna
Mantegazza was laughing at a puzzled expression on the good-natured
countenance of Cesare Orsi; Gheta was slowly waving a fan of gilded
feathers; Abrego y Mochales was standing rigid and somberly handsome;
and, as usual, Pier Mantegazza was late.

Gheta Sanviano turned and saw Lavinia approaching, and the elder's
face, always pale, grew suddenly chalky; it was drawn, and the wrinkles,
carefully treated with paste, became visible about her eyes. Her hands
shook a little as she took a step forward.

"What does this mean, Lavinia?" she demanded. "Why did I know nothing
about that dress?"

"I knew nothing myself until a little bit ago," Lavinia explained
apologetically, filled with a formless pity for Gheta. "Isn't it pretty?
Anna Mantegazza gave it to me."

She could see, over Gheta's shoulder, Cesare Orsi staring at her in
idiotic surprise.

"Don't you like it, Gheta?" Anna asked.

Gheta Sanviano didn't answer, but closed her eyes for a moment in an
effort to control the anger that shone in them. The silence deepened to
constraint, and then she laughed lightly.

"Quite a woman of fashion!" she observed of Lavinia. "Fancy! It's a pity
that she must go back to the convent so soon."

Her eyes while she was speaking were directed toward Anna Mantegazza
and the resentment changed to hatred. The other shrugged her shoulders
indifferently and moved toward the dining room, catching Lavinia's arm
in her own.

Mantegazza entered at the soup and was seated on Gheta's right; Cesare
Orsi was on Anna's left; and Lavinia sat between the two men, with
Mochales opposite. Whatever change had taken place in her looks made
absolutely no impression upon the latter; it was clear that he saw no
one besides Gheta Sanviano.

In the candlelight his face more than ever resembled bronze; his hair
was dead-black; above the white linen his head was like a superb effigy
of an earlier and different race from the others. It was almost savage
in its still austerity. Cesare Orsi, too, said little, which was
extraordinary for him. If Lavinia had made small mark on Mochales, at
least she had overpowered the other to a ludicrous degree. It seemed
that he had never before half observed her; he even muttered to himself
and smiled uncertainly when she chanced to gaze at him.

But what the others lacked conversationally Anna Mantegazza more than
supplied; she was at her best, and that was very sparkling, touched with
malice and understanding, and absolute independence. She insisted on
including Lavinia in every issue. At first Lavinia was only confused by
the attention pressed on her; she retreated, growing more inarticulate
at every sally. Then she became easier; spurred partly by Gheta's
direct unpleasantness and partly by the consciousness of her becoming
appearance, she retorted with spirit; engaged Pier Mantegazza in a duet
of verbal confetti. She gazed challengingly at Abrego y Mochales, but
got no other answer than a grave perfunctory inclination.

She thought of an alternative to the black gowns and unrelieved
melancholy--she might become the gayest member of the gay Roman world,
be known throughout Italy for her reckless exploits, her affairs and
Vienna gowns, all the while hiding her passion for the Flower of Spain.
It would be a vain search for forgetfulness, with an early death in an
atmosphere of roses and champagne. Gheta was gazing at her so crossly
that she took a sip of Mantegazza's brandy; it burned her throat
cruelly, but she concealed the choking with a smile of high bravado.

After dinner they progressed to a drawing-room that filled an entire end
of the villa; it lay three steps below the hall, the imposing walls and
floor covered with tapestries and richly dark rugs. Lavinia more than
ever resembled an orchid, here in a gloom of towering trees curiously
suggested by the draperies and space. She went forward with Anna
Mantegazza to an amber blur of lamplight, the others following
irregularly.

Cesare Orsi sat at Lavinia's side, quickly finishing one long black
cigar and lighting another; Pier Mantegazza and Mochales smoked
cigarettes. Anna was smoking, but Gheta had refused. Lavinia's feeling
for her sister had changed from pity to total indifference. The elder
had been an overbearing and thoughtless superior; and now, when Lavinia
felt in some subtle inexplicable manner that Gheta was losing rank, her
store of sympathy was small. Lavinia hoped that she would marry Orsi
immediately and leave the field free for herself. She wondered whether
her father would buy her a dress by Verlat.

"Honestly," Orsi murmured, "more beautiful than your--"

She stopped him with an impatient gesture, wondering what Mochales was
saying to Gheta. A possibility suddenly filled her with dread--it was
evident that the Spaniard was growing hourly more absorbed in Gheta, and
the latter might----Lavinia could not support the possibility of Abrego
y Mochales married to her sister. But, she reassured herself, there was
little danger of that--Gheta would never make a sacrifice for emotion;
she would be sure of the comfortable material thing, and now more than
ever.

Anna Mantegazza moved to a piano, which, in the obscurity, she began to
play. The notes rose deliberate and melodious. Gheta Sanviano told Orsi:

"That's Iris. Do you remember, we heard it at the Pergola in the
winter?"

"Do go over to her," Lavinia whispered.

He rose heavily and went to Gheta's side, and Lavinia waited expectantly
for Mochales to change too. The Spaniard shifted, but it was toward the
piano, where he stood with the rosy reflection of his cigarette on a
moody countenance. It was Pier Mantegazza who sat beside her, with a
quizzical expression on his long gray visage. He said something to her
in Latin, which she only partly understood, but which alluded to the
changing of water into wine.

"I am a subject of jest," he continued in Italian, "because I prefer
water."

She smiled with polite vacuity, wondering what he meant.

"You always satisfied me, Lavinia, with your dark smooth plait and white
simplicity; you were cool and refreshing. Now they have made you only
disturbing. I suppose it was inevitable, and with you the change will be
temporary."

"I'll never let my hair down again," she retorted. "I've settled that
with Gheta. Mother didn't care, really."

She was annoyed by the implied criticism, his entire lack of response to
her new being. He had grown blind staring at his stupid old coins.

A step sounded behind her; she turned hopefully, but it was only Cesare
Orsi.

"The others have gone outside," he told her, and she noticed that the
piano had stopped.

Mantegazza rose and bowed in mock serious formality, at which Lavinia
shrugged an impatient shoulder and walked with Orsi across the room and
out upon the terrace.

Florence had sunk into a dark chasm of night, except for the curving
double row of lights that marked the Lungarno and the indifferent
illumination of a few principal squares. The stars seemed big and near
in deep blue space. Orsi was standing very close to her, and she moved
away; but he followed.

"Lavinia," he muttered, and suddenly his arm was about her waist.

She leaned back, pushing with both hands against his chest; but he
swept her irresistibly up to him and kissed her clumsily. A cold
rage possessed her. She stopped struggling; yet there was no need to
continue--he released her immediately and opened a stammering apology.

"I am a madman," he admitted abjectly--"a little animal that ought to
be shot. I don't know what came over me; my head was in a carnival. You
must forgive or I shall be a maniac, I----"

She turned and walked swiftly into the house and mounted to her
room. All the pleasure she had had in the evening, the Viennese gown,
evaporated, left her possessed by an utter loathing of self. Now, in the
mirror, she seemed hateful, the clouded chiffon and airy clinging satin
unspeakable. Looking back out of the dim glass was a stranger who had
betrayed and cheapened her. Her pure serenity revolted against the
currents of life sweeping down upon her, threatening to inundate her.

She unhooked the Verlat gown with trembling fingers and--once more in
simple white--dropped into a deep chair, where she cried with short
painful inspirations, her face pressed against her arm. Her emotion
subsided, changed to a formless dread, and again to a black sense
of helplessness. Suddenly she rose and mechanically shook loose
her hair--footsteps were approaching. Her sister entered, pale and
vindictive.

"You are to be congratulated," she proceeded thinly; "you made a success
with everybody--that is, with all but Mochales. It was for him, wasn't
it? You were very clever, but you failed ridiculously."

Lavinia made no reply.

"I hope Mochales excuses you because of your greenness."

"Youth isn't any longer your crime," Lavinia retorted at last.

"That dress--it would suit Anna Mantegazza; but you looked only
indecent."

"Perhaps you're right, Gheta," Lavinia said unexpectedly. "I'm going to
bed now, please."

Her balance, restored by sleep, was once more normal when she returned
to the Lungarno. It was again late afternoon, the daily procession was
returning from the Cascine, and Gheta was at the window, looking coldly
down. The Marchesa Sanviano was knitting at prodigious speed a shapeless
gray garment. They all turned when a servant entered:

Signer Orsi wished to see the marchese.

This unusual formality on the part of Cesare Orsi could have but one
purpose, and Lavinia and their mother gazed significantly at the elder
sister.

"The marchese is dressing," his wife directed.

She drew a long breath of relief and nodded over her needles. Gheta
raised her chin; her lips bore the half-contemptuous expression that
lately had become habitual; her eyes were half closed.

Lavinia sat with her hands loose in her lap. She was wondering whether
or not, should she make a vigorous protest, they would send her back
to the convent. The Verlat gown was carefully hung in her closet. Last
night she had been idiotic.

The Marchese Sanviano appeared hurriedly and alone; his tie was crooked
and his expression very much disturbed. His wife looked up, startled.

"What!" she demanded directly. "Didn't he----"

"Yes," Sanviano replied, "he did! He wants to marry Lavinia."

Lavinia half rose, with a horrified protest; Gheta seemed suddenly
turned to stone; the knitting fell unheeded from the marchesa's lap.
Sanviano spread out his hands helplessly.

"Well," he demanded, "what could I do?... A man with Orsi's blameless
character and the Orsi banks!"

V

The house to which Cesare Orsi took Lavinia was built over the rim of a
small steep island in the Bay of Naples, opposite Castellamare. It
faced the city, rising in an amphitheater of bright stucco and almond
blossoms, across an expanse of glassy and incredibly blue water. It
was evening, the color of sky and bay was darkening, intensified by a
vaporous rosy column where the ascending smoke of Vesuvius held the last
upflung glow of the vanished sun. Lavinia could see from her window the
pale distant quiver of the electric lights springing up along the Villa
Nazionale.

The dwelling itself drew a long irregular facade of white marble on
its abrupt verdant screen--a series of connected pavilions, galleries,
pergolas, belvedere, flowering walls and airy chambers. There were
tesselated remains from the time of the great pleasure-saturated Roman
emperors, a later distinctly Moorish influence, quattrocento-painted
eaves, an eighteenth-century sodded court, and a smoking room with the
startling colored glass of the nineteenth.

The windows of Lavinia's room had no sashes; they were composed of a
double marble arch, supported in the center by a slender twisted marble
column, with Venetian blinds. She stood in the opening, gazing fixedly
over the water turning into night. She could hear, from the room beyond,
her husband's heavy deliberate footfalls; and the sound filled her with
a formless resentment. She wished to be justifiably annoyed by them,
or him; but there was absolutely no cause. Cesare Orsi's character
and disposition were alike beyond reproach--transparent and heroically
optimistic. Since their marriage she had been insolent, she had been
both captious and continuously indifferent, without unsettling the
determined eager good-nature with which he met her moods.

During the week he went by launch into Naples in the interests of his
banking, and did not return for luncheon; and she had long uninterrupted
hours for the enjoyment of her pleasant domain. Altogether, his demands
upon her were reasonable to the point of self-effacement. He laughed
a great deal; this annoyed her youthful gravity and she remonstrated
sharply more than once, but he only leaned back and laughed harder. Then
she would either grow coldly disdainful or leave the room, followed by
the echo of his merriment. There was something impervious, like armor,
in his excellent humor. Apparently she could not get through it to wound
him as she would have liked; and she secretly wondered.

He was prodigal in his generosity--the stores of the Via Roma were
prepared to empty themselves at her desire. Cesare Orsi's wife was
a figure of importance in Naples. She had been made welcome by the
Neapolitan society--lawn fetes had been given in villas under the
burnished leaves of magnolias on the height of Vomero. The Cavaliere
Nelli, Orsi's cousin and a retired colonel of Bersaglieri, entertained
lavishly at dinner on the terrace of Bertolini's; she went out to old
houses looking through aged and riven pines at the sea.

She would have enjoyed all this hugely if she had not been married to
Orsi; but the continual reiteration of the fact that she was Orsi's wife
filled her with an accumulating resentment. The implication that she
had been exceedingly fortunate became more than she could bear. The
consequence was that, as soon as it could be managed, she ceased going
about.

She was now at the window, immersed in a melancholy sense of total
isolation; the water stirring along the masonry below, a call from a
shadowy fishing boat dropping down the bay, filled her with longing for
the cheerful existence of the Lungarno. She had had a letter from Gheta
that morning, the first from her sister since she had left Florence,
brief but without any actual expression of ill will. After all was said,
she had brought Gheta a great disappointment; if she had been in the
elder's place probably she would have behaved no better.... It occurred
to her to ask Gheta to Naples. At least then she would have some one
with whom to recall the pleasant trifles of past years. She would
have liked to ask Anna Mantegazza, too; but this she knew was
impossible--Gheta had not forgiven Anna for her part on the night that
had resulted in Orsi's proposal for Lavinia.

She wondered, more obscurely, whether Abrego y Mochales was still in
Florence. He loomed at the back of her thoughts, inscrutably dark and
romantic. It piqued her that he had not made the slightest response to
her palpable admiration. But he had been tremendously stirred by Gheta,
who was never touched by such emotions.

A desire to see Mochales grew insidiously out of her speculations; a
desire to talk about him, hear his name. Lavinia deliberately shut her
eyes to the fact that this last became her principal reason for wishing
to see Gheta.

She told Cesare, with a diffidence which she was unable to overcome,
that she had written asking her sister for a visit. Seemingly he didn't
hear her. They were at breakfast, on the wine-red tiling of a pergola
by the water, and he had shaken his fist, with a rueful curse, in the
direction of Naples. Before him lay an open letter with an engraved page
heading.

"I said," Lavinia repeated impatiently, "that Gheta will probably be
here the last of the week."

"The sacred camels!" Orsi exclaimed; then: "Oh, Gheta--good!" But he
fell immediately into an angry reverie. "If I dared--" he muttered.

"What has stirred you up so?"

"It's difficult to explain to any one not born in Naples. Here, you see,
all is not in order, like Florence; we have had a stormy time between
brigands and secret factions and foreign rulers; and certain societies
sprang up, necessary once, but now--when one still exists--a source of
bribery and nuisance. This letter, for example, congratulates me on the
possession of a charming bride; it expresses the devotion of a hidden
organization, but points out that in order to guarantee your safety in
a city where the guards are admittedly insufficient it will be necessary
for me to forward two thousand lire at once."

"You will, of course, ignore it."

"I will certainly send the money at once."

"What a cowardly attitude!" Lavinia declared contemptuously. "You allow
yourself to be blackmailed like a common criminal."

Orsi laughed, his equilibrium quickly restored.

"I warned you that a stranger could not understand," he reminded her.
"If the money weren't sent, in ten days or two weeks perhaps, there
would be a little accident on the Chiaja--your carriage would be run
into; you would be upset, confused, angry. There would be profuse
apologies, investigation, perhaps arrests; but nothing would come of it.
If the money was still held back something a little more serious would
occur. Nothing really dangerous, you understand; but finally the
two thousand lire would be gladly paid over and the accidents would
mysteriously cease."

"An outrage!" Lavinia asserted, and Orsi nodded.

"If you had an enemy," he continued, "you could have her gown ruined in
the foyer of the San Carlos; if it were a man he would be caught at his
club with an uncomfortable ace in his cuff. At least so I'm assured.
I haven't had any reason to look the society up yet." He laughed
prodigiously. "Even murders are ascribed to it. Careful, Cesare, or a
new valet will cut your throat some fine morning and your widow walk
away with a more graceful man!"

"Your jokes are so stupid." Lavinia shrugged her shoulders.

He laid the letter on the table's edge and a wandering air bore it
slanting to the floor, but he promptly recovered it.

"That must go in the safe," he ended; "it is well to have a slight grasp
on those gentlemen."

He rose; and a few minutes later Lavinia saw his trim brown launch,
with its awning and steersman in gleaming white, rushing through the bay
toward Naples.

VI

The basin from which the launch plied lay inside a seawall inclosing a
small placid rectangle with a walk all about and iron benches. Steps at
the back, guarded by two great Pompeian sandstone urns, and pressed by
a luxuriant growth, led up to the villa. Gheta looked curiously about
as she stepped from the launch and went forward with her brother-in-law.
Lavinia followed, with Gheta's maid and a porter in the rear.

Lavinia realized that her sister looked badly; in the unsparing blaze
of midday the wrinkles about her eyes were apparent, and they had
multiplied. Although it was past the first of June, Gheta was wearing
a linen suit of last year; and--as her maid unpacked--Lavinia saw the
familiar pink tulle and the lavender gown with the gold velvet buttons.

"Your dressmaker is very late," she observed thoughtlessly.

A slow flush spread over the other's countenance; she did not reply
immediately and Lavinia would have given a great deal to unsay her
period.

"It isn't that," Gheta finally explained; "the family find that I am too
expensive. You see, I haven't justified their hopes and they have been
cutting down."

Her voice was thin, metallic; her features had sharpened like folded
paper creased between the fingers.

"It's very good form here," she went on, dancing about her room. It was
hardly more than a marble gallery, the peristyle choked with flowering
bushes, camellias and althea and hibiscus, barely furnished, and filled
with drifting perfumes and the savor of the sea. "What a shame that
these things must be got at a price!"

Lavinia glanced at her sharply; until the present moment that would have
expressed her own attitude, but said by Gheta it seemed a little crude.
It was, anyhow, painfully obvious, and she had no intention of showing
Gheta the true state of her being.

"Isn't that so of everything--worth having?" she asked, adding the
latter purely as a counter.

The elder drew up her fine shoulders.

"That's very courageous of you," she admitted--"especially since
everybody knew your opinion of Orsi. Heaven knows you made no effort to
disguise your feeling to others."

Lavinia smiled calmly; Cesare was really very thoughtful, and she said
so. Gheta replied at a sudden tangent:

"Mochales has been a great nuisance."

Lavinia was gazing through an opening in the leaves at the sparkling
blue plane of the bay. She made no movement, aware of her sister's
unsparing curiosity turned upon her, and only said:

"Really?"

"Spaniards are so tempestuous," Gheta continued; "he's been whispering
a hundred mad schemes in my ear. He gave up an important engagement in
Madrid rather than leave Florence. I have been almost stirred by him, he
is so slender and handsome.

"Simply every woman--except perhaps me--is in love with him."

"There's no danger of your loving any one besides yourself."

"I saw him the day before I left; told him where I was going. Then I had
to beg him not to take the same train. He said he was going to Naples,
anyhow, to sail from there for Spain. He will be at the Grand Hotel and
I gave him permission to see me here once."

Lavinia revolved slowly.

"Why not? He turned my head round at least twice." She moved toward
the door. "Ring whenever you like," she said; "there are servants for
everything."

In her room she wondered, with burning cheeks, when Abrego y Mochales
would come. Her sentimental interest in him had waned a trifle during
the past busy weeks; but, in spite of that, he was the great romantic
attachment of her life. If he had returned her love no whispered scheme
would have been too mad. What would he think of her now? But she knew
instinctively that there would be no change in Mochales' attitude. He
was in love with Gheta; blind to the rest of the world.

She sat lost in a day-dream--how different her life would have been,
married to the bull-fighter! She would have become a part of the fierce
Spanish crowds at the ring, traveled to South America, seen the people
heap roses, jewels, upon her idol....

Cesare Orsi stood in the doorway, smiling with oppressive good-nature.

"Lavinia," he told her, "I've done something, and now I'm in the devil
of a doubt." He advanced, holding a small package, and sat on the edge
of a chair, mopping his brow. "You see," he began diffidently, "that is,
as you must know, at first--you were at the convent--I thought something
of proposing for your sister. Thank God," he added vigorously, "I
waited! Well, I didn't; although, to be completely honest, I knew that
it came to be expected. I could see the surprise in your father's
face. It occurred to me afterward that if I had brought Gheta any
embarrassment I'd like to do something in a small way, a sort of
acknowledgment. And to-day I saw this," he held out the package; "it
was pretty and I bought it for her at once. But now, when the moment
arrives, I hesitate to give it to her. Gheta has grown so--so formal
that I'm afraid of her," he laughed.

Lavinia unwrapped the paper covering from a green morocco box and,
releasing the catch, saw a shimmering string of delicately pink pearls.

"Cesare!" she exclaimed. "How gorgeous!" She lifted the necklace,
letting it slide cool and fine through her fingers. "It's too good of
you. This has cost hundreds and hundreds. I'll keep it myself."

He laughed, shaking all over; then fell serious.

"Everything I have--all, all--is yours," he assured her. Lavinia
turned away with an uncomfortable feeling of falseness. "What do you
predict--will Gheta take it, understand, or will she play the frozen
princess?"

"If I know Gheta, she'll take it," Lavinia promptly replied.

Orsi presented Gheta Sanviano with the necklace at dinner. She took it
slowly from its box and glanced at the diamond clasp.

"Thank you, Cesare, immensely! What a shame that pink pearls so closely
resemble coral! No one gives you credit for them."

A feeling of shame for her sister's ungraciousness possessed Lavinia and
mounted to angry resentment. She had no particular desire to champion
Cesare, but the simplicity and kindness of his thought demanded more
than a superficial admission. At the same time she had no intention of
permitting Gheta any display of superiority here.

"You need only say they were from Cesare," she observed coldly; "with
him, it is always pearls."

Such a tide of pleasure swept over her husband's countenance that
Lavinia bit her lip in annoyance. She had intended only to rebuke Gheta
and had not calculated the effect of her speech upon Cesare. She was
scrupulously careful not to mislead the latter with regard to her
feeling for him. She went to a rather needless extreme to demonstrate
that she conducted herself from a sense of duty and propriety alone.

Her married life, she assured herself, already resembled the
Mantegazzas', whose indifferent courtesy she had marked and wondered at.
Perhaps in time, like them, she would grow accustomed to it; but now it
took all her determination to maintain the smallest daily amenities. It
was not that her actual condition was unbearable, but only that it was
so tragically removed from what she had imagined; she had dreamed of
romance, it had been embodied for her eager gaze--and she had married
Cesare Orsi!

Gheta returned the necklace to its box and the dinner progressed in
silence. The coffee was on when the elder sister said:

"I had a card from the Grand Hotel a while ago; Abrego y Mochales is
there."

"And there," Orsi put in promptly, "I hope he'll stay, or sail for
Spain. I don't want the clown about here."

Gheta turned.

"But you will regret that," she addressed Lavinia; "you always found him
so fascinating."

Lavinia's husband cleared his throat sharply; he was clearly impatiently
annoyed.

"What foolishness!" he cried. "From the first, Lavinia has been scarcely
conscious of his existence."

Lavinia avoided her sister's mocking gaze, disturbed and angry.

"Certainly Signore Mochales must be asked here," she declared.

"I suppose it can't be avoided," Orsi muttered.

It was arranged that the Spaniard should dine with them on the following
evening and Lavinia spent the intervening time in exploring her
emotions. She recognized now that Gheta hated both Cesare and herself,
and that she would miss no opportunity to force an awkward or even
dangerously unpleasant situation upon them. Gheta had sharpened in
being as well as in countenance to such a degree that Lavinia lost what
natural affection for her sister she had retained.

This, in a way, allied her with Cesare. She was now able at least to
survey him in a detached manner, with an impersonal comprehension of his
good qualities and aesthetic shortcomings; and in pointing out to Gheta
the lavish beauty of her--Lavinia's--surroundings, she engendered in
herself a slight proprietary pride. She met Abrego y Mochales at the
basin with a direct bright smile, standing firmly upon her wall.

Against the blue water shadowed by the promise of dusk he was a somber
and splendid figure. Her heart undeniably beat faster and she was vexed
when he turned immediately to Gheta. His greeting was intensely serious,
his gaze so hungry that Lavinia looked away. It was vulgar, she told
herself. Cesare met them above and greeted Mochales with a superficial
heartiness. It was difficult for Cesare Orsi to conceal his opinions and
feelings. The other man's gravity was superb.

At dinner conversation languished. Gheta, in a very low dress, had
a bright red scarf about her shoulders, and was painted. This was so
unusual that it had almost the effect of a disguise; her eyes were
staring and brilliant, her fingers constantly fidgeting and creasing
her napkin. Afterward she walked with Mochales to the corner of the
belvedere, where they had all been sitting, and from there drifted
the low continuous murmur of her voice, briefly punctuated by a deep
masculine note of interrogation. Below, the water was invisible in the
wrap of night. Naples shone like a pale gold net drawn about the sweep
of its hills. A glow like a thumb print hung over Vesuvius; the hidden
column of smoke smudged the stars.

Lavinia grew restless and descended to her room, where she procured a
fan. Returning, she was partly startled by a pale still figure in the
gloom of a passage. She saw that it was Gheta, and spoke; but the other
moved away without reply and quickly vanished. Above, Lavinia halted
at the strange spectacle--clearly drawn against the luminous depths of
space--of Mochales and her husband rigidly facing each other.

"I must admit," Orsi said in an exasperated voice, "that I don't
understand."

Lavinia saw that he was holding something in a half-extended hand.
Moving closer, she identified the object as the necklace he had given
Gheta.

"What is it that you don't understand, Cesare?" she asked.

"Some infernal joke or foolishness!"

"It is no joke, signore," Mochales responded; "and it is
better,--perhaps, for your wife to leave us."

Orsi turned to Lavinia.

"He gives me back this necklace of Gheta's," he explained; "he says that
he has every right. It appears that Gheta is going to marry him, and he
already objects to presents from her brother-in-law."

"But what stuff!" Lavinia pronounced.

A swift surprise overtook her at Cesare's announcement--Gheta and
Mochales to marry! She was certain that the arrangement had not existed
that morning. A fleet inchoate sorrow numbed her heart and fled.

"Orsi has been only truthful enough to suit his own purpose," Mochales
stated, "Signora, please----" He indicated the descent from the
belvedere.

She moved closer to him, smiling appealingly.

"What is it all about?" she queried.

"Forgive me; it is impossible to answer."

"Cesare?" She addressed her husband.

"Why, this--this donkey hints that there was something improper in my
present. It seems that I have been annoying Gheta by my attentions,
flattering her with pearls."

"Did Gheta tell you that?" Lavinia demanded. A growing resentment took
possession of her. "Because if she did, she lied!"

"Ah!" Mochales whispered sharply.

"They're both mad," Orsi told her, "and should be dipped in the bay."

Never had Abrego y Mochales appeared handsomer; never more like fine
bronze. That latter fact struck her forcibly. His face was no more
mutable than a mask of metal. Its stark rigidity sent a cold tremor to
her heart.

"And," she went on impetuously, "since Gheta said that, I'll tell you
really about this necklace: Cesare gave it to her because he was sorry
for her; because he thought that perhaps he had misled her. He spoke of
it to me first."

"No, signora," the Spaniard responded deliberately; "it is not your
sister who lies."

Cesare Orsi exclaimed angrily. He took a hasty step; but Lavinia,
quicker, moved between the two men.

"This is impossible," she declared, "and must stop immediately! It is
childish!"

There was now a metallic ring in Mochales' voice that disturbed her even
more than his words. The bull-fighter, completely immobile, seemed
a little inhuman; he was without a visible stir of emotion, but Orsi
looked more puzzled and angry every moment.

"This," he ejaculated, "in my own house--infamous!"

"Signor Mochales," Lavinia reiterated, "what I have told you is
absolutely so."

"Your sister, signora, has said something different.... She did not want
to tell me, but I persisted--I saw that something was wrong--and forced
it from her."

"Enough!" Orsi commanded. "One can see plainly that you have been duped;
some things may be overlooked.... You have talked enough."

Mochales moved easily forward.

"You pudding!" he said in a low even voice. "Do you talk to me--Abrego y
Mochales?"

A dark tide of passion, visible even in the night, flooded Orsi's
countenance.

"Leave!" he insisted, "Or I'll have you flung into the bay."

A deep silence followed, in which Lavinia could hear the stir of the
water against the walls below. A sharp fear entered her heart, a new
dread of the Spaniard. He was completely outside the circle of impulses
which she understood and to which she reacted. He was not a part of her
world; he coldly menaced the foundations of all right and security.
Her worship of romance died miserably. In a way, she thought, she was
responsible for the present horrible situation; it was the result of the
feeling she had had for Mochales. Lavinia was certain that if Gheta
had not known of it the Spaniard would have been quickly dropped by the
elder. She was suddenly conscious of the perfume he always bore; that,
curiously, lent him a strange additional oppression.

"Mochales," he said in a species of strained wonderment, "threatened ...
thrown into the bay! Mochales--the Flower of Spain! And by a helpless
mound of fat, a tub of entrails----"

"Cesare!" Lavinia cried in an energy of desperation. "Come! Don't listen
to him."

Orsi released her grasp.

"I believe you are at the Grand Hotel?" he addressed the other man.

"Until I hear from you."

"To-morrow----"

All the heat had apparently evaporated from their words; they spoke with
a perfunctory politeness. Cesare Orsi said:

"I will order the launch."

In a few minutes the palpitations of the steam died in the direction of
Naples.

VII

Lavinia followed her husband to their rooms, where he sat smoking one
of his long black cigars. He was pale; his brow was wet and his collar
wilted. She stood beside him and he patted her arm.

"Everything is in order," he assured her.

A species of blundering tenderness for him possessed her; an unexpected
throb of her being startled and robbed her of words. He mistook her
continued silence.

"All I have is yours," he explained; "it is your right. I can see now
that--that my money was all I had to offer you. The only thing of value
I possess. I should have realized that a girl, charming like yourself,
couldn't care for a mound of fat." Her tenderness rose till it choked in
her throat, blurred what she had to say.

"Cesare," she told him, "Gheta was right; at one time I was in love with
Mochales." He turned with a startled exclamation; but she silenced him.
"He was, it seemed, all that a girl might admire--dark and mysterious
and handsome. He was romantic. I demanded nothing else then; now
something has happened that I don't altogether understand, but it has
changed everything for me. Cesare, your money never made any difference
in my feeling for you--it didn't before and it doesn't to-night--" She
hesitated and blushed painfully, awkwardly.

The cigar fell from his hand and he rose, eagerly facing her.

"Lavinia," he asked, "is it possible--do you mean that you care the
least about me?"

"It must be that, Cesare, because I am so terribly afraid."

Later he admitted ruefully:

"But no man should resemble, as I do, a great oyster. I shall pay very
dearly for my laziness."

"You are not going to fight Mochales!" she protested. "It would be
insanity."

"Insanity," he agreed promptly. "Yet I can't permit myself to be the
target for vile tongues."

Lavinia abruptly left him and hurried to her sister's room. The door was
locked; she knocked, but got no response.

"Gheta," she called, low and urgently, "open at once! Your plans have
gone dreadfully wrong. Gheta!" she said more sharply into the answering
silence. "Cesare has had a terrific argument with Mochales, and worse
may follow. Open!" There was still no answer, and suddenly she beat
upon the door with her fists. "Liar!" she cried thinly through the wood.
"Liar! You bitter old stick! I'll make you eat that necklace, pearl for
pearl, sorrow for sorrow!"

A feeling of impotence overwhelmed her at the implacable stillness that
succeeded her hysterical outburst. She stood with a pounding heart, and
clasped straining fingers.

Abrego y Mochales could kill Cesare without the slightest shadow of a
question. There was, she recognized, something essentially feminine in
the saturnine bullfighter; his pride had been severely assaulted; and
therefore he would be--in his own, less subtle manner--as dangerous
as Gheta. Cesare's self-esteem, too, had been wounded in its most
vulnerable place--he had been insulted before her. But, even if the
latter refused to proceed, Mochales, she knew, would force an acute
conclusion. There was nothing to be got from her sister and she
slowly returned to her chamber, from which she could hear Orsi's heavy
footfalls.

She mechanically removed the square emerald that hung from a platinum
thread about her neck, took off her rings, and proceeded to the small
iron safe where valuables were kept. As she swung open the door a sheet
of paper slipped forward from an upper compartment. It bore a
printed address ... in the Strada San Lucia. She saw that it was the
blackmailing letter Cesare had received from the Neapolitan secret
society, demanding two thousand lire. She recalled what he had said at
the time--if she had an enemy her gown could be spoiled in the foyer of
the opera; a man ruined at his club.... Even murders were ascribed to
it.

She held the letter, gazing fixedly at the address, mentally repeating
again and again the significance of its contents. She thought of
showing it to Cesare, suggesting----But she realized that, bound by a
conventional honor, he would absolutely refuse to listen to her.

Almost subconsciously she folded the sheet and hid it in her dress.
Kneeling before the safe she procured a long red envelope. It contained
the sum of money her father had given her at the wedding. It was her
dot--a comparatively small amount, he had said at the time with an
apologetic smile; but it was absolutely, unquestionably her own. This,
when she locked the safe, remained outside.

When she had hidden the letter and envelope in her dressing table Cesare
stood in the doorway. He was still pale, but composed, and held himself
with simple dignity.

"Some men," he said, "are not so happy, even for an hour."

A sudden passionate necessity to save him swept over her.

In the morning Orsi remained at the villa, but he sent the launch in
early with an urgent summons for the Cavaliere Nelli. Later, when he
asked for Lavinia, he was told that she had gone to Naples; and when
the boat returned, Nelli--a military figure, with hair and mustache like
yellowish white silk--assisted her to the wall. She was closely veiled
against the sparkling flood of light and bay, and hurried directly to
her room.

There she knelt on a praying chair before a small alcoved altar with
tall wax tapers, and remained a long while. She was disturbed by a
sudden ringing report below; it was Cesare practising with a dueling
pistol. Lavinia remembered, from laughing comments in Florence, that
her husband was an atrocious shot. The sound was repeated at irregular
intervals through an unbearably long morning.

Gheta, she learned, had refused the morning chocolate and, with her
maid, had collected and packed all her effects. Lavinia had no desire to
see her. The situation now was past Gheta's mending.

After luncheon Lavinia remained in her room, Nelli departed for Naples
and Cesare joined her. It was evident that he was greatly disturbed;
but he spoke to her evenly. He was possessed by an impotent rage at
his unwieldy body and clumsy hand. This alternated with an evident
wonderment at the position in which he found himself and a great
tenderness for Lavinia.

At dusk they were in Lavinia's room waiting for a message from Naples.
Lavinia was leaning across the marble ledge of her window, gazing over
the dim blue sweep of water to the distant flowering lights. She heard
sudden footsteps and, half turning, saw her husband tearing open an
envelope.

"Lavinia!" he cried. "There has been an accident in the elevator of the
Grand Hotel, and Mochales--is dead!" She hung upon the ledge now for
support. "The attendant, a new man, started the car too soon and caught
Mochales----" She sank down upon her knees in an attitude of prayer, and
Cesare Orsi stood reverently bowed.

"The will of God!" he muttered.

A long slow shiver passed over Lavinia, and he bent and lifted her in
his arms.




TOL'ABLE DAVID

I

He was the younger of two brothers, in his sixteenth year; and he
had his father's eyes--a tender and idyllic blue. There, however, the
obvious resemblance ended. The elder's azure gaze was set in a face
scarred and riven by hardship, debauch and disease; he had been--before
he had inevitably returned to the mountains where he was born--a
brakeman in the lowest stratum of the corruption of small cities on
big railroads; and his thin stooped body, his gaunt head and uncertain
hands, all bore the stamp of ruinous years. But in the midst of this
his eyes, like David's, retained their singularly tranquil color of
sweetness and innocence.

David was the youngest, the freshest thing imaginable; he was overtall
and gawky, his cheeks were as delicately rosy as apple blossoms, and his
smile was an epitome of ingenuous interest and frank wonder. It was
as if some quality of especial fineness, lingering unspotted in Hunter
Kinemon, had found complete expression in his son David. A great deal of
this certainly was due to his mother, a thick solid woman, who retained
more than a trace of girlish beauty when she stood back, flushed from
the heat of cooking, or, her bright eyes snapping, tramped with heavy
pails from the milking shed on a winter morning.

Both the Kinemon boys were engaging. Allen, almost twenty-one, was,
of course, the more conspicuous; he was called the strongest youth in
Greenstream County. He had his mother's brown eyes; a deep bony box of
a chest; rippling shoulders; and a broad peaceful countenance. He drove
the Crabapple stage, between Crabapple, the village just over the back
mountain, and Beaulings, in West Virginia. It was twenty-six miles from
point to point, a way that crossed a towering range, hung above a far
veil of unbroken spruce, forded swift glittering streams, and followed
a road that passed rare isolated dwellings, dominating rocky and
precarious patches and hills of cultivation. One night Allen slept in
Beaulings; the next he was home, rising at four o'clock in order to take
his stage out of Crabapple at seven sharp.

It was a splendid job, and brought them thirty-five dollars a month; not
in mere trade at the store, but actual money. This, together with Hunter
Kinemon's position, tending the rich bottom farm of State Senator Gait,
gave them a position of ease and comfort in Greenstream. They were a
very highly esteemed family.

Gait's farm was in grazing; it extended in deep green pastures and
sparkling water between two high mountainous walls drawn across east and
west. In the morning the rising sun cast long delicate shadows on one
side; at evening the shadow troops lengthened across the emerald valley
from the other. The farmhouse occupied a fenced clearing on the eastern
rise, with a gray huddle of barn and sheds below, a garden patch of
innumerable bean poles, and an incessant stir of snowy chickens. Beyond,
the cattle moved in sleek chestnut-brown and orange herds; and farther
out flocks of sheep shifted like gray-white clouds on a green-blue sky.

It was, Mrs. Kinemon occasionally complained, powerful lonely, with the
store two miles up the road, Crabapple over a heft of a rise, and no
personable neighbors; and she kept a loaded rifle in an angle of the
kitchen when the men were all out in a distant pasturage. But David
liked it extremely well; he liked riding an old horse after the steers,
the all-night sap boilings in spring groves, the rough path across a rib
of the mountain to school.

Nevertheless, he was glad when studying was over for the year. It
finished early in May, on account of upland planting, and left
David with a great many weeks filled only with work that seem to him
unadulterated play. Even that didn't last all the time; there were hours
when he could fish for trout, plentiful in cool rocky pools; or shoot
gray squirrels in the towering maples. Then, of evenings, he could
listen to Allen's thrilling tales of the road, of the gambling and
fighting among the lumbermen in Beaulings, or of strange people that had
taken passage in the Crabapple stage--drummers, for the most part, with
impressive diamond rings and the doggonedest lies imaginable. But they
couldn't fool Allen, however believing he might seem.... The Kinemons
were listening to such a recital by their eldest son now.

They were gathered in a room of very general purpose. It had a rough
board floor and crumbling plaster walls, and held a large scarred cherry
bed with high posts and a gayly quilted cover; a long couch, covered
with yellow untanned sheepskins; a primitive telephone; some painted
wooden chairs; a wardrobe, lurching insecurely forward; and an empty
iron stove with a pipe let into an original open hearth with a wide
rugged stone. Beyond, a door opened into the kitchen, and back of the
bed a raw unguarded flight of steps led up to the peaked space where
Allen and David slept.

Hunter Kinemon was extended on the couch, his home-knitted socks
comfortably free of shoes, smoking a sandstone pipe with a reed stem.
Mrs. Kinemon was seated in a rocking-chair with a stained and torn red
plush cushion, that moved with a thin complaint on a fixed base. Allen
was over against the stove, his corduroy trousers thrust into greased
laced boots, and a black cotton shirt open on a chest and throat like
pink marble. And David supported his lanky length, in a careless and
dust-colored garb, with a capacious hand on the oak beam of the mantel.

It was May, school had stopped, and a door was open on a warm still
dusk. Allen's tale had come to an end; he was pinching the ear of a
diminutive dog--like a fat white sausage with wire-thin legs and a rat
tail--that never left him. The smoke from the elder Kinemon's pipe rose
in a tranquil cloud. Mrs. Kinemon rocked vigorously, with a prolonged
wail of the chair springs. "I got to put some tallow to that chair,"
Kinemon proclaimed.

"The house on Elbow Barren's took," Allen told him suddenly--"the one
just off the road. I saw smoke in the chimney this evening."

A revival of interest, a speculation, followed this announcement.

"Any women'll get to the church," Mr. Kinemon asserted. "I wonder? Did a
person say who were they?"

"I asked; but they're strange to Crabapple. I heard this though: there
weren't any women to them--just men--father and sons like. I drew up
right slow going by; but nobody passed out a word. It's a middling bad
farm place--rocks and berry bushes. I wouldn't reckon much would be
content there."

David walked out through the open doorway and stood on the small
covered portico, that with a bench on each side, hung to the face of
the dwelling. The stars were brightening in the sky above the confining
mountain walls; there was a tremendous shrilling of frogs; the faint
clamor of a sheep bell. He was absolutely, irresponsibly happy. He
wished the time would hurry when he'd be big and strong like Allen, and
get out into the absorbing stir of the world.

II

He was dimly roused by Allen's departure in the beginning brightness of
the following morning. The road over which the stage ran drew by the
rim of the farm; and later David saw the rigid three-seated surrey, the
leather mail bags strapped in the rear, trotted by under the swinging
whip of his brother. He heard the faint sharp bark of Rocket, Allen's
dog, braced at his side.

David spent the day with his father, repairing the fencing of the middle
field, swinging a mall and digging post holes; and at evening his arms
ached. But he assured himself he was not tired; any brother of Allen's
couldn't give in before such insignificant effort. When Hunter Kinemon
turned back toward house and supper David made a wide circle, ostensibly
to see whether there was rock salt enough out for the cattle, but
in reality to express his superabundant youth, staying qualities and
unquenchable vivid interest in every foot of the valley.

He saw the meanest kind of old fox, and marked what he thought might be
its hole; his flashing gaze caught the obscure distant retreat of ground
hogs; he threw a contemptuous clod at the woolly-brained sheep; and with
a bent willow shoot neatly looped a trout out upon the grassy bank. As
a consequence of all this he was late for supper, and sat at the table
with his mother, who never took her place until the men--yes, and boys
of her family--had satisfied their appetites. The dark came on and she
lighted a lamp swinging under a tin reflector from the ceiling. The
kitchen was an addition, and had a sloping shed roof, board sides, a
polished stove, and a long table with a red cloth.

His father, David learned, attacking a plateful of brown chicken
swimming with greens and gravy, was having another bad spell. He had the
familiar sharp pain through his back and his arms hurt him.

"He can't be drove to a doctor," the woman told David, speaking, in her
concern, as if to an equal in age and comprehension.

David had grown accustomed to the elder's periods of suffering; they
came, twisted his father's face into deep lines, departed, and things
were exactly as before--or very nearly the same. The boy saw that Hunter
Kinemon couldn't support labor that only two or three years before he
would have finished without conscious effort. David resolutely ignored
this; he felt that it must be a cause of shame, unhappiness, to his
father; and he never mentioned it to Allen. Kinemon lay very still on
the couch; his pipe, beside him on the floor, had spilled its live core,
burning into a length of rag carpet. His face, hung with shadows like
the marks of a sooty finger, was glistening with fine sweat. Not a
whisper of complaint passed his dry lips. When his wife approached
he attempted to smooth out his corrugated countenance. His eyes, as
tenderly blue as flowers, gazed at her with a faint masking of humor.

"This is worse'n usual," she said sharply. "And I ain't going to have
you fill yourself with any more of that patent trash. You don't spare
me by not letting on. I can tell as soon as you're miserable. David can
fetch the doctor from Crabapple to-night if you don't look better."

"But I am," he assured her. "It's just a comeback of an old ache. There
was a power of heavy work to that fence."

"You'll have to get more to help you," she continued. "That Galt'll let
you kill yourself and not turn a hand. He can afford a dozen. I don't
mind housing and cooking for them. David's only tol'able for lifting,
too, while he's growing."

"Why," David protested, "it ain't just nothing what I do. I could do
twice as much. I don't believe Allen could helt more'n me when he was
sixteen. It ain't just nothing at all."

He was disturbed by this assault upon his manhood; if his muscles were
still a little stringy it was surprising what he could accomplish with
them. He would show her to-morrow.

"And," he added impetuously, "I can shoot better than Allen right
now. You ask him if I can't. You ask him what I did with that cranky
twenty-two last Sunday up on the mountain."

His clear gaze sought her, his lean face quivered with anxiety to
impress, convince her of his virility, skill. His jaw was as sharp as
the blade of a hatchet. She studied him with a new surprised concern.

"David!" she exclaimed. "For a minute you had the look of a man. A real
steady look, like your father. Don't you grow up too fast, David,"
she directed him, in an irrepressible maternal solicitude. "I want a
boy--something young--round a while yet."

Hunter Kinemon sat erect and reached for his pipe. The visible strain
of his countenance had been largely relaxed. When his wife had left the
room for a moment he admitted to David:

"That was a hard one. I thought she had me that time."

The elder's voice was light, steady. The boy gazed at him with intense
admiration. He felt instinctively that nothing mortal could shake the
other's courage. And, on top of his mother's complimentary surprise, his
father had confided in him, made an admission that, David realized, must
be kept from fretting women. He couldn't have revealed more to Allen
himself.

He pictured the latter swinging magnificently into Beaulings, cracking
the whip over the horses' ears, putting on the grinding brake before the
post-office. No one, even in that town of reckless drinking, ever
tried to down Allen; he was as ready as he was strong. He had charge of
Government mail and of passengers; he carried a burnished revolver in
a holster under the seat at his hand. Allen would kill anybody who
interfered with him. So would he--David--if a man edged up on him or on
his family; if any one hurt even a dog of his, his own dog, he'd shoot
him.

An inextinguishable hot pride, a deep sullen intolerance, rose in him at
the thought of an assault on his personal liberty, his rights, or on
his connections and belongings. A deeper red burned in his fresh young
cheeks; his smiling lips were steady; his candid blue eyes, ineffably
gentle, gazed widely against the candlelit gloom where he was making his
simple preparations for bed. The last feeling of which he was conscious
was a wave of sharp admiration, of love, for everything and everybody
that constituted his home.

III

Allen, on his return the following evening, immediately opened an
excited account of the new family, with no women, on the place by Elbow
Barren.

"I heard they were from down hellwards on the Clinch," he repeated; "and
then that they'd come from Kentucky. Anyway, they're bad. Ed Arbogast
just stepped on their place for a pleasant howdy, and some one on the
stoop hollered for him to move. Ed, he saw the shine on a rifle barrel,
and went right along up to the store. Then they hired Simmons--the one
that ain't good in his head--to cut out bush; and Simmons trailed home
after a while with the side of his face all tore, where he'd been hit
with a piece of board. Simmons' brother went and asked them what was it
about; and one of the Hatburns--that's their name--said he'd busted the
loony just because!"

"What did Simmons answer back?" Hunter Kinemon demanded, his coffee cup
suspended.

"Nothing much; he'd law them, or something like that. The Simmonses
are right spindling; they don't belong in Greenstream either." David
commented: "I wouldn't have et a thing till I'd got them!" In the ruddy
reflection of the lamp his pink-and-blue charm, his shy lips, resembled
a pastoral divinity of boyhood. Allen laughed.

"That family, the Hatburns----" He paused. "Why, they'd just mow you
down with the field daisies."

David flushed with annoyance. He saw his mother studying him with the
attentive concern she had first shown the day before yesterday.

"You have no call to mix in with them," Kinemon told his elder son.
"Drive stage and mind your business. I'd even step aside a little from
folks like that."

A sense of surprised disappointment invaded David at his father's
statement. It seemed to him out of keeping with the elder's courage and
determination. It, too, appeared almost spindling. Perhaps he had said
it because his wife, a mere woman, was there. He was certain that Allen
would not agree with such mildness. The latter, lounging back from the
table, narrowed his eyes; his fingers played with the ears of his dog,
Rocket. Allen gave his father a cigar and lit one himself, a present
from a passenger on the stage. David could see a third in Allen's shirt
pocket, and he longed passionately for the day when he would be old
enough to have a cigar offered him. He longed for the time when he, like
Allen, would be swinging a whip over the horses of a stage, rambling
down a steep mountain, or walking up at the team's head to take off some
weight.

Where the stage line stopped in Beaulings the railroad began. Allen, he
knew, intended in the fall to give up the stage for the infinitely
wider world of freight cars; and David wondered whether Priest, the
storekeeper in Crabapple who had charge of the awarding of the position,
could be brought to see that he was as able a driver, almost, as Allen.

It was probable Priest would call him too young for the charge of the
Government mail. But he wasn't; Allen had to admit that he, David, was
the straighter shot. He wouldn't step aside for any Hatburn alive. And,
he decided, he would smoke nothing but cigars. He considered whether he
might light his small clay pipe, concealed under the stoop, before the
family; but reluctantly concluded that that day had not yet arrived.

Allen passed driving the next morning as usual, leaving a gray wreath
of dust to settle back into the tranquil yellow sunshine; the sun moved
from the east barrier to the west; a cool purple dusk filled the valley,
and the shrilling of the frogs rose to meet the night. The following day
was almost identical--the shadows swept out, shortened under the groves
of trees and drew out again over the sheep on the western slope. Before
Allen reached home he had to feed and bed his horses, and walk back the
two miles over the mountain from Crabapple; and a full hour before the
time for his brother's arrival, David was surprised to see the stage
itself making its way over the precarious turf road that led up to the
Kinemons' dwelling. He was standing by the portico, and immediately
his mother moved out to his side, as if subconsciously disturbed by
the unusual occurrence. David saw, while the stage was still diminutive
against the rolling pasture, that Allen was not driving; and there was
an odd confusion of figures in a rear seat. Mrs. Kinemon said at once,
in a shrill strange voice:

"Something has happened to Allen!" She pressed her hands against her
laboring breast; David ran forward and met the surrey as it came through
the fence opening by the stable shed. Ed Arbogast was driving; and a
stranger--a drummer evidently--in a white-and-black check suit, was
holding Allen, crumpled in a dreadful bloody faint.

"Where's Hunter?" Arbogast asked the boy.

"There he comes now," David replied, his heart pounding wildly and dread
constricting his throat.

Hunter Kinemon and his wife reached the stage at the same moment. Both
were plaster-white; but the woman was shaking with frightened concern,
while her husband was deliberate and still.

"Help me carry him in to our bed," he addressed Ed Arbogast.

They lifted Allen out and bore him toward the house, his limp fingers,
David saw, trailing through the grass. At first the latter involuntarily
turned away; but, objurgating such cowardice, he forced himself to gaze
at Allen. He recognized at once that his brother had not been shot; his
hip was too smeared and muddy for that. It was, he decided, an accident,
as Arbogast and the drummer lead Hunter Kinemon aside. David Kinemon
walked resolutely up to the little group. His father gestured for him
to go away, but he ignored the elder's command. He must know what
had happened to Allen. The stranger in the checked suit was speaking
excitedly, waving trembling hands--a sharp contrast to the grim
immobility of the Greenstream men:

"He'd been talking about that family, driving out of Beaulings and
saying how they had done this and that; and when we came to where
they lived he pointed out the house. A couple of dark-favored men were
working in a patch by the road, and he waved his whip at them, in a
way of speaking; but they never made a sign. The horses were going slow
then; and, for some reason or other, his little dog jumped to the road
and ran in on the patch. Sirs, one of those men spit, stepped up to the
dog, and kicked it into Kingdom Come."

David's hands clenched; and he drew in a sharp sobbing breath.

"This Allen," the other continued, "pulled in the team and drawed a
gun from under the seat before I could move a hand. You can hear me--I
wouldn't have kicked any dog of his for all the gold there is! He got
down from the stage and started forward, and his face was black; then
he stopped, undecided. He stood studying, with the two men watching
him, one leaning careless on a grub hoe. Then, by heaven, he turned and
rested the gun on the seat, and walked up to where laid the last of his
dog. He picked it up, and says he:

"'Hatburn, I got Government mail on that stage to get in under contract,
and there's a passenger too--paid to Crabapple; but when I get them
two things done I'm coming back to kill you two dead to hear the last
trumpet.'

"The one on the hoe laughed; but the other picked up a stone like my
two fists and let Allen have it in the back. It surprised him like; he
stumbled forward, and the other stepped out and laid the hoe over his
head. It missed him mostly, but enough landed to knock Allen over. He
rolled into the ditch, like, by the road; and then Hatburn jumped down
on him, deliberate, with lumbermen's irons in his shoes."

David was conscious of an icy flood pouring through him; a revulsion of
grief and fury that blinded him. Tears welled over his fresh cheeks
in an audible crying. But he was silenced by the aspect of his father.
Hunter Kinemon's tender blue eyes had changed apparently into bits of
polished steel; his mouth was pinched until it was only a line among the
other lines and seaming of his worn face.

"I'd thank you to drive the stage into Crabapple, Ed," he said; "and if
you see the doctor coming over the mountain--he's been rung up for--ask
him, please sir, will he hurry." He turned and walked abruptly away,
followed by David.

Allen lay under the gay quilt in the Kinemons' big bed. His stained
clothes drooped from a chair where Mrs. Kinemon had flung them. Allen's
face was like white paper; suddenly it had grown as thin and sharp as
an old man's. Only a slight quiver of his eyelids showed that he was not
dead.

Hunter Kinemon sat on the couch, obviously waiting for the doctor. He,
too, looked queer, David thought. He wished his father would break
the dreadful silence gathering over them; but the only sound was the
stirring of the woman in the kitchen, boiling a pot of water. Allen
moved and cried out in a knifelike agony, and a flicker of suffering
passed over his father's face.

An intolerable hour dragged out before the doctor arrived; and then
David was driven from the room. He sat outside on the portico, listening
to the passage of feet about Allen in a high shuddering protest. David's
hands and feet were still cold, but he was conscious of an increasing
stillness within, an attitude not unlike his father's. He held out an
arm and saw that it was as steady as a beam of the stoop roof. He was
without definite plan or knowledge of what must occur; but he told
himself that any decision of Hunter Kinemon's must not exclude him.

There were four Hatburns; but two Kinemons were better; and he meant his
father and himself, for he knew instinctively that Allen was badly hurt.
Soon there would be no Hatburns at all. And then the law could do as
it pleased. It seemed to David a long way from the valley, from Allen
broken in bed, to the next term of court--September--in Crabapple. The
Kinemons could protect, revenge, their own.

The doctor passed out, and David entered where his mother was bent above
her elder son. Hunter Kinemon, with a blackened rag, was wiping the lock
of an old but efficient repeating rifle. His motions were unhurried,
careful. Mrs. Kinemon gazed at him with blanching lips, but she
interposed no word. There was another rifle, David knew, in the long
cupboard by the hearth; and he was moving to secure it when his father's
voice halted him in the middle of the floor. "You David," he said, "I
want you to stop along here with your mother. It ain't fit for her to be
left alone with Allen, and there's a mess of little things for doing.
I want those cows milked dry, and catch in those little Dominicker
chickens before that old gander eats them up."

David was about to protest, to sob out a passionate refusal, when a
glimpse of his father's expression silenced him. He realized that the
slightest argument would be worse than futile. There wasn't a particle
of familiar feeling in the elder's voice; suddenly David was afraid of
him. Hunter Kinemon slipped a number of heavily greased cartridges into
the rifle's magazine. Then he rose and said:

"Well, Mattie?"

His wife laid her hand on his shoulder.

"Hunter," she told him, "you've been a mighty sweet and good husband."
He drew his hand slowly and lovingly across her cheek.

"I'm sorry about this, Mattie," he replied; "I've been powerful happy
along with you and all of us. David, be a likely boy." He walked out of
the room, across the grass to the stable shed.

"He's going to drive to Elbow Barren," David muttered; "and he hadn't
ought to have left me to tend the cows and chickens. That's for a woman
to do. I ought to be right along with him facing down those Hatburns. I
can shoot, and my hand is steady as his."

He stood in the doorway, waiting for the reappearance of his father with
the roan horse to hitch to their old buggy. It didn't occur to David to
wonder at the fact that the other was going alone to confront four men.
The Kinemons had a mort of friends who would have gladly accompanied,
assisted Hunter; but this, the boy told himself, was their own
affair--their own pride.

From within came the sound of his mother, crying softly, and of Allen
murmuring in his pain. David was appalled by the swift change that had
fallen over them--the breaking up of his entire world, the shifting
of every hope and plan. He was appalled and confused; the thoughtless
unquestioning security of his boyhood had been utterly destroyed.
He looked about dazed at the surrounding scene, callous in its total
carelessness of Allen's injury, his haggard father with the rifle. The
valley was serenely beautiful; doves were calling from the eaves of the
barn; a hen clucked excitedly. The western sky was a single expanse of
primrose on which the mountains were jagged and blue.

He had never known the elder to be so long getting the bridle on the
roan; the buggy was drawn up outside. An uneasy tension increased within
him--a pressing necessity to see his father leading out their horse. He
didn't come, and finally David was forced to walk over to the shed.

The roan had been untied, and turned as the boy entered; but David,
at first, failed to find Hunter Kinemon; then he almost stepped on his
hand. His father lay across a corner of the earthen floor, with the
bridle tangled in stiff fingers, and his blue eyes staring blankly up.

David stifled an exclamation of dread, and forced himself to bend
forward and touch the gray face. Only then he realized that he was
looking at death. The pain in his father's back had got him at last! The
rifle had been carefully placed against the wall; and, without realizing
the significance of his act, David picked it up and laid the cold barrel
against his rigid young body.

IV

On the evening after Hunter Kinemon's burial in the rocky steep
graveyard above Crabapple, David and his mother sat, one on the couch,
the other in her creaking rocking-chair, lost in heavy silence. Allen
moved in a perpetual uneasy pain on the bed, his face drawn and fretful,
and shadowed by a soft young beard. The wardrobe doors stood open,
revealing a stripped interior; wooden chairs were tied back to back; and
two trunks--one of mottled paper, the other of ancient leather--stood
by the side of a willow basket filled with a miscellany of housekeeping
objects.

What were left of the Kinemons were moving into a small house on the
edge of Crabapple; Senator Galt had already secured another tenant for
the care of his bottom acres and fat herds. The night swept into the
room, fragrant and blue, powdered with stars; the sheep bells sounded in
a faintly distant clashing; a whippoorwill beat its throat out against
the piny dark.

An overpowering melancholy surged through David; though his youth
responded to the dramatic, the tragic change that had enveloped them,
at the same time he was reluctant to leave the farm, the valley with its
trout and ground hogs, its fox holes and sap boilings. These feelings
mingled in the back of his consciousness; his active thoughts were all
directed toward the time when, with the rifle, the obligation that he
had picked up practically from his dead father's hand, he would walk up
to the Hatburn place and take full payment for Allen's injury and their
paternal loss.

He felt uneasily that he should have gone before this--at once; but
there had been a multitude of small duties connected with the funeral,
intimate things that could not be turned over to the kindest neighbors;
and the ceremony itself, it seemed to him, should be attended by dignity
and repose.

Now, however, it was over; and only his great duty remained, filling the
entire threshold of his existence. He had no plan; only a necessity to
perform. It was possible that he would fail--there were four Hatburns;
and that chance depressed him. If he were killed there was no one else,
for Allen could never take another step. That had been disclosed by the
most casual examination of his injury. Only himself, David, remained to
uphold the pride of the Kinemons.

He gazed covertly at his mother; she must not, certainly, be warned of
his course; she was a woman, to be spared the responsibility borne by
men. A feeling of her being under his protection, even advice, had grown
within him since he had discovered the death in the stable shed. This
had not changed his aspect of blossoming youth, the intense blue candor
of his gaze; he sat with his knees bent boyishly, his immature hands
locked behind his head.

An open wagon, piled with blankets, carried Allen to Crabapple, and Mrs.
Kinemon and David followed in the buggy, a great bundle, folded in the
bright quilt, roped behind. They soon crossed the range and dropped into
a broader valley. Crabapple lay on a road leading from mountain wall to
wall, the houses quickly thinning out into meadow at each end.

A cross-roads was occupied by three stores and the courthouse, a square
red-brick edifice with a classic white portico and high lantern; and
it was out from that, where the highway had degenerated into a sod-cut
trail, that the future home of the Kinemons lay. It was a small somber
frame dwelling, immediately on the road, with a rain-washed patch rising
abruptly at the back. A dilapidated shed on the left provided a meager
shelter for the roan; and there was an aged and twisted apple tree over
the broken pump.

"You'll have to get at that shed, David," his mother told him; "the
first rain would drown anything inside."

She was settling Allen on the couch with the ragged sheepskin. So he
would; but there was something else to attend to first. He would walk
over to Elbow Barren, to-morrow. He involuntarily laid his hand on the
barrel of the rifle, temporarily leaned against a table, when his mother
spoke sharply from an inner doorway.

"You David," she said; "come right out into the kitchen."

There he stood before her, with his gaze stubbornly fixed on the bare
floor, his mouth tight shut.

"David," she continued, her voice now lowered, fluctuating with anxiety,
"you weren't reckoning on paying off them Hatburns? You never?" She
halted, gazing at him intently. "Why, they'd shoot you up in no time!
You are nothing but a--"

"You can call me a boy if you've a mind to," he interrupted; "and maybe
the Hatburns'll kill me--and maybe they won't. But there's no one can
hurt Allen like that and go plumb, sniggering free; not while I can move
and hold a gun."

"I saw a look to you that was right manlike a week or two back," she
replied; "and I said to myself: 'There's David growing up overnight.' I
favored it, too, though I didn't want to lose you that way so soon. And
only last night I said again: 'Thank God, David's a man in his heart,
for all his pretty cheeks!' I thought I could build on you, with me
getting old and Allen never taking a mortal step. Priest would give you
a place, and glad, in the store--the Kinemons are mighty good people. I
had it all fixed up like that, how we'd live here and pay regular.

"Oh, I didn't say nothing to your father when he started out--he was
too old to change; but I hoped you would be different. I hoped you would
forget your own feeling, and see Allen there on his back, and me ...
getting along. You're all we got, David. It's no use, I reckon; you'll
go like Allen and Hunter, full up with your own pride and never----" She
broke off, gazing bitterly at her hands folded in her calico lap.

A new trouble filled David's heart. Through the open doorway he could
see Allen, twisting on the couch; his mother was older, more worn, than
he had realized. She had failed a great deal in the past few days. She
was suddenly stripped of her aspect of authority, force; suddenly she
appeared negative, dependent. A sharp pity for her arose through his
other contending emotions.

"I don't know how you figure you will be helping Allen by stepping off
to be shot instead of putting food in his mouth," she spoke again. "He's
got nobody at all but you, David."

That was so; and yet--

"How can I let those skunks set their hell on us?" he demanded
passionately. "Why, all Greenstream will think I'm afraid, that I let
the Hatburns bust Allen and kill my father. I couldn't stand up in
Priest's store; I couldn't bear to look at anybody. Don't you understand
how men are about those things?"

She nodded.

"I can see, right enough--with Hunter in the graveyard and Allen with
both hips broke. What I can't see is what we'll do next winter; how
we'll keep Allen warm and fed. I suppose we can go to the County Home."

But that, David knew, was as disgraceful as the other--his own mother,
Allen, objects of public charity! His face was clouded, his hands
clenched. It was only a chance that he would be killed; there were four
Hatburns though. His heart, he thought, would burst with misery;
every instinct fought for the expression, the upholding of the family
prestige, honor. A hatred for the Hatburns was like a strangling hand at
his throat.

"I got to!" he said; but his voice was wavering; the dull conviction
seized him that his mother was right.

All the mountains would think of him as a coward--that Kinemon who
wouldn't stand up to the men who had destroyed Allen and his father!

A sob heaved in his chest; rebellious tears streamed over his thin
cheeks. He was crying like a baby. He threw an arm up across his eyes
and stumbled from the room.

V

However, he had no intention of clerking back of a counter, of getting
down rolls of muslin, papers of buttons, for women, if it could be
avoided. Priest's store was a long wooden structure with a painted
facade and a high platform before it where the mountain wagons unloaded
their various merchandise teamed from the railroad, fifty miles distant.
The owner had a small glass-enclosed office on the left as you entered
the store; and there David found him. He turned, gazing over his
glasses, as the other entered.

"How's Allen?" he asked pleasantly. "I heard he was bad; but we
certainly look to have him back driving stage."

"I came to see you about that," David replied. "Allen can't never drive
again; but, Mr. Priest, sir, I can. Will you give me a try?"

The elder ignored the question in the concern he exhibited for Allen's
injury.

"It is a cursed outrage!" he declared. "Those Hatburns will be got up,
or my name's not Priest! We'd have them now, but the jail wouldn't keep
them overnight, and court three months off."

David preserved a stony silence--the only attitude possible, he had
decided, in the face of his patent dereliction.

"Will you try me on the Beaulings stage?" he repeated. "I've been round
horses all my life; and I can hold a gun straighter than Allen."

Priest shook his head negatively.

"You are too light--too young," he explained; "you have to be above a
certain age for the responsibility of the mail. There are some rough
customers to handle. If you only had five years more now--We are having
a hard time finding a suitable man. A damned shame about Allen! Splendid
man!"

"Can't you give it to me for a week," David persisted, "and see how I
do?"

They would have awarded him the position immediately, he felt, if he had
properly attended to the Hatburns. He wanted desperately to explain his
failure to Priest, but a dogged pride prevented. The storekeeper was
tapping on an open ledger with a pen, gazing doubtfully at David.

"You couldn't be worse than the drunken object we have now," he
admitted. "You couldn't hold the job permanent yet, but I might let
you drive extra--a day or so--till we find a man. I'd like to do what I
could for Mrs. Kinemon. Your father was a good man, a good customer....
Come and see me again--say, day after to-morrow."

This half promise partly rehabilitated his fallen pride. There was no
sign in the men he passed that they held him in contempt for neglecting
to kill the Hatburns; and his mother wisely avoided the subject. She
wondered a little at Priest's considering him, even temporarily, for
the stage; but confined her wonder to a species of compliment. David
sat beside Allen, while the latter, between silent spaces of suffering,
advised him of the individual characters and attributes of the horses
that might come under his guiding reins.

It seemed incredible that he should actually be seated in the driver's
place on the stage, swinging the heavy whip out over a team trotting
briskly into the early morning; but there he was. There were no
passengers, and the stage rode roughly over a small bridge of loose
boards beyond the village. He pulled the horses into a walk on the
mountain beyond, and was soon skirting the Gait farm, with its broad
fields, where he had lived as a mere boy.

David slipped his hand under the leather seat and felt the smooth handle
of the revolver. Then, on an even reach, he wrapped the reins about
the whipstock and publicly filled and lighted his clay pipe. The smoke
drifted back in a fragrant cloud; the stage moved forward steadily and
easily; folded in momentary forgetfulness, lifted by a feeling of mature
responsibility, he was almost happy. But he swung down the mountain
beyond his familiar valley, crossed a smaller ridge, and turned into a
stony sweep rising on the left.

It was Elbow Barren. In an instant a tide of bitterness, of passionate
regret, swept over him. He saw the Hatburns' house, a rectangular bleak
structure crowning a gray prominence, with the tender green of young
pole beans on one hand and a disorderly barn on the other, and a blue
plume of smoke rising from an unsteady stone chimney against an end of
the dwelling. No one was visible.

Hot tears filled his eyes as the stage rolled along past the moldy ditch
into which Allen had fallen. The mangy curs! His grip tightened on the
reins and the team broke into a clattering trot, speedily leaving the
Barren behind. But the day had been robbed of its sparkle, his position
of its pleasurable pride. He saw again his father's body on the earthen
floor of the stable, the bridle in his stiff fingers; Allen carried into
the house. And he, David Kinemon, had had to step back, like a coward or
a woman, and let the Hatburns triumph.

The stage drew up before the Beaulings post-office in the middle of the
afternoon. David delivered the mail bags, and then led the team back
to a stable on the grassy verge of the houses clustered at the end
of tracks laid precariously over a green plain to a boxlike station.
Beaulings had a short row of unpainted two-story structures, the single
street cut into deep muddy scars; stores with small dusty windows;
eating houses elevated on piles; an insignificant mission chapel with
a tar-papered roof; and a number of obviously masked depots for the
illicit sale of liquor.

A hotel, neatly painted white and green, stood detached from the main
activity. There, washing his face in a tin basin on a back porch, David
had his fried supper, sat for a while outside in the gathering dusk,
gazing at the crude-oil flares, the passing dark figures beyond, the
still obscured immensity of mountain and forest. And then he went up to
a pine sealed room, like the heated interior of a packing box, where he
partly undressed for bed.

VI

The next mid-morning, descending the sharp grade toward Elbow Barren,
there was no lessening of David's bitterness against the Hatburns. The
flavor of tobacco died in his mouth, he grew unconscious of the lurching
heavy stage, the responsibility of the mail, all committed to his care.
A man was standing by the ditch on the reach of scrubby grass that fell
to the road; and David pulled his team into the slowest walk possible.
It was his first actual sight of a Hatburn. He saw a man middling
tall, with narrow high shoulders, and a clay-yellow countenance,
extraordinarily pinched through the temples, with minute restless black
eyes. The latter were the only mobile feature of his slouching indolent
pose, his sullen regard. He might have been a scarecrow, David thought,
but for that glittering gaze.

The latter leaned forward, the stage barely moving, and looked
unwaveringly at the Hatburn beyond. He wondered whether the man knew
him--David Kinemon? But of course he did; all the small details of
mountain living circulated with the utmost rapidity from clearing to
clearing. He was now directly opposite the other; he could take out the
revolver and kill that Hatburn, where he stood, with one precise shot.
His hand instinctively reached under the seat. Then he remembered Allen,
forever dependent on the couch; his mother, who had lately seemed so
old. The stage was passing the motionless figure. David drew a deep
painful breath, and swung out his whip with a vicious sweep.

His pride, however, returned when he drove into Crabapple, down the
familiar street, past the familiar men and women turning to watch him,
with a new automatic measure of attention, in his elevated position. He
walked back to his dwelling with a slight swagger of hips and shoulders,
and, with something of a flourish, laid down the two dollars he had been
paid for the trip to Beaulings.

"I'm to drive again to-morrow," he stated to his mother and Allen;
"after that Priest has a regular man. I suppose, then, I'll have to go
into the store."

The last seemed doubly difficult now, since he had driven stage. As he
disposed of supper, eating half a pie with his cracklings and greens,
his mother moved from the stove to the table, refilled his plate, waved
the paper streamers of the fly brush above his head, exactly as she had
for his father. Already, he assured himself, he had become a man.

The journey to Beaulings the following day was an unremarkable replica
of the one before. He saw no Hatburns; the sun wheeled from east to
west at apparently the same speed as the stage; and Beaulings held its
inevitable surge of turbulent lumbermen, the oil flares made their lurid
note on the vast unbroken starry canopy of night.

The morning of his return was heavy with a wet low vapor. The mail bags,
as he strapped them to the rear rack, were slippery; the dawn was a
slow monotonous widening of dull light. There were no passengers for
Crabapple, and David, with his coat collar turned up about his throat,
urged the horses to a faster gait through the watery cold.

The brake set up a shrill grinding, and then the stage passed Elbow
Barren in a smart rattle and bumping.

After that David slowed down to light his pipe. The horses willingly
lingered, almost stopping; and, the memory of the slippery bags at the
back of his head, David dismounted, walked to the rear of the stage.

A chilling dread swept through him as he saw, realized, that one of the
Government sacks was missing. The straps were loose about the remaining
two; in a minute or more they would have gone. Panic seized him, utter
misery, at the thought of what Priest, Crabapple, would say. He would be
disgraced, contemptuously dismissed--a failure in the trust laid on him.

He collected his faculties by a violent effort; the bags, he was sure,
had been safe coming down the last mountain; he had walked part of the
way, and he was certain that he would have noticed anything wrong. The
road was powerful bad through the Barren....

He got up into the stage, backed the team abruptly on its haunches, and
slowly retraced his way to the foot of the descent. There was no mail
lying on the empty road. David turned again, his heart pounding against
his ribs, tears of mortification, of apprehension, blurring his vision.
The bag must have fallen here in Elbow Barren. Subconsciously he stopped
the stage. On the right the dwelling of the Hatburns showed vaguely
through the mist. No one else could have been on the road. A troubled
expression settled on his glowing countenance, a pondering doubt; then
his mouth drew into a determined line.

"I'll have to go right up and ask," he said aloud.

He jumped down to the road, led the horses to a convenient sapling,
where he hitched them. Then he drew his belt tighter about his slender
waist and took a step forward. A swift frown scarred his brow, and he
turned and transferred the revolver to a pocket in his trousers.

The approach to the house was rough with stones and muddy clumps of
grass. A track, he saw, circled the dwelling to the back; but he walked
steadily and directly up to the shallow portico between windows with
hanging, partly slatted shutters. The house had been painted dark
brown a long while before; the paint had weathered and blistered into a
depressing harmony with the broken and mossy shingles of the roof, the
rust-eaten and sagging gutters festooning the ragged eaves.

David proceeded up the steps, hesitated, and then, his mouth firm and
hand steady, knocked. He waited for an apparently interminable space,
and then knocked again, more sharply. Now he heard voices within. He
waited rigidly for steps to approach, the door to open; but in vain.
They had heard, but chose to ignore his summons; and a swift cold anger
mounted in him. He could follow the path round to the back; but, he told
himself, he--David Kinemon--wouldn't walk to the Hatburns' kitchen door.
They should meet him at the front. He beat again on the scarred wood,
waited; and then, in an irrepressible flare of temper, kicked the door
open.

He was conscious of a slight gasping surprise at the dark moldy-smelling
hall open before him. A narrow bare stairway mounted above, with a
passage at one side, and on each hand entrances were shut on farther
interiors. The scraping of a chair, talking came from the left; the
door, he saw, was not latched. He pushed it open and entered. There
was a movement in the room still beyond, and he walked evenly into what
evidently was a kitchen.

The first thing he saw was the mail bag, lying intact on a table. Then
he was meeting the concerted stare of four men. One of two, so similar
that he could not have distinguished between them, he had seen before,
at the edge of the road. Another was very much older, taller, more
sallow. The fourth was strangely fat, with a great red hanging mouth.
The latter laughed uproariously, a jangling mirthless sound followed by
a mumble of words without connective sense. David moved toward the mail
bag:

"I'm driving stage and lost those letters. I'll take them right along."

The oldest Hatburn, with a pail in his hand, was standing by an opening,
obviously at the point of departure on a small errand. He looked toward
the two similar men, nearer David.

"Boy," he demanded, "did you kick in my front door?"

"I'm the Government's agent," David replied. "I've got to have the mail.
I'm David Kinemon too; and I wouldn't step round to your back door,
Hatburn--not if there was a boiling of you!"

"You'll learn you this," one of the others broke in: "it will be the
sweetest breath you ever draw'd when you get out that back door!"

The elder moved on to the pounded earth beyond. Here, in their presence,
David felt the loathing for the Hatburns a snake inspires--dusty brown
rattlers and silent cottonmouths. His hatred obliterated every other
feeling but a dim consciousness of the necessity to recover the mail
bag. He was filled with an overpowering longing to revenge Allen; to
mark them with the payment of his father, dead in the stable shed.

His objective senses were abnormally clear, cold: he saw every detail
of the Hatburns' garb--the soiled shirts with buttoned pockets on their
left breasts; the stained baggy breeches in heavy boots--such boots as
had stamped Allen into nothingness; dull yellow faces and beady eyes;
the long black hair about their dark ears.

The idiot thrust his fingers into his loose mouth, his shirt open on a
hairy pendulous chest. The Hatburn who had not yet spoken showed a row
of tobacco-brown broken teeth.

"He mightn't get a heave on that breath," he asserted.

The latter lounged over against a set of open shelves where, David saw,
lay a heavy rusted revolver. Hatburn picked up the weapon and turned it
slowly in his thin grasp.

"I'm carrying the mail," David repeated, his hand on the bag. "You've
got no call on this or on me."

He added the last with tremendous effort. It seemed unspeakable that he
should be there, the Hatburns before him, and merely depart.

"What do you think of putting the stage under a soft little strawberry
like that?" the other inquired.

For answer there was a stunning report, a stinging odor of saltpeter;
and David felt a sharp burning on his shoulder, followed by a slow
warmish wet, spreading.

"I didn't go to do just that there!" the Hatburn who had fired
explained. "I wanted to clip his ear, but he twitched like."

David picked up the mail bag and took a step backward in the direction
he had come. The other moved between him and the door.

"If you get out," he said, "it'll be through the hog-wash."

David placed the bag on the floor, stirred by a sudden realization--he
had charge of the stage, official responsibility for the mail. He was no
longer a private individual; what his mother had commanded, entreated,
had no force here and now. The Hatburns were unlawfully detaining him.

As this swept over him, a smile lighted his fresh young cheeks, his
frank mouth, his eyes like innocent flowers. Hatburn shot again;
this time the bullet flicked at David's old felt hat. With his smile
lingering he smoothly leveled the revolver from his pocket and shot the
mocking figure in the exact center of the pocket patched on his left
breast.

David wheeled instantly, before the other Hatburn running for him, and
stopped him with a bullet as remorselessly placed as the first. The
two men on the floor stiffened grotesquely and the idiot crouched in a
corner, whimpering.

David passed his hand across his brow; then he bent and grasped the mail
bag. He was still pausing when the remaining Hatburn strode into the
kitchen. The latter whispered a sharp oath. David shifted the bag; but
the elder had him before he could bring the revolver up. A battering
blow fell, knocked the pistol clattering over the floor, and David
instinctively clutched the other's wrist.

The blows multiplied, beating David into a daze, through which a single
realization persisted--he must not lose his grip upon the arm that was
swinging him about the room, knocking over chairs, crashing against the
table, even drawing him across the hot iron of the stove. He must hold
on!

He saw the face above him dimly through the deepening mist; it seemed
demoniacal, inhuman, reaching up to the ceiling--a yellow giant bent on
his destruction....

His mother, years ago, lives away, had read to them--to his father and
Allen and himself--about a giant, a giant and David; and in the end----

He lost all sense of the entity of the man striving to break him against
the wooden angles of the room; he had been caught, was twisting, in
a great storm; a storm with thunder and cruel flashes of lightning; a
storm hammering and hammering at him.... Must not lose his hold on--on
life! He must stay fast against everything! It wasn't his hand gripping
the destructive force towering above him, but a strange quality within
him, at once within him and aside, burning in his heart and directing
him from without.

The storm subsided; out of it emerged the livid face of Hatburn; and
then, quite easily, he pitched David back across the floor. He lay there
a moment and then stirred, partly rose, beside the mail bag. His pistol
was lying before him; he picked it up.

The other was deliberately moving the dull barrel of a revolver up over
his body. A sharp sense of victory possessed David, and he whispered
his brother's name. Hatburn fired--uselessly. The other's battered lips
smiled.

Goliath, that was the giant's name. He shot easily, securely--once.

Outside, the mail bag seemed weighted with lead. He swayed and staggered
over the rough declivity to the road. It required a superhuman effort to
heave the pack into the stage. The strap with which he had hitched the
horses had turned into iron. At last it was untied. He clambered up to
the enormous height of the driver's seat, unwrapped the reins from the
whipstock, and the team started forward.

He swung to the lurching of the stage like an inverted pendulum;
darkness continually thickened before his vision; waves of sickness
swept up to his head. He must keep the horses on the road, forward the
Government mail!

A grim struggle began between his beaten flesh, a terrible weariness,
and that spirit which seemed to be at once a part of him and a voice.
He wiped the blood from his young brow; from his eyes miraculously blue
like an ineffable May sky.

"Just a tol'able David," he muttered weakly--"only just tol'able!"




BREAD

I

The train rolling rapidly over the broad salt meadows thunderously
entered the long shed of the terminal at the sea. August Turnbull rose
from his seat in the Pullman smoking compartment and took down the
coat hanging beside him. It was gray flannel; in a waistcoat his shirt
sleeves were a visible heavy mauve silk, and there was a complication
of gold chains about his lower pockets. Above the coat a finely woven
Panama hat with a narrow brim had rested, and with that now on his head
he moved arrogantly toward the door.

He was a large man, past the zenith of life, but still vigorous in
features and action. His face was full, and, wet from the heat, he
mopped it with a heavy linen handkerchief. August Turnbull's gaze was
steady and light blue; his nose was so heavy that it appeared to droop a
little from sheer weight, almost resting on the mustache brushed out
in a horizontal line across prominent lips; while his neck swelled in a
glowing congestion above a wilting collar.

He nodded to several men in the narrow corridor of the car; men like
himself in luxurious summer clothes, but for the most part fatter;
then in the shed, looking about in vain for Bernard, his son-in-law,
he proceeded to the street, where his automobile was waiting. It was a
glittering landaulet, folded back and open. Thrusting a wadded evening
paper into a crevice he sank in an upholstered corner while his
chauffeur skillfully worked out through a small confusion of similar
motor activity. Before him a carved glass vase set in a bracket held
smilax and yellow rosebuds, and he saw on the floor a fallen gold powder
box.

Picking it up his face was suffused by a darker tide; this was the
result of stooping and the angry realization that in spite of his
prohibition Louise had been using the landaulet again. She must be made
to understand that he, her father, had an absolute authority over his
family and property. Marriage to Bernard Foster did not relieve her
from obedience to the head of the house. Bernard had a car as well as
himself; yet August Turnbull knew that his son-in-law--at heart a stingy
man--encouraged her to burn the parental gasoline in place of his own.
Turned against the public Bernard's special quality was admirable; he
was indeed more successful, richer, than August had been at the other's
age; but Louise and her husband would have to recognize his precedence.

They were moving faster now on a broad paved avenue bound with steel
tracks. A central business section was left for a more unpretentious
region--small open fruit and fish stands, dingy lodging places, drab
corner saloons, with, at the intervals of the cross streets, fleet
glimpses of an elevated boardwalk and the luminous space of the sea.
Though the day was ending there was no thinning of the vaporous heat,
and a sodden humanity, shapeless in bathing suits, was still reluctantly
moving away from the beach.

Groups of women with their hair in trailing wet wisps and short uneven
skirts dripping on the pavements, gaunt children in scant haphazard garb
surged across the broad avenue or with shrill admonishments stood in
isolated helpless patches amid the swift and shining procession of
automobiles.

August Turnbull was disturbed by the sudden arrest of his progress, and
gazing out saw the insignificant cause of delay. He had again removed
his hat and a frown drew a visible heavy line between his eyes.

"More police are needed for these crossings," he complained to the
chauffeur; "there is the same trouble every evening. The city shouldn't
encourage such rabbles; they give the place a black eye."

All the immediate section, he silently continued, ought to be torn
down and rebuilt in solid expensive structures. It made him hot and
uncomfortable just to pass through the shabby quarter. The people in it
were there for the excellent reason that they lacked the ambition, the
force to demand better things. They got what they deserved.

August Turnbull made an impatient movement of contempt; the world,
success, was for the strong men, the men who knew what they wanted and
drove for it in a straight line. There was a great deal of foolishness
in the air at present--the war was largely responsible; though, on
the other hand, the war would cure a lot of nonsense. But America in
particular was rotten with sentimentality; it was that mainly which had
involved them here in a purely European affair. Getting into it had been
bad business.

Nowhere was the nation's failing more evident than in the attitude
toward women. It had always been maudlin; and now, long content to use
their advantages in small ways, women would become a serious menace to
the country generally. He had admitted their economic value--they filled
every possible place in the large establishment of the Turnbull Bakery;
rather, they performed all the light manual labor. There they were more
satisfactory than men, more easily controlled--yes, and cheaper. But in
Congress, voting, women in communities reporting on factory conditions
were a dangerous nuisance.

He had left the poorer part, and the suavity of the succeeding
streets rapidly increased to a soothing luxury. Wide cottages
occupied velvet-green lawns, and the women he saw were of the sort he
approved--closely skirted creatures with smooth shoulders in transparent
crepe de Chine. They invited a contemplative eye, the thing for which
they were created--a pleasure for men; that and maternity.

The automobile turned toward the sea and stopped at his house midway
in the block. It was a square dwelling painted white with a roof of
tapestry slate, and broad awning-covered veranda on the sea. A sprinkler
was flashing on the lawn, dripping over the concrete pavement and
filling the air with a damp coolness. No one was visible and, leaving
his hat and coat on a chair in an airy hall furnished in black wicker
and flowery chintz hangings on buff walls, he descended to the basement
dressing rooms.

In his bathing suit he presented a figure of vigorous glowing
well-being. Only the silvering hair at his temples, the fatty bulge
across the back of his neck, and a considerable stomach indicated his
multiplying years. He left by a lower door, and immediately after was on
the sand. The tide was out, the lowering sun obscured in a haze, and the
sea undulated with a sullen gleam. Two men were swimming, and farther at
the left a woman stood in the water with arms raised to her head. It
was cold, but August Turnbull marched out without hesitation and threw
himself forward with an uncompromising solid splash.

He swam adequately, but he had not progressed a dozen feet before he was
conscious of a strong current sweeping him up the beach, and he regained
his feet with an angry flourish. The other men came nearer, and he
recognized Bernard Foster, his son-in-law, and Frederick Rathe, whose
cottage was directly across the street from the Turnbulls'.

Like August they were big men, with light hair and eyes. They were very
strong and abrupt in their movements, they spoke in short harsh periods,
and fingered mustaches waxed and rolled into severe points.

"A gully has cut in above," Bernard explained, indicating a point not
far beyond them; "it's over your head. Watch where you swim." They were
moving away.

"Are you coming over to dinner?" August Turnbull called to Bernard.

"Can't," the latter shouted; "Victorine is sick again. Too many
chocolate sundaes."

Left alone, August dived and floated until he was thoroughly cooled;
then he turned toward the beach. The woman, whose existence he had
forgotten, was leaving at the same time. She approached at an angle, and
he was admiring her slim figure when he realized that it was Miss Beggs,
his wife's companion. He had never seen her in a bathing suit before.
August Turnbull delayed until she was at his side.

"Good evening." Her voice was low, and she scarcely lifted her gaze from
the sand.

He wondered why--she had been in his house for a month--he had failed
completely to notice her previously. He decided that it had been because
she was so pale and quiet. Ordinarily he didn't like white cheeks; and
then she had been deceptive; he had subconsciously thought of her as
thin.

She stopped and took off her rubber cap, performing that act slowly,
while her body, in wet satin, turned like a faultless statue of
glistening black marble.

"Do you enjoy bathing in the ocean?" he asked.

A momentary veiled glance accompanied her reply. "Yes," she said;
"though I can't swim. I like to be beaten by the waves. I like to fight
against them."

She hesitated, then fell definitely back; and he was forced to walk on
alone.

His wife's companion! With the frown once more scoring the line between
his eyes he satirically contrasted Miss Beggs, a servant really, and
Emmy.

II

His room occupied the front corner on the sea, Emmy's was beyond; the
door between was partly open and he could hear her moving about, but
with a cigarette and his hair-brushes he made no acknowledgment of her
presence.

The sun was now no more than a diffused gray glow, the sea like
unstirred molten silver. The sound of the muffled gong that announced
dinner floated up the stairs.

Below, the damask was lit both by rose silk-shaded candles and by the
radiance of a suspended alabaster bowl. August Turnbull sat at the
head of a table laden with silver and crystal and flowers. There were
individual pepper mills--he detested adulterated or stale spices--carved
goblets for water, cocktail glasses with enameled roosters, ruby goblets
like blown flowers and little gilt-speckled liqueur glasses; there were
knives with steel blades, knives all of silver, and gold fruit knives;
there were slim oyster forks, entree forks of solid design, and forks of
filigree; a bank of spoons by a plate that would be presently removed,
unused, for other filled plates.

Opposite him Emmy's place was still empty, but his son, Morice, in the
olive drab and bar of a first lieutenant, together with his wife, was
already present. August was annoyed by any delay: one of the marks of
a properly controlled household, a house admirably conscious of the
importance of order--and obedience--was an utter promptness at the
table. Then, silent and unsubstantial as a shadow, Emmy Turnbull slipped
into her seat.

August gazed at her with the secret resentment more and more inspired
by her sickness. At first he had been merely dogmatic--she must recover
under the superlative advice and attention he was able to summon for
her. Then his impatience had swung about toward all doctors--they were
a pack of incompetent fools, medicine was nothing more than an
organized swindle. They had tried baths, cures, innumerable infallible
treatments--to no purpose. Finally he had given up all effort, all hope;
he had given her up. And since then it had been difficult to mask his
resentment.

The butler, a white jacket taking the place of the conventional somber
black, poured four cocktails from a silver mixer and placed four dishes
of shaved ice, lemon rosettes and minute pinkish clams before August
Turnbull, Morice and his wife, and Miss Beggs, occupying in solitude a
side of the table. Then he set at Mrs. Turnbull's hand a glass of milk
thinned with limewater and an elaborate platter holding three small
pieces of zwieback.

She could eat practically nothing.

It was the particular character of her state that specially upset August
Turnbull. He was continually affronted by the spectacle of Emmy seated
before him sipping her diluted milk, breaking her dry bread, in the
midst of the rich plenty he provided. Damn it, he admitted, it got on
his nerves!

The sting of the cocktail whipped up his eagerness for the iced tender
clams. His narrowed gaze rested on Emmy; she was actually seven years
older than he, but from her appearance she might be a hundred,
a million. There was nothing but her painfully slow movements to
distinguish her from a mummy.

The plates were again removed and soup brought on, a clear steaming
amber-green turtle, and with it crisp wheat rolls. Morice's wife gave a
sigh of satisfaction at the latter.

"My," she said, "they're elegant! I'm sick and tired of war bread."

She was a pinkish young woman with regular features and abundant coppery
hair. Marriage had brought her into the Turnbull family from the
chorus of a famous New York roof beauty show. August had been at first
displeased, then a certain complacency had possessed him--Morice, who
was practically thirty years old, had no source of income other than
that volunteered by his father, and it pleased the latter to keep them
depending uncertainly on what he was willing to do. It insured just the
attitude from Rosalie he most enjoyed, approved, in a youthful and not
unhandsome woman. He liked her soft scented weight hanging on his arm
and the perfumed kiss with which she greeted him in the morning.

Nevertheless, at times there was a gleam in her eyes and an expression
at odds with the perfection of her submission; on several occasions
Morice had approached him armed with a determination that he, August,
knew had been injected from without, undoubtedly by Rosalie. Whatever it
had been he quickly disposed of it, but there was a possibility that she
might some day undertake a rebellion; and there was added zest in the
thought of how he would totally subdue her.

"It's a wonder something isn't said to you," she continued. "They're
awfully strict about wheat now."

"That," August Turnbull instructed her heavily, "is a subject we needn't
pursue."

The truth was that he would permit no interference with what so closely
touched his comfort. He was not a horse to eat bran. His bakery--under
inspection--conformed rigidly with the Government requirements; but he
had no intention of spoiling his own dinners. Any necessary conservation
could be effected at the expense of the riffraff through which he had
driven coming from the station. Black bread was no new experience to
them.

He saw that Miss Beggs' small white teeth were crushing salted cashew
nuts. Noticing her in detail for the first time he realized that she
enormously appreciated good food. Why in thunder, since she ate so
heartily, didn't she get fat and rosy! She was one of the thin kind--yet
not thin, he corrected himself. Graceful. Why, she must weigh a hundred
and twenty-five pounds; and she wasn't tall.

The butler filled his ruby goblet from a narrow bottle of Rhine wine. It
was exactly right, not sweet but full; and the man held for his choice a
great platter of beef, beautifully carved into thick crimson slices; the
bloodlike gravy had collected in its depression and he poured it over
his meat.

"A piece of this," he told Emmy discontentedly, "would set you right up;
put something in your veins besides limewater."

She became painfully upset at once and fumbled in her lap, with her face
averted, as the attention of the table was momentarily directed at her.
There was an uncontrollable tremor of her loose colorless mouth.

What a wife for him, August Turnbull! The stimulants and rich flavors
and roast filled him with a humming vitality; he could feel his heart
beat--as strong, he thought, as a bell. In a way Emmy had deceived
him--she probably had always been fragile, but was careful to conceal
it from him at their marriage. It was unjust to him. He wished that she
would take her farcical meals in her room, and not sit here--a skeleton
at the feast. Positively it made him nervous to see her--spoiled his
pleasure.

It had become worse lately; he had difficulty in putting her from his
mind; he imagined Emmy in conjunction with the bakery, of her slowly
starving and the thousands of loaves he produced in a day. There was
something unnatural in such a situation; it was like a mockery at him.

A vision of her came to him at the most inopportune moments, lingering
until it drove him into a hot rage and a pounding set up at the back of
his neck.

The meat was brought back, and he had more of a sweet boiled huckleberry
pudding. A salad followed, with a heavy Russian dressing. August
Turnbull's breathing grew thicker, he was conscious of a familiar
oppression. He assaulted it with fresh wine.

"I saw Bernard on the beach," he related; "Victorine is sick once more.
Chocolate sundaes, Bernard said. She is always stuffing herself at
soda-water counters or with candy. They oughtn't to allow it; the child
should be made to eat at the table. When she is here she touches nothing
but the dessert. When I was ten I ate everything or not at all.
But there is no longer any discipline, not only with children but
everywhere."

"There is a little freedom, though," Rosalie suggested.

His manner clearly showed displeasure, almost contempt, and he turned
to Miss Beggs. "What do you think?" he demanded. "I understand you have
been a school-teacher."

"Oh, you are quite right," she responded; "at least about children, and
it is clear from them that most parents are idiotically lax." A blaze of
discontent, loathing, surprisingly invaded her pallid face.

"A rod of iron," August recommended.

The contrast between his wife and Miss Beggs recurred, intensified--one
an absolute wreck and the other as solidly slender as a birch tree. Fate
had played a disgusting trick on him. In the prime of his life he was
tied to a hopeless invalid. It put an unfair tension on him. Women were
charming, gracious--or else they were nothing. If Emmy's money had been
an assistance at first he had speedily justified its absorption in the
business. She owed him, her husband, everything possible. He suddenly
pictured mountains of bread, bread towering up into the clouds, fragrant
and appetizing; and Emmy, a thing of bones, gazing wistfully at it.
August Turnbull, with a feeling like panic, brushed the picture from his
mind.

The dessert was apparently a bomb of frozen coffee, but the center
revealed a delicious creamy substance flaked with pistache. The cold
sweet was exactly what he craved, and he ate it rapidly in a curious
mounting excitement. With the coffee he fingered the diminutive glass
of golden brandy and a long dark roll of oily tobacco. He lighted this
carefully and flooded his head with the coiling bluish smoke. Rosalie
was smoking a cigarette--a habit in women which he noisily denounced.
She extinguished it in an ash tray, but his anger lingered, an
unreasoning exasperation that constricted his throat. Sharply aware of
the sultriness of the evening he went hastily out to the veranda.

Morice following him with the evening paper volunteered, "I see German
submarines are operating on the Atlantic coast."

His father asserted: "This country is due for a lesson. It was anxious
enough to get into trouble, and now we'll find how it likes some severe
instruction. All the news here is bluff--the national asset. What I hope
is that business won't be entirely ruined later."

"The Germans will get the lesson," Rosalie unexpectedly declared at his
shoulder.

"You don't know what you're talking about," he replied decidedly. "The
German system is a marvel, one of the wonders of civilization."

She turned away, lightly singing a line from one of her late numbers:
"I've a Yankee boy bound for Berlin."

Morice stirred uneasily. "They got a Danish tanker somewhere off
Nantucket," he continued impotently.

August Turnbull refused to be drawn into further speech; he inhaled his
cigar with a replete bodily contentment. The oppression of dinner was
subsiding. His private opinion of the war was that it would end without
a military decision--he regarded the German system as unsmashable--and
then, with France deleted and England swamped in internal politics, he
saw an alliance of common sense between Germany and the United States.
The present hysteria, the sentimentality he condemned, could not
continue to stand before the pressure of mercantile necessity. After
all, the entire country was not made up of fools.

Morice and his wife wandered off to the boardwalk, and he, August,
must have fallen asleep, for he suddenly sat up with a sensation of
strangeness and dizzy vision.

He rose and shook it off. It was still light, and he could see Bernard
at his automobile, parked before the latter's cottage.

The younger man caught sight of August at the same moment and called:
"We are going to a cafe with the Rathes; will you come?"

He was still slightly confused, his head full, and the ride, the gayety
of the crowd, he thought, would do him good.

"Be over for you," the other added; and later he was crowded into a rear
seat between Louise, his daughter, and Caroline Rathe.

Louise was wearing the necklace of platinum and diamonds Bernard Foster
had given her last Christmas. It was, August admitted to himself,
a splendid present, and must have cost eighteen or twenty thousand
dollars. The Government had made platinum almost prohibitive. In things
of this kind--the adornment of his wife, of, really, himself, the
extension of his pride--Bernard was extremely generous. It was in the
small affairs such as gasoline that he was prudent.

Both Caroline Rathe and Louise were handsome women handsomely dressed;
he was seated in a nest of soft tulle and ruffled embroidery, of pliant
swaying bodies. Their satin-shod feet had high sharp insteps in films
of black lace and their fingers glittered with prismatic stones. Bernard
was in front with the chauffeur, and Frederick Rathe occupied a small
seat at the knees of the three others. He had not made his money, as had
August and Bernard, but inherited it with a huge brewery. Frederick was
younger than the other men too; but his manner was, if anything, curter.
He said things about the present war that made even August Turnbull
uneasy.

He was an unusual youth, not devoted to sports and convivial
pleasures--as any one might infer, viewing his heavy frame and
wealth--but something of a reader. He quoted fragments from
philosophical books about the will-to-power and the _Uebermensch_
that stuck like burrs in August Turnbull's memory, furnishing him with
labels, backing, for many of his personally evolved convictions and
experience.

They were soon descending the steps to the anteroom of the cafe, where
the men left their hats and sticks. As they entered the brilliantly
lighted space beyond a captain hurried forward. "Good evening,
gentlemen," he said servilely; "Mr. Turnbull----"

He ushered them to a table by the rope of an open floor for dancing and
removed a reserved card. There he stood attentively with a waiter at his
shoulder.

"What will you have?" Frederick Rathe asked generally. "For me nothing
but beer. Not the filthy American stuff." He turned to the servants. "If
you still have some of the other. You understand?"

"No beer for me!" Louise exclaimed.

"Champagne," the captain suggested.

She agreed, but Caroline had a fancy for something else. August Turnbull
preferred a Scotch whisky and soda. The cafe was crowded; everywhere
drinking multiplied in an illuminated haze of cigarettes. A slight
girl in an airy slip and bare legs was executing a furious dance with a
powdered youth on the open space. The girl whirled about her partner's
head, a rigid shape in a flutter of white.

They stood limply answering the rattle of applause that followed. A
woman in an extravagantly low-cut gown took their place, singing. There
was no possibility of mistaking her allusions; August smiled broadly,
but Louise and Caroline Rathe watched her with an unmoved sharp
curiosity. In the same manner they studied other women in the cafe; more
than once August Turnbull hastily averted his gaze at the discovery that
his daughter and he were intent upon the same individual.

"The U-boats are at it again," Bernard commented in a lowered voice.

"And, though it is war," Frederick added, "every one here is squealing
like a mouse. 'Ye are not great enough to know of hatred and envy,'" he
quoted. "'It is the good war which halloweth every cause.'"

"I wish you wouldn't say those things here," his wife murmured.

"'Thou goest to women?'" he lectured her with mock solemnity. "'Do not
forget thy whip!'"

The whisky ran in a burning tide through August Turnbull's senses. His
surroundings became a little blurred, out of focus; his voice sounded
unfamiliar, as though it came from somewhere behind him. Fresh buckets
of wine were brought, fresh, polished glasses. His appetite revived, and
he ordered caviar. Beyond, a girl in a snake-like dress was breaking a
scarlet boiled lobster with a nut cracker; her cigarette smoked on the
table edge. Waiters passed bearing trays of steaming food, pitchers of
foaming beer, colorless drinks with bobbing sliced limes, purplish sloe
gin and sirupy cordials. Bernard's face was dark and there was a splash
of champagne on his dinner shirt. Louise was uncertainly humming a
fragment of popular song. The table was littered with empty plates and
glasses. Perversely it made August think of Emmy, his wife, and acute
dread touched him at the mockery of her wasting despair.

III

The following morning, Thursday, August Turnbull was forced to go into
the city. He drove to the Turnbull Bakery in a taxi and dispatched his
responsibilities in time for luncheon uptown and an early afternoon
train to the shore. The bakery was a consequential rectangle of brick,
with the office across the front and a court resounding with the
shattering din of ponderous delivery trucks. All the vehicles, August
saw, bore a new temporary label advertising still another war bread;
there was, too, a subsidiary patriotic declaration: "Win the War With
Wheat."

He was, as always, fascinated by the mammoth trays of bread, the
enormous flood of sustenance produced as the result of his energy and
ability. Each loaf was shut in a sanitary paper envelope; the popular
superstition, sanitation, had contributed as much as anything to his
marked success. He liked to picture himself as a great force, a
granary on which the city depended for life; it pleased him to think of
thousands of people, men, women and children, waiting for his loaves or
perhaps suffering through the inability to buy them.

August left a direction for a barrel of superlative flower to be sent to
his cottage, and then with a curious feeling of expectancy he departed.
He was unable to grasp the cause of his sudden impatience to be again
at the sea. On the train, in the Pullman smoking compartment, his coat
swinging on a hook beside him, the vague haste centered surprisingly
about the person of Miss Beggs. At first he was annoyed by the reality
and persistence of her image; then he slipped into an unquestioning
consideration of her.

Never had he seen a more healthy being, and that alone, he told himself,
was sufficient to account for his interest. He liked marked physical
well-being; particularly, he added, in women. A sick wife, for example,
was the most futile thing imaginable; a wife should exist for the
comfort and pleasure of her husband. What little Miss Beggs--her name,
he now remembered from the checks made out for her, was Meta Beggs--had
said was as vigorous as herself. He realized that she had a strong,
even rebellious personality. That, in her, however, should not be
encouraged--an engaging submission was the becoming attitude for her
sex.

He proceeded immediately into the ocean, puffing strenuously and gazing
about. No women could be seen. They never had any regularity of
habit, he complained silently. After dinner--a surfeit of tenderloin
Bordelaise--he walked up the short incline to the boardwalk, where
on one of the benches overlooking the sparkling water he saw a slight
familiar figure. It was Miss Beggs. Her eyes dwelt on him momentarily
and then returned to the horizon.

"You are a great deal alone," he commented on the far end of the bench.

"It's because I choose to be," she answered sharply.

An expression of displeasure was audible in his reply, "You should have
no trouble."

"I ought to explain," she continued, her slim hands clasped on shapely
knees; "I mean that I can't get what I want."

"So you prefer nothing?"

She nodded.

"That's different," August Turnbull declared. "Anybody could see you're
particular. Still, it's strange you haven't met--well, one that suited
you."

"What good would it do me--a school-teacher, and now a companion!"

"You might be admired for those very things."

"Yes, by old ladies, male and female. Not men. There's just one
attraction for them."

"Well----"

She turned now and faced him with a suppressed bitter energy. "Clothes,"
she said.

"That's nonsense!" he replied emphatically. "Dress is only incidental."

"When did you first notice me?" she demanded. "In bathing. That bathing
suit cost more than any two of my dresses. It is absolutely right."
August was confused by the keenness of her perception. It wasn't proper
for a woman to understand such facts. He was at a loss for a reply.
"Seven men spoke to me in it on one afternoon. It is no good for you
to try to reassure me with platitudes; I know better. I ought to, at
least."

August Turnbull was startled by the fire of resentment smoldering under
her still pale exterior. Why, she was like a charged battery. If he
touched her, he thought, sparks would fly. She was utterly different
from Emmy, as different as a live flame from ashes.

It was evident that having at last spoken she intended to unburden
herself of long-accumulated passionate words.

"All my life I've had to listen to and smile sweetly at ridiculous
hypocrisies. I have had to teach them and live them too. But now I'm so
sick of them I can't keep it up a month longer. I could kill some one,
easily. In a world where salvation for a woman is in a pair of slippers
I have to be damned. If I could have kept my hair smartly done up and
worn sheer batiste do you suppose for a minute I'd be a companion to
Mrs. Turnbull? I could be going out to the cafes in a landaulet."

"And looking a lot better than most that do," he commented without
premeditation.

She glanced at him again, and he saw that her eyes were gray, habitually
half closed and inviting.

"I've had frightfully bad luck," she went on; "once or twice when
it seemed that I was to have a chance, when it appeared
brighter--everything went to pieces."

"Perhaps you want too much," he suggested.

"Perhaps," she agreed wearily; "ease and pretty clothes and--a man." She
added the latter with a more musical inflection than he had yet heard.

"Of course," he proceeded importantly, "there are not a great many men.
At least I haven't found them. As you say, most people are incapable of
any power or decision. I always maintain it's something in the country.
Now in----" He stopped, re-began: "In Europe they are different. There a
man is better understood, and women as well."

"I have never been out of America," Miss Beggs admitted.

"But you might well have been," he assured her; "you are more
Continental than any one else I can think of."

He moved toward the middle of the bench and she said quickly: "You must
not misunderstand. I am not cheap nor silly. It might have been better
for me." She addressed the fading light on the sea. "Silly women, too,
do remarkably well. But I am not young enough to change now." She rose,
gracefully drawn against space; her firm chin was elevated and her hands
clenched. "I won't grow old this way and shrivel like an apple," she
half cried.

It would be a pity, he told himself, watching her erect figure diminish
over the boardwalk. He had a feeling of having come in contact with an
extraordinarily potent force. By heaven, she positively crackled! He
smiled, thinking of the misguided people who had employed her, ignorant
of all that underlay that severe prudent manner. At the same time he was
flattered that she had confided in him. It was clear she recognized
that he, at least, was a man. He was really sorry for her--what an
invigorating influence she was!

She had spoken of being no longer young--something over thirty-five he
judged--and that brought the realization that he was getting on. A few
years now, ten or twelve, and life would be behind him. It was a
rare and uncomfortable thought. Usually he saw himself as at the most
desirable age--a young spirit tempered by wisdom and experience. But
in a flash he read that his prime must depart; every hour left was
priceless.

The best part of this must be dedicated to a helpless invalid; a strong
current of self-pity set through him. But it was speedily lost in a more
customary arrogance. August Turnbull repeated the favorite aphorisms
from Frederick Rathe about the higher man. If he believed them at all,
if they applied to life in general they were equally true in connection
with his home; in short--his wife. Emmy Turnbull couldn't really be
called a wife. There should be a provision to release men from such
bonds.

It might be that the will-to-power would release itself. In theory
that was well enough, but practically there were countless small
difficulties. The strands of life were so tied in, one with another.
Opinion was made up of an infinite number of stupid prejudices. In
short, no way presented itself of getting rid of Emmy.

His mind returned to Meta Beggs. What a woman she was! What a triumph to
master her contemptuous stubborn being!

IV

At least, August reflected with a degree of comfort at breakfast,
Emmy didn't come down in the morning; she hadn't enough strength. He
addressed himself to the demolishment of a ripe Cassaba melon. It melted
in his mouth to the consistency of sugary water. His coffee cup had a
large flattened bowl, and pouring in the ropy cream with his free hand
he lifted the silver cover of a dish set before him. It held spitted
chicken livers and bacon and gave out an irresistible odor. There were,
too, potatoes chopped fine with peppers and browned; and hot delicately
sweetened buns. He emptied two full spits, renewed his coffee and
finished the potatoes.

With a butter ball at the center of a bun he casually glanced at the
day's paper. The submarines, he saw, were operating farther south. A
small passenger steamer, the _Veronica_ had been torpedoed outside the
Delaware Capes.

A step sounded in the hall, and Louise entered the dining room, clad
all in white with the exception of a closely fitting yellow hat. After
a moment Victorine, a girl small for her age, with a petulant satiated
expression, followed.

"It's a shame," Louise observed, "that with Morice and his wife in the
cottage you have to breakfast alone. I suppose all those theatrical
people get up at noon."

"Not quite," Rosalie told her from the doorway.

Louise made no reply other than elevating her brows. Victorine looked at
the other with an exact mirroring of her mother's disdain.

"Good morning," Morice said indistinctly, hooking the collar of his
uniform. "It's a bloody nuisance," he asserted. "Why can't they copy the
English jacket?"

"It is much better looking," Louise added.

"Well," Rosalie proclaimed, "I'm glad to see Morice in any; even if it
means nothing more than a desk in the Quartermaster's Department."

"That is very necessary," August Turnbull spoke decidedly.

"Perhaps," she agreed.

"I think it is bad taste to raise such insinuations." Louise was severe.

"An army," August put in, "travels on its stomach. As Louise
suggests--we must ask you not to discuss the question in your present
tone." Morice's wife half-audibly spoke into her melon, and his face
reddened. "What did I understand you to say?" he demanded.

"Oh, 'Swat the fly!'" Rosalie answered hardily.

"Not at all!" he almost shouted. "What you said was 'Swat the Kaiser!'"

"Well, swat him!"

"It was evident, also, that you did not refer to the Emperor of
Germany--but to me."

"You said it," she admitted vulgarly. "If any house ever had a
Hohenzollern this has."

"Shut up, Rosalie!" her husband commanded, perturbed; "you'll spoil
everything."

"It might be better if she continued," Louise Foster corrected him.
"Perhaps then we'd learn something of this--this beauty."

"I got good money for my face anyhow," Rosalie asserted. "And no cash
premium went with it either. As for going on, I'll go." She turned to
August Turnbull: "I've been stalling round here for nearly a year with
Morice scared to death trying to get a piece of change out of you. Now
I'm through; I've worked hard for a season's pay, but this is slavery.
What you want is an amalgamated lady bootblack and nautch dancer. You're
a joke to a free white woman. I'm sorry for your wife. She ought to slip
you a bichloride tablet. If it was worth while I'd turn you over to the
authorities for breaking the food regulations."

She rose, unceremoniously shoving back her chair. "For a fact, I'm tired
of watching you eat. You down as much as a company of good boys on the
march. Don't get black in the face; I'd be afraid to if I were you."

August Turnbull's rage beat like a hammer at the base of his head. He,
too, rose, leaning forward with his napkin crumpled in a pounding fist.

"Get out of my house!" he shouted.

"That's all right enough," she replied; "the question is--is Morice
coming with me? Is that khaki he has on or a Kate Greenaway suit?"

Morice looked from one to the other in obvious dismay. He had a pleasant
dull face and a minute spiked mustache on an irresolute mouth.

"If you stay with me," she warned him further, "I'll have you out of
that grocery store and into a trench."

"Pleasant for you, Morice," Louise explained.

"Things were so comfortable, Rosalie," he protested despairingly. "What
in the name of sense made you stir this all up? The governor won't do a
tap for us now."

His wife stood by herself, facing the inimical Turnbull front, while
Morice wavered between.

"If you'll get along," the former told him, "I can make a living till
you come back. We can do without any Truebner money. I'm not a lot at
German, but I guess you can understand me," she again addressed August.
"Not that I blame you for the change, such as it is."

"I'll have to go with her," Morice unhappily declared.

August Turnbull's face was stiff with congestion. The figures before him
wavered in a sort of fog. He put out a hand, supporting himself on the
back of his chair.

"Get out of my house," he repeated in a hoarse whisper.

Fortunately Morice's leave had come to an end, and Rosalie and he
withdrew in at least the semblance of a normal departure. August's rage
changed to an indignant surprise, and he established himself with a
rigid dignity on the veranda. There, happening on a cigar that burned
badly, he was reduced to a state of further self-commiseration. That is,
he dwelt on the general deterioration of the world about him. There was
no discipline; there was no respect; authority was laughed at. All this
was the result of laxness, of the sentimentality he condemned; a firmer
hand was needed everywhere.

He turned with relief to the contemplation of Meta Beggs; she was
enormously satisfactory to consider. August watched her now with the
greatest interest; he even sat in his wife's room while her companion
moved silently and gracefully about. Miss Beggs couldn't have noticed
this, for scarcely ever did her gaze meet his; she had a habit of
standing lost in thought, her slimness a little drooping, as if she
were weary or depressed. She was in his mind continually--Miss Beggs and
Emmy, his wife.

The latter had a surprising power to disturb him; lately he had even
dreamed of her starving to death in the presence of abundant food. He
began to be superstitious about it, to think of her in a ridiculous
nervous manner as an evil design on his peace and security. She seemed
unnatural with her shrunken face bowed opposite him at the table. His
feeling for her shifted subconsciously to hatred. It broke out publicly
in sardonic or angry periods under which she would shrink away,
incredibly timid, from his scorn. This quality of utter helplessness
gave the menace he divined in her its illusive air of unreality. She
seemed--she was--entirely helpless; a prematurely aged woman, of the
mildest instincts, dying of malnutrition.

Miss Beggs now merged into all his daily life, his very fiber. He
regarded her in an attitude of admirable frankness. "Still it is
extraordinary you haven't married."

The tide was out, it was late afternoon, and they were walking over the
hard exposed sand. Whenever she came on a shell she crushed it with a
sharp heel.

"There were some," she replied indifferently.

He nodded gravely. "It would have to be a special kind of man," he
agreed. "An ordinary individual would be crushed by your personality.
You'd need a firm hand."

Her face was inscrutable. "I have always had the misfortune to be too
late," she told him.

"I wish I had known you sooner!" he exclaimed.

Her arms, in transparent sleeves, were like marble. His words
crystallized an overwhelming realization of how exactly she was
suited to him. The desire to shut her will in his hand increased a
thousandfold.

"Yes," she said, "I would have married you. But there's no good
discussing it." She breathed deeply with a sinking forward of her
rounded shoulders. All her vigor seemed to have left her. "I have been
worried about Mrs. Turnbull lately," she went on. "Perhaps it's my
imagination--does she look weaker to you?"

"I haven't noticed," he answered brusquely.

Curiously he had never thought of Emmy as dying; she appeared eternal,
without the possibility of offering him the relief of such freedom as
yet remained. Freedom for--for Meta Beggs.

"The doctor was at the cottage again Thursday," she informed him. "I
didn't hear what he said."

"Humbugs," August Turnbull pronounced.

A sudden caution invaded him. It would be well not to implicate himself
too far with his wife's companion. She was a far shrewder woman than was
common; there was such a thing as blackmail. He studied her privately.
Damn it, what a pen he had been caught in! Her manner, too, changed
immediately, as though she had read his feeling.

"I shall have to go back."

She spoke coldly. A moment before she had been close beside him, but now
she might as well have been miles away.

V

The fuse of the electric light in the dining room burned out, and dinner
proceeded with only the illumination of the silk-hooded candles. In the
subdued glow Meta Beggs was infinitely attractive. His wife's place was
empty. Miss Beggs had brought apologetic word from Emmy that she felt
too weak to leave her room. A greater degree of comfort possessed August
Turnbull than he had experienced for months. With no one at the table
but the slim woman on the left and himself a positive geniality radiated
from him. He pressed her to have more champagne--he had ordered that
since she preferred it to Rhine wine--urged more duckling, and ordered
the butler to leave the brandy decanter before them.

She laughed--a rare occurrence--and imitated, for his intense amusement,
Mrs. Frederick Rathe's extreme cutting social manner. He drank more than
he intended, and when he rose his legs were insecure. He made his way
toward Meta Beggs. She stood motionless, her thin lips like a thread of
blood on her tense face.

"What a wife you'd make!" he muttered.

There was a discreet cough at his back, and swinging about he saw a maid
in a white starched cap and high cuffs.

"Excuse me, sir," she said; "Mrs. Turnbull wants to know would you
please come up to her room."

He swayed slightly, glowering at her with a hot face in which a vein
throbbed persistently at his temple. Miss Beggs had disappeared.

"Very well," he agreed heavily.

Mounting the stairs he fumbled for his cigar case, and entered the
chamber beyond his, clipping the end from a superlative perfecto.

Emmy was in bed, propped up on a bank of embroidered pillows. A light
from one side threw the shadow of her head on a wall in an animated
caricature of life.

"I didn't want to disturb you, August."

Her voice was weak and apologetic. He stood irritably beside her.

"It's hot in here." His wife at once detected whatever assaulted his
complete comfort. She fell into a silence that strained his patience to
the utmost.

When at last she spoke it was in a tone of voice he had never heard from
her--impersonal, with at the same time a note of fear like the flutter
of a bird's wing.

"The doctor has been here two or three times lately. I didn't want to
bother you, and he said----"

She broke off, and her hand raised from her side in a gesture of
seeking. He held it uncomfortably, wishing that the occasion would
speedily end.

"August, I've--I've got to leave you."

He did not comprehend her meaning, and stood stupidly looking down at
her spent face. "I'm going to die, August, almost any time now. I wanted
to tell you first when we were quietly together; and then Louise and
Bernard must know."

His sensations were so confused, the mere shock of such an announcement
had so confounded him that he was unable to penetrate the meaning of the
sudden expansion of his blood. His attention strayed from the actuality
of his wife to the immaterial shadow wavering on the wall. There Emmy's
profile, grotesquely enlarged and sharpened, grimaced at him. August
Turnbull's feelings disentangled and grew clearer, there was a
conventional memory of his wife as a young woman, the infinitely sharper
realization that soon he must be free, a vision of Meta Beggs as she had
been at dinner that night, and intense relief from nameless strain.

He moved through the atmosphere of suspense that followed the knowledge
of Emmy's condition with a feeling of being entirely apart from his
family. Out of the chaos of his emotions the sense of release was most
insistent. Naturally he couldn't share it with any one else, not at
present. He avoided thinking directly of Meta Beggs, partly from the
shreds of the superstitious dread that had once colored his attitude
toward his wife and partly from the necessity to control what otherwise
would sweep him into a resistless torrent. However, most of his
impatience had vanished--a little while now, and in a discreet manner he
could grasp all that he had believed so hopelessly removed.

Except for the occasions of Louise's informal presence he dined alone
with Miss Beggs. They were largely silent, attacking their plates with
complete satisfaction. On the day of her monthly payment he drew the
check for a thousand dollars in place of the stipulated hundred, and
gave it to her without comment. She nodded, managing to convey entire
understanding and acceptance of what it forecast. Once, at the table, he
called her Meta.

She deliberated a reply--he had asked her opinion about British bottled
sauces--but when she answered she called him Mr. Turnbull. This, too,
pleased him. She had an unerring judgment in the small affairs of
deference. Dinner had been better than usual, and he realized he had
eaten too much. His throat felt constricted, he had difficulty in
swallowing a final gulp of coffee; the heavy odors of the dining room
almost sickened him.

"We'll get out on the beach," he said abruptly; "a little air."

They proceeded past the unremitting sprinklers on the strip of lawn to
the wide gray sweep of sand. At that hour no one else was visible, and
a new recklessness invaded his discomfort. "You see," he told her, "that
bad luck of yours isn't going to hold."

"It seems incredible," she murmured. She added without an appearance of
the least ulterior thought: "Mrs. August Turnbull."

"Exactly," he asserted.

A triumphant conviction of pleasure to come surged through him like a
subtle exhilarating cordial.

"I'll take no nonsensical airs from Louise or the Rathes," he
proclaimed.

"Don't let that worry you," she answered serenely.

He saw that it need not, and looked forward appreciatively to a scene in
which Meta would not come off second.

Above them the long curve of the boardwalk was empty, with, behind it,
the suave ornamental roofs of the cottages. A wind quartering from
the shore had smoothed the ocean into the semblance of a limitless and
placid lake. Minute waves ruffled along the beach with a continuous
whispering, and the vault of the west, from which the sun had just
withdrawn, was filled with light the color of sauterne wine.

It was inconceivable to August Turnbull that soon Emmy would be gone out
of his life. He shook his thick shoulders as if by a gesture to unburden
himself of her unpleasant responsibility. He smiled slightly at the
memory of how he had come to fear her. It had been the result of the
strain he was under; once more the vision of mountainous bread and Emmy
returned. The devil was in the woman!

"What are you smiling at?" Meta asked.

"Perhaps it was because my luck, as well, has changed," he admitted.

She came close up to him, quivering with emotion.

"I want everything!" she cried in a vibrant hunger; "everything! Do you
understand? Are you willing? I'm starved as much as that woman up in her
bed. Can you give me all the gayety, all the silks and emeralds there
are in the world?"

He patted her shoulder. "You'll look like a Christmas tree. When this
damned war is over we will go to Europe, to Berlin and Munich. They have
the finest streets and theaters and cafes in the world. There things are
run by men for men. The food is the best of all--no French fripperies,
but solid rare cuts. Drinking is an art----"

"What is that out in the water?" she idly demanded.

He gazed impatiently over the unscored tide and saw a dark infinitesimal
blot.

"I have been watching it for a long while," she continued. "It's coming
closer, I think."

He again took up his planning.

"We'll stay two or three years; till things get on their feet here. Turn
the bakery into a company. No work, nothing but parties."

"Do look!" she repeated. "It's coming in--a little boat. I suppose it is
empty."

The blot was now near enough for him to distinguish its outline. As Meta
said, no one was visible. It was drifting. Against his wish his gaze
fastened on the approaching boat. It hesitated, appeared to swing away,
and then resumed the progress inshore.

"I believe it will float into that cut in the beach below," he told her.

His attention was divided between the craft and the image of all
the pleasures he would introduce to Meta--Turnbull. It was a lucky
circumstance that he had plenty of money, for he realized that she would
not marry a poor man. This was not only natural but commendable. Poor
men were fools, too weak for success; only the strong ate white bread
and had fine women, only the masterful conquered circumstance.

"Come," she said, catching his hand; "it's almost here."

She half pulled him over the glistening wet sand to where the deeper
water thrust into the beach. Her interest was now fully communicated to
him.

"We must drag it safely up," he articulated, out of breath from her
eagerness. The bow swept into the onward current, it moved more
swiftly, and then sluggishly settled against the bottom. Painted on its
blistering white side was a name, "_Veronica_," and "Ten persons."
There was a slight movement at the rail, and a sharp unreasoning horror
gripped August Turnbull.

"Something in it," he muttered. He wanted to turn away, to run from the
beach; but a stronger curiosity dragged him forward. Not conscious of
stepping through shallow water he advanced.

A hunger-ravished dead face was turned to him from the bottom, a huddle
of bony joints, dried hands. There were others--all dead, starved. In
a red glimmer he saw the incredible travesty of a child, a lead-colored
woman, shriveled and ageless from agony.

He fell back with a choking cry, "Emmy!"

There was a dull uproar in his head, and then a violent shock at the
back of his brain. August Turnbull's body slid down into the tranquil
ripples that ran along the boat's side.




ROSEMARY ROSELLE


It would be better for my purpose if you could hear the little clear
arpeggios of an obsolete music box, the notes as sweet as barley sugar;
for then the mood of Rosemary Roselle might steal imperceptibly into
your heart. It is made of daguerreotypes blurring on their misted
silver; tenebrous lithographs--solemn facades of brick with classic
white lanterns lifted against the inky smoke of a burning city; the
pages of a lady's book, elegant engravings of hooped and gallooned
females; and the scent of crumbled flowers.

Such intangible sources must of necessity be fragile--a perfume linked
to a thin chime, elusive faces on the shadowy mirror of the past,
memories of things not seen but felt in poignant unfathomable emotions.
This is a magic different from that of to-day; here perhaps are only
some wistful ghosts brought back among contemptuous realities--a man in
a faded blue uniform with a face drawn by suffering long ended, a girl
whose charm, like the flowers, is dust.

It is all as remote as a smile remembered from youth. Such apparent
trifles often hold a steadfast loveliness more enduring than the
greatest tragedies and successes. They are irradiated by an imperishable
romance: this is my desire--to hold out an immaterial glamour, a vapor,
delicately colored by old days in which you may discover the romantic
and amiable shapes of secret dreams.

I

It will serve us best to see Elim Meikeljohn first as he walked across
Winthrop Common. It was very early in April and should have been
cool, but it was warm--already there were some vermilion buds on the
maples--and Elim's worn shad-belly coat was uncomfortably heavy. The
coat was too big for him--his father had worn it for twenty years before
he had given it to Elim for college--and it hung in somber greenish
folds about his tall spare body. He carried an equally oppressive black
stiff hat in a bony hand and exposed a gaunt serious countenance.

Other young men passing, vaulting lightly over the wooden rail that
enclosed the common, wore flowing whiskers, crisply black or brown like
a tobacco leaf; their luxuriant waistcoats were draped with a profusion
of chains and seals; but Elim's face was austerely shaved, he wore
neither brocade nor gold, and he kept seriously to the path.

He was, even more than usual, absorbed in a semi-gloom of thought. It
was his birthday, he was twenty-six, and he had been married more
than nine years. Already, with his inherited dark temperament, he was
middle-aged in situation and feeling. He had been assistant to the
professor of philosophy and letters for three of those married years;
yes--he had been graduated when he was twenty-three. He arrived at an
entrance to the common that faced the row of houses where he had his
room, and saw that something unusual was in progress.

The front of his boarding house was literally covered with young men:
they hung over the small portico from steps to ridge, they bulged from
every window and sat astride of the dormer windows in the roof. Before
them on the street a camera had been set up and was covered, all save
the snout, by a black rubber cloth, backward from which projected the
body and limbs of the photographer.

The latter, Elim realized, was one of a traveling band that took
pictures of whatever, on their way, promised sufficient pecuniary
return. Here the operator had been in luck--he would sell at least
thirty photographs at perhaps fifty cents each. Harry Kaperton, a great
swell, was in his window with his setter, Spot; his legs, clad in bags
with tremendous checks and glossy boots, hung outward. On the veranda
were Hinkle and Ben Willing, the latter in a stovepipe hat; others wore
stovepipes set at a rakish angle on one ear. They were all irrepressibly
gay, calling from roof to ground, each begging the photographer to focus
on his own particular charm.

Perhaps fifty cents--Elim Meikeljohn would have liked a place in the
picture; he would like to possess one, to keep it as a memento of the
youthful life that flowed constantly about him, but the probable cost
was prohibitive. He even wished, as he paused before making his way up
the crowded veranda steps, that some one would ask him to stay and
have his picture taken with the rest. He delayed, hoping for the mere
formality of this friendliness. But it was not forthcoming. He had felt
that it wouldn't be; he had divined the careless silence with which the
men moved aside for him to mount. There was even a muttered allusion
to his famous Scotch thrift, contained in a sharper word. Elim didn't
mind--actively. He had been accustomed to the utmost monetary caution
since the first dawn of his consciousness. He had come to regard the
careful weighing of pennies as an integral part of his being. It had
always been necessary for the Meikeljohns, father and son, on their
rocky pastures. He didn't mind, but at the same time he bore a faint
resentment at the injustice of the marked and perceptible disdain of the
majority of his fellows.

They didn't understand, he told himself, still ascending to his room in
the third floor back. Every cent that he could squeeze from his small
salary must go back to the support of the invalid, his wife. He had
never, of course, explained this to any one in Cambridge. They wouldn't
be particularly interested and, in addition, his daily companions seemed
far too young for such serious confidences. In reality Harry Kaperton
was three years older than Elim; and Kaperton had been pleasantly at
college, racing horses, for seven years; many others were Elim's age,
but the maturity of the latter's responsibility separated them.

In his room he took off his formal coat and nankeen waistcoat and hung
them on a pegged board. The room was bare, with two uncurtained windows
that afforded a glimpse of the shining river; it contained a small
air-tight stove, now cold and black, and a wood box, a narrow bed, a
deal table with a row of worn text-books and neatly folded papers, a
stand for water pitcher and basin, and two split-hickory Windsor chairs.
Now it was filled with an afternoon glow, like powdered gold, and the
querulously sweet piping of an early robin.

He dipped his face and hands in cooling water and, at the table, with
squared elbows, addressed himself to a set task.

II

Elim Meikeljohn laid before him a small docket of foolscap folded
lengthwise, each section separately indorsed in pale flowery ink, with a
feminine name, a class number and date. They were the weekly themes of
a polite Young Ladies' Academy in Richmond, sent regularly north for the
impressive opinion of a member of Elim's college faculty. The professor
of philosophy and letters had undertaken the task primarily; but, with
the multiplication of his duties, he had turned the essays over to Elim,
whose careful judgments had been sufficiently imposing to secure for him
a slight additional income.

He sat for a moment regarding the papers with a frown; then, with a
sudden movement, he went over the names that headed each paper. Two he
laid aside. They bore above their dates in March, eighteen sixty-one,
the name Rosemary Roselle.

He picked one up tentatively. It was called A Letter. Elim opened it
and regarded its tenuous violet script. Then, with an expression of
augmented determination, he folded it again and placed it with its
fellow at the bottom of the heap. He firmly attacked the topmost theme.
He read it slowly, made a penciled note in a small precise hand on
its margin, folded it once more and marked it with a C minus. He went
carefully through the pile, jotting occasional comments, judging the
results with A, B or C, plus or minus. Finally only the two he had
placed at the bottom remained.

Elim took one up again, gazing at it severely. He wondered what Rosemary
Roselle had written about--in her absurd English--this time. As he
looked at the theme's exterior, his attention shifted from the paper
to himself, his conscience towered darkly above him, demanding a
condemnatory examination of his feelings and impulses.

Had he not begun to look for, to desire, those essays from a doubtless
erroneous and light young woman? Had he not even, on a former like
occasion, awarded her effort with a B minus, when it was questionable
if she should have had a C plus? Had his conduct not been dishonest,
frivolous and wholly reprehensible? To all these inexorable accusations
he was forced to confess himself guilty. He had undoubtedly, only a few
minutes before, looked almost impatiently for something from Rosemary
Roselle. Beyond cavil she should have had an unadorned C last month. And
these easily proved him a broken reed.

He must at once take himself in hand, flames were reaching hungrily for
him from the pit of eternal torment. In a little more he would be damned
beyond any redemption. He was married ... shame! His thoughts turned to
Hester, his wife for nine and more years.

Her father's farm lay next to the Meikeljohns'; the two places formed
practically one convenient whole; and when Elim had been no more than a
child, Meikeljohn Senior and Hester's parents had solemnly agreed upon a
mutually satisfactory marriage. Hester had always been a thin pale slip
of a girl, locally famous for her memory and grasp of the Scriptures;
but it was only at her fourteenth year that her health began perceptibly
to fail, at the same time that a succession of material mischances
overwhelmed her family. Finally, borne down to actual privation, her
father decided to remove to another section and opportunity. He sold his
place for a fraction more than the elder Meikeljohn could pay ... but
there was Hester, now an invalid; and there was the agreement that
Meikeljohn had made when it had seemed to his advantage. The latter was
a rigidly upright man--he accepted for his son the responsibility he
himself had assumed, and Hester was left behind. Space in the
Meikeljohn household was valuable, the invalid presented many practical
difficulties, and, with the solemn concurrence of the elders of their
church, Elim--something short of seventeen but a grave mature-seeming
boy--and Hester were married.

The winter of his marriage Elim departed for college--his father was
a just man, who had felt obscurely that some reparation was due Elim;
education was the greatest privilege of which Meikeljohn could conceive,
so, at sacrifices that all grimly accepted, Elim was sent to Cambridge.
There, when he had been graduated, he remained--there were already more
at the Meikeljohn home than their labor warranted--assistant to the
professor of philosophy and letters.

Elim again opened the paper before him and spread it severely on the
table. The supposititious letter, "Two, Linden Row," opened in proper
form and spelling, addressed to "Dearest Elizabeth." Its progress,
however, soon wabbled, its periods degenerated into a confusion. It
endeavored to be casual, easy, but he judged it merely trivial. At
one paragraph, despite his resolution of critical impersonality, his
interest deepened:

"On Thursday we have to have ready a Theme to send off to Harvard.
Of course, every Thursday morning We, with one accord, begin to make
excuses. Well, the Dread Day rolls around to-morrow, and consequently
I am deep in the Slough of Despond. My only consolation is that our
Geniuses can't write regularly, but then the mood to write never
possesses me.... This week, in writing a comparison between Hamlet and
Antonio, I did succeed in jotting down something, but unfortunately I
found that I had said the same many times before, only about different
heroes. My tale of Woe----"

Elim once more took himself firmly in hand; he folded the paper
and sharply indorsed it with a C minus. Afterward he felt decidedly
uncomfortable. He wondered if Rosemary Roselle would be made unhappy by
the low marking? Probably she wouldn't care; probably all that occupied
her mind were dress and company. Possibly she danced--light, godless.

The haze within deepened; he could see through the window the tops of
the maples--they held a green sheen as if in promise of the leaves to
follow. The robin whistled faint and clear.

Possibly she danced. Carried away on the gracious flood of the
afternoon, he wondered what Rosemary Roselle looked like. He was certain
that she was pretty--her writing had the unconscious assurance of a
personable being. Well, he would never know.... Rosemary Roselle--the
name had a trick of hanging in the memory; it was astonishingly easy to
repeat. He tried it aloud, speaking with a sudden emphasis that startled
him. The name came back to him from the bare walls of his room like an
appeal. Something within him stirred sharp as a knife. He rose with a
deep breath, confused, as if some one else, unseen, had unexpectedly
spoken.

III

His conscience, stirring again, projected the image of Hester, with
her pinched glistening countenance, on his conjecturing. He resolutely
addressed himself to the judgment of Rosemary Roselle's second
paper, his lighter thoughts drowned in the ascending dark tide of his
temperament It was called Our Waitress, and an instant antagonism for
the entire South and its people swept over him.

He saw that the essay's subject was a negro, a slave; and all his
impassioned detestation of the latter term possessed him. The essence of
the Meikeljohns was a necessity for freedom, an almost bitter pride in
the independence of their bodies. Their souls they held to be under the
domination of a relentless Omnipotence, evolved, it might have been,
from the obdurate and resplendent granite masses of the highland where
they had first survived. These qualities gave to Elim Meikeljohn's
political enmity for the South a fervor closely resembling fanaticism.
Even now when, following South Carolina, six other states had seceded,
he did not believe that war would ensue; he believed that slavery would
be abolished at a lesser price; but he was a supporter of drastic means
for its suppression. His Christianity, if it held a book in one hand,
grasped a sword in the other, a sword with a bright and unsparing blade
for the wrong-doer.

He consciously centered this antagonism on Rosemary Roselle; he
visualized her as a thoughtless and capricious female, idling in vain
luxury, cutting with a hard voice at helpless and enslaved human beings.
He condemned his former looseness of being, his playing with insidious
and destructive forces. A phrase, "Babylonish women," crept into his
mind from some old yellow page. He read:

"Indy is a large light mulatto, very neat and very slow. She has not
much Sense, but a great deal of Sensibility. Helping her proves Fatal.
The more that is done for her the less well does she work.... Indy
is very unfortunate: going out with a present of money she lost every
penny. Of course she was incapable of work until the sum was replaced."

Elim paused with an impatient snort at this exhibition of shiftlessness.
If the negroes were not soon freed they would be ruined beyond
redemption. He read the remainder of the paper rigid and unapproving.
It gave, he considered, such an excellent picture of Southern iniquities
that he marked it B plus, the highest rating his responsibility had
allowed Rosemary Roselle. Now he was certain that her very name held
a dangerous potentiality--it came too easily to the tongue; it had a
wanton sound like a silk skirt.

The warm glow faded from the room; without, the tenuous and bare upper
branches of the maples wavered in the oncoming dusk. The river had
disappeared. Elim was acutely conscious of the approaching hour of
supper; and in preparation to go out to it he donned again the nankeen
waistcoat and solemn garment that had served his father so long and so
well.

IV

The following day was almost hot; at its decline coming across Winthrop
Common Elim was oppressed and weary. Nothing unusual was happening at
the boarding house; a small customary group was seated on the veranda
steps, and he joined it. The conversation hung exclusively to the
growing tension between North and South, to the forming of a Confederate
States of America in February, the scattered condition of the Union
forces, the probable fate of the forts in Charleston harbor.

The men spoke, according to their dispositions, with the fiery emphasis
or gravity common to great crises. The air was charged with a sense of
imminence, the vague discomfort of pending catastrophe. Elim listened
without comment, his eyes narrowed, his long countenance severe. Most
of the men had gone into Boston, to the Parker House, where hourly
bulletins were being posted. Those on the steps rose to follow, all
except Elim Meikeljohn--in Boston he knew money would be spent.

He went within, stopping to glance through a number of lately arrived
letters on a table and found one for himself, addressed in his father's
painstaking script. Alone, once more without his coat, he opened the
letter. Its beginning was commonplace--"My dear son, Elim"--but what
followed confused him by the totally unexpected shock it contained:
Hester, his wife, was dead.

At first he was unable to comprehend the details of what had happened to
him; the fact itself was of such disturbing significance. He had never
considered the possibility of Hester's dying; he had come to think
of her as a lifelong responsibility. She had seemed, in her invalid's
chair, withdrawn from the pressure of life as it bore upon others,
more enduring than his father's haggard concern over the increasing
difficulties of material existence and spiritual salvation, than his
mother's flushed toiling.

Elim had lived with no horizon wider than the impoverished daily
necessity; he had accepted this with mingled fatality and fortitude; any
rebellion had been immediately suppressed as a wicked reflection upon
Deity. His life had been ordered in this course; he had accepted it
the more readily from his inherited distrust of worldly values and
aspirations; it had, in short, been he, and now the foundations of his
entire existence had been overthrown.

He read the letter more carefully, realizing the probable necessity of
his immediate return home for the funeral. But that was dispelled--his
father wrote that it had been necessary to bury Hester at once. The
elder Meikeljohn proceeded relentlessly to an exact exposition of why
this had been done. "A black swelling" was included in the details. He
finished:

"And if it would be inconvenient for you to leave your work at this
time it is not necessary for you to come here. In some ways it would
be better for you to stay. There is little enough for you to do and it
would stop your money at college.... The Lord is a swift and terrible
Being Who worketh His will in the night."

Hester was dead. Elim involuntarily walked to a window, gazing with
unseeing eyes at the familiar pleasant prospect. A realization flashed
unbidden through his mind, a realization like a stab of lightning--he
was free. He overbore it immediately, but it left within him a strange
tingling sensation. He directed his mind upon Hester and the profitable
contemplation of death; but rebellion sprang up within him, thoughts
beyond control whirled in his brain.

Free! A hundred impulses, desires, of which--suppressed by his rigid
adherence to a code of duty--he had not been conscious, leaped into
vitality. His vision of life swung from its focus upon outward and
invisible things to a new surprising regard of his own tangible self. He
grew aware of himself as an entity, of the world as a broad and various
field of exploit and discovery.

There was, his father had bluntly indicated, no place for him at home;
and suddenly he realized that his duties at college had been a tedious
grind for inconsiderable return. This admission brought to him the
realization that he detested the whole thing--the hours in class; the
droning negligent recitations of the men; the professor of philosophy
and letters' pedantic display; the cramped academic spirit of the
institution. The vague resentment he had felt at the half-concealed
disdain of his fellows gave place to a fiery contempt for their
majority; the covert humility he had been forced to assume--by
the thought of Hester and the few miserable dollars of an inferior
position--turned to a bitter freedom of opinion.

The hour for supper approached and passed, but Elim did not leave his
room. He walked from wall to wall, by turns arrogant and lost in his new
situation. Of one thing he was certain--he would give up his occupation
here. It might do for some sniveling sycophant of learning and money,
but he was going forth to--what?

He heard footfalls in the bare hall below, and a sudden easy desire
for companionship seized him; he drew on the sturdy Meikeljohn coat and
descended the stairs to the lower floor. Harry Kaperton's door was
open and Elim saw the other moving within. He advanced, leaning in the
doorway.

"Back early," Elim remarked. "What's new at Parker's?"

Kaperton was unsuccessful in hiding his surprise at the other's
unexpected appearance and direct question. "Why--why, nothing when
I left;" then more cordially: "Come in, find a chair. Bottle on the
table--oh, I didn't think." He offered an implied apology to Elim's
scruples.

But Elim advanced to the table, where, selecting a decanter at random,
he poured out a considerable drink of pale spirits. Harry Kaperton
looked at him in foolish surprise.

"Had no idea you indulged!" he ejaculated. "Always took you to be a
severe Puritan duck."

"Scotch," Elim corrected him, "Presbyterian."

He tilted the glass and the spirits sank smoothly from sight. His throat
burned as if he had swallowed a mouthful of flame, but there was a
quality in the strong rum that accorded with his present mood: it was
fiery like his released sense of life. Kaperton poured himself a drink,
elevated it with a friendly word and joined Elim.

"I'm going home," the former proceeded. "You see, I live in Maryland,
and the situation there is getting pretty warm. We want to get our
women out of Baltimore, and our affairs conveniently shaped, before any
possible trouble. I had a message this evening to come at once."

The two men presented the greatest possible contrast--Harry Kaperton
had elegantly flowing whiskers, a round young face that expressed facile
excitement at a possible disturbance, and sporting garb of tremendous
emphasis. Elim's face, expressing little of the tumult within, harsh and
dark and dogged, was entirely appropriate to his somber greenish-black
dress. Kaperton gestured toward the bottle, and they took a second
drink, then a third.

Kaperton's face flushed, he grew increasingly voluble, but Elim
Meikeljohn was silent; the liquor made no apparent impression upon him.
He sat across the table from the other with his legs extended straight
before him. They emptied the decanter of spirits and turned to sherry,
anything that was left. Kaperton apologized profoundly for the depleted
state of his cellar--knowing that he was leaving, he had invited a party
of men to his room the night before. He was tremendously sorry that Elim
had been overlooked--the truth being that no one had known what a good
companion Elim was.

It seemed to Elim Meikeljohn, drinking sherry, that the night before he
had not existed at all. He did not analyze his new being, his surprising
potations; he was proceeding without a cautious ordering of his steps.
It was neither a celebration nor a protest, but instinctive, like the
indiscriminate gulping of a man who has been swimming under the water.

"Why," Kaperton gasped, "you've got a head like a cannon ball."

He rose and wandered unsteadily about, but Elim sat motionless, silent,
drinking. He was conscious now of a drumming in his ears like distant
martial music, a confused echo like the beat of countless feet. He
tilted his glass and was surprised to find it empty.

"It's all gone," Kaperton said dully.

He was as limp as an empty doll, Elim thought contemptuously. He, Elim,
felt like hickory, like iron; his mind was clear, vindicative. He rose,
sweeping back the hair from his high austere brow. Kaperton had slid
forward in his chair with hanging open hands and mouth.

The drumming in Elim's ears grew louder, a hum of voices was added to
it, and it grew nearer, actual. A crowd of men was entering the boarding
house, carrying about them a pressure of excited exclamations and a more
subtle disturbance. Elim Meikeljohn left Kaperton and went out into the
hall. An ascending man met him.

"War!" he cried. "The damned rebels have assaulted and taken Sumter!
Lincoln has called for fifty thousand volunteers!" He hurried past and
left Elim grasping the handrail of the stair.

War! The word carried an overwhelming significance to his mind dominated
by the intangible drumming, to his newly released freedom. War upon
oppression, upon the criminal slaveholders of the South! He descended
the stairs, pausing above the small agitated throng in the hall.

A passionate elation swept over him. He held his long arms upward and
out.

"How many of the fifty thousand are here?" he asked. His ringing voice
was answered in an assent that rolled in a solid volume of sound up the
stairs. Elim Meikeljohn's soul leaped in the supreme kinship that linked
him, man to man, with all.

V

It was again April, extremely early in the morning and month, and
thickly cold, when Brevet-Major Elim Meikeljohn, burning with the fever
of a re-opened old saber wound, strayed away from his command in the
direction of Richmond. His thoughts revolved with the rapidity of a
pinwheel, throwing off crackling ideas, illuminated with blinding spurts
and exploding colors, in every direction. A vague persistent pressure
sent him toward the city. It was being evacuated; the Union forces,
he knew, were to enter at dawn; but he had stumbled ahead, careless of
consequences, oblivious of possible reprisal.

He was, he recognized by the greater blackness ahead, near the outskirts
of the city--for Richmond was burning. The towering black mass of
smoke was growing more perceptible in the slowly lightening dawn. Elim
Meikeljohn could now hear the low sullen uprush of flames, the faint
crackling of timbers, and a hot aromatic odor met him in faint waves.

His scabbard beat awkwardly about his heels, and he impatiently unhooked
it and threw it into the gloom of the roadside. The service revolver was
still in its holster; but he had forgotten its presence and use. In
the multicolored confusion of his mind but one conscious impression
remained; and, in its reiteration, he said aloud, over and over, in dull
tones, "Two, Linden Row."

The words held no concrete meaning, they constructed no vision, embodied
no tangible desire; they were merely the mechanical expression of
an obscure and dominating impulse. He was hardly more sensate in his
progress than a nail drawn irresistibly by a magnet.

The gray mist dissolved, and his long haggard face grew visible; it had
not aged in the past four years of struggle--almost from boyhood it had
been marked with somber longitudinal lines--but it had grown keener,
more intense, with the expression of a man whose body had starved
through a great spiritual conflict. His uniform, creased and stained,
and now silvery with dew, flapped about a gaunt ironlike frame; and from
under the leather peak of his kepi, even in his fever, his eyes burned
steady and compelling.

Scattered houses, seemingly as unsubstantial as shadows, gathered about
him; they grew more frequent, joined shoulder to shoulder, and he was in
a city street. On the left he caught a glimpse of the river, solid and
smooth and unshining; a knot of men passed shouting hoarsely, and a wave
of heat swept over him like a choking cloth. Like the morning, his mind
partially cleared, people and scenes grew coherent. The former were a
disheveled and rioting rabble; the conflagration spread in lurid waves.

The great stores of the tobacco warehouses had been set on fire, and the
spanning flames threatened the entire city. The rich odor of the burning
tobacco leaves rolled over the streets in drifting showers of ruby
sparks. The groups on the streets resolved into individuals. Elim saw
a hulking woman, with her waist torn from grimy shoulders, cursing the
retreating Confederate troops with uplifted quivering fists; he saw
soldiers in gray joined to shifty town characters furtively bearing
away swollen sacks; carriages with plunging frenzied horses, a man with
white-faced and despairingly calm women. He stopped hurrying in the
opposite direction and demanded:

"Two, Linden Row?"

The other waved a vague arm toward the right and broke away.

The street mounted sharply and Elim passed an open space teeming with
hurrying forms, shrill with cries lost in the drumming roar of the
flames. Every third man was drunk. He passed fights, bestial grimaces,
heard the fretful crack of revolvers. The great storehouses were now
below him, and he could see the shuddering inky masses of smoke blotting
out quarter after quarter. He was on a more important thoroughfare now,
and inquired again:

"Two, Linden Row?"

This man ejaculated:

"The Yankees are here!" The fact seemed to stupefy him, and he stood
with hanging hands and mouth.

Elim Meikeljohn repeated his query and was answered by a negro who had
joined them.

"On ahead, capt'n," he volunteered; "fourth turn past the capitol and
first crossing."

The other regained his speech and began to curse the negro and Elim, but
the latter moved swiftly on.

Above him, through the shifting tenebrous banks, he saw a classic white
building on a patch of incredible greenery, infinitely remote; and then
from the center of the city came a deafening explosion, a great sullen
sheet of flame, followed by flashes like lightning in the settling
blackness.

"The powder magazines," Elim heard repeated from person to person. An
irregular file of Confederate soldiers galloped past him, and the echo
of their hoofs had hardly died before a troop of mounted Union cavalry,
with slanting carbines, rode at their heels. They belonged, Elim
recognized, to Kautz' command.

He had now reached the fourth turn beyond the withdrawn vision of
the capitol, and he advanced through a black snowing of soot. Flames,
fanlike and pallid, now flickered about his feet, streamed in the
gutters and lapped the curbs. He saw heaps of broken bottles against
the bricks, and the smell of fine spilled wines and liquors hung in his
nostrils. His reason again wavered--the tremendous spectacle of
burning assumed an apocalyptic appearance, as if the city had burst
spontaneously into flame from the passionate and evil spirits engendered
and liberated by war.

He stopped at the first crossing and saw before him a row of tall brick
houses, built solidly and set behind small yards and a low iron fencing.
They had shallow porticoes with iron grilling, and at this end a
towering magnolia tree swept its new glossy greenery against the
third-story windows.

"Linden Row," he muttered. "Well--Number Two?"

He swung back a creaking gate and went up a flight of bricked steps to
the door. He had guessed right; above a brass knocker filmed with the
floating muck of the air he saw the numeral, Two, painted beneath the
fanlight. The windows on the left were blank, curtained. The house rose
silent and without a mark of life above the obscene clamor of the city.
He knocked sharply and waited; then he knocked again. Nothing broke the
stillness of the facade, the interior. He tried the door, but it was
solidly barred. Then a second fact, a memory, joined the bare location
in his brain. It was a name--Rose--Rosemary Roselle. He beat with an
emaciated fist on the paneling and called, "Roselle! Roselle!"

There was a faint answering stir within; he heard the rattle of a chain;
the door swung back upon an apparently empty and cavernous cool hall.

VI

A colored woman, in a crisp white turban, with a strained face more gray
than brown, suddenly advanced holding before her in both hands a heavy
revolver of an outworn pattern. Elim Meikeljohn could see by her drawn
features that she was about to pull the trigger, and he said fretfully:

"Don't! The thing will explode. One of us will get hurt." She closed
her eyes, Elim threw up his arm, and an amazingly loud report crashed
through the entry. He stood swaying weakly, with hanging palms, while
the woman dropped the revolver with a gasp. Elim Meikeljohn began to cry
with short dry sobs.... It was incredible that any one should discharge
a big revolver directly at his head. He sank limply against a chest at
the wall.

"Oh, Indy!" a shaken voice exclaimed. "Do you think he's dying?" The
colored woman went reluctantly forward and peered at Elim. She touched
him on a shoulder.

"'Deed, Miss Rosemary," she replied, relieved and angry, "that shot
didn't touch a hair. He's just crying like a big old nothing." She
grasped him more firmly, gave him a shake. "Dressed like a soldier," she
proceeded scornfully, "and scaring us out of our wits. What did you want
to come here for anyhow calling out names?"

Elim's head rolled forward and back. The hall seemed full of flaming
arrows, and he collapsed slowly on the polished floor. He was moved; he
was half-conscious of his heels dragging upstairs, of frequent pauses,
voices expostulating and directing thinly. Finally he sank into a
sublimated peace in, apparently, a floating white cloud.

He awoke refreshed, mentally clear, but absurdly weak--he was lying in
the middle of a four-posted bed, a bed with posts so massive and tall
that they resembled smooth towering trees. Beyond them he could see
a marble mantel; a grate filled with softly smoldering coals, and a
gleaming brass hod; a highboy with a dark lustrous surface; oval gold
frames; and muslin curtains in an open window, stirring in an air that
moved the fluted valance at the top of the bed. It was late afternoon,
the light was fading, the interior wavering in a clear shadow filled
with the faint fat odor of the soft coal.

The immaculate bed linen bore an elusive cool scent, into which he
relapsed with profound delight. The personality of the room, somber and
still, flowed about him with a magical release from the inferno of
the past years, the last hours. He heard a movement at a door, and the
colored woman in the white turban moved to the side of the bed.

"I told her," she said in an aggrieved voice, "there wasn't nothing at
all wrong with you. I reckon now you're all ready to fight again or eat.
Why did you stir things all up in Richmond and kill good folks?"

"To set you free!" Elim Meikeljohn replied.

She gazed at him thoughtfully.

"Capt'n," she asked finally, "are you free?"

"Why, certainly----" he began, and then stopped abruptly, lost in the
memory of the dour past. He recalled his father, with a passion for
learning, imprisoned in the narrow poverty of his circumstances and
surroundings; he remembered Hester, with her wishful gaze in the
confines of her invalid chair; his own laborious lonely days. Freedom,
a high and difficult term, he saw concerned regions of the spirit not
liberated--solved--by a simple declaration on the body. The war had been
but the initial, most facile step. The woman had silenced his sounding
assertion, humiliated him, by a word. He gazed at her with a new, less
confident interest. The mental effort brought a momentary recurrence of
fever; he flushed and muttered: "Freedom ... spirit."

"You're not as wholesome as you appeared," the woman judged. "You can't
have nothing beside a glass of milk." She crossed the room and, stirring
the fire, put on fresh coal that ignited with an oily crackle. Again at
the door she paused. "Don't you try to move about," she directed; "you
stay right in this room. Mr. Roselle, he's downstairs, and Mr. McCall,
and--" her voice took on a faint insistent note of warning. He paid
little heed to her; he was lost in a wave of weariness.

The following morning, stronger, he rose and tentatively trying the
door found it locked. The colored woman appeared soon after with a
tray which, when he had performed a meager toilet, he attacked with a
pleasant zest.

"The city's just burning right up," she informed him, standing in the
middle of the floor; "the boats on the river caught fire and their
camions banged into Canal Street." She had a pale even color, a straight
delicate nose and sensitive lips.

"Are the Union troops in charge?" he asked.

"Yes, sir. They got some of the fire out, I heard tell. But that's not
the worst now--a body can't set her foot in the street, it's so full of
drunken roaring trash, black and white. It's good Mr. Roselle and Mr.
McCall and Mr. John are here," she declared again; "they could just
finish off anybody that offered to turn a bad hand."

This, Elim felt, was incongruous with his reception yesterday.

Still he made no inquiry. The breakfast finished, he relapsed once more
on his pillows and heard the key stealthily turn in the door from the
outside.

He told himself, without conviction, that he must rise and join his
command. The war, he knew, was over; the courage that had sustained him
during the struggle died. The simple question of the colored woman had
largely slain it. His own personality, the vision of his forthcoming
life and necessity, rose to the surface of his consciousness. Elim
realized what had drawn, him to his present situation--it had, of
course, been the memory of Rosemary Roselle. The days when he--an
assistant to a professor of philosophy and letters--had read and marked
her essays seemed to lie in another existence, infinitely remote. How
would he excuse his presence, the calling of her name before the house?
This was an inopportune--a fatal--moment for a man in the blue of the
North to make his bow to a Richmond girl, in the midst of her wasted and
burning place of home. He decided reluctantly that it would be best to
say nothing of his connection with her academic labors, but to depart
as soon as possible and without explanation of his first summons....
Rosemary Roselle--the name had clung persistently to his memory. It was
probable that he would see her--once. That alone was extraordinary. He
marveled at the grim humor of circumstance that had granted him such a
wildly improbable wish, and at the same time made it humanly impossible
for him to benefit from it.

VII

The leisurely progress of his thoughts was interrupted by hasty feet
without; the bolt was shot back and his door flung open. It was the
colored woman--the Indy of the essay--quivering with anger and fear.

"Capt'n," she exclaimed, gasping with her rapid accent, "you come right
down to the dining room, and bring that big pistol of yours. There's
two, two----" Words failed her. "Anyhow you shoot them! It's some
of that liberty you brought along, I reckon. You come down to Miss
Rosemary!"

She stood tense and ashen, and Elim rose on one elbow.

"Some of our liberty?" he queried. "Did Miss Roselle send for me?"

"No, sir, she didn't. Miss Rosemary she wouldn't send for you, not if
you were the last man alive. I'm telling you to come down to the dining
room.... We've tended you and--"

"Well," he demanded impatiently, "what do you want; whom shall I shoot?"

"You'll see, quick enough. And I can't stand here talking either; I've
got to go back. You get yourself right along down!"

With painful slowness Elim made his preparations to descend; his fingers
could hardly buckle the stiff strap of his revolver sling, but finally
he made his way downstairs through a deep narrow hall. He turned from a
blank wall to a darkened reception room, with polished mahogany, somber
books and engravings on the walls, and a rosy blur of fire in the
hearth. A more formal chamber lay at his right, empty, but through an
opposite door he caught the faint clatter of a spoon.

Rosemary Roselle was seated, rigid and white, at the end of a table that
bore a scattered array of dishes. There were shadows beneath her eyes,
and her hands, on the table, were clenched. On her left a man in
an unmarked blue uniform sat, sagging heavily forward in his chair,
breathing stertorously, with a dark flush over a pouched and flaccid
countenance. Opposite him, sitting formally upright, was a negro in a
carefully brushed gray suit, with a crimson satin necktie surcharged by
vivid green lightning. His bony face, the deep pits of his temples, were
the dry spongy black of charcoal, and behind steel-rimmed glasses his
eyes rolled like yellow agates. He glanced about, furtive and startled,
when Elim Meikeljohn entered, but he was immediately reassured by Elim's
disordered uniform. He made a solemn obeisance.

"Colonel," he said, "will you make one of a little informal repast? We
are, you see, at the lady's table."

Overcome by a sharp weakness, Elim slipped into the chair at his side
and faced Rosemary Roselle. The latter gave no sign of his presence.
She sat frozen into a species of statuesque rage. "Like you," the negro
continued pompously, "we invited ourselves. All things are free and easy
for all. The glorious principle of equality instituted lately has swept
away--swept away the inviderous distinctions of class and color. The
millenium has come!" He made a grandiloquent gesture with a sooty hand.

"'Ray!" the sodden individual opposite unexpectedly cried.

"We came in," the other continued, "to uphold our rights as the
exponents of--of----"

"You sneaked in the kitchen," the woman in the doorway interrupted; "and
I found you rummaging in the press."

"Silence!" the orator commanded. "Are you unaware of the dignity now
resting on your kinks--hair, hair." He rose, facing Elim Meikeljohn.
"Colonel, gentleman, in a conglomeration where we are all glorious
cohevals of--of--"

"Shut up!" said the apostrophized colonel, sudden and fretful. "Get
out!"

The orator paused, disconcerted, in the midflow of his figures; and
unaccustomed arrogance struggled with habitual servility. "Gentleman,"
he repeated, "in a corposity of souls high above all narrow
malignations--"

Elim Meikeljohn took his revolver from its holster and laid it before
him on the table. The weapon produced an electrical effect on the figure
nodding in a drunken stupor. He rose abruptly and uncertain.

"I'm going," he asserted; "come on, Spout. You can be free and equal
better somewheres else."

The negro hesitated; his hand, Elim saw, moved slightly toward a knife
lying by his plate. Elim's fingers closed about the handle of his
revolver; he gazed with a steady cold glitter, a thin mouth, at the
black masklike countenance above the hectic tie and neat gray suit.

The latter backed slowly, instinctively, toward the rear door. His
companion had already faded from view. The negro proclaimed:

"I go momentiously. There are others of us banded to obtain
equality irrespectable of color; we shall be back and things will
go different.... They have gone different in other prideful
domestications."

Elim Meikeljohn raised the muzzle lying on the cloth, and the negro
disappeared. Rosemary Roselle did not move; her level gaze saw,
apparently, nothing of her surroundings; her hands were still clenched
on the board. She was young, certainly not twenty, but her oval
countenance was capable of a mature severity not to be ignored. He
saw that she had wide brown eyes the color of a fall willow leaf, a
high-bridged nose and a mouth--at present--a marvel of contempt. Her
slight figure was in a black dress; she was without rings or ornamental
gold.

"That talking trash gave me a cold misery," the colored woman
admitted. She glanced at the girl and moved a bowl of salad nearer Elim
Meikeljohn. "Miss Rosemary," she begged, "take something, my heart."

Rosemary Roselle answered with a slow shudder; she slipped forward,
with her face buried in her arms on the table. Elim regarded her with
profound mingled emotions. In the fantastic past, when he had created
her from the studied essays, he had thought of her--censoriously--as
gay. Perhaps she danced! He wondered momentarily where the men were
Indy had spoken of as present; then he realized that they had been but
a precautionary figment of Indy's imagination; the girl, except for the
woman with the tender brown hand caressing her shoulder, was alone in
the house.

He sat with chin on breast gazing with serious speculation at the
crumpled figure opposite him. Indy, corroborating his surmise, said to
the girl:

"I can't make out at all why your papa don't come back. He said
yesterday when he left he wouldn't be hardly an hour."

"Something dreadful has happened," Rosemary Roselle insisted, raising a
hopeless face. "Indy, do you suppose he's dead like McCall and--and--"

"Mr. Roselle he ain't dead," the woman responded stoutly; "he's just had
to keep low trash from stealing all his tobacco."

"He could easily be found," Elim put in; "I could have an orderly
detailed, word brought you in no time." The girl paid not the slightest
heed to his proposal. From the street came a hoarse drunken shouting, a
small inflamed rabble streamed by. It wouldn't be safe to leave Rosemary
Roselle alone here with Indy. He recalled the threat of the black
pomposity he had driven from the house--it was possible that there were
others, banded, and that they would return. It was clear to him that he
must stay until its head reappeared, order had been reestablished--or,
if he went out, take the girl with him.

"You let the capt'n do what he says," the woman urged. Rosemary
Roselle's eyes turned toward Elim; it was, seemingly, the first time she
had become aware of his presence. She said in a voice delicately colored
by hate:

"Thank you, I couldn't think of taking the--the orderly from his
conquests."

"Then I'll find your father myself," Elim replied. "You will come with
me, of course; show me where to go. It would be a good thing to start at
once. I--we--might be of some assistance to him with his tobacco."

Indy declared with an expression of instant determination:

"We'll go right along with you." She silenced Rosemary's instinctive
protest. "I'll get your hat and shawl," she told the girl.

And, before the latter could object, the colored woman hurried from the
room.

Silence enveloped the two at the table. Elim replaced his revolver in
its belt. He had never before studied a girl like Rosemary Roselle; fine
white frills fell about her elbows from under the black short sleeves.
Her skin was incredibly smooth and white. It was evident that her hands
had never done manual labor; their pointed little beauty fascinated him.
He thought of the toil-hardened hands of the women of his home. This
girl represented all that he had been taught to abjure, all that--by
inheritance--he had in the abstract condemned. She represented
the vanities; she was vanity itself; and now he was recklessly,
contumaciously, glad of it. Her sheer loveliness of being intoxicated
him; suddenly it seemed as absolutely necessary to life as the virtues
of moral rectitude and homely labor. Personally, he discovered, he
preferred such beauty to the latter adamantine qualities. He had a fleet
moment of amazed self-consciousness: Elim Meikeljohn--his father an
elder in the house of God--astray in the paths of condemned worldly
frivolities! Then he recalled a little bush of vivid red roses his
mother carefully protected and cultivated; he saw their bright fragrant
patch on the rocky gray expanse of the utilitarian acres; and suddenly
a light of new understanding enveloped his mother's gaunt drearily-clad
figure. He employed in this connection the surprising word "starved."
... Rosemary Roselle was a flower.

Indy returned with a small hat of honey-colored straw and a soft
white-silk mantilla. The former she drew upon the girl's head and
wrapped the shawl about the slim shoulders.

"Now," she pronounced decisively, "we're going to find your papa." She
led Rosemary Roselle toward the outer door. Elim found his cap in the
hall and followed them down the bricked steps to the street. It was at
present deserted, quiet; and they turned to the left, making their way
toward the river and warehouses.

The fires had largely subsided; below them rose blackened bare walls of
brick, sullen twisting flags of smoke; an air of sooty desolation had
settled over the city. Houses were tightly shuttered; some with broken
doors had a trail of hastily discarded loot on the porticoes; still
others were smoldering shells.

A bugle call rose clear and triumphant from the capital; at one place
they passed Union soldiers, extinguishing flames.

They descended the flagged street over which Elim had come, turned into
another called--he saw--Cary, and finally halted before a long somber
facade. Here, too, the fire had raged; the charred timbers of the fallen
roof projected desolately into air.

A small group at a main entrance faced them as they approached; a
coatless man with haggard features, his clothes saturated with water,
advanced quickly.

"Miss Rosemary!" he ejaculated in palpable dismay. He drew Elim
Meikeljohn aside. "Take her away," he directed; "her father ... killed,
trying to save his papers."

"Where?" Elim demanded. "Their house is empty. She can't stay in
Richmond alone."

"I'd forgotten that!" the other admitted. "McCall and John both gone,
mother dead, and now--by heaven!" he exclaimed, low and distressed, "she
has just no one. I'm without a place. Her friends have left. There's a
distant connection at Bramant's Wharf, but that's almost at the mouth of
the James."

Rosemary Roselle came up to them.

"Mr. Jim Haxall," she asked, direct and white, "is father dead?"

He studied her for a moment and then answered:

"Yes, Miss Rosemary."

She swayed. Indy, at her side, enveloped her in a sustaining arm.

"Indy," the girl said, her face on the woman's breast, "he, too!"

"I'm sending a few bales of leaf down the river," Haxall continued to
Elim; "the sloop'll pass Bramant's Wharf; but the crew will be just
anybody. Miss Rosemary couldn't go with only her nigger--"

Elim Meikeljohn spoke mechanically:

"I'll be responsible for her." The war was over; he had been ordered
from the column when his wound had broken afresh, and in a maze of fever
he had been irresistibly impelled toward Linden Row. "I'll take her to
Bramant's Wharf."

Haxall regarded suspiciously the disordered blue uniform; then his gaze
shifted to Elim's somber lined countenance.

"Miss Rosemary's rubies and gold--" he said finally. "But I believe
you're honest, I believe you're a good man."

VIII

James Haxall explained this to Rosemary. Elim, standing aside, could see
that the girl neither assented nor raised objection. She seemed utterly
listless; a fleet emotion at the knowledge of her father's death had, in
that public place, been immediately repressed. The sloop, Elim learned,
was ready to start at once. The afternoon was declining; to reach
Bramant's Wharf would take them through the night and into the meridian
of tomorrow. They had made no preparations for the trip, there was
neither bedding nor food; but Elim and Haxall agreed that it was best
for Rosemary Roselle to leave the city at the price of any slight
momentary discomfort.

Elim looked about for a place where he might purchase food. A near-by
eating house had been completely wrecked, its floor a debris of broken
crockery. Beyond, a baker's shop had been deserted, its window shattered
but the interior intact. The shelves, however, had been swept bare of
loaves. Elim searched behind the counters--nothing remained. But in
walking out his foot struck against a round object, wrapped in paper,
which on investigation proved to be a fruit cake of satisfactory
solidity and size. With this beneath his arm he returned to Rosemary
Roselle, and they followed Haxall to the wharf where the sloop lay.

The tiller was in charge of an old man with peering pale-blue eyes and
tremulous siccated hands. Yet he had an astonishingly potent voice, and
issued orders, in tones like the grating of metal edges, to a loutish
youth in a ragged shirt and bare legs. The cabin, partly covered, was
filled with bagged bales; a small space had been left for the steersman,
and forward the deck was littered with untidy ropes and swab, windlass
bar and other odds.

Elim Meikeljohn moved forward to assist Rosemary on to the sloop,
but she evaded his hand and jumped lightly down upon the deck, Indy,
grumbling and certain of catastrophe, was safely got aboard, and Elim
helped the youth to push the craft's bow out into the stream. The grimy
mainsail rose slowly, the jib was set, and they deliberately gathered
way, slipping silently between the timbered banks, emerging from the
thin pungent influence of the smoking ruins.

Behind them the sun transfused the veiled city into a coppery blur that
gradually sank into a tender-blue dusk. Indy had arranged a place with
the most obtainable comfort for Rosemary Roselle; she sat with her back
against the mast, gazing toward the bank, stealing backward, at the
darkening trees moving in solemn procession.

After the convulsed and burning city, the uproar of guns and clash of
conflict, the quiet progress of the sloop was incredibly peaceful and
withdrawn. Elim felt as if they had been detached from the familiar
material existence and had been set afloat in a stream of silken
shadows. The wind was behind them, the boom had been let far but, the
old steersman drowsed at his post, and the youth had fallen instantly
asleep in a strange cramped attitude.

Elim was standing at the stern--he had conceived it his duty to stay as
far away from Rosemary Roselle as her wish plainly indicated; but,
in this irrelated phase of living, he gradually lost his sense of
responsibility and restrained conduct. He wanted extravagantly to be
near Rosemary, to be where he could see her clearly. Perhaps, but this
was unlikely, she would speak to him. His desire gradually flooded him;
it induced a species of careless heroism, and he made his way resolutely
forward and sat on a heap of rope at a point where he could study her
with moderate propriety and success. She glanced at him momentarily when
he took his place--he saw that her under lip was capable of an extremely
human and annoying expression--and returned to her veiled scrutiny of
the sliding banks.

An unfamiliar emotion stirred at Elim's heart; and in his painstaking
introspective manner he exposed it. He found a happiness that, at the
same time, was a pain; he found an actual catch in his throat that was
a nebulous desire; he found an utter loneliness together with the
conviction that this earth was a place of glorious possibilities of
affinity. Principally he was conscious of an urging of his entire being
toward the slight figure in black, staring with wide bereft eyes into
the gathering evening. On the other side of the mast, Indy was sleeping
with her head upon her breast. The feeling in Elim steadily increased
in poignancy--faint stars appearing above the indefinite foliage pierced
him with their beauty, the ashen-blue sky vibrated in a singing chord,
the river divided in whispering confidences on the bow of the sloop.

Elim Meikeljohn debated the wisdom of a remark; his courage grew
immeasurably reckless.

"The wind and river are shoving us along together." Pronounced, the
sentence seemed appallingly compromising; he had meant that the wind and
river together, not--

She made no reply; one hand, he saw, stirred slightly.

Since he had not been blasted into nothingness, he continued:

"I'm glad the war's over. Why," he exclaimed in genuine surprise, "you
can hear the birds again." A sleepy twitter had floated out over the
stream. Still no response. He should not, certainly, have mentioned
the war. He wondered desperately what a fine and delicate being like
Rosemary Roselle talked about? It would be wise to avoid serious and
immediate considerations for commonplaces.

"Ellik McCosh," he said, "a girl in our village who went to Boston,
learned to dance, and when she came back she taught two or three. Her
communion medal was removed from her," he added with complete veracity.
"Perhaps," he went on conversationally, "you don't have communion medals
in Richmond--it's a little lead piece you have when you are in good
standing at the Lord's table. Mine was taken away for three months for
whistling by the church door. A long while ago," he ended in a different
voice. He thought of the fruit cake, and breaking off a piece offered it
to the silent girl. "It's like your own," he told her, placing it on a
piece of paper at her side; "it's from Richmond and wasn't even paid for
with strange silver."

At this last a sudden uneasiness possessed him, and he hurriedly
searched his pockets. He had exactly fifty cents. Until the present he
had totally overlooked the depleted state of his fortune. Elim had
some arrears of pay, but now he seriously doubted whether they were
collectible. Nothing else. He had emerged from the war brevetted major
but as penniless as the morning of his enlistment. He doubted whether,
in the hurry of departure, Rosemary Roselle had remembered to bring any
money.

Still, she would be cared for, supplied with every necessity, at
Bramant's Wharf. There he would leave her ... his breathing stopped,
for, incredibly, he saw that her hand was suspended over the piece of
cake. She took it up and ate it slowly, absently. This, he felt,
had created a bond between them; but it was a conviction in which,
apparently, she had no share. She might have thanked him but she didn't.

An underhanded and indefensible expedient occurred to him, and he sat
for a perceptible number of minutes concentrating his memory upon a dim
and special object. Finally he raised his head.

"Indy," he quoted, "a large light mulatto, hasn't much sense but a great
deal of sensibility. That," he added of himself, "is evidently very
well observed." He saw that Rosemary turned her head with an impatient
curiosity. "She is very unfortunate," he continued uncertainly; "she
lost a present of money and couldn't work till it was given back."

"But how," demanded Rosemary Roselle, "did you know that?" Curiosity had
betrayed her.

Elim Meikeljohn concealed a grin with difficulty. It was evident that
she profoundly regretted the lapse, yet she would not permit herself to
retreat from her position. She maintained a high intolerant aspect of
query.

"Have you forgotten," he went on, "how the dread day rolled around?" He
paused wickedly. "The slough of despond?" he added.

"What silly stuff!" Rosemary pronounced.

"It was," he agreed, "mostly. But the paper about Indy was a superior
production. B plus, I think."

A slow comprehension dawned on her face, blurred by the night.

"So that's where they went," she observed; "you marked them." He would
have sworn that a smile hovered for the fraction of a moment on her pale
lips. She drew up her shoulders slightly and turned away.

His best, his only hope had flickered for a minute and died away. Her
silence was like impregnable armor. A puff of wind filled the sails,
there was a straining of cordage, an augmented bubbling at the sloop's
bow, and then the stir subsided. He passed into a darkness of old
distresses, forebodings, grim recollections from his boyhood, inherited
bleak memories. Rosemary Roselle's upright figure gradually sank. He
realized that she was asleep on her arm. Elim bent forward shamelessly
and studied her worn countenance. There was a trace of tears on her
cheek. She was as delicate, as helpless as a flower sleeping on its
stalk.

An impulse to touch her hair was so compelling that he started back,
shaken; a new discordant tumult rose within him, out of which emerged
an aching hunger for Rosemary Roselle; he wanted her with a passion cold
and numbing like ether. He wanted her without reason, and in the desire
lost his deep caution, his rectitude of conscience. He was torn far
beyond the emotional possibilities of weak men. The fact that, penniless
and without a home, he had nothing to offer was lost in the beat and
surge of his feelings. He went with the smashing completeness of a heavy
body, broken loose in an elemental turmoil. He wanted her; her fragrant
spirit, the essence that was herself, Rosemary Roselle. He couldn't
take it; such consummations, he realized, were beyond will and act, they
responded from planes forever above human desire--there was not even
a rift of hope. The banks had been long lost in the night; the faint
disembodied cry of an owl breathed across the invisible river.

IX

She woke with a little confused cry, and sat gazing distractedly into
the dark, her hands pressed to her cheeks.

"Don't you remember," Elim Meikeljohn spoke, "Haxall and the sloop; your
relatives at Bramant's Wharf?"

She returned to a full consciousness of her surroundings.

"I was dreaming so differently," she told him. It seemed to Elim that
the antagonism had departed from her voice; he even had a feeling that
she was glad of his presence. Indy, prostrate on the deck with her chin
elevated to the stars, had not moved.

The darkness increased, broken only by the colored glimmer of the port
and starboard lights and a wan blur about the old man bent over the
tiller. Once he woke the youth and sent him forward with a sounding
pole, once the sloop scraped heavily over a mud bank, but that was all;
their imperceptible progress was smooth, unmarked.

Elim, recalling Joshua, wished that the sloop and night were anchored,
stationary. Already he smelled the dawn in a newly stirring, cold air.
The darkness thickened. Rosemary Roselle said:

"I'm dreadfully hungry."

He immediately produced the fruit cake.

"It's really quite satisfactory," she continued, eating; "It's like the
rest of this--unreal.... What is your name?" she demanded unexpectedly.

"Elim Meikeljohn."

"That's a very Northern sort of name."

"It would be hard to come by one more so," he agreed. "It's from the
highlands of Scotland."

"Then if you don't mind, I'll think of you as Scotch right now."

He conveyed to her the fact that he didn't.

"Look!" she exclaimed. "There's the morning!"

A thin gray streak widened across the east. Almost immediately the night
dissolved. They were sweeping down the middle of a river that surprised
Elim with its width and majesty. The withdrawn banks bore clustered
trees, undulating green reached inland, the shaded facades of houses sat
back on lawns that dipped to the stream.

Rosemary Roselle's face was pale with fatigue; her eyes appeared
preternaturally large; and this, for Elim, made her charm infinitely
more appealing. She smoothed her dress, touched her hair with light
fingers. The intimacy of it all thrilled him. A feeling of happy
irresponsibility deepened. He lost sight of the probable unhappiness of
tomorrow, the catastrophe that was yesterday; Elim was radiantly content
with the present.

"You look Northern too," she went on; "you are so much more solemn than
the Virginia men--I mean your face is."

"I suppose I've had a solemn sort of existence," he agreed. "Life's
an awful serious thing where I was born. The days are not long enough,
life's too short, to get your work done. It's a stony pasture," he
admitted. He described the Meikeljohn farm land, sloping steeply
to swift rocky streams, the bare existence of the sheep, the bitter
winters. He touched briefly on Hester and his marriage.

"It's no wonder," she pronounced, "that you have shadows in your eyes.
You can't imagine," she continued, "how wonderful everything was in
Richmond, before--I simply can't talk about it now. I suppose we are
ruined, but there isn't a man or woman who wouldn't do the same thing
all over again. I'm almost glad that father isn't--isn't here; misery
of any kind made him so wretched ... perfect memories." She closed her
eyes.

Her under lip, he saw, projected slightly, her chin was fine but
stubborn. These details renewed his delight; they lent a warm humanity
to her charm.

"Any one would know," she said, regarding him, "that you are absolutely
trustworthy. It's a nice quality now, but I don't think I would have
noticed it even a month ago. You can see that I have grown frightfully
old in the littlest while. Yes, you are comfortable to be with, and I
suspect that counts for a great deal. It's quite sad, too, to grow old.
Oh, look, we've changed! Where do you suppose he is going? This can't
nearly be Bramant's."

The mainsail had been hauled in, and the course of the sloop changed,
quartering in toward the shore. The youth, moving forward, stopped to
enlighten them. He jerked a thumb in the direction of the old man.

"He's got kin here at Jerico," he explained; "and we're setting in to
see them. We won't stop long."

The mainsail came smoothly down, the jib fluttered, and the sloop slid
in beside a sturdy old wharf, projecting from a deep fringe of willows.
No sign of life or habitation was visible.

The youth made fast a hawser, the old man mounted painfully to the dock,
and Indy stirred and rose.

"I must have just winked asleep," she declared in consternation.

Rosemary Roselle lightly left the boat, and Elim followed. "If we
explored," he proposed, "perhaps we could get you a cup of coffee."
She elected, however, to stay by the river, and Elim went inward alone.
Beyond the willows was an empty marshland. The old man had disappeared,
with no trace of his objective kin. A road, deep in yellow mire, mounted
a rise beyond and vanished a hundred yards distant. Elim, unwilling to
get too far away from the sloop, had turned and moved toward the wharf,
when he was halted by the sound of horses' hoofs.

He saw approaching him over the road a light open carriage with a
fringed canopy and a pair of horses driven by a negro in a long white
dust coat. In the body of the carriage a diminutive bonneted head
was barely visible above an enormous circumference of hoops. Elim saw
bobbing gray curls, peering anxious eyes, and a fluttering hand in a
black silk-thread mit.

"Gossard," a feminine voice cried shrilly to the driver, at the sight of
Elim on the roadside, "here's a Yankee army; lick up those horses!"

The negro swung a vicious whip, the horses started sharply forward,
but the carriage wheels, sinking in a deep slough, remained fixed; the
harness creaked but held; the equipage remained stationary. The negro
dismounted sulkily, and Elim crossed the road and put his shoulder to a
wheel. Together with the driver, he lifted the carriage on to a firmer
surface. The old lady was seated with tightly shut eyes.

"This here man ain't going to hurt you," the driver exclaimed
impatiently. "This exdus is all nonsense anyways," he grumbled. "I got a
mind to stop--I'm free."

She directed upon him a beady black gaze.

"You get right into this carriage," she commanded; "you'd be free to
starve. You are a fool!" The man reluctantly obeyed her. "I thank you
for your clemency," she said to Elim. She fumbled among her flounces
and hoops and produced an object carefully wrapped and tied. "Here,"
she proclaimed; "I can still pay for a service. Gossard--" the carriage
moved forward, was lost in the dip in the road. Elim opened the package
in his hand and regarded, with something like consternation, a bottle of
champagne.

Beyond the wharf the great yellow flood of the river gleamed in the sun;
choirs of robins whistled in trees faintly green. Rosemary Roselle was
seated with her feet hanging over the water.

"Champagne for breakfast," she observed, shaking her head; "only the
most habitual sports manage that." He recounted the episode of the
"Yankee army," delighted by her less formal tone, then the old man
returned as enigmatically as he had disappeared. The ropes were cast
off, the sloop swung out into the current, and their smooth progress was
resumed.

A few more hours and they would be at Bramant's Wharf. There, Elim knew,
he would be expected to leave Rosemary. There would be a perfunctory
gratitude from her relatives, perhaps a warmer appreciation from
herself--a moment--a momentary pressure of her hand--and then--where? He
would never again come in contact with so exquisite a girl; they were,
he realized, customarily held in a circle where men like himself,
outsiders, rarely penetrated; once more with her family and he would be
forgotten. Anyhow, he had nothing.

But in spite of these heavy reflections his irresponsible happiness
increased. In this segment of existence no qualifications from the shore
were valid. Time, himself, at the tiller, seemed drifting, unconcerned.
Rosemary Roselle regarded Elim with a franker interest. She took off
a small slipper and emptied some sand from the shore; the simple act
seemed to him burdened with gracious warmth. Now she was infinitely
easier than any girl he had known before. Those about his home met the
younger masculine world either with a blunt sarcasm or with an uneasy
voiceless propriety. Rosemary, propped on an elbow, was as unconcerned
as a boy. This made her infinitely more difficult of approach. Her
slight beautiful body, not hidden by clothes--as decency demanded in
the more primitive state--was delightfully marked, suggested. Here was
beauty admitted, lauded, even studied, in place of the fierce masking
and denouncement of his father and the fellow elders.

He remembered, from collegiate hours, the passion of the Greeks for
sheer earthly strength and loveliness--Helen and Menelaus, Sappho on
the green promontories of Lesbos. At the time of his reading he had
maintained a wry brow ... now Elim Meikeljohn could comprehend the siege
of Troy.

He said aloud, without thinking and instantly aghast at his words:

"You are like a bodied song." He was horrified; then his newer spirit
utterly possessed him, he didn't care; he nodded his long solemn head.

Rosemary Roselle turned toward him with a cool stare that was lost in
irresistible ringing peals of laughter.

"Oh!" she gasped; "what a face for a compliment. It was just like
pouring sirup out of a vinegar cruet."

He became annoyed and cleared his throat in an elder-like manner, but
her amusement strung out in silvery chuckles.

"It's the first I've said of the kind," he admitted stiffly; "I've no
doubt it came awkward."

She grew more serious, studied him with thoughtful eyes. "Do you know,"
she said slowly, "I believe you. Compliments in Virginia are like
cherries, the trees are full of them; they're nice but worth--so much."
She measured an infinitesimal degree with a rosy nail against a finger.
"But I can see that yours are different. They almost hurt you, don't
they?"

He made no reply, struggling weakly against what, he perceived, was to
follow.

"You're like a song that to hear would draw a man about the world," said
Elim Meikeljohn, pagan. "He would leave his sheep and byre, he'd drop
his duty and desert his old, and follow. I'm lost," he decided, in
a last perishing flicker of early teaching; and then he smiled
inexplicably at the wrath to come.

Rosemary Roselle grew more serious.

"But that's not a compliment at all," she discovered; "it's more, and it
makes me uncomfortable. Please stop!"

"About the world," echoed Elim, "and everything else forgotten."

"Please," she repeated, holding up a prohibitory palm.

"Rose petals," he said, regarding it. His madness increased. She
withdrew her hand and gazed at him with a small frown. She was sitting
upright, propped on her arms. Her mouth, with its slightly full
under lip, was elevated, and an outrageous desire possessed him. His
countenance slowly turned hotly red, and slowly a faint tide of color
stained Rosemary Roselle's cheeks. She looked away; Elim looked away.
He proceeded aft and learned that Bramant's Wharf lay only a few miles
ahead.

The old man cursed the wind in his stringent tones. Elim hadn't noticed
anything reprehensible in the wind. It appeared that for a
considerable time there hadn't been any. A capful was stirring now, and
humanity--ever discontented--silently cursed that.

"We're nearly there," he said, returning to Rosemary Roselle.

He was unable to gather any intelligence from her expression.

She rose, and stood with a hand on Indy's shoulder, murmuring
affectionately in the colored woman's ear. The sloop once more headed
at a long angle for the shore. Bramant's Wharf grew visible, projecting
solidly from a verdant bank. They floated silently up to the dock, and
the youth held the sloop steady while Rosemary Roselle and Indy mounted
from its deck. Elim followed, but suddenly he stopped, and his hand
went into his pocket. A half dollar fell ringing into the boat. Elim
indicated the youth; he was now penniless.

X

"The house," Rosemary explained, "is almost a mile in. There is a
carriage at the wharf when they expect you. And usually there is some
one about."

Elim, carrying the cake and bottle, followed over a grassy road between
tangles of blackberry bushes. On either hand neglected fields held
a sparse tangle of last year's weeds; beyond, trees closed in the
perspective. The sun had passed the zenith, and the shadows of walnut
trees fell across the road. Elim's face was grim, a dark tide rose about
him, enveloping his heart, bothering his vision. He wanted to address
something final to the slim girl in black before him, something now,
before she was forever lost in the gabble of her relatives; but he could
think of nothing appropriate, expressive of the tumult within him. His
misery deepened with every step, grew into a bitterness of rebellion
that almost forced an incoherent reckless speech. Rosemary Roselle
didn't turn, she didn't linger, there were a great many things that she
might say. The colored woman was positively hurrying forward. A great
loneliness swept over him. He had not, he thought drearily, been made
for joy.

"It's queer there's no one about," Rosemary Roselle observed. They
reached the imposing pillars of an entrance--the wooden gate was
chained, and they were obliged to turn aside and search for an opening
in a great mock-orange hedge. Before them a wide sweep of lawn led up
to a formal dark facade; a tanbark path was washed, the grass ragged and
uncut. Involuntarily they quickened their pace.

Elim saw that towering brown pillars rose to the roof of the dwelling
and that low wings extended on either hand. Before the portico a stiffly
formal garden lay in withered neglect.

The flower beds, circled with masoned rims and built up like wired
bouquets, held only twisted and broken stems.

A faint odor of wet plaster and dead vegetation rose to meet them. On
the towering wall of the house every window was tightly shuttered. The
place bore a silent and melancholy air of desertion.

The girl gave a dismayed gasp. Elim hastily placed his load on the steps
and, mounting, beat upon the door. Only a dull echo answered. Dust fell
from the paneling upon his head.

"Maybe they have shut up the front for protection," he suggested. He
made his way to the rear; all was closed. Through the low limbs of apple
trees he could see a double file of small sad brick quarters for the
slaves. They, too, were empty. The place was without a living being. He
stood, undecided, when suddenly he heard Rosemary Roselle calling with
an acute note of fear.

He ran through the binding grass back to the garden.

"Elim Meikeljohn!" She stumbled forward to meet him. "Oh, Elim," she
cried; "there's no one in the world----" A sob choked her utterance.

He fell on his knees before her:

"There's always me."

She sank in a fragrant heap into his arms.

Elim Meikeljohn laughed over her shoulder at his entire worldly goods on
the steps--the fragmentary fruit cake and a bottle of champagne.

Here they are lost on the dimming mirror of the past.




THE THRUSH IN THE HEDGE

I

Harry Baggs came walking slowly over the hills in the blue May dusk.
He could now see below him the clustered roofs and tall slim stack of
a town. His instinct was to avoid it, but he had tramped all day, his
blurred energies were hardly capable of a detour, and he decided to
settle near by for the night. About him the country rose and fell,
clothed in emerald wheat and pale young corn, while trees filled the
hollows with the shadowy purple of their darkening boughs. A robin piped
a belated drowsy note; the air had the impalpable sweetness of beginning
buds.

A vague pleasant melancholy enveloped him; the countryside swam
indistinctly in his vision--he surrendered himself to inward sensations,
drifting memories, unformulated regrets. He was twenty and had a short
powerful body; a broad dusty patient face. His eyes were steady, light
blue, and his jaw heavy but shapely. His dress--the forlorn trousers,
the odd coat uncomfortably drawn across thick shoulders, and incongruous
hat--held patently the stamp of his worldly position: he was a tramp.

He stopped, looking about. The road, white and hard, dipped suddenly
down; on the right, windows glimmered, withdrawn behind shrubbery and
orderly trees; on the left, a dark plowed field rose to a stiff company
of pines and the sky. Harry Baggs stood turned in the latter direction,
for he caught the faint odor of wood smoke; behind the field, a newly
acquired instinct told him, a fire was burning in the open. This,
now, probably meant that other wanderers--tramps--had found a place of
temporary rest.

Without hesitation he climbed a low rail fence, found a narrow path trod
in the soft loam and followed it over the brow into the hollow beyond.
His surmise was correct--a fire smoldered in a red blur on the ground,
a few relaxed forms gathered about the wavering smoke, and at their back
were grouped four or five small huts.

Harry Baggs walked up to the fire, where, with a conventional sentence,
he extended his legs to the low blaze. A man regarded him with a peering
suspicious gaze; but any doubts were apparently laid, for the other
silently resumed a somnolent indifference. His clothes were an amazing
and unnecessary tangle of rags; his stubble of beard and broken black
hat had an air of unreality, as though they were the stage properties of
a stupid and conventional parody of a tramp.

Another, sitting with clasped knees beyond the fire, interrupted a
monotonous whining recital to question Harry Baggs. "Where'd you come
from?"

"Somewhere by Lancaster."

"Ever been here before?" And, when Baggs had said no: "Thought I hadn't
seen you. Most of us here come back in the spring. It's a comfortable
dump when it don't rain cold." He was uncommonly communicative. "The
Nursery's here for them that want work; and if not nobody's to ask you
reasons."

A third, in a grimy light overcoat, with a short bristling red mustache
and morose countenance, said harshly: "Got any money?"

"Maybe two bits."

"Let's send him in for beer," the other proposed; and a new animation
stirred the dilapidated one and the talker.

"You can go to hell!" Baggs responded without heat.

"That ain't no nice way to talk," the second proclaimed. "Peebles, here,
meant that them who has divides with all that hasn't."

Peebles directed a hard animosity at Harry Baggs. His gaze flickered
over the latter's heavy-set body and unmoved face. "Want your jaw
slapped crooked?" he demanded with a degree of reservation.

"No," the boy placidly replied.

A stillness enveloped them, accentuated by the minute crackling of the
disintegrating wood. The dark increased and the stars came out; the
clip-clip of a horse's hoofs passed in the distance and night. Harry
Baggs became flooded with sleep.

"I s'pose I can stay in one of these brownstones?" he queried,
indicating the huts.

No one answered and he stumbled toward a small shelter. He was forced to
bend, edge himself into the close damp interior, where he collapsed into
instant unconsciousness on a heap of bagging. In the night he cried out,
in a young strangely distressed voice; and later a drift of rain fell on
the roof and ran in thin cold streams over his still body.

II

He woke late the following morning and emerged sluggishly into a
sparkling rush of sunlight. The huts looked doubly mean in the pellucid
day. They were built of discarded doors and variously painted fragments
of lumber, with blistered and unpinned roofs of tin, in which rusted
smokepipes had been crazily wired; strips of moldy matting hung over an
entrance or so, but the others gaped unprotected. The clay before them
was worn smooth and hard; a replenished fire smoked within blackened
bricks; a line, stretched from a dead stump to a loosely fixed post,
supported some stained and meager red undergarb.

Harry Baggs recognized Peebles and the loquacious tramp at the edge of
the clearing. The latter, clad in a grotesquely large and sorry suit of
ministerial black, was emaciated and had a pinched bluish countenance.
When he saw Baggs he moved forward with a quick uneven step.

"Say," he proceeded, "can you let me have something to get a
soda-caffeine at a drug store? This ain't a stall; I got a fierce
headache. Come out with a dime, will you? My bean always hurts, but
to-day I'm near crazy."

Harry Baggs surveyed him for a moment, and then, without comment,
produced the sum in question. The other turned immediately and rapidly
disappeared toward the road.

"He's crazy, all right, to fill himself with that dope," Peebles
observed; "it's turning him black. You look pretty healthy," he added.
"You can work, and they're taking all the men they can get at the
Nursery."

The boy was sharply conscious of a crawling emptiness--hunger. He had
only fifteen cents; when that was gone he would be without resources. "I
don't mind," he returned; "but I've got to eat first."

"Can't you stick till night?" his companion urged. "There's only half a
day left now. If you go later there'll be nothing doing till tomorrow."

"All right," Harry Baggs assented.

The conviction seized him that this dull misery of hunger and dirt had
settled upon him perpetually--there was no use in combating it; and,
with an animal-like stoicism, he followed the other away from the road,
out of the hollow, to where row upon row of young ornamental trees
reached in mathematical perspective to broad sheds, glittering expanses
of glass, a huddle of toolhouses, and office.

His conductor halted at a shed entrance and indicated a weather-bronzed
individual.

"Him," he said. "And mind you come back when you're through; we all dish
in together and live pretty good."

Harry Baggs spent the long brilliant afternoon burning bunches of
condemned peach shoots. The smoke rolled up in a thick ceaseless cloud;
he bore countless loads and fed them to the flames. The hungry crawling
increased, then changed to a leaden nausea; but, accepting it as
inevitable, he toiled dully on until the end of day, when he was given a
dollar and promise of work to-morrow.

He saw, across a dingy street, a small grocery store, and purchased
there coffee, bacon and a pound of dates. Then he returned across the
Nursery to the hollow and huts. More men had arrived through the day,
other fires were burning, and an acrid odor of scorched fat and boiling
coffee rose in the delicate evening. A small group was passing about
a flasklike bottle; a figure lay in a stupor on the clay; a mutter of
voices, at once cautious and assertive, joined argument to complaint.

"Over this way," Peebles called as Harry Baggs approached. The former
inspected the purchased articles, then cursed. "Ain't you got a bottle
on you?"

But when the bacon had been crisped and the coffee turned into a
steaming thick liquid, he was amply appreciative of the sustenance
offered. They were shortly joined by Runnel, the individual with the
bluish poisoned countenance, and the elaborately ragged tramp.

"Did you frighten any cooks out of their witses?" Peebles asked the last
contemptuously. The other retorted unintelligibly in his appropriately
hoarse voice. "Dake knocks on back doors," Peebles explained to Harry
Baggs, "and then fixes to scare a nickel or grub from the women who
open."

Quiet settled over the camp; the blue smoke of pipes and cigarettes
merged imperceptibly into the dusk of evening. Harry Baggs was enveloped
by a momentary contentment, born of the satisfaction of food, relaxation
after toil; and, leaning his head back on clasped hands, he sang:

  _"I changed my name when I got free
    To Mister, like the res'.
  But now ... Ol' Master's voice I hears
    Across de river: 'Rome,
  You damn ol' nigger, come and bring
    Dat boat an' row me home!'"_

His voice rolled out without effort, continuous as a flowing stream,
grave and round as the deep tone of a temple bell. It increased in
volume until the hollow vibrated; the sound, rather than coming from a
single throat, seemed to dwell in the air, to be the harmony of evening
made audible. The simple melody rose and fell; the simple words became
portentous, burdened with the tragedy of vain longing, lost felicity.
The dead past rose again like a colored mist over the sordid reality of
the present; it drifted desirable and near across the hill; it soothed
and mocked the heart--and dissolved.

The silence that followed the song was sharply broken by a thin
querulous question; a tenuous bent figure stumbled across the open.

"Who's singing?" he demanded.

"That's French Janin," Peebles told Harry Baggs; "he's blind."

"I am," the latter responded--"Harry Baggs."

The man came closer, and Baggs saw that he was old and incredibly worn;
his skin clung in dry yellow patches to his skull, the temples were bony
caverns, and the pits of his eyes blank shadows. He felt forward with
a siccated hand, on which veins were twisted like blue worsted over
fleshless tendons, gripped Harry Baggs' shoulder, and lowered himself to
the ground.

"Another song," he insisted; "like the last. Don't try any cheap show."

The boy responded immediately; his serious voice rolled out again in a
spontaneous tide.

"'Hard times,'" Harry Baggs sang; "'hard times, come again no more.'"

The old man said: "You think you have a great voice, eh? All you have to
do to take the great roles is open your mouth!"

"I hadn't thought of any of that," Baggs responded. "I sing
because--well, it's just natural; no one has said much about it."

"You have had no teaching, that's plain. Your power leaks like an old
rain barrel. What are you doing here?"

"Tramping."

Harry Baggs looked about, suddenly aware of the dark pit of being into
which he had fallen. The fires died sullenly, deserted except for an
occasional recumbent figure. Peebles had disappeared; Dake lay in
his rags on the ground; Runnel rocked slowly, like a pendulum, in his
ceaseless pain.

"Tramping to the devil!" he added.

"What started you?" French Janin asked.

"Jail," Harry Baggs answered.

"Of course you didn't take it," the blind man commented satirically; "or
else you went in to cover some one else."

"I took it, all right--eighteen dollars." He was silent for a moment;
then: "There was something I had to have and I didn't see any other way
of getting it. I had to have it. My stepfather had money that he put
away--didn't need. I wanted an accordion; I dreamed about it till I got
ratty, lifted the money, and he put me in jail for a year.

"I had the accordion hid. I didn't tell them where, and when I got out
I went right to it. I played some sounds, and--after all I'd done--they
weren't any good. I broke it up--and left."

"You were right," Janin told him; "the accordion is an impossible
instrument, a thing entirely vulgar. I know, for I am a musician, and
played the violin at the Opera Comique. You think I am lying; but you
are young and life is strange. I can tell you this: I, Janin, once led
the finale of Hamlet. I saw that the director was pale; I leaned forward
and he gave me the baton. I knew music. There were five staves to
conduct--at the Opera Comique."

He turned his sightless face toward Harry Baggs.

"That means little to you," he spoke sharply; "you know nothing. You
have never seen a gala audience on its feet; the roses--"

He broke off. His wasted palms rested on knees that resembled bones
draped with maculate clothing; his sere head fell forward. Runnel paced
away from the embers and returned. Harry Baggs looked, with doubt and
wonderment, at the ruined old man.

The mere word musician called up in him an inchoate longing, a desire
for something far and undefined. He thought of great audiences, roses,
the accompaniment of violins. Subconsciously he began to sing in a
whisper that yet reached beyond the huts. He forgot his surroundings,
the past without light, the future seemingly shorn of all prospect.

French Janin moved; he fumbled in precarious pockets and at last
produced a small bottle; he removed the cork and tapped out on his palm
a measure of white crystalline powder, which he gulped down. Then
he struggled to his feet and wavered away through the night toward a
shelter.

Harry Baggs imagined himself singing heroic measures; he finished, there
was a tense pause, and then a thunderous acclamation. His spirit mounted
up and up in a transport of emotional splendor; broken visions thronged
his mind of sacrifice, renouncement, death. The fire expired and the
night grew cold. His ecstasy sank; he became once more aware of the
human wreckage about him, the detritus of which he was now a part.

III

He spent the next day moving crated plants to delivery trucks, where his
broad shoulders were most serviceable, and in the evening returned to
the camp, streaked with fine rich loam. French Janin was waiting for him
and consumed part of Harry Baggs' unskilfully cooked supper. The old man
was silent, though he seemed continually at the point of bursting into
eager speech. However, he remained uncommunicative and followed the
boy's movements with a blank speculative countenance. Finally he said
abruptly:

"Sing that song over--about the 'damn ol' nigger.'"

Harry Baggs responded; and, at the end, Janin nodded.

"What I should have expected," he pronounced. "When I first heard you I
thought: 'Here, perhaps, is a great voice, a voice for Paris;' but I was
mistaken. You have some bigness--yes, good enough for street ballads,
sentimental popularities; that is all."

An overwhelming depression settled upon Harry Baggs, a sense of
irremediable loss. He had considered his voice a lever that might one
day raise him out of his misfortunes; he instinctively valued it to
an extraordinary degree; it had resembled a precious bud, the possible
opening of which would flood his being with its fragrant flowering. He
gazed with a new dread at the temporary shelters and men about him,
the huts and men that resembled each other so closely in their patched
decay.

Until now, except in brief moments of depression, he had thought of
himself as only a temporary part of this broken existence. But it was
probable that he, too, was done--like Runnel, and Dake, who lived on the
fear of women. He recalled with an oath his reception in the village of
his birth on his return from jail: the veiled or open distrust of the
adults; the sneering of the young; his barren search for employment. He
had suffered inordinately in his narrow cell--fully paid, it had seemed,
the price of his fault. But apparently he was wrong; the thing was to
follow him through life--and he would live a long while--; condemning
him, an outcast, to the company of his fellows.

His shoulders drooped, his face took on the relaxed sullenness of those
about him; curiously, in an instant he seemed more bedraggled, more
disreputable, hopeless.

French Janin continued:

"Your voice is good enough for the people who know nothing. Perhaps it
will bring you money, singing at fairs in the street. I have a violin, a
cheap thing without soul; but I can get a thin jingle out of it. Suppose
we go out together, try our chance where there is a little crowd; it
will be better than piggin' in the earth."

It would, Baggs thought, be easier than carrying heavy crates; subtly
the idea of lessened labor appealed to him. He signified his assent and
rolled over on his side, staring into nothingness.

French Janin went into the town the following day--he walked with a
surprising facility and speed--to discover where they might find a
gathering for their purpose. Harry Baggs loafed about the camp until the
other returned with the failing of light.

"The sales about the country are all that get the people together now,"
he reported; "the parks are empty till July. There's to be one tomorrow
about eight miles away; we'll try it."

He went to the shelter, where he secured a scarred violin, with roughly
shaped pegs and lacking a string. He motioned Harry Baggs to follow him
and proceeded to the brow of the field, where he settled down against a
fence, picking disconsolately at the burring strings and attempting
to tighten an ancient bow. Baggs dropped beside him. Below them night
flooded the winding road and deepened under the hedges; a window showed
palely alight; the stillness was intense.

"Now!" French Janin said.

The violin went home beneath his chin and he improvised a thin but
adequate opening for Harry Baggs' song. The boy, for the first time
in his existence, sang indifferently; his voice, merely big, lacked
resonance; the song was robbed of all power to move or suggest.

Janin muttered unintelligibly; he was, Harry Baggs surmised, speaking
his native language, obscurely complaining, accusing. They tried a
second song: "Hard times, hard times, come again no more." There was not
an accent of longing nor regret.

"That'll do," French Janin told him; "good enough for cows and
chickens."

He rose and descended to the camp, a bowed unsubstantial figure in the
gloom.

IV

They started early to the sale. Janin, as always, walked swiftly, his
violin wrapped in a cloth beneath his arm. Harry Baggs lounged sullenly
at his side. The day was filled with a warm silvery mist, through which
the sun mounted rayless, crisp and round. Along the road plum trees were
in vivid pink bloom; the apple buds were opening, distilling palpable
clouds of fragrance.

Baggs met the morning with a sullen lowered countenance, his gaze on the
monotonous road. He made no reply to the blind man's infrequent remarks,
and the latter, except for an occasional murmur, fell silent. At last
Harry Baggs saw a group of men about the fence that divided a small lawn
and neatly painted frame house from the public road. A porch was filled
with a confusion of furniture, china was stacked on the grass, and a bed
displayed at the side.

The sale had not yet begun; A youth, with a pencil and paper, was moving
distractedly about, noting items; a prosperous-appearing individual,
with a derby resting on the back of his neck, was arranging an open
space about a small table. Beyond, a number of horses attached to dusty
vehicles were hitched to the fence where they were constantly augmented
by fresh arrivals.

"Here we are!" Baggs informed his companion. He directed Janin forward,
where the latter unwrapped his violin. A visible curiosity held the
prospective buyers; they turned and faced the two dilapidated men on the
road. A joke ran from laughing mouth to mouth. Janin drew his bow across
the frayed strings; Harry Baggs cleared the mist from his throat. As he
sang, aware of an audience, a degree of feeling returned to his tones;
the song swept with a throb to its climax:

  "'_You damn ol' nigger, come and bring
  Dat boat an' row me home_!'"

There was scattered applause.

"Take your hat round," Janin whispered; and the boy opened the gate and
moved, with his battered hat extended, from man to man.

Few gave; a careless quarter was added to a small number of pennies and
nickels. Janin counted the sum with an unfamiliar oath.

"That other," he directed, and drew a second preliminary bar from his
uncertain instrument.

"Here, you!" a strident voice called. "Shut your noise; the sale's going
to commence."

French Janin lowered the violin.

"We must wait," he observed philosophically. "These things go on and on;
people come and go."

He found a bank, where he sat, after stumbling through a gutter of
stagnant water. Harry Baggs followed and filled a cheap ornate pipe.
The voice of the auctioneer rose, tiresome and persistent, punctuated by
bids, haggling over minute sums for the absurd flotsam of a small
house keeping square of worn oilcloth, a miscellany of empty jars. A
surprisingly passionate argument arose between bidders; personalities
and threats emerged. Janin said:

"Listen! That is the world into which musicians are born; it is against
such uproar we must oppose our delicate chords--on such hearts." His
speech rambled into French and a melancholy silence.

"It's stopped for a little," Baggs reminded him.

Janin rose stiffly and the other guided him to their former place. The
voice and violin rose, dominated a brief period, and the boy went among
the throng, seeking newcomers. The mist thickened, drops of water shone
on his ragged sleeves, and then a fine rain descended. The crowd filled
the porch and lower floor, bulged apparently from door and windows.
Harry Baggs made a motion to follow with his companion, but no one
moved; there was no visible footing under cover. They stayed out
stolidly in the wet, by an inadequate tree; and whenever chance offered
Harry Baggs repeated his limited songs. A string of the violin broke;
the others grew soggy, limp; the pegs would tighten no more and Janin
was forced to give up his accompanying.

The activities shifted to a shed and barn, where a horse and three sorry
cows and farming implements were sold. Janin and Harry Baggs followed,
but there was no opportunity for further melody; larger sums were here
involved; the concentration of the buyers grew painful. The boy's throat
burned; it was strained, and his voice grew hoarse. Finally he declared
shortly that he was going back to the shelter by the Nursery.

As they tramped over the rutted and muddy road, through a steadily
increasing downpour, Harry Baggs counted the sum they had collected. It
was two dollars and some odd pennies. Janin was closely attentive as the
money passed through the other's fingers. He took it from Baggs' hand,
re-counted it with an unfailing touch, and gave back a half.

The return, even to the younger's tireless being, seemed interminable.
Harry Baggs tramped doggedly, making no effort to avoid the deepening
pools. French Janin struggled at his heels, shifting the violin from
place to place and muttering incoherently.

It was dark when they arrived at the huts; the fires were sodden mats
of black ash; no one was visible. They stumbled from shelter to shelter,
but found them full. One at last was discovered unoccupied; but they had
no sooner entered than the reason was sharply borne upon them--the roof
leaked to such an extent that the floor was an uneasy sheet of mud.
However, there was literally nowhere else for them to go. Janin found
a broken chair on which he balanced his bowed and shrunken form; Harry
Baggs sat against the wall.

He dozed uneasily, and, wakened by the old man's babbling, cursed
him bitterly. At last he fell asleep; but, brought suddenly back to
consciousness by a hand gripping his shoulder, he started up in a blaze
of wrath.

He shook off the hand and heard French Janin slip and fall against an
insecure wall. The interior was absolutely black; Harry Baggs could see
no more than his blind companion. The latter fumbled, at last regained a
footing, and his voice fluctuated out of an apparent nothingness.

"There is something important for you to know," Janin proceeded.

"I lied to you about your voice--I, once a musician of the orchestra
at the Opera Comique. I meant to be cunning and take you round to the
fairs, where we would make money; have you sing truck for people who
know nothing. I let you sing to-day, in the rain, for a dollar--while I,
Janin, fiddled.

"I am a _voyou_; there is nothing in English low enough. The thought of
it has been eating at me like a rat." The disembodied words stopped, the
old man strangled and coughed; then continued gasping: "Attention! You
have a supreme barytone, a miracle! I heard all the great voices for
twenty years, and know.

"At times there is a voice with perfect pitch, a true art and range;
not many--they are cold. At times there is a singer with great heart,
sympathy ... mostly too sweet.

"But once, maybe, in fifty, sixty years, both are together. You are
that--I make you amends."

The rain pounded fantastically on the roof a few inches above Harry
Baggs' head and the water seeped coldly through his battered shoes;
but, in the violent rebirth of the vague glow he had lost a short while
before, he gave no heed to his bodily discomfort. "A supreme barytone!"
The walls of the hut, the hollow, dissolved before the sudden light
of hope that enveloped him; all the dim dreams, the unformulated
aspirations on which subconsciously his spirit had subsisted, returned.

"Can you be sure?" he demanded uncertainly.

"Absolutely! You are an artist, and life has wrung you out like a
cloth--jail, hungry, outcast; yes, and nights with stars, and water
shining; men like old Janin, dead men, begging on the roads--they are
all in your voice, jumbled--serious barytone----" The high thin recital
stopped, from exhaustion.

Harry Baggs was warm to the ends of his fingers. He wiped his wet brow
with a wetter hand.

"That's fine," he said impotently; "fine!"

He could hear French Janin breathing stertorously; and, suddenly aware
of the other's age, the misery of their situation, he asked:

"Don't you feel good?"

"I've been worse and better," he replied. "This is bad for your throat,
after singing all day in the rain. _Voyou_!" he repeated of himself.

Silence enveloped them, broken by the creaking of the blind man's chair
and the decreasing patter of the rain. Soon it stopped and Harry Baggs
went outside; stars glimmered at the edges of shifting clouds, a sweet
odor rose from the earth, a trailing scent of blossoming trees expanded.

He sang in a vibrant undertone a stave without words. An uneasy form
joined him; it was Runnel.

"I b'lieve my head'll burst!" he complained.

"Leave that soda-caffeine be."

He would never forget Runnel with his everlasting pain; or Dake, who
lived by scaring women.... Great audiences and roses, and the roar of
applause. He heard it now.

V

Harry Baggs returned to the Nursery, where, with his visions, his sense
of justification, he was happy among the fields of plants. There he was
given work of a more permanent kind; he was put under a watchful eye in
a group transplanting berry bushes, definitely reassigned to that labor
to-morrow. He returned to the camp with a roll of tar paper and, after
supper, covered the leaking roof of the shelter. French Janin sat with
his blank face following the other's movements. Janin's countenance
resembled a walnut, brown and worn in innumerable furrows; his neck was
like a dry inadequate stem. As he glanced at him the old man produced
a familiar bottle and shook out what little powder, like finely ground
glass, it contained. He greedily absorbed what there was and, petulantly
exploring the empty container, flung it into the bushes. A nodding
drowsiness overtook him, his head rolled forward, he sank slowly into a
bowed amorphous heap. Harry Baggs roused him with difficulty.

"You don't want to sit like this," he said; "come up by the field, where
it's fresher."

He lifted Janin to his feet, half carried him to the place under
the fence. Harry Baggs was consumed by a desire to talk about the
future--the future of his voice; he wanted to hear of the triumphs of
other voices, of the great stages that they finally dominated. He wanted
to know the most direct path there; he was willing that it should not be
easy. "I'm as strong as an ox," he thought.

But he was unable to move French Janin from his stupor; in reply to his
questions the blind man only muttered, begged to be let alone. Life was
at such a low ebb in him that his breathing was imperceptible. Harry
Baggs was afraid that he would die without a sound--leave him. He gave
up his questioning and sang. He was swept to his feet by a great wave
of feeling; with his head back, he sent the resonant volume of his tones
toward the stars. Baggs stopped suddenly; stillness once more flooded
the plowed hill and he raised imploring arms to the sky in a gust of
longing.

"I want to sing!" he cried. "That's all--to sing."

Janin was brighter in the morning.

"You must have some exercises," he told the boy. "I'll get new strings
for the violin; it'll do to give you the pitch."

At the day's end they went again to the hilltop. French Janin tightened
and tuned his instrument.

"Now!" he measured, with poised bow. "Ah!" Both his voice and violin
were tremulous, shrill; but they indicated the pitch of the desired
note. "Ah!" the old man quavered, higher.

"Ah!" Harry Baggs boomed in his tremendous round tone.

They repeated the exercises until a slip of a new moon, like a wistful
girl, sank and darkness hid the countryside. A palpitating chorus of
frogs rose from the invisible streams. Somnolence again overtook Janin;
the violin slipped into the fragrant grass by the fence, but his fingers
still clutched the bow.

Pity for the other stirred Baggs' heart. He wondered what had ruined
him, brought him--a man who had played in an opera house--here. A bony
elbow showed bare through a torn sleeve--the blind man had no shirt; the
soles of his shoes gaped, smelling evilly. Yet once he had played in an
orchestra; he was undoubtedly a musician. Life suddenly appeared grim, a
sleepless menace awaiting the first opportune weakness by which to enter
and destroy.

It occurred to Harry Baggs for the first time that against such a hidden
unsuspected blight his sheer strength would avail him little. He had
stolen money; that in itself held danger to his future, his voice. He
had paid for it; that score was clear, but he must guard against
such stupidities in the years to come. He had now a conscious single
purpose--to sing. A new sense of security took the place of his doubts.
He stirred Janin from his collapsed sleep, directed him toward their
hut.

He returned eagerly in the evening to the vocal exercises. French Janin
struggled to perform his part, but mostly Harry Baggs boomed out his
Ahs! undirected. The other had been without his white powder for three
days; his shredlike muscles twitched continually and at times he was
unable to hold the violin. Finally:

"Can you go in to the post-office and ask for a package for me at
general delivery?" he asked Harry Baggs. "I'm expecting medicine."

"That medicine of yours is bad as Runnel's dope. I've a mind to let it
stay."

The other rose, stood swaying with pinching fingers, tremulous lips.

"I'm afraid I can't make it," he whimpered.

"Sit down," Harry Baggs told him abruptly; "I'll go. Too late now to try
pulling you up. Whatever it is, it's got you."

It was warm, almost hot. He walked slowly down the road toward the town.
On the left was a smooth lawn, with great stately trees, a long gray
stone house beyond. A privet hedge, broken by a drive, closed in
the withdrawn orderly habitation. A young moon bathed the scene in a
diffused silver light; low cultivated voices sounded from a porch.

Harry Baggs stopped; he had never before seen such a concretely
desirable place; it filled him with a longing, sharp like pain. Beyond
the hedge lay a different world from this; he could not even guess its
wide possession of ease, of knowledge, of facility for song. A voice
laughed, gay and untroubled as a bird's note. He wanted to stay, seated
obscurely on the bank, saturate himself with the still beauty; but the
thought of French Janin waiting for the relief of his drug drove him on.

The maple trees that lined the quiet streets of the town were in full
early leaf. Groups paced tranquilly over the brick ways; the houses
stood in secure rows. A longing for safety, recognition, choked at Harry
Baggs' throat. He wanted to stop at the corner, talk, move home to a
shadowy cool porch. He hurried in his ragged clothes past the pools of
light at the street crossings into the kinder gloom. At that moment he
would have surrendered his voice for a place in the communal peace about
him.

He reached the post-office and asked for a package addressed to
Janin. The clerk delayed, regarded him with suspicion, but in the end
surrendered a small precisely wrapped box. As he returned his mood
changed; all he asked, he muttered bitterly, was a fair trial for
his voice. He recognized obscurely that a singer's existence must be
different from the constricted life of a country town; here were no
stage, no audience, for the great harmonies he had imagined himself
producing. He had that in his heart which would make mere security,
content, forever impossible.

In the dilapidated camp French Janin eagerly clutched the box. He almost
filled his palm with the crystalline powder and gulped it hastily. Its
effect was produced slowly.... Janin waited rigidly for the release of
the drug.

The evening following, under the fence on the hill, the blind man dozed
while Harry Baggs exercised his voice.

"Good!" the former pronounced unexpectedly. "I know; heard all the great
voices for twenty years; a violin in the Opera Comique. Once I led the
finale of Hamlet. I saw the Director stop.... He handed me the baton.
He died soon after, and that was the beginning of my bad luck. I should
have been Director; but I was ignored, and came to America--Buenos
Aires; then Washington, and--and morphia."

There was a long silence and then he spoke again with a new energy:

"I'm done, but you haven't started. You're bigger than ever I was;
you'll go on and on. I, Janin, will train you; when you sing the great
roles I'll sit in a box, wear diamond studs. Afterward, as we roll in a
carriage down the Grandes Boulevards, the people in front of the cafes
will applaud; the voice is appreciated in Paris."

"I have a lot to learn first," Baggs put in practically.

The old man recovered his violin. "Ah!" He drew the note tenuous but
correct from the uncertain strings. "Ah!" Harry Baggs vociferated to the
inattentive frogs, busy with their own chorus.

VI

The practice proceeded with renewed vigor through the evenings that
followed; then French Janin sank back into a torpor, varied by acute
depression.

"I haven't got the life in me to teach you," he admitted to Harry Baggs.
"I'll be dead before you get your chance; besides, you ought to be
practising all day, and not digging round plants and singing a little in
the evening. You've got the voice, but that's not enough; you've got to
work at exercises all your life."

"I'm strong," Harry Baggs told him; "I can work more than most men."

"No, that won't do alone; you've got to go at it right, from the start;
the method's got to be good. I'll be dead in some hospital or field when
you'll be hardly starting. But remember it was Janin who found you,
who dug you out of a set of tramps, gave you your first lessons." He
changed. "Stay along with me, Harry," he begged; "take me with you.
You're strong and'll never notice an old man. You will be making
thousands some day. I will stop the morphia; perhaps I've got a good bit
in me yet. Attention!" He raised the bow.

"No!" he cried, interrupting. "Breathe deep, below the chest. Control!
Control! Hold the note steady, in the middle; don't force it into your
head."

His determination scion expired. Tears crept from under his sunken
lids. He reached furtively into his pocket, took morphia. The conviction
seized Harry Baggs that nothing could be accomplished here. The other's
dejection was communicated to him. Where could he find the money, the
time for the necessary laborious years of preparation? He was without
credentials, without clothes; there was no one to whom he could go but
the old spent man beside him. They were adrift together outside life, as
the huts they inhabited were outside the orderly town beyond the hill.

He rose, left Janin, and walked slowly along the fence to the road. The
moon had increased in size and brilliancy; the apple trees had bloomed
and their fallen petals glimmered on the ground. He thought of the house
on the smooth sward, with its hedge and old trees; a sudden longing
seized him to linger at its edge, absorb again the profound peaceful
ease; and he quickened his pace until he was opposite the low gray
facade.

He sat on the soft steep bank, turned on his elbow, gazing within. The
same voices drifted from the porch, voices gay or placid, and contained
laughter. A chair scraped. It was all very close to Harry Baggs--and in
another world. There was a movement within the house; a window leaped
into lighted existence and then went out against the wall. Immediately
after, a faint pure harmony of strings drifted out to the hedge. It was
so unexpected, so lovely, that Harry Baggs sat with suspended breath.
The strings made a pattern of simple harmony; and then, without warning,
a man's voice, almost like his own, began singing. The tones rose fluid
and perfect, and changed with feeling. It seemed at first to be a man;
and then, because of a diminuendo of the voice, a sense of distance not
accounted for by his presence near the hedge, he knew that he heard a
record of the actual singing.

The voice, except for its resemblance to his own, did not absorb his
attention; it was the song itself that thrilled and held him. He had
never before heard music at once so clear and capable of such depths.
He realized instinctively, with a tightening of his heart, that he was
listening to one of the great songs of which Janin had spoken. It hung
for a minute or more in his hearing, thrilling every nerve, and then
died away. It stopped actually, but its harmony rang in Harry Baggs'
brain. Instantly it had become an essential, a permanent part of his
being. It filled him with a violent sense of triumph, a richness of
possession that gave birth to a new unconquerable pride.

He rose, waited for a short space; but nothing more followed. He was
glad of that; he had no wish to blur the impressions of the first. Harry
Baggs hurried up the road and crossed the field to where he had left
French Janin. The latter was still sleeping, crumpled against
the vegetation. Baggs grasped the thin shoulder, shook him into
consciousness.

"I have just heard something," he said. "Listen! What is it?"

He sang without further preliminary, substituting a blank phrasing for
uncomprehended words; but the melody swept without faltering to its
conclusion. Janin answered irritably, disturbed by his rude awakening:

"The Serenade from Don Giovanni--Mozart. Well, what about it?"

"It's wonderful!" Harry Baggs declared. "Are there any more as great?"

"It is good," Janin agreed, his interest stirred; "but there are
better--the Dio Possente, the Brindisi from Hamlet. Once I led the
finale of Hamlet. I saw the Director----"

"I'll get every one," the boy interrupted.

"There are others now, newer--finer still, I'm told; but I don't know."
Janin rose and steadied himself against the fence. "Give me a start.
I've been getting confused lately; I don't seem to keep a direction like
I could. From Don Giovanni: _'Deh vieni alla finestra_'--'Come to the
window' 's about it. I'm glad you're not a tenor; they're delicate and
mean. But you are a fine boy, Harry; you'll take the old man up along
with you!"

He talked in a rapid faint voice, like his breathing. Harry Baggs
grasped his arm and led him down to their shanty. French Janin entered
first, and immediately the other heard a thin complaint from within:

"Somebody's got that nice bed you made me."

Harry Baggs went into the hut and, stooping, shook a recumbent shape.

"Get out of the old man's place!" he commanded.

A string of muffled oaths responded.

"There's no reserved rooms here."

"Get out!" Baggs insisted.

The shape heaved up obscurely and the boy sent him reeling through the
door. French Janin sank with weary relief on the straw and bagging. He
grasped the thick young arm above him.

"We won't be long in this," he declared; "diamond studs!"

He fell asleep instantly, with his fingers caught in Harry Baggs'
sleeve. The latter, with the supreme egotism of youth, of a single
ambition, loosened the hand and moved out of the narrow confinement of
the shanty. He wanted space, the sky, into which to sing his imaginary
triumphant songs.

VII

The next day moved toward its end without arresting incident. Janin
and Harry Baggs had walked to the public road, where they stood leaning
against the rail fence. The smoke from Baggs' pipe uprose in unbroken
spheres; the evening was definitely hot. French Janin said:

"In the town to-day I asked about that house here at the bend. It seems
he's got money; comes for a couple of months in the spring--just like
us--and then goes to Europe like as not. Perhaps he knows a voice."

The blind man fell silent, contemplative.

"Trouble is," he broke out fretfully, "we've got nothing to sing. That
about the 'damn old nigger' won't do. You ought to know something like
the Serenade.

"Well," he added after a moment, "why not? I could teach you the
words--it's Italian; you've nearly got the air. It's all wrong and
backward; but this isn't the Conservatoire. You can forget it when you
have started; sing exercises again."

"When can we begin?" Harry Baggs asked.

"We'll brush our clothes up best we can," Janin proceeded, absorbed
in his planning, "and go up to the porch of an evening. 'Mr.
Brinton'--that's his name--I'll say, 'I'm M. Janin, once of the
orchestra at the Opera Comique, and I'd like you to listen to a pupil of
mine. I've heard them all and this boy is better----'" He stopped; took
morphia.

"Can't you stop that for a day?" Harry Baggs demanded desperately.
"Can't you?"

He watched with bitter rebellion the inevitable slackening of the
other's being, the obfuscation of his mind. Janin hung over the fence,
with hardly more semblance of life than an incredibly tattered and empty
garment.

"Come on, you old fool!" Baggs exclaimed, burning with impatience,
balked desire; he half carried him brusquely to his bed.

Yet, under the old man's fluctuating tuition, he actually began the
Serenade within twenty-four hours. "_Deh vieni alla finestra_," French
Janin pronounced. "_Deh vieni_----" Harry Baggs struggled after him. His
brow grew wet with the intensity of his effort; his tongue, it seemed to
him, would never accomplish the desired syllables.

Janin made a determined effort to live without his drug; the abstinence
emphasized his fragility and he was cold, even in the heart of the long
sunny day; but the effort stayed him with a flickering vitality, bred
visions, renewed hopes of the future. He repeated the names of places,
opera houses--the San Carlo, in Naples; the Scala--unknown to Harry
Baggs, but which came to him with a strange vividness. The learning of
the Serenade progressed slowly; French Janin forgot whole phrases, some
of which returned to memory; one entire line he was forced to supply
from imagination.

At last the boy could sing it with a degree of intelligence; Janin
translated and reconstructed the scene, the characters.

"You ought to have some good clothes," he told Harry Baggs; he spoke
again of the necessity of a diamond stud.

"Well, I haven't," the other stated shortly. "They'll have to listen to
me without looking."

He borrowed a rusted razor and subjected himself to the pain of an
awkward shaving; then inadequately washed his sole shirt and looped the
frayed collar with a nondescript tie.

The night was immaculate; the moon, past the full, cast long segments of
light and shadow across the countryside. Harry Baggs drew a deep breath:

"We might as well go."

French Janin objected; he wasn't ready; he wasn't quite sure of what he
was going to say. Then:

"I haven't anything to show. Perhaps they will laugh at me--at Janin, of
the Opera Comique. I couldn't allow that."

"I'm going to sing," the boy reminded him; "if it's any good they won't
laugh. If what you say's right they'll have to believe you."

"I feel bad to-night, too, in my legs."

"Get your violin."

A fresh difficulty arose: French Janin positively refused to play on his
present instrument before a critical audience.

"It's as thin as a cat," he protested. "Do you want me to make a show of
myself?"

"All right; I'll sing alone. Come on!"

Janin's legs were uncertain; he stumbled over the path to the road and
stopped at the fence. He expressed fresh doubts, the hesitation of old
age; but Harry Baggs silenced him, forced him on. A cold fear possessed
the boy, which he resolutely suppressed: if Janin were wrong, his voice
worthless, if they laughed, he was done. Opportunity, he felt, would
never return. With his voice scorned, no impetus remained; he had no
other interest in life, no other power that could subdue the slight
inward flaw.

He saw this in a vivid flash of self-knowledge.... If he couldn't sing
he would go down, lower than Janin; perhaps sink to the level of Dake.

"Come on!" he repeated grimly, assisting his companion over the luminous
white road.

Janin got actually feebler as he progressed. He stopped, gasping, his
sightless face congested.

"I'll have to take a little," he whispered, "just a taste. That puts
life in me; it needs a good deal now to send me off."

He produced the familiar bottle and absorbed some powder. Its effect was
unexpected--he straightened, walked with more ease; but it acted upon
his mind with surprising force.

"I want to stop just a little," he proclaimed with such an air of
decision that Harry Baggs followed him without protest to the fragrant
bank. "You're a good fellow," Janin went on, seated; "and you're going
to be a great artist. It'll take you among the best. But you will have
a hard time for a while; you won't want anybody hanging on you. I'd only
hurt your chances--a dirty old man, a drugtaker. I would go back to
it, Harry; it's got me, like you said. People wouldn't have me round.
I doubt if I'd be comfortable with them. They'd ask me why I wasn't
Director."

"Come on," Baggs repeated for the third time; "it's getting late."

He lifted French Janin to his feet and forced him on. "You don't know
life," the other continued. "You would get sick of me; you might get
influenced to put me in a Home. I couldn't get my breath right there."

Harry Baggs forced him over the road, half conscious of the protesting
words. The fear within him increased. Perhaps they wouldn't even listen
to him; they might not be there.

His grip tightened on French Janin; he knew that at the first
opportunity the old man would sink back into the oblivion of morphia.

"I've done all I could for you, Harry"--the other whimpered. "I've
been some--good. Janin was the first to encourage you; don't expect too
much."

"If I get anywhere, you did it," Harry Baggs told him.

"I'd like to see it all," French Janin said. "I know it so well. Who'd
have thought"--a dull amazement crept into his voice--"that old Janin,
the sot, did it?... And you'll remember."

They stopped opposite the entrance to the place they sought. Harry Baggs
saw people on the porch; he recognized a man's voice that he had heard
there before. On the right of the drive a thick maple tree cast a deep
shadow, but beyond it a pool of clear moonlight extended to the house.
He started forward, but Janin dragged him into the gloom of the maple.

"Sing here," he whispered in the boy's ear; "see, the window--_Deh vieni
alla finestra_."

Harry Baggs stood at the edge of the shadow; his throat seemed to
thicken, his voice expire.

"No," he protested weakly; "you must speak first."

He felt the old man shaking under his hand and a sudden desperate calm
overtook him.

He moved forward a little and sang the first phrase of the Serenade.

A murmur of attention, of surprised amusement, arose from the porch;
then, as his voice gained in bigness, flowed rich and thrilling and
without effort from his deep powerful lungs, the murmur died away. The
song rose toward its end; Harry Baggs saw nothing but the window above
him; he put all the accumulated feeling, the longing, of the past
miserable years into his ending.

A silence followed, in which Harry Baggs stood with drooping head. Then
an unrestrained patter of applause followed; figures advanced. French
Janin gave the boy a sharp unexpected shove into the radiance beyond the
tree.

"Go on and on," he breathed; "and never come back any more!"

He turned and shambled rapidly away into the shadows, the obscurity,
that lined the road.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Happy End, by Joseph Hergesheimer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAPPY END ***

***** This file should be named 7843.txt or 7843.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/8/4/7843/

Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Tiffany Vergon, Joshua
Hutchinson, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

