The Project Gutenberg EBook of After Long Years and Other Stories, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: After Long Years and Other Stories

Author: Various

Translator: Sophie A. Miller
            Agnes M. Dunne

Posting Date: September 25, 2014 [EBook #8111]
Release Date: May, 2005
First Posted: June 15, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AFTER LONG YEARS AND OTHER STORIES ***




Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Tiffany Vergon, Tonya Allen,
Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.










[Illustration: "The Count then opened the door and overcome with emotion
he fell at the feet of the Countess."--From _"Royal Palace to Lowly
Hut"_]



_SUNSHINE AND SHADOW SERIES_



AFTER LONG YEARS

AND

OTHER STORIES


TRANSLATIONS FROM THE GERMAN BY

SOPHIE A. MILLER

AND

AGNES M. DUNNE




NOTE


These ethical stories have been translated from the German with the view
of instilling into the minds of youthful readers such truths as will
help materially toward building a character that will withstand the
trials and temptations of life.

It is conceded by educators that ethics presented in the lecture form
fails of its purpose; therefore the writers have presented this subject
in the form most appealing to children--the story.




CONTENTS


I. AFTER LONG YEARS

Chapter

I. The Journey

II. Apprenticeship

III. Alfred Banford

IV. The Stranger


II. THE CAPTIVE

Chapter

I. Home-Coming

II. The Slave

III. In the Turkish Family

IV. The Lion

V. The Offer

VI. The Plans

VII. Restored to Freedom


III. THE ARTIST'S MASTERPIECE

Chapter

I. The Gift

II. Under the Emperor's Bush

III. No Prophet in His Own Country

IV. The Condition

V. The Fulfilment


IV. THE VINEYARD ON THE HILLSIDE

Chapter

I. Missing

II. The Faithful Dog

III. The Fond Foster-Parents

IV. The Errand

V. The Old Man

VI. The Legacy

VII. The Journey


V. THE DAMAGED PICTURE

Chapter

I. The Artist

II. The Picture

III. The Discovery


VI. MEMORIES AWAKENED

Chapter

I. The Change of Circumstances

II. The Revelation


VII. THE INHERITANCE

Chapter

I. Mr. Acton and his Son

II. The Uninvited Guest

III. The Flowering Plant

IV. The Two Families

V. The Feast


VIII. HOW IT HAPPENED

Chapter

I. The Wooded Island

II. Far From Home

III. The Smoke


IX. FROM ROYAL PALACE TO LOWLY HUT

Chapter

I. The Suburbs

II. The Retreat

III. The Prison

IV. The Purchase

V. Reunited


X. THE UGLY TRINKET

Chapter

I. The Opened Door

II. The Test

III. Reverses




AFTER LONG YEARS




CHAPTERS.

I. THE JOURNEY.

II. APPRENTICESHIP.

III. ALFRED BANFORD.

IV. THE STRANGER.


[Illustration: "He halted, offered his assistance to the two half-frozen
men, helped them into the sleigh and hurried on with them."]




AFTER LONG YEARS




CHAPTER I

THE JOURNEY


The Duchess of Banford and her two children were driving toward their
villa, when, owing to the roughness of the road, the front wheel of
their coach was suddenly broken. Considerably frightened, mother and
children quickly alighted. The approaching darkness, coupled with the
loneliness of the place, added to the difficulty; for the prospect of
spending the night in the woods was particularly distressing.

Just then a stable-boy chanced along and seeing the predicament, said:
"Oh, that wheel can be easily mended. Not far from here there lives a
wheelwright, and I am sure he can repair it in a very short time." The
boy then looked about him, and seeing a long pole, said: "We can use
this to support the wagon as it drags along. The road is rugged, and it
will take us about an hour to get there."

"Is there no shorter route?" inquired the Duchess.

"This is the only wagon road; but if you wish, I will lead you along a
shorter path across the fields which will cut the distance in half."

The Duchess thanked him, and asked: "Do you think that we may take this
pole? It seems to me as though some wood-cutter had left it here to prop
a tree."

"Oh, yes," he answered, "it belongs to the wheelwright to whom I am
taking you. All the wood around here belongs to him, and he will be glad
to have this pole so handy." So saying, he hurried to get the pole and
helped the coachman fasten it in place. The horses then drew the
carriage slowly over the rocky road, while the coachman walked
alongside.

The family, however, followed the footpath, which led between tall elms
and blooming shrubbery along the edge of a babbling brook.

The silence was broken now and then by the plaintive song of a
nightingale. The Duchess and her two children seated themselves upon the
trunk of a fallen tree and listened to the music till it ceased. A
gentle wind sighed softly through the leaves of the trees, and merrily
flowed the near-by brook. As the nightingale repeated its song, they all
listened intently.

When the song was ended, the Duchess said: "I would give twenty pounds
if I had such a bird in my garden. I have heard many nightingales sing
in the city, but here in the country, in this wooded region and deep
stillness, and at this twilight hour, its song seems doubly enchanting.
Oh, that I might hear it sing in the little bower near my villa."

"Hm," whispered the stable-boy, who stood near her oldest son, Alfred,
"those twenty pounds could be easily earned."

Alfred nodded, and motioned to the boy to be still, for just then the
nightingale began to sing. When the song ceased the Duchess arose to
continue her way. Alfred, however, lagged behind with the stable-boy,
with whom he was soon busily engaged in earnest talk.

"A nightingale in a cage is not what my mother wants; what she wants is
a nightingale that is at liberty, to sing and nest and fly as it pleases
in our beautiful garden, and to return to us in the spring from its
winter home."

"I understand very well what you mean. I should not want to catch a bird
and deliver it into captivity." After questioning Alfred more closely
about the trees near his villa, the boy said: "I feel sure that I can
get a nightingale and its nest for you. I know just how to go about it.
You will soon hear its song resound from all parts of your
garden--possibly not this week, but surely next."

Alfred stood still for a moment and looked at the boy--clothed in a
shabby suit, with his hair protruding from his torn hat. Then he asked,
wonderingly, "What would you do with the money?"

"Oh," said the boy, and the tears stood in his eyes, "twenty pounds
would help us out of our troubles. You see, my father is a day-laborer.
He is not a very strong man, and I was just on my way to visit him, and
do what I could to help him. My foreman has given me a few days' leave
of absence. I don't earn much, but it helps my father a little. I often
feel that it would be a great help to him if I could earn more. I
certainly should like nothing better than to be a wheelwright. It must
be grand to be able to take the wood that lies here in the forest, and
make a beautiful carriage out of it, like the one you own. I have often
talked with the wheelwright, but he will not take me as an apprentice
until I have a certain amount of money. Besides, I should need money to
buy tools. It would cost twenty pounds, and my father and I haven't as
much as that together.

"Poor boy," thought Alfred, "if what he says is true, we must help him."
Then he said aloud, "Bring me a written recommendation from your
schoolmaster; and if the wheelwright really wants to take you, I will
give you ten pounds as soon as the nightingale sings in our garden; and I
know that the missing ten pounds will soon be forthcoming. But you must
say nothing about this to anyone until my mother's wish is gratified. I
should like to give her an unexpected pleasure."

Soon they struck the main road again, and the rest of the distance was
quickly covered.

While the wheelwright was repairing the carriage, Alfred engaged him in
conversation concerning the stable-boy, all of whose statements the man
corroborated. He also showed a willingness to apprentice the boy on the
terms stated.

The damage had now been repaired, so the Duchess paid the charges,
giving the stable-boy a few coins, and seated herself in the carriage
with her children.

After whispering a few words to the boy, to tell him how to reach the
villa, Alfred joined his mother and sister, and with tooting of horns
they proceeded on their journey in high spirits.




CHAPTER II

APPRENTICESHIP


The little stable-boy, Michael Warden, hurried on to his sick father. It
was late, and the journey would take him two hours. On his way he
stopped to buy a few delicacies for his father with the coins the
Duchess had given him. To his surprise, he found on arrival that his
father was very much improved.

Before daybreak on the following morning, Michael hurried to the woods
to find the nightingale's nest he knew so well. When he had last visited
it, he had seen five brownish-green eggs there. But as he now peered
into it he found, to his great astonishment, that the young birds had
broken through their shells. With all haste he set out for the villa,
several miles distant, to study the situation and decide where he could
best fasten the nest. Arriving there, he found a suitable place, and
then hurried back to the woods.

In the course of a few days, he succeeded in caging the parent birds.
Placing the nest beside them in the cage, he carried it to the garden of
the Duchess. He arrived there toward evening, and was hospitably
received by the gardener, who had been fully acquainted with the idea.

Adjoining the villa was a large tract of land, well wooded, which was
beautifully laid out with garden plots, pebbly, shaded paths,
vine-covered bowers and rustic seats. In one corner of the garden there
stood an odd little thatch-covered arbor, nestling between high rocks in
the shadow of the tall trees. A brook which fell in foaming whiteness
flowed past this little nook, clear as crystal, and made the stillness
fascinating by its intermittent murmuring. This spot the Duchess loved
well, and many hours of the day she spent here.

Scarcely a hundred feet distant, there stood a willow tree closely
resembling the late home of the caged nightingales. The boy had chosen
this tree and had prepared a place for the nest on a forked branch. He
went there late one evening, as the moon was shining brightly, and
placed the nest securely on this tree; then he gave the parent birds
their freedom.

The next morning, the boy returned to the spot and hid himself in the
thick shrubbery, to see whether the birds would feed their young, who
were loudly crying for food. In a little while the parent birds returned
and fed them.

"Now I have triumphed," said Michael; and he hurried to the villa to
carry to Alfred the welcome news that in a few days the nightingales
would be singing their song in his garden.

"Fine," said Alfred, "and then the money will be yours. Stay a few days
longer and you can take it with you."

Two days later, the Duchess invited her friends to a lawn-party. The sun
had risen in all its glory, the sky was unclouded, and the breezes were
light and refreshing. The garden, with all its natural beauty, afforded
a most entrancing spot for the feast, which proved perfect in every
detail and was enjoyed in full measure.

After the guests had departed, the Duchess said to her children, "Let us
spend this delightful twilight hour here in quiet. My soul is satisfied;
for what can compare with this blessed evening hour? What comparison can
there be between the grandeur of our salon and the beauty of nature?"

Just then the nightingale broke the stillness with its ecstatic song.
The Duchess was surprised, and listened intently until the song was
ended.

"I wonder how this nightingale came to my garden. The oldest residents
cannot remember ever having heard one in this region."

"Dear mother," said Alfred, "you often wished that a nightingale would
lend its song and its presence to grace this beautiful spot. The same
boy who assisted us out of a difficulty recently, helped me gratify your
wish. You remember, dear mother, that you said at that time: 'I would
give twenty pounds to have a nightingale in my garden.' That boy has
helped us please you, and we have paid him half this amount out of our
savings. The boy is worthy of the money, and it may be the foundation of
his future success."

"You have acted nobly," said the Duchess. "I am transported with ecstasy
at hearing the nightingale sing for the first time in my garden, and
also at the love which you have shown for your mother. It moves me still
more, however, when I think that my children possess a heart big enough
to part with money intended for their own use, and voluntarily give it
up to afford help and joy to others. I, too, will reward the boy
generously. I wonder what use he would make of the money."

"We could not give the money to a more worthy person," said Alfred, who
then related to his mother the boy's aspirations. "Besides, I have
written to his teacher, and this is what he says about him: 'A greater
deed of charity you could not perform than to help Michael Warden carry
out his desire to learn a trade. He is a clever, ingenious boy, and
would learn quickly. I think he would like best to be a wheelwright, and
I would suggest that you apprentice him with the master in our village.'
So you see, mother, the money would not be spent in vain."

"Very well, the money shall be his."

On the following morning, Alfred sent for Michael, and counted out to
him the money, increasing it to fifty pounds. Michael's astonishment
almost carried him off his feet, and he thanked Alfred profusely for the
extra money. He hurried home to his father and laid his wealth before
him on the table. The old man stared at it in blank amazement, and said:
"My boy, I hope you have not stolen this money!"

"No, father, but a little bird in the forest helped me," and Michael
related the incident.

His father, overjoyed, now made all preparations for Michael's outfit.
He then conducted him to the master wheelwright, paid the stipulated sum
and entered him as an apprentice. At the end of three years, the boy was
as accomplished in his trade as his master.

Before starting out into the world, Michael returned to the Castle of
Banford to tell of his progress, and once more thank the Duchess and her
children for their kindness to him. They praised him heartily for the
strides he had made. The Duchess then gave him another gift of money for
his journey, and said: "Success be yours. We must never do good by
halves; the sapling that we plant we should also water." Then with many
encouraging remarks, the Banfords bade him good-bye.

Touched by their interest and charity, Michael was so stupefied that he
could scarcely speak. When he recovered his self-control, he thanked
them all, and promised faithfully to do his best and always remember
their good advice.




CHAPTER III

ALFRED BANFORD


Alfred Banford had always been kind to the poor and dutiful and
affectionate to his mother. Suddenly he was seized with patriotic
fervor. For some time he had nursed the desire to be a soldier. At the
age of seventeen, he studied the art of warfare at a military academy.
He surprised all the officers with his military genius.

The Duchess, too, loved her fatherland, and at last she tearfully
recognized that she must give up her son to fight in defense of his
country.

"Go, then," said she, "fight for the right and your country; and may God
protect you."

Alfred fought valiantly and well, and at last was forced to proceed with
the great French army against Russia. On the way to Moscow the ranks
were greatly depleted, owing to the long, wearisome marches and
privations. After untold hardships and bloodshed, the army at last
reached Moscow, with her many palaces and temples and spires and the old
palace, the Kremlin. It was a pleasing picture. Alfred, like every other
soldier, now hoped to recuperate from the hardships of warfare. But he
found the city uninhabited, the streets deserted, the palaces and houses
empty.

At midnight, a dreadful fire which had been smoldering for several days,
broke out in wild fury and laid the greater part of the city in ashes.
The army was obliged to retreat; and many thousand brave soldiers,
exposed to snow and ice, hunger and cold, met a horrible death. One
single freezing night killed thousands of horses, Alfred's among them.
He was obliged to walk knee deep in icy water.

They traversed miles and miles of country without passing one hut; and
when in the distance a human habitation appeared and gave promise of
warmth and food, they found upon approach that it was deserted and
devoid of everything.

The poor, miserable, weakened soldiers were obliged to spend many a
weary night on the snow-covered ground, with no roof but the sky. The
need of food became more and more imperative each moment; yet if they
had had the wealth of kings, they could not have bought a dry crust of
bread; so they were reduced to the extremity of eating the flesh of
their fallen horses. They quenched their thirst with snow.

The street upon which the greater part of the army had gathered was
marked with deserted cannons and powder wagons; and on both sides lay
the dead, upon whom the fast falling snow had spread a white coverlet.
Many of the soldiers of Alfred's regiment had fallen, and lay frozen in
the snow; others were scattered here and there.

Alfred and a chum, both in a weakened condition, tried to go on. They
descried a little village, about half an hour distant; but before they
reached it, Alfred had become so weak that he fell exhausted in the
snow, saying: "Thus must I die here!" He extended his hand to his friend
and with tears in his eyes said: "Should you ever reach the Castle of
Banford, bear my love to my mother and sisters. Tell them that Alfred
Banford fought bravely, and fell in the service of his country."

These words reached the ears of a Russian gentleman, Vosky by name, who
in a rude sled was going in the direction of the village. He halted,
offered his assistance to the two half-frozen men, helped them into the
sleigh and hurried on with them. A few minutes' drive brought them to a
little inn, half concealed by the drifted snow.

The men were conducted into the house and furnished with food and
warmth. The host asked them no questions, for he saw that they were
benumbed and almost unconscious. At last, when they had recovered, he
raised his glass and said: "To your health, gentlemen. All brave
soldiers should live. I sympathize with you, although I am a Russian
subject. The sad fate of your fellow soldiers pains me. I will do all in
my power to help you. I know you are not our enemy. We have but one
enemy--the man whose iron will has forced all these hundreds of
thousands of men into our country." Then he arose and went about the
place, giving orders to his assistant.

The sleigh still stood at the door, and the horses impatiently shook the
sleigh bells and pawed the snow. As Vosky re-entered the room, his two
guests had finished their repast.

"Now," said he, "let me conduct you to a room where you can rest and
sleep, undisturbed and undiscovered." After climbing a ladder and
walking through a narrow passage, they came to a secret door which
opened into a bedroom. Alfred Banford looked about him, and was startled
when he saw in a mirror the reflection of such a pale, hungry-looking
visage and such tattered clothes.

Pity was plainly written in Vosky's kind face, but all he said was:
"Stay here and recuperate. To my sorrow, I must leave you for a little
while in order to transact some urgent business; but I will instruct my
valet to provide you with every possible comfort. Everything in this
house stands at your service."

Alfred Banford ventured to ask whether it would be perfectly safe to
remain, for he feared that Russian soldiers might capture him and that
he would be sent to Siberia.

"I give you my word," said Vosky. "You will be as safe here as the Czar
is in his Castle. Give me your word of honor to remain until my return.
I will then devise means to help you reach your country. But I must be
off now. Take good care of yourselves." And hurriedly he closed the door
behind him.

Alfred Banford marveled at the friendliness and goodness of this strange
man who had come to his rescue so unexpectedly and so opportunely, like
an angel from heaven. "It seems like awakening from a dream, to find
myself transported from an icy field to a warm, cozy room," said he. "It
borders on the miraculous--I cannot fathom it." But sleep was fast
overpowering him. He had lain for so long on straw, on icy ground, and
even in the snow, that it seemed as if he had never felt anything softer
or warmer than this bed. He soon fell asleep and rested quietly and
peacefully till the dawn.




CHAPTER IV

THE STRANGER


On the following morning, at breakfast, Alfred Banford turned to the
kind-hearted Russian servant, and said: "Do tell me what sort of man
your master is, and what is his name?"

"He is a very good man," said the servant. "I can think of no one who is
kindlier. His name is Vosky, the Czar's chief financial adviser, and he
is particularly concerned with the care of the Russian army. He has
always shown me great consideration, for I was only a poor beggar boy.

"One day one of Mr. Vosky's assistants lost a package containing some
valuable papers and a large sum of money. It was extensively advertised.
I fortunately found the package and brought it to Mr. Vosky, who was so
pleased with my honesty that he offered me a home, had me trained for a
commercial life, and now takes me with him on his journeys, partly as
secretary and partly as valet.

"His home is in St. Petersburg. This house is only used as a stopping
place when his business carries him to this region, which happens quite
frequently. Before leaving yesterday, he gave me strict orders to look
after your welfare. I trust you will be pleased with my efforts, and
give Mr. Vosky a good report when he returns."

By slow degrees Alfred Banford recovered his strength. He found books
with which to while away the time. The stillness of this secluded spot
was a gratifying change from the noisy battlefield.

One night, Mr. Vosky returned. As he entered the house, his face shone
with enthusiasm and gay spirits. "I come," said he, turning to Alfred,
"to give you liberty after your long confinement. I stand at your
service, and wish to do everything in my power to see you safely
restored to your own country. I would suggest that you go with me to St.
Petersburg; from there you can easily return to your own home by water.
I should like to introduce you to my wife and children. Besides, I could
not let you depart without suitable clothing, and I cannot provide you
with that here."

"My good man," said Alfred, "your extraordinary kindness to me exceeds
all measure. I cannot understand how I should merit such consideration
from you."

"But," said Mr. Vosky, almost choked with emotion, "I find nothing
extraordinary or bountiful in my acts. It is my duty, an act of
gratitude."

"I fail to understand you," said Alfred. "I cannot remember the
slightest favor that I have ever proffered you. I never saw you before,
and what is more, I never heard of you in my life."

"Never?" cried Mr. Vosky. "Then listen to what I have to say. My entire
fortune I owe to you. All my success I lay at your door."

Alfred looked at him in astonishment and shook his head.

"Did you never help a poor boy, by giving him fifty pounds?"

"Just now I don't remember ever having done any poor boy such a
charity."

"Now," said Vosky, "perhaps you may remember a nightingale that you
wished to have brought to your mother's garden. You will recall that
poor stable-boy who managed it for you."

"Oh, yes," said Alfred, "I remember the boy very well. He was a poor,
worthy, ambitious lad, named Michael Warden. The last I heard of him was
when he went out into the world as a wheelwright, to make his fortune."

"So, you do remember him. Well, that boy Michael was none other than
myself. Now I am the owner of a large factory, besides being financial
adviser to the Czar. I had my name legally changed to Vosky. I was that
stable-boy, that wheelwright."

"You!" cried Alfred, filled with admiration and astonishment. He sprang
forward and embraced his benefactor. "But why didn't you tell me all
this at first?"

"That was impossible," said Vosky. "It would have taken too long to
explain; and my business affairs were so pressing, and you were so
exhausted, that you could not have listened to a detailed account. I
deferred it for a more quiet, restful time, when I could express to you
my thanks. I saw that you did not recognize me, and I, too, would never
have recognized you had you not said that day as you sank in the snow,
'Give my love to my mother and sisters and say that Alfred Banford fell
in the service of his country.' Let us be thankful that we have been
brought together, and that the opportunity has been afforded me to show
you that I am not ungrateful. I cannot express to you the joy it gives
me to see you, and to be able to serve you."

Mr. Vosky then related some of the events of his life. How he had
visited the principal cities of Europe; and how he had studied under the
best men, in order to make himself proficient in his line of work.
Having heard that many Londoners were competing for the construction of
carriages for Russia, he had hastily sent in his estimate. The work was
accorded to him, and in a few years time he had amassed a large fortune.
He had also opened a large wagon factory, and as soon as the war broke
out with France, he had received orders from the Czar to supply the
Russian army with additional powder wagons. The government had been as
pleased with his promptness as with his honesty. Later, he had received
the title of "Imperial Financial Adviser."

Alfred listened earnestly, and said: "God blessed you with excellent
talents. Even as a child you showed genius. You certainly made good use
of your gifts. I see from all that you have told me, that you were
always ready to embrace an opportunity; that you worked with diligence,
honesty and system, and that you began and ended all your work with an
honest purpose. God, upon whom you relied, has blessed all your
undertakings."

"That is true," said Mr. Vosky. "The fortune which I have accumulated
gives me pleasure; for with it I can help the needy. Many a poor lad,
like myself, have I (in memory of my own childhood) taken by the hand
and helped to become a man of standing in the world."

Mr. Vosky became silent, and after a long pause said, "I sorely regret
that my poor father did not live, to see how valuable was the good
training which he gave me, and that I was not permitted to make some
return to him for his love and devotion."

On the following day, Mr. Vosky and his guests started on their journey
to St. Petersburg. The route lay along a beautiful section of the
country; and so, with entertaining conversation, they reached their
destination before they had expected.

Mr. Vosky's home was a beautiful place. His family came forward with
warm greetings, and were introduced to Alfred Banford. The children
could hardly understand how any man who looked so shabby and worn could
ever have been their father's benefactor. The father, however, explained
to them that the trials and tribulations of warfare, through which
Alfred had passed, accounted for his appearance; and they were moved to
sympathy for his sufferings.

Mr. Vosky had his tailor furnish Alfred with a complete outfit, suitable
to his station.

Alfred remained with the Vosky family until the following spring, when
they escorted him to the wharf. Mr. Vosky gave him a large roll of
bills, for which Alfred thanked him, and said: "I will send you a check
for this amount as soon as I reach home."

"Oh, no," said Mr. Vosky; "rather give the money to some poor boy. What
we give to the poor always returns to us."

With many adieus and handshakes, Alfred departed; and the Vosky family
continued waving their handkerchiefs until the vessel was lost to view.




THE CAPTIVE




CHAPTERS.

I.   HOME-COMING.

II.  THE SLAVE.

III. IN THE TURKISH FAMILY.

IV.  THE LION.

V.   THE OFFER.

VI.  THE PLANS.

VII. RESTORED TO FREEDOM.


[Illustration: The Master of the House.]




THE CAPTIVE




CHAPTER I

HOME-COMING


Early one morning, Antonio, a noble youth of sixteen, was wandering by
the seashore. He had just come from a high school in Salerno, Italy, and
wished to spend the Easter holidays at his father's ancestral home. The
earth looked gay in all the beauty of spring, and the sea shone in the
rosy light of the morning sun. Antonio's heart glowed with adoration as
he gazed upon the scene, and he thanked the Creator of all these
wonders. With hurried steps he continued his way, thinking of his home
and the reception awaiting him.

His parents were of noble birth. They had lost considerable property and
money; but they desired to give their son every advantage and--what was
worth more than money--an excellent education. From his earliest
childhood, they had taught him to reverence God and respect the laws.
All his talents were being carefully developed. At a great personal
sacrifice, they had sent him to the high school. Here Antonio denied
himself many pleasures in which his richer classmates indulged, and
tried in every way to live economically. He made no secret of his lack
of money, nor did he envy those who possessed more than he did. So on
this particular morning we find Antonio saving traveling expenses by
making the journey to his home on foot.

The path led through some tall bushes and curved around a huge rock.
Here he suddenly espied a queer looking vessel lying at anchor. Several
men with swarthy faces, clothed in a strange, odd fashion, were drawing
water from a spring which gushed from the rock. They were pirates from
Algiers. As soon as they caught sight of the boy, they sprang upon him,
like tigers upon a harmless lamb, seized him, dragged him to the ship,
robbed him of his beautiful clothing, dressed him like a slave, bound
him hand and foot and placed him beside some other captives, who greeted
Antonio with loud cries.

When Antonio had recovered from the first great shock, he folded his
chained hands, and turning his eyes towards the heavens, he cried aloud
to God for strength to bear this great trial, and for safe deliverance
from, the hands of his enemies.

The other prisoners, mostly Italians, had understood his prayers and
were deeply touched by his great faith. They soon became confidential,
and little by little they unfolded to one another the story of their
lives. One prisoner, well versed in law, who knew Antonio's father,
showed the boy much sympathy. Another prisoner, a sailor, grieved over
the old parents whose mainstay he had been for many years. "Oh," sighed
he, "now hunger and want will overtake them." Another, a fisherman,
somewhat older than the rest, was the saddest of them all. He sat apart
at one end of the ship, holding his head in his hand and weeping
silently. He was the father of five children. He grieved sorely when he
thought what his absence would mean to them. Antonio tried to comfort
the old man with the assurance that some rescuer would be sent to save
them.

All the prisoners listened to Antonio. His appearance, his friendliness,
his cheerfulness, his faith, his trust brightened them all and gave them
renewed hope. Then the fisherman stood up and said: "This boy has been
sent to cheer us. Let us trust as he does, and some day, perhaps, our
chains may be removed." Then he began to sing and all the prisoners
joined in the song.




CHAPTER II

THE SLAVE


The pirates now weighed anchor, and slowly the ship began to move.
Antonio watched the mountains, the hills, the temples and the palaces
gradually become smaller and smaller and finally fade from view. Then a
great pain at leaving his beloved fatherland, his sunny Italy, clutched
his heart. Soon he was able to see nothing but the heavens and the vast
expanse of water.

For several days the vessel sailed hither and thither, in search of more
prey. Suddenly the pirates spied in the distance a warship, which was in
pursuit of them. The prisoners rejoiced in silence and felt buoyed by
the hope of an early rescue. The pirates lashed the prisoners to greater
activity, and made them help with the oars. Under cover of the night,
the pirates made their escape.

As the morning sun broke over the sea, Antonio gazed upon the waters,
and saw nothing of the warship. His heart sank, and he could scarcely
repress his tears. But suddenly he raised his voice, and said to his
fellow-prisoners, "Though our trusting prayers have not been answered,
they will not pass unheeded, and our deliverance will surely come."

In less than an hour they saw in the distance the city of Algiers,
glistening in the sunlight. Little by little they were able to
distinguish the houses, and the Temple of the Turks, with the sign of
the Crescent upon it.

The ship anchored, the prisoners were landed, and after a short rest
were led through the narrow, dirty streets to the market place. Here
they were exhibited for sale like cattle. The purchasers passed among
the prisoners, and examined them as they would horses. In order to
display their strength, the prisoners were obliged to lift heavy stones,
placed there for that purpose. Many sales were made. The lawyer, the
sailor and several others went for a good price. As Antonio could not
lift the heavier stones, the buyers considered him too weak for a slave
and scornfully passed him by.

A little removed from the crowd, there stood a merchant with a very
wrinkled face, who seemed to be taking but little interest in the sale.
After all the captives had been sold, except Antonio, the merchant
stepped nearer, put on his spectacles, and surveyed Antonio from head to
foot. He examined his hands, and hesitated when he found them soft and
white. "But," said the merchant, speaking in Italian, "there must be
something that you have learned." Antonio thought a moment, and not
wishing to hide anything, said confidently that he could do clerical
work and could write in the Italian and French languages. "Hm, hm," said
the merchant, "that is something, but what else can you do?"

Antonio said, "I understand Latin and Greek."

"Oh, my, such wares we cannot use here. Is there nothing else that you
know?"

"Yes," answered Antonio, "I can sing and play the guitar."

"I wish I had an instrument at hand," said the merchant; "but suppose
you sing a song for me."

Antonio did as the old man wished, and his voice was sweet and clear.

The merchant offered three gold pieces for Antonio, but as the dealers
kept on raising the price, the merchant shrugged his shoulders, turned
and went on.

The pirates called him back and offered him the boy for ten gold pieces.
The merchant paid the price, and the boy belonged to him.

It grieved Antonio to think that he had been bought like a horse or a
dog; but his trust and faith were so steadfast that he knew, in the
fullness of time, some good would result from it.

The merchant was named Jesseph. He carried on a slave business, but only
occasionally. Slaves who were accustomed to rough, hard work he never
deigned to purchase; such as were young, active, refined or clever
suited his purpose best. Besides, he tried to buy at the lowest figure,
and sell at a great profit. He certainly hoped to sell Antonio at a high
price.

When he reached home, he said to his overseer: "See what a fine specimen
I have brought. Notice his manly bearing and refined, handsome face. See
the intelligence that beams from his eyes. All these things fill me with
the expectation of soon disposing of him profitably.

"Now," said he, turning to Antonio, "go with my overseer and buy
yourself a guitar of the very best make." Then, addressing the overseer,
he said, "Be sure you pay the very least amount possible."

When they returned Jesseph bade Antonio play and sing.

"Oh, that is beautiful!" cried he. "That touches the heart. You talk
well and you sing well; both are good recommendations and will certainly
secure for you a fine position." And, thought he to himself, "will bring
me a good price, too."

Jesseph did not try to sell Antonio immediately. He hoped to teach him a
little of the language, manners and customs of the Turks, so that he
could the better fill a position in a Turkish household. He gave him
instruction, and was surprised at his rapid progress. He fed him well
and housed him well, and exacted from him daily labor at clerical work.
Often Antonio was obliged to unpack large cases of goods; but he
performed all the work with patience, cheerfulness and obedience.




CHAPTER III

IN THE TURKISH FAMILY


A year had slowly passed. One day Jesseph called Antonio to him and
said: "I have some good news to impart. I have secured a very desirable
position for you, and I am certain that you will meet all the
requirements."

Jesseph bade Antonio gather together his things, and provided him with a
suitable outfit. At the end of the week, he conducted Antonio to a
Turkish house in the heart of the city. The servant, having announced
their arrival, ushered them into a magnificent reception room.

The master of the house, a Turk, clad in rich Turkish garments, sat upon
a divan, smoking a long bamboo pipe which was filled with fragrant
tobacco. Beside him, on a low table, stood a cup of coffee.

Turning to Antonio, the Turk said, "I have been told that you are a fine
singer and player. Let me hear you perform."

Modestly Antonio addressed the Turk and said: "I can sing nothing in
your language; I know only Italian songs."

"That will please me, as I understand Italian. Just sing and play what
you know best," said the Turk.

Then Antonio, who felt himself an outcast from his own pleasant, sunny
Italy, and transported as a captive to Africa, softly lifted his voice,
and sang a song of home and fatherland, with deep tenderness and
soulfulness.

The Turk listened attentively, the smoke rising from his pipe, and said
as soon as the song was ended: "Bravo! your talent exceeds my
expectation."

After plying Antonio with a few more questions, he said, "I think you
possess the necessary qualifications."

Then the Turk counted out one hundred gold pieces to Jesseph and laid
them upon the table. Jesseph counted them and placed them in his leather
bag. "Your honor," said he, turning to the Turk, "will be pleased with
this bargain, I am sure; and you, Antonio, must show by your good works
that you are worthy the price. Live well! Adieu!"

The Turk, Ashmed by name, was a rich merchant who traded extensively
with other countries. He wished Antonio to carry on his correspondence
with French and Italian merchants, and to serve in his house.

As it was now time to dine, he directed Antonio to prepare himself and
then proceed to the dining-room.

[Illustration: "Now you may sing and play for us."]

Here Antonio became acquainted with the other members of the household.
At the table there were four persons, Ashmed, his wife, Fatime, and
their two children, a boy and a girl.

As Ashmed's wife removed the veil which had concealed her face, Antonio
was struck by her exquisite beauty. The children, who were very well
behaved, greeted him in a friendly way and watched him attentively.
Antonio tried to do his best, and felt amply repaid when Ashmed said:
"Your services this day have pleased us. Now you may sing and play for
us."

As Antonio had noticed the affection which existed in this household, he
sang a sweet Italian song of motherly love.

"The song is beautiful," said the girl. And the boy said, "I wish I
could sing like that."

"Very well," said the father, "Antonio shall teach you."

The children were overjoyed, and Antonio assured the father that it
would give him great pleasure to instruct them. The music served as a
bond to draw them closer, and soon the children grew very fond of
Antonio. This pleased the parents, and won for Antonio their full
appreciation.




CHAPTER IV

THE LION


Ashmed now decided to take his family, Antonio included, to visit his
country estate, which lay in the southwestern part of Algeria near the
mountains. Here he owned a large house, surrounded by a beautiful
garden. A short distance from the house stood a great number of olive
trees belonging to the estate. Many slaves were busily employed
gathering the olives, which were afterwards pressed to extract the oil.

Shortly after their arrival, Ashmed took his family to view the estate
and to watch the laborers finishing their day's work. The sun was fast
declining and the men, before leaving the grounds for the day, tried to
extinguish a small fire which they had shortly before lighted. They
stamped on the burning material and scattered it, leaving a brand or two
to die out slowly.

Ashmed and Fatime walked on to view the mountains, whose tops glowed in
the sunlight, while the valley lay in shadow. The two children enjoyed
themselves chasing insects that looked to them like flying diamonds.

Suddenly there came down the mountain path a ferocious lion, with
bristling mane and wide open month. All fled toward the house, pale with
fright. The little girl, Almira, who could not run so fast, lost her
footing and fell helpless on the ground as the lion was approaching her.
Antonio quickly seized a glowing fire-brand, swung it in circles and
thus renewed the flames. With this fiery torch whirling before him, he
walked boldly in the direction of the lion.

He knew that all animals fear fire. The lion stumbled, stood still,
shook his mane, uttered a roar that brought a thunderous echo from the
mountains, then slowly retreated, always keeping his eyes fixed upon the
torch. The enraged lion again stood still, growled and roared louder
than before, and once more stood ready to spring. Antonio plucked up
courage, and steadily swung his fiery weapon before him. The lion stood
still for the third time. Suddenly it turned, trotted up the mountain
path, and soon disappeared in the darkness of the approaching night.

In the meantime the frightened child had reached her mother, who had
tried hard to save her, but had found herself too helpless to move.
Almira sank into her mother's arms, overcome with the shock. The mother
pressed her child's pale face close to her own, and their tears mingled.
The father turned his eyes, full of gratitude, toward heaven. He drew
Antonio, inwardly trembling, close to his side and pressed his hands in
silent thanks. Little Aladin caressed his sister and said: "How glad I
am that you are saved. If Antonio had not been here, the lion would have
eaten you."

The father and mother praised Antonio for his heroism. But Antonio was
only too glad to have saved Almira; and at night he thanked God for the
strength and courage which He had sent him to save a human life.




CHAPTER V

THE OFFER


In his whole life Antonio had never slept so peacefully as he did on
this night; never had he arisen from his bed in such a happy frame of
mind as on the following morning. He walked out into the garden and
gazed for a long time at the sun, just peeping over the hills; he
thought it had never shone so brightly. Never had the heavens appeared
so blue or the flowers more vivid. Each dewdrop, too, seemed to be more
brilliant. All nature proclaimed itself friendlier than ever. With the
fragrance of the flowers, his grateful prayer ascended to heaven. As he
went about gathering blossoms for the decoration of the house, he met
his master, Ashmed, who wished him a pleasant good-morning.

"Come with me; I have something important to tell you," said Ashmed.

He took Antonio affectionately by the hand and led him to a pathway
lined on both sides with flowering bushes, where they walked up and down
for a few moments in deep silence. After a short pause, Ashmed said: "I
am greatly indebted to you, Antonio. You have saved my child. Each
moment I realize your bravery more and more fully. From this hour you
shall no longer be my slave, but I will look upon you as my son. You
shall share all our joys."

For a moment Antonio seemed unable to utter a word, so completely was he
lost in thought and overcome with emotion. Oh, the delight of being once
more free, with the possibility of some day clasping in his arms his
loved ones, still so far away. Suddenly awaking from his reverie,
Antonio thanked Ashmed again and again.

Resuming their walk, Antonio talked of his childhood and his home in
Italy; and so tenderly and pathetically did he speak of his parents that
Ashmed's heart was deeply moved.

Appreciating the confidence and love which he felt drawing him closer
and closer to the Turk, Antonio continued the conversation. He vividly
described his home and country, and expressed a great longing to visit
the familiar scenes again, and be clasped in the arms of his parents.

This awoke in Ashmed a sense of the great loss which Antonio and his
parents had suffered. As he had on the previous day almost lost his dear
Almira, he now understood much better what the loss of a child could
mean. He began to think how noble it would be to restore Antonio to his
parents. He said nothing, however, and together they walked toward home.

When Antonio entered the house he found Fatime awaiting her husband.

"Good Antonio!" she cried, as he entered, "you certainly performed a
heroic deed yesterday. You snatched my child from death's grasp, and you
did it at the risk of your own life."

"It was no more than my duty," said Antonio.

Then Almira took his hand and said: "Antonio, how good you were to save
me"; and she kissed him again and again.

Fatime then led him to talk of himself, and became intensely interested
in the tale of his home and early training. Her mother's heart went out
to the boy who had saved her child.

Breakfast had been long delayed. As Ashmed now entered the room, the
meal was soon dispatched, and the children went with Antonio to an
adjoining room, where they sang and played till dinner time.




CHAPTER VI

THE PLANS


Ashmed and Fatime withdrew to the library, and seated themselves to
enjoy a quiet half-hour in conversation.

"My dear husband," said his wife, "I wish you had come a few moments
sooner, and you would have heard a sad story. It was so full of love and
longing that if I could help Antonio get back to his mother I feel that
I should be repaying him, in a measure at least, for saving my child.
Oh, how much better I understand now what a mother must feel at the loss
of a child."

Ashmed's face brightened as he heard these words. "How thankful I am
that you are so minded," said he. "I feel just as you do, and I wish to
discuss the matter fully with you."

Fatime was ready with plans at once. "You have," said she, "often spoken
of taking a trip to Italy and making your residence there. What could
better suit your purpose than to do it now. Our treasures of gold and
silver, pearls, diamonds and other valuables we could take with us. Our
landed estates and all your wares we could sell. Let us do so as soon as
possible, and leave Algiers forever."

Ashmed praised his wife for her cleverness, and resolved to carry out
her plans immediately.

After a few more months of planning, he met with unusual success in
disposing of his property, real and personal, and with his wife, the
children and Antonio soon took passage on a steamer bound for Italy.

As the city of Algiers receded from view, Ashmed and his family felt
happy. Antonio was the happiest boy in the world. The thought of home
and parents made the voyage seem a short one to him; and soon the city
of Salerno could be seen in the distance. When the steamer reached port,
Ashmed and his family took up their quarters at a hotel, while Antonio
was permitted to seek his home and family.

One evening, as Antonio's parents were seated beneath a tree at the door
of their cottage, thinking and talking of their loved boy, there came
toward them a stranger. At first they did not recognize him as their
Antonio, for he had grown taller and his complexion browner; but when
they looked into his face, they saw there such an expression of love and
tenderness, that they immediately knew their son. Oh, the great joy of
this meeting, and the embracing and hand-shaking! Words failed them; for
they were so overcome with emotion that they could not speak; but they
drew him in triumph into the house. Antonio removed his cloak and stood
before them, richly clad, suitable to his station. His mother soon
prepared a sumptuous meal for him, and while partaking of it, he related
to his parents the events that had occurred during his long absence.
They wept over his woes, and rejoiced over his bravery, and praised him
for his steadfastness.

At the end of the week Ashmed and his family called upon Antonio's
people. Ashmed honored them as if they were his own. He knew, too, that
they had met with many financial losses, so he had made out a deed to
them, which he handed to them, saying: "As I have been benefited through
you and your son, whom you trained so well, and who saved my child, I
feel that it is my duty to share my fortune with you. Here is a deed
which represents one-fourth of my wealth."

"No--no," answered Antonio's father. "Far be it from me to accept one
penny. True, we are not rich; but neither are we poor, and in the return
of our long-lost Antonio we feel richly repaid. We offer you our
gratitude and thank you for your protection of him, and for your
generosity."

"I regret that you will not accept my offer, but I trust you will not
prevent me from bestowing it upon your son, Antonio. He has been so well
tested that I know riches will not spoil him. Here, my dear Antonio,
take this deed."

"I," answered Antonio, "cannot accept your handsome gift, but if I may,
I would beg you to use your riches in behalf of those men who were taken
captive with me on that pirate ship, particularly the young lawyer, the
poor sailor and the old fisherman, and buy their freedom for them. There
is a society here in Salerno which devotes its time and attention to the
needs of the outcast, the lost and the captive; and as it is in great
need of funds, I know that your donation would be most acceptable to it
and be productive of much good. I beg you to use the money in this way.
A greater charitable work you can never perform."

Ashmed answered: "Not only half, but all of this money, I will give as a
ransom for the three unfortunates you name, and for many more."

This greatly pleased Antonio, and he said: "I thank you sincerely, and I
am sure that many blessings will be sent you in return."




CHAPTER VII

RESTORED TO FREEDOM


After searching for a suitable place to settle, Ashmed purchased a
beautiful house not far from Antonio's home. The families exchanged
visits, and their friendly relations continued for years and years.
Antonio resumed his studies at the best colleges, his tuition being paid
by his friend and benefactor.

One day, at Eastertide, Antonio returned home for a short visit. Ashmed
and his family called upon Antonio, to whom they presented a letter
which they had just received. In it, Antonio read the greetings which
his friend, the lawyer, extended to him, together with thanks to him and
Ashmed for their kind helpfulness in securing his liberty for him.

On the following day, as the guests were all seated at the table, a
knock announced some strangers. They were the old fisherman and the
young sailor who had been captives with Antonio, but were now free and
had come to offer their thanks. It was a touching sight.

Ashmed said, "Don't thank me, but rather this boy. He is your
emancipator."

"Yes," said the old fisherman, "this is the boy who appeared to us, like
an angel, and comforted us as we sat in chains. We now lay our thanks
at his feet."

Antonio waved them back and said, "Thank my dear parents, for they
taught me by word and example; and everything I have done is due to
their training."

Then Antonio's father stepped into their midst and raising his eyes to
heaven, said: "All honor and praise we give to God. As always, He has
made everything turn out for the best. He sends us great sorrows for
some good purpose; but He also sends us great joys. When a child follows
the good instructions received from good parents, makes good use of his
talents, and forgets not to be grateful, he will become an instrument of
good for the benefit of humanity. Antonio was sent to you in your
captivity, and through Antonio you were all led back to your liberty.
Let us give thanks."

After a long silence, the conversation again became animated. The men
narrated the varied incidents in their lives, and talked about their
future prospects.

Ashmed gave the men some ready money with which to start in business,
and they promised to repay him as soon as they were able. Ashmed did not
wish the money refunded, but they felt that it would be more manly to do
this.

As the time for departure arrived, the men bade Antonio and Ashmed
good-bye, and were off.

The next day Antonio returned to college. He continued his studies there
for several years, and was graduated with high honors.

In the course of time he became an opera singer of international fame.
He always maintained a dignified bearing, free from any vanity; and
recognizing his gift as coming from God, accepted the praise and
acclamation of the world in all humility.

He found time in his busy life to help the needy, and later became a
director of the society which we have said was organized for the rescue
of the outcast. He devoted his voice, his hands, his strength and his
life to the betterment of mankind.




THE ARTIST'S MASTER-PIECE




CHAPTERS.

I. THE GIFT.

II. UNDER THE EMPEROR'S BUSH.

III. No PROPHET IN HIS OWN COUNTRY.

IV. THE CONDITION.

V. THE FULFILMENT.


[Illustration: "Hans, undaunted, stepped up to her father."]




THE ARTIST'S MASTERPIECE




CHAPTER I

THE GIFT


A little village with its scattered glimmering lights lay in peaceful
dreams. Just as a black swan draws her young under her, so the mighty
Cathedral rested in the midst of the low houses, which seemed to creep,
like birds, under its wing.

It struck twelve from the church tower, and larger and smaller clocks,
near and far, carried the message onward. Dead silence again hovered
over the sleeping village.

Just as dawn bathed the hills in sunlight, two stately men wandered
along the Cathedral Square. One seemed somewhat older, with his full
gray beard. His hair, rich and abundant, curled beneath his velvet cap.
He walked so majestically that one could see, at the very first glance,
that he was no ordinary person, but one upon whose shoulders an
invisible weight rested. Handsome, tall and noble, just as one would
picture the highest type of man--a king from head to foot.

Here, in the little village of Breisach, as he named it, Emperor
Maximilian liked to rest from the cares of his Empire. Here, in this
little retreat, filled with calm and quietude, he loved to wander. From
here he sent letters full of tender thoughts to his daughter in the
Netherlands.

He loved the place well, and christened it "Care-Free."

As Emperor Maximilian walked proudly, but with heavy tread, along the
parapet of the Cathedral Square, his eye rested upon the gay scene at
his feet. To-day the invisible world of care pressed heavily upon his
shoulders. Suddenly he stood still, and turning to his private
secretary, he said, "I wonder who those children are who are so
industriously planting a rose-bush in the niche of the wall?"

The children, a girl and a boy (the former about eight, and the latter
twelve years of age), were so engrossed in their work that they had not
noticed the approach of the Emperor, until his presence was so near that
it startled them. They turned full face upon him. Then the boy touched
the girl and said, "It's the Emperor!"

"What are you doing there?" he asked, and his artistic eye feasted on
the beauty of this charming pair.

"We are planting a rose-bush," said the boy, undaunted.

The Emperor smiled, and said, "What is your name?"

"Hans Le Fevre, sir."

"And the little one, is she your sister?"

"No, she is Marie, our neighbor's child."

"Ah!--you like each other very much?"

"Yes, when I'm old enough, and when I own a knife, I'm going to marry
her."

The Emperor opened his eyes wide, and said, "Why do you need a knife?"

"Surely," answered the boy, earnestly, "if I have no knife I cannot cut,
and if I cannot cut I can earn no money. My mother has always said that
without money one cannot marry. Besides, I should have to have much
money to enable me to marry my little friend Marie, as she is the
Counselor's daughter."

"But," questioned the Emperor, "what do you want to cut?"

"Wood!"

"Ha! ha! I understand. You want to be a wood-carver. Now, I remember
that I once met two young boys, named Le Fevre. They were studying in
Nuernberg, with Duerer, 'The Prince of Artists.' Were they, perhaps, your
relatives?"

"Yes, my cousins, and once I saw them carve, and I would like to learn
how, too; but my father and uncle are dead, and my mother never buys me
a knife."

The Emperor thrust his hand into his pocket, and after much fumbling and
jingling, pulled out a knife with an artistically carved handle. "Will
that do?" said he.

The boy flushed, and one could see how beneath his coarse, torn shirt
his heart beat with joy.

"Yes," stammered the boy, "it's beautiful."

"Well, take it and use it diligently," said the Emperor.

The boy took the treasure from the Emperor's hand as carefully as if it
were red hot and might burn his fingers.

"I thank you many times!" was all that he could say; but in his dark
eyes there beamed a fire of joy whose sparks of love and gratitude
electrified the Emperor.

"Would you like to go to your cousins in Nuernberg, and help them in
plate-engraving! There's plenty of work there."

"I would like to go to Duerer in Nuernberg, but I don't want to be a
plate-engraver. I would rather cut figures that look natural."

"That's right," said the Emperor, "you will be a man, indeed; always
hold to that which is natural and you will not fail."

At that moment the Emperor drew a leather bag from his velvet riding
jacket and gave it to the boy.

"Be careful of it. Save the golden florins within; give them to no one.
Remember, the Emperor has ordered that they be used toward your
education. Study well, and when you are full-grown and able to travel,
then go to Duerer, in Nuernberg. Convey to him my greetings; say to him
that, as I, while in his studio one day, held the ladder for him lest he
fall, so should he now hold the ladder of fame for you, that you may be
able to climb to the very top of it. Will you promise me all that, my
boy?"

"Yes, your majesty!" cried Hans, inspired, and, seizing the Emperor's
right hand, he shook it heartily and kissed it. Then the Emperor passed
on, while the boy stood there in a dream. Marie still held tightly to
her apron.

Just at that moment a servant appeared who had been in search of Marie.
The children ran to meet her and related their experience with the
Emperor. The servant called all the townsfolk together to see the knife
and the contents of the bag, but wise Hans kept the bag closed.

The next day the Emperor rode off; but for many days to come his talk
with Hans was the town topic. "Surely, it is no wonder," said the
envious ones. "Hans always was a bold boy and knew how to talk up for
himself, so why shouldn't he know how to talk to the Emperor?" This
speech was decidedly undeserved; but Hans was too young to understand
their meanness. He was absorbed in the Emperor's greatness and
kindliness.




CHAPTER II

UNDER THE EMPEROR'S BUSH


Years passed. Hans Le Fevre lost his mother and Marie hers; and closer
and closer did the bond of companionship draw these children.

In the evening, when her father was busy with a committee-meeting and
the housekeeper was gossiping with the neighbors, Hans and Marie would
climb the garden wall. Here they would sit together, while Hans cut
beautiful toys for her, such as no child of those times had. He would
talk with her about all the beautiful pictures and carvings he had
lately seen, and of the masters in the art of wood-carving; for now he
was attending art lectures and studying hard. Hours were spent in this
way; but often, when the opportunity offered, they would run off to the
Cathedral and water the rose-bush, which Hans had now christened the
"Emperor's Bush."

There they loved best to linger, for there they hoped always that the
Emperor would return. And often they would cry out aloud, "Your Majesty,
Your Majesty, come again!"

But their voices died away unanswered; for, far from them, the Emperor
was concerned with the affairs of State. The children waited for him in
vain. The Emperor came no more.

As the time went by, the children grew, and the rose-bush grew also.
Just as if the tender threads of love in their hearts had unconsciously
entwined them as one around the roots of the little bush, it kept
drawing them to itself, there in the niche of the wall. There they found
each other, day after day. The bush was like a true friend, who held
their two hands fast in his. But their true friend was not strong enough
to hold together what other people wished to separate.

The lovely, highly respected Counselor's daughter was no longer
permitted to meet Hans. Her father forbade her one day, saying that Hans
was not only poor but was not even a native of the town. His ancestors
were Hollanders who had wandered into Breisach. A stranger he was, and a
poor stranger at that. He was a sort of Pariah and could not be fitted
into their time-honored customs. Then, too, he did not pursue any
regular trade. "He expects to be an artist." At that time that was as
good as to be a robber, or a tramp or a conjurer.

Whatever Hans did or whatever he worked at, he kept a secret. He had
bought the little house in which he dwelt, and since his mother's death
had lived there all alone. Nobody came or went, except a famous sculptor
who had quarreled one day with a native in Breisach and been obliged to
leave the town. People said that Hans helped him get away. Ever since
that time Hans had been in ill-repute with his rich neighbor, the
Counselor.

Often Hans met Marie at the "Emperor's Bush," and these little meetings
seemed to make them like each other more than they had ever dreamed.
After Hans had missed Marie for many days, he sang a little song beneath
her window.

The next day she met Hans at the "Emperor's Bush," and there they
promised to be true to each others always. Then, in a moment of ecstasy,
Hans cried out, "Would that the Emperor were here!" Just as if he felt
that no one but the Emperor was worthy of sharing his great joy.

As the Emperor did not come, Hans cut the initials "M." and "H." in the
bark of the rosebush, and above it a little crown. This meant "Marie,
Hans and Emperor Maximilian."

The fall passed and winter came; and the children now seldom saw each
other. Hans sang so frequently beneath Marie's window that her father
heard him one night, and in great anger threatened to punish her if she
continued her acquaintance with this boy.

One evening Hans and Marie stood for the last time under the rose-bush
which they had planted eight years before. He was now a youth of twenty
years; she a rosebud of sixteen summers.

It was a lowering day in February. The snow had melted and a light wind
shook the bare branches of the bush. With downcast eyes she had related
to him all she had been forced to hear concerning him; and big tears
rolled down her cheeks.

"Marie," said the boy in deep grief, "I suppose you will finally be made
to believe that I am really a bad person?"

Then she looked full upon him, and a light smile played over her
features as she said: "No, Hans, never, never. No one can make me doubt
you. They do not understand you, but I do. You have taught me (what the
others do not know) everything that is good and great and noble. You
have made me what I am; just as your artistic hands have cut beautiful
forms out of dead wood." She took his big, brown hands and gently
pressed them to her lips. "I believe in you, for you worship the Supreme
with your art; and the man who does that, in word or deed, cannot be
wicked."

"And will you always remain true, Marie, till I have perfected myself
and my art, and can return to claim you?"

"Yes, Hans, I will wait for you; and should I die before you return, it
is here under this rosebush, where we have spent so many happy hours,
that I wish to be buried. You must return here to rest, when wearied by
your troubles; and every rose-leaf that falls upon you will be a good
wish from me."

Her tears fell silently, and their hearts were sorely tried by the grief
of parting.

"Don't cry," said Hans, "all will yet be well. I am going to Duerer, as
the Emperor bade me. I will learn all that I can; and when I feel I know
something, I will seek the Emperor, wherever he may be, tell him my
desires, and beg him to intercede for me with your father."

"Oh, yes, the Emperor--if he were only here, he would help us."

"Perhaps he will come again," said Hans. "We will pray that he be sent
to us, or I to him."

They sank upon their knees in the cold, soft winter grass; and it seemed
to them as if a miracle would be performed, and the rose-bush be changed
into the Emperor.

There--what was that? The big clock on the church struck slowly,
solemnly, sadly--

The two looked up. "What is it, do you suppose? A fire--enemies,
perhaps? I sense a great calamity," said she.

Just at that moment people were coming toward the church. Hans hurried
up to them, to find out what was the trouble, while Marie waited.

"Where have you been, that you don't know? Why, yonder in the market
place the notice was read--'the Emperor is dead!'" they cried.

"The Emperor is dead?"

There stood Hans, paralyzed. All his hopes seemed shattered. As soon as
quiet reigned again, he returned to Marie, and seated himself on a
bench. Leaning his head in uncontrollable grief against the slender stem
of the rose-bush, he moaned aloud: "Oh, my Emperor, my dear, good
Emperor, why did you leave me?" Lightly Marie touched his shoulder in
sympathy.

The last rays of the setting sun had now departed. The last tones of the
dirge had died away. Everything was still and deserted, as if there
could never again be spring.

"Oh, Marie!" lamented Hans, hopelessly, "the King will never come
again."

"Bear up," said Marie, "for we have each other." And as she gazed far
off in the twilight, her eyes seemed like two exiled stars, yearningly
seeking their home.

As Hans gazed at her, standing there before him with her hands crossed
over her breast, in all her purity and humility, a great joy lit up his
countenance. He folded his hands, inspired.

"Marie," he whispered, "let us not despair. In this very moment I have
received an inspiration, and if I can bring to pass that which I now see
in my mind's eye, I shall be an artist who will need the help of no
one--not even an Emperor."

The dawn of the next day found Hans ready to set out on his journey. He
carried a knapsack on his back, and on his breast the little leather bag
which the Emperor had given him, with the few florins that remained. He
closed the door of his little house, put the key into his pocket, and
walked slowly off. Loud and clear sounded his rich, soft voice as he
sang, "On the rose thorn, on the rose thorn, there my hope is hanging!"

Softly in Marie's house a window was raised, and with a little white
handkerchief she gently waved her mute farewell.

Quickly mastering himself, Hans grasped his staff more firmly, and now
only his heavy tread echoed through the streets.




CHAPTER III

NO PROPHET IN HIS OWN COUNTRY


Year after year passed. Hans Le Fevre had not been heard from. People
thought of him, however, when they passed his house with the front door
firmly locked and the shades drawn, and wondered who would next lay
claim to it.

Only Marie thought constantly of him, and hoped and waited longingly. No
pleading, no scolding, no threats could arouse her. She never left the
house, unless it was to visit the rose-bush which she watered and tended
so well that it had now grown tall and stately. She knew that the sight
of it would cheer his faithful heart on his return. It was the only bond
between them. He had planted it with her, and they both loved it. It was
almost as high as the niche where it stood, and seemed as if it wished
to stretch beyond. Marie bent it and fastened it to the wall with a
string, so that its flowering top had to bend beneath the vaulted niche.

These quiet acts were her only joy, her only recreation. In work and
prayer she passed her days, and her fresh young cheeks began to pale.
Her father noticed the change, but without pity.

It was fortunate for her that his busy life took him away from home so
often.

Just at this time the people of Breisach desired a new altar for their
church. A proclamation was accordingly sent forth to all German artists
to compete, by submitting drawings and estimates for the work. To the
one who sent the best the contract would be given to carry out the
design.

Marie heard little about this, as she seldom came in contact with the
people. She lived lonely in her little home. It was now the fifth year
since Hans' departure, and long ago his letters had ceased to come,
because her father had forbidden any correspondence. Hans had no friends
in Breisach through whom he could communicate. But such uncertainty
gnaws. Marie was tired of waiting--very tired.

One afternoon she seated herself at her desk and started to write her
last wish. Her father was absent, and she was unwatched.

"When I die," she wrote, "I beg you to bury me yonder beside the
Cathedral wall, under the rose-bush which I planted in my childhood.
Should Hans Le Fevre ever return, I beg you--" she paused, for just then
a song, at first soft, then louder, greeted her ears.

No star ever fell from heaven, no swallow ever flew more quickly than
flew the maiden to her window, drawn by this call.

In trembling tones the final words of the song died away. Her paper, her
ink, her pen, everything had fallen from her in her haste. As a captive
bird, freed from its cage, flies forth joyously, so Marie bounded forth
from her home. Faster and faster she went, never stopping till she
reached the rose-bush. Breathless and with beating heart, she halted.
There before her stood Hans Le Fevre.

They seated themselves upon the bench. Long, long they sat silently.

At last Hans said, "My dear, true girl, how pale you have grown. Are you
ill?"

She shook her head. "No more, and I trust never again. But you stayed
away much too long. Couldn't you have come back sooner?"

"No, my dear, I could _not_. Had I returned as a poor, struggling
carver your father would have banished me from his door-step. We should
then have seen each other again, only to be parted for the second time.
So I waited till I had accomplished what I set out to do. I have
traveled extensively and feasted my eyes on the beautiful works of art
in great cities. I have studied under Duerer, and now my name is
mentioned with honor as one of Duerer's pupils."

"Oh, Hans, do you really believe that that will soften my father's
heart?" said Marie, anxiously.

"Yes, Marie, I don't think that he can fail me. I heard in Nuernberg that
a new altar is to be built in this Cathedral, so I hastened here to
compete. Should I be deemed worthy to do such a piece of work, what
could your father have against me?"

Marie, however, shook her head doubtfully; but Hans was full of hope.

"But see how our rose-bush has grown!" cried Hans in astonishment. "You
tended it well; but it seems almost as if the roses had taken from you
all your life and strength and health. Return my darling's strength to
her," Hans said laughingly; and taking a handful of roses, he softly
stroked her face with them; but her cheeks remained white.

"Rejoice, my rosebud, rejoice, my darling, for the spring will soon be
here; and with my care you will soon be well."

A half hour later, the beadle walked timidly into the council hall of
the high-gabled Council House, and said, "Honored Counselor, will you
graciously pardon me, but there is a man without who pressingly begs to
be ushered into your presence."

"Who is it?" asked the Counselor.

"It is Hans Le Fevre," answered the beadle, "but he is handsomely
attired. I hardly recognized him."

This was a great surprise to all. Hans, the runaway, the tramp, who
slipped away by night--to me. "See! see! ingeniously thought out," cried
he.

"But just to design a thing is far easier than to carry it out," said
another.

"Hans Le Fevre never did this kind of work before."

"Perhaps he has progressed," remarked the Mayor, "and possibly he would
do it cheaper than the renowned Master Artist."

This idea took root. "But," said one, "it would be an unheard of thing
to give such an exalted work to a simple boy like Hans Le Fevre, whom
everybody knew as a stupid child, and whom we looked upon disdainfully.
The appearance of the thing alone would not justify us in selecting
him."

But this remark had its good side, too; for the gentlemen now decided
that, in order that the work be given to the most competent, it would be
advisable to send to Duerer all the designs thus far submitted, and ask
his opinion in the matter.

Marie cried bitterly when she heard of the treatment Hans had received;
but Hans did not yet despair. At the same time that these worthy
gentlemen dispatched the designs to Duerer, Hans sent a letter to his
great friend and teacher, in whom he had great faith.

Weeks elapsed. The Counselor's attention was directed to affairs of
state, and thus withdrawn from his daughter, who lived and bloomed with
the returning spring.

Hans had opened his desolate house, for which, in the meantime, he had
carved a beautiful front door. Notwithstanding all the depreciation
expressed for the native artist's ability, this door caused quite a
sensation.

Duerer's answer was long delayed. At last, after four weeks, the letter
arrived. Who can describe the astonishment of the assembled committee,
as the contents of the letter revealed the design of the disdainfully
rejected applicant, Hans Le Fevre.

Duerer wrote, "With the very best intentions, I could recommend no wiser
course for you to pursue than to use the sketch presented by my friend
and pupil, Hans Le Fevre; and I will furnish security for the complete
execution of his plan. I cannot understand how a town that harbors in
its midst such a genius, should look abroad for other artists. Hans Le
Fevre is such an honorable lad and such a great artist, that the town of
Breisach should be proud to name him as her own, and should do
everything in its power to hold him captive; for to Hans the world lies
open, and only his attachment to Breisach has moved him to return there
once more."

Directly upon receipt of this letter, an unheard of number of villagers
crowded the narrow street. Hans, who was working quietly in his shop ran
to the window to see what the noise was about. But lo! the crowd had
stopped at his house and loudly did they make the brazen knocker
resound, as it struck the carved lion's head upon the door.

Hans came forth, and before him stood a deputation of men in festive
attire, followed by a throng of residents.

"What do you desire of me?" asked Hans, surprised.


"Hans Le Fevre," began the speaker, "the honorable Counselor makes known
to you that he has finally decided to honor your application, with the
instruction that if money be needed for the purchase of materials,
application may be made to the clerk of the town."

Hans clapped his hands in glee. "Is it true--is it possible!" said he.
"To whom am I indebted for this good fortune?"

"The Council sends you this letter which we will now read before these
assembled people." Hans had not noticed in his joy that his neighbor,
the Counselor, had angrily closed his windows, as if the praise bestowed
upon the young artist might offend his ears.

After the deputation had departed, and Hans found himself alone, he
dressed, put a flower in his buttonhole, and walked over to the
Counselor's house; for now the moment had arrived when he could prove
his worth.




CHAPTER IV

THE CONDITION


Marie opened the door. A loud cry of joy escaped her, and she ran to her
room.

Hans, undaunted, stepped up to her father.

"What do you wish?" said the Counselor, with flashing eyes.

"I wish first to thank you for your faith in me."

"You need not thank me," interrupted her father. "I did not cast my vote
for you."

"So?" said Hans, disappointed. "That was not kind. What did you have to
say against me?"

"What, do you still ask the same old question? You well know my opinion
of you. You know that I wish my daughter to marry a good and honorable
man."

"Well," said Hans, "I know a worthy man and I have come to bring him
before you."

"Pray, who can he be?"

"I, worthy Counselor."

"You? Did anyone ever hear such audacity from a beggar boy?"

"Mr. Counselor, I never was a beggar. I was poor, but let that person
come before you who dares say he ever gave me a cent. My father
supported me until his death, when my mother took up the burden. The
only thing I ever received was the King's gift, and for that I never
begged. The King gave it to me out of his big heart. His eye could
pierce with love the soul of humanity; and in me, a poor boy, he sensed
appreciation. Truly, his money has accumulated interest. I am no beggar,
Mr. Counselor, and will not tolerate such a speech."

"No, you will not tolerate it;" said he, somewhat calmed. "Where, then,
is your wealth?"

"Here," said Hans Le Fevre, and he touched his head and his hands. "I
have a thinking head and skilled hands."

"Well, what do you purpose doing?"

"For the next two years I shall be busy with the altar, which will yield
me ample means to marry your daughter."

Long and wearily they argued, till Hans felt as if he could control
himself no longer.

"O, patience!" he cried, "if it were not that I regard you as something
holy, because you are the father of Marie, I would not brook your
disdain. A king held the ladder for Duerer, and a Counselor treats his
beloved pupil like a rogue. Yonder is a laughing, alluring world. There
I have enjoyed all the honors of my calling; and here, in this little
dark corner of the earth, I must let myself be trodden upon. All because
I bring a ray of sunshine and beauty that hurts your blinded eyes--in
short, because I am an artist."

"Go, then, into your artistic world. Why didn't you stay there? Why did
you bother to return to this dark corner, as you name it?"

"Because I love your daughter so much, that no sacrifice I could make
would be too great."

"Did you for one moment think that I could sink so far as to allow my
daughter to marry an artist?"

"Yes, considering the respect I enjoyed."

"Well, I don't care how many times the King held the ladder, or whether
or not he cleaned Duerer's shoes, I will hold to this: that as impossible
as it is for you to build within the Cathedral an altar that is yet
higher than the Cathedral, just so impossible is it for you to marry my
daughter, who is so much above you in station."

"Mr. Counselor, is this your last word?" said Hans.

The Counselor laughed scornfully, and said, "Carve an altar that is
higher than the church in which it is to stand. Then, and not before
then, you may ask for my daughter."

Hans hastened from his presence and turned his steps to the rose-bush.
It was a beautiful day. Shadowless the world lay before him. Splendor
and glory streamed from the sky. But nature in all her beauty seemed to
him, this day, like a disinterested friend, who laughs while another
grieves. He seated himself in the niche under the rose-bush, where
somehow he always felt the Emperor's presence and influence, and where,
too, he always found peace and hope.

But what hope could ever come to him again? Could the bush uproot itself
and plead with the Counselor? Could the King, who had never returned in
life, return from death to help him? No one could help him, for had not
the Counselor taken an oath, that he would not give his daughter to him,
unless he built an altar higher than the church in which it should
stand. This, of course, was impossible. His overcharged feelings gave
vent to tears, and he cried, "My Emperor, my Emperor, why did you desert
me?" This time Marie was not at his side to cheer him, and tell him that
God would not desert him.

All was still, except the humming of the bees among the roses; and in
the distance the birds sang. All of a sudden something struck him in the
back. He thought that maybe the Emperor had returned. But what was it
but the rosebush, which by the force of its own weight had loosened
itself from the arched wall and had pressed itself outward. For the
first time, Hans noticed that the bush had grown much higher than the
niche in which it had been planted. As quick as lightning a thought
flashed through his brain. What had the rose-bush taught him?




CHAPTER V

THE FULFILMENT


Hans could not see Marie, for her father had sent her far away.

From early morn till late at night Hans worked, without rest or quiet.
Neither pleadings nor threats moved him to desist from his labors. He
lived like a hermit in his workshop. Two long years had passed; and at
last Hans appeared at the Council Chamber and made known the fact that
he had accomplished the work assigned him.

Great excitement reigned in Breisach. The Cathedral was locked for three
days, during which time the altar was to be placed. Many inquisitive
neighbors gathered around the Cathedral to get a glimpse of the work, if
possible. But well-wrapped and concealed, Hans brought the pieces, one
by one, from his house--and so the excitement grew intenser every
moment.

On the fourth day the altar was to be dedicated. Early in the day the
people started for the Cathedral. Joyously the big clock resounded. From
all sides, by foot and by wagon, the country folk swarmed to see the
wonderful work, the talk of the neighborhood for the past two years.

At break of day Hans had hastened to the Cathedral once more to test his
work with his critical eye. Just then the bell pealed forth. He dropped
his hat, and with folded hands offered a short prayer.

Anyone who has worked for years, in the sweat of his brow, for future
and fortune, knows how Hans felt as he stood there in his mute
eloquence. His God understood it, too.

Now the crowd surged into the Cathedral, and the critical moment had
arrived when the artist gave his work, executed through long, lonely
days and nights, freely to the public eye. One last look he cast upon
his creation, then he withdrew, and in anxious suspense watched the
impression it would make upon the assembled people.

The morning sun sent her full rays directly upon the altar, and an
exclamation of astonishment echoed from the high-vaulted roof. Joy and
wonder filled each breast. There stood the altar before the people in
all its glory. Was it really wood--stiff, hard wood--from which these
figures had been carved? Were they not human? And that host of angels
that seemed to be singing "Hallelujah," each one so perfectly natural.
All figures were life size. The entire work was entwined and crowned
with wreaths of artistically carved foliage, the center branch of which
reached upward to the arched ceiling.

The untrained eye of the simple villagers could not all at once, drink
in such a work. Not one of them had ever beheld the like. They felt
there must be some magic in it. They now crowded around the artist, who,
modest and deeply affected, felt every eye that beamed upon him. The
Mayor stepped forward and heartily shook him by the hand. Each one
followed his example, except the Counselor, who leaned sullenly against
a pillar.

Marie, who had been permitted to return for this occasion, stood beside
her father, paler than ever, but with a heavenly expression in her
charming face.

"Do you not notice that one of the angels on the altar resembles Marie?"
said one to the other.

"True it is."

"And that another angel resembles the Emperor Maximilian?" said an old
man. Like lightning, this news flew from row to row. Marie and the
Emperor had been portrayed.

"Yes, my friends," said Hans, calmly and distinctly, "I did that because
I know of nothing more beautiful in the world than the Emperor and
Marie. God made people in His image, and the sculptor, who is like a
creator, has the right to choose those forms which he feels are most
like the Image."

"Well said," echoed from all sides.

Now Hans, with bold strides, neared the bench where the Counselor sat
with his daughter.

"I still have something to say to you, and you must hear me. I have
fully carried out your behest. Will you now keep your oath? You demanded
of me what seemed impossible; namely, 'To build an altar higher than the
Church in which it should stand,' and you solemnly vowed, that if I
accomplished this, I should wed your daughter. Now, Mr. Counselor, look
up. The altar is exactly one foot higher than the Church, and yet it
stands within the Church--I have merely bent the top of it."

The Counselor saw it and paled. He had not dreamed of such a thing. It
sickened him; but, as Counselor, in all propriety and dignity, he would
have to keep his word before these assembled people.

A long pause ensued. Hans kept his patience. Then the Counselor arose,
and taking his daughter by the hand, presented her to Hans, saying, "A
Counselor should never break his word. There, take my child. You have
fulfilled the condition and I keep my vow."

Two young boys hastily brought in some branches from the rose-bush, and
wove wreaths for the pair. With loud approval, they crowned the master
and his bride. Humbly, Hans removed his crown, and laid it on the altar.
"These roses belong to God. With them He saved me. Do you notice,
Marie," said he, as he pointed upward to the curved top of the altar,
"that's what the rose-bush taught me. To you, Mr. Counselor, I would say
that one may bend and still be greater than the one who causes him to
stoop."

A few weeks later, Hans and Marie were married at this altar. It was a
wedding the elegance of which surprised Breisach. For his work the
grateful town had paid Hans a sum of money which, for that period, was a
small fortune.

Marie's father paid all the expenses which this occasion demanded. By
this time he realized how unreasonable he had been, and did all in his
power to make amends. Besides, he now respected his artist son-in-law,
and for many years he lived with the couple in peace and happiness.




THE VINEYARD ON THE HILLSIDE




CHAPTERS.

I. MISSING.

II. THE FAITHFUL DOG.

III. THE FOND FOSTER-PARENTS.

IV. THE ERRAND.

V. THE OLD MAN.

VI. THE LEGACY.

VII. THE JOURNEY.


[Illustration: "They reached the cradle and discovered the child in
it."]




THE VINEYARD ON THE HILLSIDE




CHAPTER I

MISSING


Many years ago, in a quaint little village bordering the bank of the
Rhine River, there lived a hard-working farmer, named Joseph Swift, and
his industrious wife, Caroline.

Their neat little white cottage stood very near the edge of the water,
where on the bright, sunny days it was beautifully reflected. On one
side of the cottage, there jutted out into the river a little hill,
overgrown with grapevines which Joseph had planted, and which as a
result of training and watchfulness yielded him abundant fruit. South of
the house there stretched a field, bordered on all sides by leafy
shrubbery. This plot of ground was used by Mrs. Swift as a bleachery,
and through her industry and carefulness she succeeded in making her
linen snow-white, so that all the housewives of that village and
neighboring town brought her their linens to bleach.

In this way Joseph Swift and his good little wife earned their daily
bread and a little more to lay by for time of need.

A big brown dog guarded the bleachery during the spring and summer
months; but in the early fall, when the grapes were ripening, he
transferred his attention to the vineyard. During the entire year, and
particularly in the long winter months, the house was his particular
care.

The little family lived happily and contentedly in simplicity and love.
These good people found their greatest joy and richest treasure upon
earth in their five little children. The youngest was a baby, less than
a year old. They trained them with the greatest care, and taught them to
work and pray. The children had a living example of goodness and
uprightness in their parents. This happy household, however, was soon to
experience a great change.

A cold, hard winter had set in and covered the fields and house-tops
with many blankets of snow. The river had frozen; and the people feared
that when the ice-floes and the immense quantity of snow began to melt,
the river would overflow its banks.

Weeks passed and at last a thaw set in. The ice and snow began to melt.
The brooks and rivulets swiftly carried the water to the great river.

Joseph Swift and his family retired early one night, and lay wrapped in
deep sleep. About midnight, the father's slumbers were broken by the
tones of the village clock. As he became more and more awake, he heard a
great splashing of water.

Hastily jumping out of his bed, he seized his clothing and rushed to
find out the cause of the disturbance. But so much water had filled the
hall that for a moment it seemed as if he could go no further. He
managed, however, to push along. As he opened the door of the house, the
water rushed in with such force and volume that it almost tore him from
his footing. He sprang back into the bed-room and cried: "Oh, Caroline,
Caroline, help me save our children!"

Caroline, half awake, tumbled out of bed and wrapped a garment around
each child. Then both parents made strides to reach the vineyard on the
hill.

The water rushed against them with such violence that they nearly sank
with their load. The night was dark, for the moon had long since gone
under and heavy clouds obscured the stars. The rain was falling in
torrents and a dreadful wind raged about them. The water so filled the
streets and by-ways that the Swifts thought each moment would be their
last. The children, half asleep, were crying loudly. From each house
still louder cries reached their ears.

In the distance, lamps began to flash their lights. Hundreds of people
could be seen striving with all their might to reach the hill. On all
sides difficulties and dangers confronted them.

Near the low window of a little hut, there stood a weeping mother with
her children. She passed them, one after the other, to her husband, who
stood in water up to his waist and could scarcely keep an upright
position.

In another place, grown sons were carrying an invalid mother, fleeing
with difficulty on account of their heavy burden. Some brave, humane men
hurried along with boats and brought them safely to the hill.

Mrs. Swift, with a child on each arm, was overthrown. Her husband,
equally burdened with two other children, could render her no
assistance. Two stalwart men rushed toward her, however, and brought
mother, children, and father to the neighboring hill.

Some men gathered sticks, and after many futile attempts at last started
a fire on the hill, so that the drenched people might dry themselves.

As Mrs. Swift, breathless and in a half-dazed condition, reached the
hill top, she looked at her children and uttered a loud cry: "Where is
my baby, where is my Edward?" The child--the baby--who had lain in a
cradle at the mother's bedside, was missing.

The water had rushed into the house in such volume that the cradle had
begun to move, and was carried along gradually by the force of the
water, till it passed out unnoticed through the open door. The mother
had tried to reach the cradle in the darkness; but, not finding it, she
had concluded that the father had taken the cradle and the baby to a
place of safety, and so she had given all her attention to the other
children. But now, discovering her mistake, she wrung her hands in grief
and cried pitifully. She started to return to her home to seize her
child from so dreadful a fate, but the father held her in his strong
arms.

"Stay," said he, "you could never reach our house safely. The water is
rising too quickly and is too powerful. I will go and rescue our child.
Our helpful neighbors will go with me."

"Yes, willingly," said the two men who had just helped Mrs. Swift.

Armed with long poles which they could thrust into the ground and with
which they could steady themselves, they started forth by the light of a
lantern.

All the people on the hill watched those three men tremblingly. At last
the light died away in the distance. Still they looked, although they
could distinguish nothing. They only heard the dreadful rushing of the
waters, the sighing of the winds, and from time to time the crash of a
falling house.

Mrs. Swift waited with bated breath for the return of her husband and
his faithful assistants. An hour had passed and nothing could be heard
or seen of them. Her fears increased each moment. At last the father
returned, with saddened countenance. One of his assistants said: "It was
impossible to reach your house, my good woman; the water was too deep.
We were in water up to our necks and were almost drowned."

Then the other man spoke up and said: "But don't give up hope, for many
brave men have been helping, all along the way. Before the water got the
upper hand, they went about with lanterns, rousing the people. Perhaps
they have cared for the baby in its cradle."

Many people, laden with household goods, reached the hill from time to
time, but the cradle never appeared and no one knew the whereabouts of
the baby.

After the dreadful night, the dawn at last broke forth; rain and storm
subsided; the clouds rolled away and the morning sun streaked the
horizon in flaming red.

From the people gathered about the fire, there arose a dreadful cry of
dismay. By the morning light, they saw that half of their village had
been submerged.

Mr. Swift's house, with many others, had been swept away by the flood.
Many a house stood roofless and in a state of threatened collapse.
People cried for the loss of their homes, but Mrs. Swift cried for the
loss of her babe. "Though everything be gone," said she, "I should care
not, had I but my child." Poor Mr. Swift, too, was more concerned about
his baby than about his other losses, and it was with a great effort
that he controlled his feelings.

The children lamented the loss of their brother as well as that of their
big pet dog, Rover.

Meanwhile, from the neighboring towns, many people had come in boats,
brought the homeless ones provisions and clothing, and offered them
shelter in their own homes. This was a great comfort for the
unfortunates.

Mr. Swift accepted their hospitality for that night. "To-morrow
morning," said he, "I will try to reach my brother's home, where I know
I can be housed with my family until the spring. Then I will rebuild my
home and help my neighbors build theirs. Let us not forget that if we
faithfully do our best, God will not forsake us. Perhaps this calamity
may in time bring us some blessing."




CHAPTER II

THE FAITHFUL DOG


Shortly after the Swifts fled, on the night of the flood, the walls of
their house had fallen with a thud, and only the strong beams remained
standing. By the time the house collapsed, the baby in its cradle had
drifted many miles down the river, along the banks of which much damage
had been wrought. The cradle passed a village which had been built on an
eminence and had consequently escaped.

The villagers who had gathered near the shore saw various household
goods floating down the river; there a table, here a chair, yonder a
trunk, and in one place even the entire roof of a house.

Two daring boys ventured to stand as near the water's edge as possible,
in order to see things a little better. All of a sudden one of the boys
cried: "Oh, see, there is a cradle afloat in mid-stream!" The other boy,
whose sight was keener, shouted: "See, a dog is swimming after it and is
trying to push it toward the shore!"

Several strong men standing near-by had long hooked poles, and were
busily engaged dragging things out of the river. One of them, a young
fisherman, saw the cradle and cried: "A baby must be in that cradle,
because the dog would not bother about an empty cradle. Up, brothers,
up, let us try to save the child. Let not the fidelity and bravery of a
dog put us to shame."

Notwithstanding the threatening danger of being crushed to death by the
rushing ice-floes, the men launched a boat and jumped into it. They
reached the cradle and discovered the child in it. They placed cradle
and babe in their boat and brought them safely to land.

The people rushed forward and crowded around the cradle to look at the
infant. Among the spectators were a gentleman and his wife, named Trent.

"Oh, what a beautiful child," cried Mrs. Trent, as she bent over the
baby. "See how peacefully it sleeps, not knowing through what dangers it
has passed, not dreaming it has been saved."

Mrs. Trent had lately lost a dear little baby, so she approached her
husband and said: "Do see how this babe resembles our lost Isabel; and
it seems to be of the same age. Let me take this child, and if its
parents cannot be found, I will be a mother to it."

Mr. Trent smiled pleasantly, nodded his head and said: "Well, well, take
it. Let us not be less sympathetic than these three men, and that
pitying dog."

By this time the poor dog had reached the shore, and stood shaking the
water from his coat; so that the bystanders had to rush aside to escape
a good wetting. Then he began to bark with joy and wag his tail,
springing first at this one, then at that one, as if to express his
thanks for the baby's rescue.

Mr. Trent noticed this, and said: "See how thankful this dog is, and
human beings should never be less thankful." He took some gold coins out
of his pocket, and handed two to each of the three fishermen. They
hesitated, not wishing to take the money. "What we have done was purely
out of love for humanity and without any thought of reward," said they.

Mr. Trent was pleased with them, and said: "Yes, I understand and
realize how very noble it is of you to refuse a reward for your
self-sacrificing services, but I must insist that you take it."

"Well, then," said the younger fisherman, "we will accept the money and
help our poor brothers in the neighboring villages who have suffered so
many losses during this flood."

The dog had now passed through the crowd. His loud barks of joy had
awakened the babe, and it started to cry. Mrs. Trent raised the child in
her arms and kissed it. It looked about as if it were seeking something.

"You are looking for your mother," said she, "but little do we know
where she is. Cry not, my dear, I will be your mother."

She then carried it into her house, while the two fishermen followed
with the cradle. The faithful dog did not wait for an invitation, but
followed of his own accord.




CHAPTER III

THE FOND FOSTER-PARENTS


Mrs. Trent hastily heated some milk, and with a small spoon she fed the
foster-child. Then she dressed it in fine clothes which had belonged to
Isabel, and brought it to Mr. Trent, saying: "See what a beautiful babe
this is, with its golden, curly hair, blue eyes and red cheeks. How
fresh and healthy it looks. But now we have a weighty matter to decide.
We do not know the baby's name and we must call it something. Let us
take your name."

"Very well," said Mr. Trent, "we will adopt him and call him Daniel
Trent. That is a very nice name. As God saved Daniel out of the lion's
den, so He saved this child from a dreadful calamity. Let us hope that
this boy will grow to be as sensible, with as much faith in God, and as
obedient to God's will, as young Daniel was."

"Let us hope it may be so," said his wife, as she cast admiring glances
upon the babe.

The faithful dog who had accompanied her now rested for awhile, as he
saw the babe in comfort and safety. After he had been fed and had
stretched himself awhile before the fire, he suddenly arose, shook
himself well, and rushed out of the house. As soon as he reached the
water's edge, he swam across the river, ran hastily up on the opposite
shore and was soon lost to view.

"Have a care, my dear," said her husband, "I fear you will soon lose
your babe. I am sure the dog has gone in quest of the child's parents
and will return here with them."

Mrs. Trent sighed. "Oh," said she, "I understand how pained those people
must be. For that reason, I would willingly restore the lost babe to its
parents. Although it would be very hard for me to part with it."

After an absence of three days, just as Mr. and Mrs. Trent were seated
at the fireside, the good, faithful dog rushed into their presence and
greeted them by barking and joyfully wagging his tail. But in a few
moments he hung his head, dropped his tail, and looked very sad; and
from that moment on he showed no desire to leave the house.

"From the dog's manner," said Mr. Trent, "I surmise that he was not
successful in finding the baby's parents, who were undoubtedly lost in
the flood. Let us take good care of him, for he has so faithfully
fulfilled his duty. We, too, have a duty to perform, for we must train
and educate this child whom we have taken into our family."

Though the child's position in life was now on a higher plane, yet his
training was no different from that which his own parents would have
given him. His new parents worked hand in hand. Daniel soon felt a
childish reverence for his foster-father, and toward his foster-mother
he showed a trusting love. He grew to be a handsome boy, displaying many
splendid talents. He was a diligent scholar and stood highest among his
classmates. He did everything in his power to give pleasure to his
foster-parents. He regarded them as his true parents, for no one had
told him otherwise. It had happened that when Daniel was two years old
his foster-parents bought a house in another section of the country and
moved into it. The new neighbors looked upon Daniel as the real son of
Mr. and Mrs. Trent.




CHAPTER IV

THE ERRAND


When Daniel Trent had reached his fourteenth year, he was able to assist
his foster-father in his business. He wrote a fine hand, did much of his
"father's" clerical work, and carried out all orders with exactness.

One evening he was sent out on an errand to a little village on the
Rhine, not far from where they now resided. Daniel was pleased at the
prospect of a long walk in the cool evening air. His good dog, who was
still living and in fairly good condition for his age, accompanied him.

Just as Daniel's business had been transacted, a ship came into port.
The passengers crowded the gang plank and the wharf. Several boys and
young men pressed forward and offered to show the travellers the way and
to carry their baggage.

At last a little boy addressed a refined, though shabbily dressed old
man, and asked if he could direct him to a hotel.

"Oh, no," said the old man, "I will remain on shipboard over night; I
couldn't pay the price of a room in a hotel. My meal will be a sandwich
that I have in this bag; and as for a drink, a glass of fresh water will
appease my thirst."

Daniel listened with sympathy to the old man, who had an honest kind
look. Timidly moving a little closer to him, he said, while his face
grew red: "If you would not feel offended, I should like to give you a
little money, out of my allowance."

"My dear young man," said the traveller, "true it is that I have never
accepted charity, but I must admit, you have offered it to me in such a
friendly, well-meaning manner that I would gladly accept it, if I could;
I thank you heartily for it. May your kind thoughtfulness be rewarded."

The dog, who in the meantime had hurried to the water's edge to quench
his thirst, hastily returned, just as Daniel was about to continue his
way. The next minute, he was leaping and springing and barking, as
loudly as he could, and showing unbounded joy. The traveller cried out
in astonishment: "My dog, you are my Rover. Do I find you again, after
so many years? How did you get here?"

Daniel looked surprised and said: "It seems that the dog knows you very
well. Did he ever belong to you?"

"Yes, truly," said the man, "but I thought he was drowned thirteen years
ago, when the Rhine overflowed and carried my house with it. I never
expected to see my dog again.--But," said he, as he dried his eyes, "I
sustained at that time a greater loss than could ever be retrieved."

"What was that?" asked Daniel.

Then the old man told the tale of the flood and said that, in the
darkness of the night, and in the great hurry and excitement, his
youngest child, a babe, had been left lying in its cradle. Perhaps it
had been crushed to death by the collapsing walls of his house and been
buried in the waters of the river.

Daniel was deeply moved by the sad fate of this babe. Little did he
dream that he was the child whom he was pitying. He tried to comfort the
old man over the loss of the infant.

The old man then said, "I have learned to accept my grief, as having
been sent from God. In the end He will prove to each life that what is
sent is for the best."

Daniel agreed with him, and offered him his hand in friendship. Then he
bade him good-bye, saying that the lateness of the hour was the cause of
his haste.

Daniel walked on and called his dog. The faithful Rover did not wish to
forsake his long-lost and newly-found master, but neither did he wish to
lose Daniel. He would hurry ahead and stand in front of Daniel, barring
the way, as if he wished to stay him, and then he would run back to the
old man.

Daniel at last stood still. The dog lay down between them and looked
appealingly, first at one and then at the other, as if he wished to beg
them to remain together. Again Daniel started, but the dog went through
the same antics. A half hour passed in this way. At last Daniel said: "I
really don't know what to do. I love this dog, but I would like you to
have him, too; but I can't let you take him, for he belongs to my
father. Come with me, and let him decide who shall have the dog."

They walked together along the lamp-lighted streets, and the happy dog,
with leaps and barks, gave evidence of his great joy.




CHAPTER V

THE OLD MAN


Mr. Trent and his wife had delayed the evening meal, awaiting Daniel's
return. Daniel led the strange man into the dining-room, where the table
was spread with a beautiful white cloth, relieved by polished silver and
food temptingly arranged. It was a welcome sight to the travel-weary old
man.

Mr. Trent was about to reprimand his son for his belated return, but he
hesitated at the sight of the stranger. Daniel related the incidents of
the evening, and they amply served to excuse him for his tardiness. Mr.
Trent then asked the old man what he knew about the dog.

Mr. Swift related at length the same story that he had told Daniel; and
added that his losses were great, but that the loss of his baby boy had
given him the greatest pain in his life.

Mr. Trent and his wife both came to the conclusion, in a flash, that the
babe which they had adopted was most assuredly this man's son. Mr.
Trent, a clever, as well as a careful man, wished to probe the matter to
his entire satisfaction, so he dismissed Daniel on some errand. Then he
questioned the stranger, as to his name, his place of residence, the
year and the month and all circumstances surrounding that dreadful
night, in minutest detail.

"Tell me," said he, "did your dog wear a collar?"

"O yes," said the old man, "it was made of red leather, and engraved on
a metal plate was his name Rover, and the letters J. M. S., which stand
for my name, Joseph Martin Swift."

"Now," said Mrs. Trent, "will you describe the cradle?"

"Very well," said the man, "it was made of pine wood. The body was
painted blue and it had a red canopy."

Mr. and Mrs. Trent looked deeply into the old man's eyes, and found in
his face, looking through the wrinkles which deep sorrow and care had
chiseled there, a remarkable resemblance to their adopted son.

"I have no further doubt," said Mr. Trent, "that the son who thirteen
years ago, as a tender babe, floated in its cradle down the Rhine, was
saved from the flood, and lives today."

"How, what?" cried the man in joyful astonishment. "Oh, where is he?
Where is he? Lead me to him at once."

"You have already seen him," said Mr. Trent. "The young man who brought
you here is your son."

"What?" cried the old man, "that handsome young lad. Could it be
possible? Oh, how miraculous!" He folded his hands and stood in silence,
till his overwrought feelings broke forth in a torrent of tears. At last
he said: "How was he saved? How did he reach this house and these good
circumstances?"

Mr. Trent related everything in a few words: how the faithfulness of the
dog had been the first means toward the rescue of the infant. "We took
your child, adopted him and brought him up. He always behaved well and
has given us great joy. As we did not know his name, we had him renamed
Daniel. We never let him know that he was not our own child. We must now
disclose this fact to him. I hear him coming and will ask you to
withdraw to the next room until you recover yourself."

"Thank you," said the highly elated father, "I should like to be alone
for a few moments, that I may offer my thanks for this great goodness."

By this time Daniel had reached the dining-room. As he missed the
stranger, but still saw the dog, he asked: "Well, my dear father, did
you satisfy the old man?"

"My dear boy, come seat yourself beside me, for I have something to say
to you. We, whom you have always considered as father and mother, are
not your parents."

Daniel was greatly disturbed by this news and could scarcely speak. At
last he said: "Oh, my dear parents, what great good you have always
rendered me. How deep has been your love to me. All the rest of my life
I will thank you. But, how is it that you only now divulge this great
secret? You do not intend to cast me out, I hope?"

"Certainly not, my dear Daniel," said Mr. Trent, "but listen further.
You are the child that was rescued from the river, and the stranger whom
you brought here is your father."

"This man!" cried Daniel in astonishment; "yet he appears to me to be a
good, honest man."

Then Mr. Trent continued, in order to test Daniel, and said: "That may
be! But he is so poor, while you are now so rich. You don't need him.
Besides, in his poor clothes, he would not be any credit to you. So I
thought I would give him a sum of money, and send him back to his
village."

"Oh, no," cried Daniel, springing from his chair. "I hope you have not
already sent him to the ship. If so, let me hurry after him. I must see
my father's face again and embrace him. I trust you did not mean what
you said. Were my father the poorest and most unfortunate man in the
whole world, I would not be ashamed of him, for he is my father.
Everything that I have, I would share with him."

Daniel's own father had heard these words, in the adjoining room. He
stepped forward, rushed upon Daniel, and cried: "My son!" and Daniel
cried: "My father!" They embraced each other and their tears fell
freely.




CHAPTER VI

THE LEGACY


Mrs. Trent now invited all to partake of the evening meal. The
conversation became animated, and Mr. Trent was happy to find that his
guest was such a sensible, honest man. He then asked him how he happened
to take such a long trip.

Joseph Swift said that a legacy had been bequeathed to him, and that he
was on his way to a distant city to claim it. He had stopped at the
near-by port in order to break the monotony of the journey. "Before the
disaster that befell me," continued he, "I lived in comparative comfort,
but ever since I have been struggling. I was obliged to begin all over
again and build a new house and start a new business. You can easily
understand that I soon fell behind in money matters. The news of this
legacy was very welcome, for every little helps. Some difficulty,
however, has arisen, so I decided to go personally; and whether I shall
get the money or not, remains to be seen."

"I trust you have all the necessary papers and credentials with you."

"O yes," said Joseph, drawing out a wallet containing the papers, in
order to prove his words.

Mr. Trent looked them over and found them correct, but conjectured that
the outcome would be somewhat doubtful. Besides, when he took into
consideration the cost of the journey, living expenses, the cost of the
trial, he found that very little would remain of the legacy after all.

Mr. Trent, who was as noble as he was rich, said: "Do you know what I
think, my dear friend? The rest of this journey would be very tiresome
for you; and besides, you would have to remain there for some time
before you could claim the money. I will give you the sum stated, and
you can give me a power of attorney so that I can get the money. I can
then instruct my business manager in that city to look after this matter
for me."

Joseph Swift was delighted with the proposition, and took the proffered
money with the heartiest thanks; although he did not realize to its full
extent the thoughtfulness of this act.

Mrs. Trent, who was as kind-hearted as her husband, inquired after the
other members of Mr. Swift's family, and then said: "Now that you have
been spared the weariness of the rest of the journey, I beg you to spend
a week with us. Then Daniel may escort you home, and remain a few days
with you, and have the pleasure of meeting his mother and sisters and
brothers face to face."

Joseph declared that he had never met such good people, in all his life
and Daniel was overjoyed in the anticipation of seeing his mother.

"I feel I must give my mother and my sisters each a gift," said he. "How
pleased I am that I saved my money. Now I can use it for a good
purpose."

Early the next morning, Mrs. Trent and Daniel went forth to purchase the
gifts, and many a beautiful present did they bring back. Turning to Mr.
Swift, she said: "Here is a handsome gold watch which Daniel bought for
you, and also the material for a new suit of clothes. I have ordered the
tailor to come and take your measurements, and he promised to deliver
the suit in a week."

Poor Mr. Swift could hardly find words to express the thanks that filled
his heart.

But Mr. Trent, noticing his deep emotion, said: "Never mind, Mr. Swift,
let it be so. Why would God give some people more than they need, unless
he intended they should give some of it to those who didn't have enough?
Sharing with others, brings us happiness."




CHAPTER VII

THE JOURNEY


Early the following week Daniel and his father started on their journey.
The dog accompanied them and sat on the front seat of the carriage, next
to the driver.

As Mr. Swift neared his home, the linen lying in the bleachery was
plainly discernible, and the dog, recognizing the locality, leaped out
of the carriage. Mrs. Swift and her daughters were wetting the linens
and the two boys were busy in the vineyard. The dog ran up to his old
mistress, sprang at her joyously, and then ran to her daughters. They
were much surprised to see the dog that they had thought dead. The sons
joined the group, and while they stood discussing the dog's return, they
heard the toot of the tally-ho horn. Suddenly the horses galloped up to
the door and halted.

Said Mrs. Swift, "What can this mean? The driver must have made a
mistake." But in an instant Mr. Swift alighted and greeted his family
warmly.

Mrs. Swift's expression was very grave as she said: "What ever possessed
you to return in such a carriage; and now that I look at you, I see you
are dressed in new clothes from head to foot. Even the dog, for which I
suppose you paid a good price, has a new collar. I always looked upon
you as a better business man than that, I fear now that nothing remains
of the legacy. Most likely you lost your senses when you saw so much
money. If you begin by spending it so lavishly it will soon be gone."

Mr. Swift laughingly replied: "Don't be so sure, my dear. Let me unpack
the things. You will see that not a penny of the legacy is missing." He
opened the trunk which the coachman had just brought in, took out a bag,
and shook the golden contents upon the table.

"Oh, my," cried his wife in glee, "so much money! I never saw that much
in all my life. It dazzles me. It seems as if I were dreaming--But, tell
me, where did you get the clothing?"

"O, never mind, just yet; I haven't shown you all, for I have brought
material for new suits for you and all the children." He laid out the
goods, the velvets, and the laces upon the table, which was scarcely big
enough to hold them all.

"This is too much. My reason actually refuses to take it in. Do tell me,
how did you get these costly things?" continued his wife.

"All these things, my dear wife, have been presented to you by my
fellow-passenger," pointing his finger at Daniel, who had kept somewhat
aloof.

[Illustration: "As I notice it now you are dressed in new clothes from
head to foot."]

Mother and children had scarcely noticed him in their happiness, but all
the while Daniel had been enjoying their rapture.

The mother looked sharply at Daniel and said: "This young man brings us
all these things! Well, who is he?"

Mr. Swift bent his head and folded his hands; then he spoke with devout
earnestness: "This friendly young man is your son, our child, whom we
mourned as dead. A rich merchant and his good wife took him into their
home and heart."

Daniel could no longer restrain himself. He fell on the neck of his
new-found mother and embraced her tenderly. Then he greeted his brothers
and sisters heartily. The ecstacy of moments like these is indescribable.

At first, a little shyness existed between the brothers and sisters and
this long-lost brother. But as he was entirely without vanity and modest
and friendly, he soon won their confidence and respect, and they
conversed with him as naturally as if they had been with him always.

One morning the family mounted the hill to show Daniel the spot where
they had spent the night of terror.

"Yes," said the father, "in the morning light, we found that our house
had been swept away. In the face of all that disaster, I remember
saying: 'This dreadful calamity will yet bring us some blessing,' and so
it has happened. The people in the whole country around became more
industrious than they had been in the time of their prosperity. Many who
had been haughty and extravagant became humble, thrifty and moderate.
God awoke many people to the performance of good deeds. Many a family
quarrel was terminated; all the people became peace loving; each helped
the other in the hour of need.

"Who would have believed that we would again see our beloved child? Who
would have thought it possible that we, who once spent on this hill the
worst night of our lives, would live to spend upon it the happiest day.
Let us learn not to give up hope, no matter how bad the prospect may
seem, for better times will come--God will make all things right at
last."

In the course of time, when Mr. Trent knew to a certainty of Mr. Swift's
honesty, he gave him the position of treasurer in his large business
enterprises. This position was accepted, and Mr. Swift transferred his
bleachery and vineyard to the care of his eldest son. With his wife and
the other members of his family he then moved to a house adjacent to the
Trents.

Daniel became his foster-father's assistant, and proved himself worthy
of all the care which had been bestowed upon him; and he remained a
good, true, helpful son to his own and his foster-parents.

[Illustration]




The Damaged Picture




Chapters.

I. The Artist.

II. The Picture.

III. The Discovery.




THE DAMAGED PICTURE




Chapter I

The Artist


If one had been seeking for a man who combined all the qualities of
goodness and greatness, one would have chosen artist Laurier. He bore
the title of "Master of Arts" and his works, mostly landscapes, were
famous far and wide. He had amassed a considerable fortune, and his
house was the handsomest building in the city, equipped with every
luxury. Besides, it was the home in which all artists, rich or poor,
found welcome at all times.

But conditions changed. Hard times, following quickly in the wake of
recent wars, had made the demand for art, particularly painting, less
and less urgent, till there was no market whatever for the artist's
works. Little by little, he had to draw upon his capital in order to
support his family. However, he continued to paint with unabated
diligence, for he hoped with the betterment of the times to sell his
paintings; or if he should not be permitted to live so long, he would
leave them as a heritage, for the benefit of his wife and children.

Alas, the great man did not live to carry out his purpose. A contagious
disease swept over the country, numbering him among its victims; and he
intuitively felt that he would never again rise from his sick bed.

One morning, following a night filled with great pain and misgivings,
his dutiful wife was seated at his bedside trying to cloak the great
sorrow which she felt at his approaching death. His two little daughters
stood at the foot of his bed. The dying man looked tenderly at his wife
and children, and said: "Be comforted and weep not. True, I can bequeath
you but little; but God, the Father of the widow and orphans, will watch
over you." He then invoked God's blessing upon them, and with his last
breath said, "In heaven we shall meet again." His eyes closed and he
passed out of this life. Mother and daughters stood convulsed in tears.

The widow now found herself in very straightened circumstances. Her
house was so heavily mortgaged that she could no longer hold it. The
pictures which her husband had bequeathed to her were valuable as works
of art, but the widow could not realize their worth in money. Soon it
became imperative to sell them at auction, at any price. Before the day
set for the sale, mother and daughters saw, with anguish, these works
hurried off to the auction room. The house, too, fell under the hammer.
The poor, miserable family left the home in which they had lived for
many years in love, peace and contentment. Still, a certain pride and
satisfaction filled the widow's heart when she realized that, though her
husband had died poor, yet he owed no one a penny--that his name stood
in the community respected and revered by all the good people. The poor
particularly held him in loving memory.

The widow was obliged to seek a new home in a cheap section of the city.
She was an expert in all household arts, particularly in the art of
sewing. Each night found the widow busily engaged with her work, the
proceeds of which kept the wolf from the door.

Her two daughters, whom she had brought up with the utmost care, were
her only joy. They grew into beautiful girlhood, were modest and good,
and loved their mother with all the tenderness of devoted childhood.
They, too, helped with the sewing; and their combined efforts, though
feeble, were not without visible returns.

Mother and daughters often talked about their departed father. "It gives
me great pain," said the mother, "that every picture which your father
painted should have been taken from us. If it were but a little
landscape that we possessed, how happy I should be. It would enrich our
otherwise barren home and make it equal to the most beautiful salon of
the grandest castle."

Mother and daughters rarely went anywhere, but every Sunday found them
attendants at a church at the other end of the city. There, on those
sacred walls, hung a beautiful painting executed by their father. "This
indeed is exquisite work," said the mother, and the children fully
agreed with her sentiments.

When the services were ended they all slowly wended their way through
the city to their modest home. Sunday after Sunday, rain or shine, found
them carrying out the same program, always returning with hearts filled
with reverence and peace.

The long, weary winter nights were passed reading the books which their
father had collected during his lifetime, and which, by the merest
accident, had not been disposed of.

Thus they passed their days, quietly and contentedly, each one
cheerfully doing her daily share of good deeds and good works in this
great vineyard of the world, where we have all been placed to do our
best.




Chapter II

The Picture


One day, as the mother was examining the apparel, she turned to her
daughters and said: "Children, I see that your summer frocks are really
very much worn and faded. As we have saved a little more than we
expected, I feel that I want to reward you for your diligence and
willingness in helping me so faithfully and uncomplainingly, by giving
you each some money, with which to buy material for a few new dresses."
She then handed each daughter a hard-earned ten dollar bill, and said:
"Select what you wish, and we can make the dresses ourselves."

Both daughters were elated with this generous gift; and at once began to
argue with each other as to the shade and material which would be most
desirable, and which would also be most durable, from an economical
standpoint. At last they started out to make the purchases. Soon they
found themselves before a massive building, upon which was placed a
sign: "Auction Sale of Paintings." Both girls, as an artist's daughters,
had an inherited love for pictures.

"Shall we go in?" said Lottie, the elder, to Louise--"Not to buy, of
course; for how could we do that? But just to look at the beautiful
works."

They stepped timidly and modestly into the great gallery where several
gentlemen and many richly gowned ladies had already assembled. Lottie
and Louise remained unnoticed, standing not far from the door.

The auctioneer just then raised a picture to view, and cried: "A
landscape, in a handsome gold frame, by the artist Laurier--ten dollars
for the first bid."

"Hm," said a portly gentleman, "this picture was certainly executed more
hastily than any of his other works. It lacks a certain finish. However,
I'm an ardent admirer of Laurier. I bid fifteen dollars."

The children had forgotten all about their dresses, and after a moment's
whispering and hesitation, Lottie called out with a beating heart and
trembling voice: "Seventeen dollars!"

Several of the ladies and gentlemen turned to see where this gentle,
timid voice had come from, and noticed the poorly clad children standing
so far back that they could scarcely see the picture. When the children
became conscious of the many eyes fastened upon them, they turned pale.
The portly gentleman, without taking any notice of them, continued: "I
give nineteen dollars."

Then Lottie said, timidly and almost inaudibly, "Twenty dollars."

"Oh, those dear children," said a friendly lady, "they are the artist's
daughters; let us bid no higher, so the picture may be theirs!"

Everyone was deeply affected, praised the deceased artist and father,
and respected the love of his daughters.

Then the auctioneer went on calling, "twenty dollars once--twice--for
the third and last time." He then summoned Lottie, the purchaser, to
take the picture.

Lottie stepped forward to the long table, and laid upon it the two ten
dollar bills which her mother had given her.

"You have made a good purchase, my child," said the portly gentleman,
"and were you not the daughter of the artist, I would not have let you
outbid me."

The assembled people wished the children luck; and taking the picture,
which was not large, both sisters hurried out of the gallery.

"O mother," they cried, as they entered the neat little living room of
their home, "we have had great good luck. The wish you have so long
expressed is at last fulfilled. See, here is a picture painted by our
beloved father."

The mother looked at it for a long time in deep silence, and at last
broke forth in tears of joy and homesick longing.

"Yes," said she, "the picture is his, though I cannot remember ever
having seen him work at it. But I know his art, his beautiful thoughts
and his delicate colorings. It is an exquisite landscape. Notice the
evening glow over the wooded hill, behind which the sun has just
disappeared; the huts, from whose chimneys the light-blue smoke ascends;
the distant village, with the old church tower which the last rays of
the declining sun still illumine; and the rosy, hazy light which spreads
over all. It is beautiful beyond description, and stirs within me
memories of the past. Such scenes have I ofttimes viewed in company with
your father. But how did you ever get this picture?"

Lottie related the incidents leading up to its purchase, and said:
"Louise and I are perfectly willing to wear our old clothes."

"We certainly have a treasure in the house now, in comparison with which
all the grandeur of the world counts as nothing," said the mother. "You
are, indeed, good children, and I appreciate your self-sacrificing
spirit. I consider that more acceptable than a great collection of
paintings. The love which you have shown for your departed father and
for me affords me unbounded joy. Come now, let us hang the picture at
once."

Often all three would stand before the painting and gather from it such
joy and strength that the work of the day seemed lightened and
brightened.

"When you study with exactness the details of a beautiful landscape,"
said the mother, "you will find more and more to admire at each view. So
it is with reading. We learn much that may befall us in life from
books, and by thinking and reviewing the good and the beautiful in the
lives of others we may better know how to act under the changing scenes
of life."




Chapter III

The Discovery


With the returning spring, the mother received an urgent letter from her
best friend, a widow, who lived in the country. This friend had been
seriously ill for some time, and her life was despaired of. She was
particularly desirous of seeing Mrs. Laurier about making a few final
arrangements.

The mother made hasty preparations, and at break of day started on her
journey, her two daughters accompanying her a short distance from the
house.

The mother gave them a parting injunction to work diligently and to
remain at home. "Within two or three days, I shall return," she said. "I
know that my friend has much to tell me, and will not hear of my going
sooner. Behave yourselves in such a manner that when I return, I may be
so pleased with your conduct that my troubles will be the lighter to
bear."

As the two girls returned to the house, Lottie said to her sister: "Do
you know, dear Louise, our rooms have become somewhat dingy during our
stay here. Let us, while mother is absent, have them painted. We could
launder the curtains and polish the floors. These bright spring days
seem to demand it. Then, when mother returns, steps into the house, and
sees its whitened walls, its beautiful fresh draperies and its
brightened aspect, what a pleasure it will give her. What do you think
about it?"

Louise clapped her hands in joy, and said: "You always have the
cleverest ideas. Yes, let us send for the painter at once."

The girls then worked industriously for two days, and everything seemed
to glide along swiftly and entirely to their satisfaction.

On the morning of the third day, Lottie said: "Everything is now in
readiness, and I will hasten to the market and order some things, so
that we may provide a good dinner for our mother when she returns this
evening."

"That is wise," said Louise, as she helped Lottie put on her coat.

When Lottie returned after an hour's absence, Louise rushed up to her
with red-rimmed eyes, and cried: "Oh, Lottie, I have met with a great
misfortune. Through ignorance, I damaged the beautiful painting. Come
quickly and see it."

Lottie looked at the picture, in horror.

"Oh," said Louise, "it seemed somewhat dusty to me, and I tried to wash
it off with soap and water. But, not until it was too late, did I notice
that the colors ran together and the beautiful painting was completely
ruined."

"Completely!" said Lottie, and began to cry. But, in order to reassure
her sister, she said, "Perhaps it may yet be restored by some good
artist."

As the two girls sat conferring as to the best method to pursue, the
mother stepped into the house. She was exceedingly delighted to find her
home in such exquisite order and newness. "You certainly are very
dutiful children. But what is troubling you? What has happened that I
find you both in tears?"

"Oh," cried Louise, "just look at the painting. I wanted to clean it. I
meant well, but met with such disappointment. Forgive me, forgive me!"
and she fell at her mother's feet.

The mother was greatly agitated, as she gazed at the painting. She paled
and trembled. "This misfortune is indeed pitiable," said she. "You know
not how much I would give had it not occurred." She drew on her glasses
and viewed the damaged picture scrutinizingly. "The colors," said she,
"were but water-colors, and that is why they were so easily blurred.
But, it is peculiar. I see, under these water-colors, a ground work of
oil paint, and there, I see a little finger, most assuredly painted by a
master. What shall I do? I will dare, as long as the picture is damaged
and past restoration, to wash it off entirely."

The mother then took a big sponge and deliberately began to wash the
painting. A hand, an arm, an angel's form appeared to view, such as only
the greatest master could portray. Though the mother hated to destroy
the work of her beloved husband, yet she worked assiduously to remove
all the water-colors, and lo! a painting of extraordinary beauty and
genius met her admiring gaze.

It was a historical picture of ancient times The figures stood forth in
living beauty and seemed to speak from out the canvas.

"If I see rightly," said the mother, "this is a painting by an old
master. On a journey, which I once took with your departed father, I saw
many paintings by this same artist. But this painting, unless I am very
much mistaken, is classed among his best productions. It is one of the
finest in art. Nothing in this picture is without purpose and shows the
stroke of a genius.

"I must seek advice from Mr. Raymond--an old, true friend of your dear
father. He is a connoisseur on works of art." So she hurriedly donned
her cape and hastened to his house.

The venerable gentleman was only too glad to welcome her to his home. He
had scarcely looked at the picture, when he cried in astonishment: "Yes,
truly, this painting is by one of the earliest Italian masters. It is
exquisite and sublime. And now it dawns on me how this beautiful work
came to be hidden by the brush of another artist.

"During the late war, as the besiegers were drawing nearer and nearer a
certain castle, the owner had his paintings and works of art concealed
in the cellar.

"As this picture, however, was the most valuable and the choicest of his
wonderful collection, he could not for one moment think of parting with
it. So he sent for your worthy husband to paint a picture over it in
water-colors, which could be easily removed, and yet serve to conceal
the picture's real value. In this way, he hoped to save it from the
hands of the besiegers.

"However, he did not live to see the war ended, and your dear husband
passed away also. This twice painted picture could have remained forever
undiscovered, but it has been destined otherwise. A wonderful treasure
has been sent to save you and your children from all future want. It
only now depends upon finding a lover of pictures, and an admirer of
genius, who will pay the full value for this work of art."

"But," said the good woman, "can I with a clear conscience keep in my
possession so valuable a picture, for which we paid but such a trifling
sum of money?"

"Of course you can, and no person can dispute your right to it. The
owner of this picture was a noble, right-living man, whom I knew well.
He had no relatives and did much good to the poor. For himself he needed
but little. His only pleasure in life was buying the paintings by the
old masters. Little by little, he collected quite a gallery. This
constituted his entire fortune. After his death, the pictures which had
been concealed in his home were brought forth and were sold, together
with this beautiful one. The late merchant, Mr. Pinole, purchased most
of them.

"If you take my advice, I would suggest that you advertise in the daily
papers the fact that you have this beautiful picture for sale. Then a
purchaser will surely present himself who will pay you its value."

Mrs. Laurier then asked him to undertake this responsibility, to which
he kindly acceded.

Soon the whole city was aware of Mrs. Laurier's wonderful possession,
and people were filled with astonishment. Mr. Pinole's son, at whose
salesroom the picture had been sold at auction, hastened to Mrs.
Laurier's house.

He had, he said, not only received less than half his due, but the
picture was worth a thousand times more than she had paid for it. As she
made no attempt whatever to return the picture to him, he left her
presence in rage, and determined to sue her at once.

When he presented the case to his lawyer, the latter explained that as
the picture had been sold at public auction, he could do nothing about
it. "Besides," said the lawyer, laughingly, "remember, your father paid
still less for it."

Disappointed and chagrined, Mr. Pinole returned to his home.

Through the untiring efforts of Mr. Raymond, the picture was at last
sold to a wealthy gentleman, who paid a high price for it.

The money which Mrs. Laurier realized from this sale enabled her to live
with her two daughters in comparative ease and comfort. The two girls
soon married well-to-do merchants, who succeeded in purchasing Mrs.
Laurier's former house, which happened just then to be on sale. It was
large and sufficiently commodious to admit of the two families occupying
it. The best room in the house was accorded to Mrs. Laurier.

The families lived together harmoniously, and vied with each other to
brighten the declining years of the mother's peaceful life.




MEMORIES AWAKENED




Chapter

I. The Change of Circumstances

II. The Revelation




MEMORIES AWAKENED




Chapter I

The Change of Circumstances


A very wealthy and worthy merchant, named Vollmar, lived in a large
commercial city. Here he carried on a prosperous business which had
descended to him from his father. By clever management, industry and
honesty, he succeeded in enlarging it; and thereby increased his wealth.

Up to the present time, Mr. Vollmar had had unusual success, but
circumstances were soon to change. One morning as the family was
breakfasting, the postman delivered a letter containing the information
that the ship which carried a valuable cargo belonging to Mr. Vollmar
had been lost at sea.

This was a severe blow; for the greater part of his fortune was now
gone. But as luck and riches had not made him proud, so this misfortune
and loss did not make him despondent.

Turning to his children, he said: "God gives and He also takes away. He
may restore all things unto us when His wise purposes have been
fulfilled. You can see that this is true, when you review the lives of
your grandparents and great-grandparents, whose pictures in the golden
frames grace this room so beautifully.

"Your great-grandfather, Lucas Vollmar, was the richest man in the city.
All that we once had and now have would not have equalled his fortune by
one quarter. Owing to the 'Thirty Years' War,' he lost all. He was
obliged to flee from the enemy. His wife did not survive the journey.
Their only son, my father, was then but a tender youth, and suffered
much during those troublous times.

"Soon this city was invaded by the enemy and plundered. Many bombs were
fired into it and homes were reduced to ashes. Into this very house,
which belonged to him, fell a great cannon ball which did much damage
but did not set it on fire. All the families, too, suffered the greatest
misery. Hunger and pestilence carried off many of them.

"Your worthy great-grandfather sought refuge in strange lands and
suffered many hardships. He had taken as much money with him as he could
carry, but on the way he was robbed. He earned his livelihood in various
ways, and soon put his son out as an apprentice. When the lad was
fourteen years old, he was called upon to face another hardship in the
loss of his father, who died in misery and poverty, although he had once
been the richest man in this city.

"This son, my father, now alone in the world, continued as an apprentice
and made progress in his trade. At last, when the war was over and peace
had been restored, he returned to this city, poor in the world's goods,
but rich in knowledge and goodness.

"Through a decision of the court, this house was returned to him. The
things that he found when he entered were empty chests and those two
pictures hanging on the wall opposite. Look at them. Do you not read in
those faces kindness and true worth? Yes, my children, they were indeed
good people.

"You never saw your great-grandparents, but you do remember your
grandfather, for he often held you both on his lap. He had to work hard
to build up a business, but through the help of his good wife he soon
acquired wealth.

"So, my children, you have now seen how from wealth one may be reduced
to poverty, and how from nothing one may rise and become something.

"My father showed me that no matter how rich he became, he always laid
by some money for the time of need. He employed the best workers and
paid the best wages; and was a great benefactor to the poor.

"His example and his teachings I have followed, or to-day we would be
very poor indeed, now that I have lost my goods at sea. We must be very
economical and, perhaps, in time we may retrieve our loss."

Other tradesmen, too, suffered by this shipwreck. Mr. Vollmar did what
he could to help them and, little by little, they were able to go on
with their business. But times changed, and there was little demand for
Mr. Vollmar's goods. Failure stared him in the face.

"If I must give up my business, it will comfort me to know that when I
have paid all my debts I shall still have a few dollars left. My
conscience will be clear when I know that no one has lost one cent
through me, and that my honor before God and man remains unspotted."

Pressed on all sides, he was almost forced to give up, but as a last
resort he made up his mind to seek aid from two friends, both very rich
men. But the one said: "I am sorry that I cannot help you, for I need my
money myself." The other man said: "I would lend you some money, but I'm
afraid I won't get it back."

This treatment at the hands of his best friends, pained him sorely, and
he returned in sadness to his home. Before entering, he seated himself
in a little bower to review the situation. The sun shone with a friendly
light; the birds sang their gladsome songs; and the flowers stood forth
in all their gay coloring.

"How hard it will be for me to leave this beautiful garden upon which I
have spent so much money, and in which I have enjoyed so many happy
hours. Who knows in what corner of the earth I shall be obliged to seek
a new home?"

He became sadder each moment, and, sinking upon his knees, he prayed for
help. Hearing footsteps, he arose, and, looking down the footpath, he
saw an old man with snow-white hair being led by a little boy. Both
seemed very poor, but they were neatly clothed.

Just then the boy said to his companion: "Here, under this tree, is a
nice seat. You are so tired, dear grandfather, rest here a little and be
comforted; for the way is not much longer." Then they both seated
themselves.

"It is a great undertaking for a man like me, blind and feeble, to
travel such a distance," said the old man. "'Tis true, oculists often
cure blind people, but I wonder if my blindness can be cured by that
doctor of whom we have heard so much? Besides, we have so little money,
and what will we live on while we're in the city? It must soon be fifty
years since I worked as a mason there. I really know no one to whom we
could apply for aid; for all my friends have passed on to a better land.
But I trust God will help us find some place to rest."

As Mr. Vollmar heard these words, he became greatly touched. "To be
blind," said he, "and not to see the blue sky, the trees, the flowers,
the sun and the people--that must be hard indeed. This man's sorrows are
greater than mine. I have my two strong eyes; and should I lose my whole
wealth, it would be as nothing compared to the loss of my sight.

"These poor people--this blind man, this brave boy--know how to find
comfort in their sorrow by trusting in God. I will learn from them and
trust, too."

Just then Mrs. Vollmar entered the garden with her two children, and Mr.
Vollmar beckoned them to join him. He related all that he had heard the
old man say.

"My dear husband," said Mrs. Vollmar, "let us take them into our house.
Though we are getting poorer each day, I am sure that what we do for
them will not hurt us; for, it is written: 'Be merciful and you shall
obtain mercy.'"

"True," said Mr. Vollmar, "and you certainly have a bigger heart than I
have. Let us not only give them food and shelter, but let us call in an
eminent eye doctor and have him examine this man's eyes."

Just then the old man rose to depart with the boy, but Mrs. Vollmar
hastened toward them, and said that they could remain with them for a
while.

Thanking them for this exceeding kindness, the strangers entered the
house, and soon the old man began to talk about himself.

"My name is Armand Seld. At one time I was a builder and mason, and
lived with my son in this city. I have been blind for the last seven
years."

As he seemed very tired, Mrs. Vollmar urged him to rest. She prepared a
repast for him and after he had partaken of it, she showed him to his
room.

On the following morning, Mr. Vollmar sent for the doctor. After
examining the old man's eyes, he said that they were both covered with
cataracts, of such a nature that he could remove them. He also held out
the hope that he could cure them in a very short time.

"But," said he, "the old man must rest for three days before I can
undertake the work."

After three days had elapsed the doctor returned and began the
operation. Then the eyes were bandaged and the old man was kept in a
darkened room. At the end of a week, the doctor removed the bandage from
the patient's eyes and slowly led him to the light.

"I see! I see the light!" cried the old man. "I see your faces! Oh, I
thank God!" Then he folded his hands and silence filled the room; for
each one was in sympathy with the old man and thanked God for his mercy.

"But now," interrupted the doctor, "we must cover the eyes again, and
let them become accustomed to the light by degrees, and each day they
will grow stronger. I will return daily and watch their progress;
meanwhile the patient must have nourishing food, in small quantities,
and he must be kept very quiet in order to save his strength." Then he
bade them good-bye and Mr. Vollmar and his wife escorted the doctor to
the door.

The children kept shouting: "He sees! he sees!" and tumult and joy ran
riot.

At last the bandages were removed for good, but the doctor warned the
patient not to strain his eyes nor look into the sunshine for another
week.




CHAPTER II

THE REVELATION


Armand Seld was now able to go about the house. The first room that he
entered, after his tedious stay in his own darkened bedroom, was the
dining-room, where the family loved best to sit. The walls of this room
were graced by the pictures of the Vollmar ancestors, together with a
landscape by a famous master.

The old man's attention was attracted to this painting.

"What do I see?" he shouted. "This picture I once saw by candlelight,
and I cannot forget it."

"Strange," said Mr. Vollmar, "that it should have made such an
impression upon you."

"May I ask," continued the old man, "have you owned this picture long?
Have you lived here some time?"

Mr. Vollmar replied: "This house, as well as the picture, descended to
me from my sainted grandparents. But why do you ask?"

"I must inquire still further before I can answer. Tell me--did your
grandfather die in this house, or did he flee to a distant country
during the war?"

"He died far from here, in a strange land. But it surprises me how you
should hit upon this question."

"Did your grandmother die first?"

"Yes; but your questions disturb me."

The old man continued: "Was your own father present before your
grandfather's death, and did he not disclose to him a very important
secret?"

"My grandfather died of a malignant fever which robbed him of his
senses. My father, then a boy, was sent for, but when he arrived he
found his father dead."

"One more question I must ask--and I know you will forgive me. Did your
father receive a big fortune?"

"My father," continued Mr. Vollmar, "returned to this city and this
house a poor man. He married a woman as poor as himself, but with
industry they at last became rich."

"Do you know," continued the old man, "you look just like your
grandfather? He, too, was about the same age as you are now, and I feel,
as I talk to you, as if he were here. But listen to my story and perhaps
it may be of value to you.

"Shortly before this city was plundered I worked as a mason. One day my
employer, a very honest man, received word to call at once upon a
gentleman who wished him to do some work which was to be kept a secret.
As my employer was sick, he sent me in his place, vouching for my honor
and trustworthiness.

"I entered the house and was ushered into a room where your grandfather
(for I have no doubts but that it was he) was seated. He started, and
was indeed surprised that my employer should have sent as a substitute
such a young man as I was then. After reading my recommendation, he
ordered the servants to light two candles and set them on the table over
which this picture hung. He made me vow never to tell the secret which
he would entrust to me, except in time of need, and then only to one of
his descendants. He spoke the oath and I repeated it, word for word,
looking up at this picture all the time.

"Then he led me into the cellar, down another stairway made of stone
into a lower cellar, where he opened a strongly bolted door. I gazed
into a hollow in the wall, where many chests were standing. 'These boxes
hold all my valuables, which I wish to save,' said he. 'Now, I want you
to cement this door so cleverly that no one will discover its
whereabouts.'

"As all the tools were lying there in readiness, and the mortar had been
previously prepared, I started to work at once. It cost a little labor
and much pains to do the work well and to hide the door, but I
succeeded, and received a gold piece for my labor.

"The gentleman laid his finger on my lips, and said: 'Remember your
vow.'

"Soon after the enemy appeared. Your grandfather fled and so did I.
Never again did I return to this city, nor did I think of the valuables
secreted in these walls. The sight of this picture, however, recalls to
my mind my vow." With a sigh of relief, Armand Seld continued: "My dear
Mr. Vollmar, God moved your heart to help a poor, strange, blind man. He
helped to open my eyes, so that I could behold this picture, and to
disclose to you your buried riches. Thus has He rewarded you for your
kindness to me."

Mr. Vollmar had listened attentively to the old man's story, and said:
"You need not thank me. I did only what was my duty. You may be right
about the treasure, for we often wondered what could have become of all
my grandfather's wealth.

"Being the wise man that he was, he would have known what havoc the war
would bring, and consequently would have collected his money and
possibly have hidden it somewhere. But where? Neither my father nor I
could ever get the slightest clue. What you have said of the little
stone stairway and the lower cellar describes exactly the place under
this house. I am more and more convinced, each moment, that my
grandfather hid his treasures there, but now the question is whether
they are still there. Let us go, at once, and find out."

[Illustration: "The chests were opened."]

They went, arm in arm. As they reached the lower cellar, the old man
shouted: "This is the place. I remember this little round spot that I
filled with putty and covered with cement."

By means of a long crow-bar, an opening was at last made, and one stone
after another fell to the floor.

"Victory!" shouted the old man. "Here are the chests, untouched. I know
my work. The treasure is still here."

Mr. Vollmar then called his son and a helper to his assistance, and the
chests were soon opened. Bags upon bags of money, jewels unnumbered,
silverware, hammered copper ornaments and some papers which had yellowed
and had almost fallen to pieces--all these, met their astonished eyes.

Taking the papers first, Mr. Vollmar read many important family records,
besides an index of the contents of the chests, and the disposition to
be made of them.

"Oh, what good luck this is! It has all been sent to us just when we
need it most," said Mr. Vollmar.

The family soon assembled to hear the good news and see the treasures.

A feast followed and fun and great merriment filled the house. The care
of the old man and his grandchild was willingly undertaken by the
Vollmars; and these good people lived together in peace and contentment
for many years.




THE INHERITANCE




CHAPTERS.

I. MR. ACTON AND HIS SON.

II. THE UNINVITED GUEST.

III. THE FLOWERING PLANT.

IV. THE TWO FAMILIES.

V. THE FEAST.


[Illustration: "By this time they had reached the grave, which was
graced by a flowering plant."]




THE INHERITANCE




CHAPTER I

MR. ACTON AND HIS SON


Mr. Acton was a clever and highly respected merchant who owed much of
his success in life to the system and exactness with which he carried on
his business. Then, too, he was so reliable, so honest, and sold his
goods so cheaply, that everyone preferred to trade with him.

His home, which he could have furnished luxuriously, was the model of
simplicity.

The only surviving member of his family was his son George, who was now
twenty years of age. He was a sturdy, manly, upright youth; willing and
obliging to his friends and kind-hearted to the poor. He reverenced God
and everything which should be held sacred in life. He was the joy of
his father's heart.

Partly on account of his father's business and partly to increase his
own knowledge and ability, George had journeyed to England, and Mr.
Acton daily awaited his return.

Late one afternoon, after a day of strenuous work, Mr. Acton sat
dreamily near the fireside, smoking his pipe. Mr. Richmond, his
bookkeeper, who had been one of his school-mates, and who on account of
his loyalty and honesty was classed as his nearest and dearest friend,
sat beside him. Together they were planning for a banquet which they
would give in honor of George's return.

A knock at the door interrupted their conversation, and in response to
the pleasant "Come," the servant entered and delivered a package of
letters. Mr. Acton broke the seals and hurriedly glanced over them, in
turn. As he took one which seemed to please him, his face suddenly
changed color, and the hand which held the letter began to tremble. Mr.
Richmond became startled, for he well knew that business losses, which
Mr. Acton had often experienced and borne calmly, could not be the cause
of this agitation. He touched him lightly on the shoulder and said, with
deep concern: "Do tell me what has happened."

"There, read it," said Mr. Acton, with a deep sigh, as he handed him the
letter. Then, sinking back in his arm chair and folding his hands, he
stared blankly into the distance, his grief too deep for words.

Mr. Richmond read the letter which a fellow merchant in a distant city
had written, and which referred incidentally to the sinking of a ship in
the English Channel. Unknown to the merchant, this ship had been the one
on which George Acton was to have taken passage.

This sad news stunned Mr. Richmond, but he tried to reassure his friend,
and said: "Perhaps your son is among the saved, or possibly he may not
have embarked, owing to some business delay."

"You certainly do kindle a faint spark of hope in my heart, my dear
Richmond, but I fear it will be extinguished. Let us lose no time in
getting all the information we can." He rang, and said to the servant
who answered: "Go at once and send this telegram." Then taking up the
evening newspaper his eye glanced hurriedly over column after column,
and finally he read that the ship Neptune had been sunk, and that eleven
persons had been rescued, but no names had been reported.

Between hope and fear, the next day passed. He summoned all his courage
and waited anxiously for an answer to his telegram.

All the neighbors, in fact all the people of the town, held Mr. Acton
and his son in the highest esteem, and they awaited the news of George
Acton's fate in dread suspense. At last the answer arrived: "George was
numbered among the passengers on board, but not among those rescued."

Poor Mr. Acton was so overcome that his eyes held no tears. With dumb
grief he shut himself up in his room to find his comfort in God, alone.

Several days later, there came to Mr. Acton's house an old sailor, who
had been on the ill-fated vessel, and who could give an accurate account
of the calamity.

"We encountered a storm," said the sailor, "such as I, an old sea-dog,
have never experienced. It broke shortly before midnight, and in less
than two hours it had driven us out of our course and seriously damaged
our ship. Suddenly, we felt a great thud, which threw us off our feet,
and a dreadful crash told us that the ship had foundered. The water
poured into the vessel from all sides, and the ship was soon submerged.

"The helmsman, seven sailors, two passengers and myself swam through the
tempestuous sea toward the cliffs which had shattered our ship. The
brave captain and all the other passengers went to their watery grave.

"The loss of young George Acton," continued the sailor, as he dried his
eyes, "was deeply lamented by us all. The sailors loved him very much,
for he was always so helpful and friendly. I know positively that every
one of us would willingly have sacrificed his life, in order to save
that of your son. But there was no moment to wait; the ship went under,
and we were obliged to sink or swim.

[Illustration: The Helmsman.]

"I last saw him near the bow of the vessel, just as the storm was
threatening to break. From that time on, I saw no more of him; but I
chanced to find this wallet, as I descended from the rigging;" and he
passed it over to Mr. Acton.

"It contains several letters from you to your son, and a bank note of
value. That is why I wished to deliver it myself."

Mr. Acton took the wallet, and opened it with trembling fingers. He
found the letters there which he had sent his son. "My good boy," said
the father, "kept all my letters so carefully, carried them with him,
and as I would have wished, read them often!"

The affectionate father whose grief had been dumb and dry, for the first
time shed the tears that would give relief to his pent-up feelings.

The sailor continued: "On the morning following the disaster, we found
ourselves on the bare rocks, with nothing about us but the immeasurable
sea. We found a stick and a piece of sail which had been cast upon the
rocks, and this we hoisted. We were taken up by the sailors of another
ship and landed at Havre."

Mr. Acton had listened attentively to each word. Then, taking the money
from the wallet, he presented it to the sailor, saying: "Take this for
your love to my son and for your honesty in returning the wallet to me.
Lay the money by for your old age."

The sailor was astonished at this rich gift. He thanked Mr. Acton for
his generosity and then departed.

Mr. Acton felt the loss of his son more and more each day, and soon his
health began to fail. One Sunday morning, as he returned from church, he
suddenly became very ill. He hadn't the strength to remove his clothing,
but sank into the nearest chair.

Mr. Richmond, who had accompanied him, hoped that the illness would be
slight, and buoyed his spirits with the thought that he would soon
recover.

"My dear Richmond," the merchant said, "my hopes in this world are over,
and I must now set all my affairs in order. Come, seat yourself at this
table. There is pen, ink and paper. I wish to dictate to you my last
wishes. The notary can then sign and seal the instrument.

"The great wealth with which God has blessed me would, in the natural
course, all fall to my relations. But, as I know them, this would not be
the best thing for them, but rather unfortunate. They shall each receive
a suitable portion, with the understanding that the money be not wasted,
but invested and bequeathed to their children. If the children do not
wish to study and learn some trade, they shall not get a penny of mine.

"For you, my dear Richmond, and for all my faithful assistants who
helped me amass my fortune, I shall provide generously. The worthy poor
and the afflicted, I shall not forget. Come now, write quickly; I fear
the time is short."

Mr. Acton began to dictate, but suddenly he stopped and cried: "I hear
my summons. I must go. God, who has not permitted me to finish this
deed, will in His wisdom fulfill it, and let it reach my heirs to their
best advantage!"

He paused, prayed silently and passed away.

All the members of the household were grieved at their loss. Mr.
Richmond spoke gently to them and said: "Our good, helpful, pious friend
sleeps in peace. Richly did he sow good deeds while here on earth, and
now he has gone to the land beyond where richly he will reap."




CHAPTER II

THE UNINVITED GUEST


The death of Mr. Acton cast a gloom over all the people, with the
exception of his relatives, who felt such unbounded joy over the
unexpected inheritance, that it gave them much trouble to mask their
true feelings.

"The inheritance is enormous!" was all they could say and think. When
the time came to make the division, and it was found upon investigation
that the value of the estate to be divided was only about a million, the
heirs were heard to grumble at the amount. They reprimanded the worthy
bookkeeper, Mr. Richmond, and all the other able assistants, as if they
had embezzled some of the money. These good, faithful men, instead of
receiving what Mr. Acton had fully intended they should, were obliged to
accept reproaches and immediate dismissal.

Soon the heirs began to quarrel among themselves, and for a time it
seemed as if they would have to settle their affairs in the court.
However, their eagerness to possess the money soon brought them into
accord, and each one accepted his portion.

Then, one began to build; another bought a country estate; another gave
up his business, and rode about in his carriage. Not one of them ever
thought of Mr. Acton, much less of erecting a monument on his grave.

Mr. Acton's house, besides a large share of his money, fell to the lot
of a man named Mr. Bond. He immediately had the house renovated and
furnished magnificently, and when it was completed to his satisfaction,
he invited all his relatives to celebrate the event. On the appointed
night, hundreds of lights illumined the house and gleamed in the
crystal, like so many colors of the rainbow. They were reflected from
the mirrors and shone upon the highly polished silver.

All the heirs of the departed Mr. Acton had responded to the invitation,
and were dressed to honor the occasion. Especially happy were the wives
and daughters, whose elaborate gowns were works of art. Mr. Bond's
daughter resembled a princess in the elegance of her attire, and
strutted about, in order to display her beautiful diamonds.

After supper had been served, the guests retired to the grand salon. The
entrancing tones of the music soon led couple after couple to dance to
its rhythm, and the revelry ran high.

It struck twelve by the big church clock. Suddenly there flashed over
the faces of the assembled guests, consternation and horror. The music
stopped--the dancers seemed rooted to the floor. A sudden stillness,
broken only by the echoing tones of the clock, or here and there a gasp
of fear or an exclamation of surprise, hovered over all. In one instant
the doors had been thrown open, and there on the threshold, clad in
black, and with a countenance pale as death, stood George Acton.

If he had really returned from the grave, the fear and shock that his
appearance caused could not have been greater.

All present felt a shudder pass over them, as they realized the
certainty of his return. However courteous it would have been for them
to have hidden their displeasure and to have extended their greetings to
him, not one came forward. The loss of their fortune was too distasteful
to them; the awakening from a happy dream, from a life of joyous
forgetfulness of right and duty, to a life of hard work was too
revolting for them. Mr. Bond had been obliged to seat himself to recover
his strength. Some swooned and had to be carried out.

The noble George Acton had not for one moment thought that his entrance
would have caused his relations such a shock. So he withdrew to another
room. Then the questions were heard: "Do we sleep or dream? Was it
really he, or was it an apparition?"

The heirs could not understand how George Acton, who was considered as
dead by everyone, even by the courts, could have the audacity to live,
and by his unexpected return to give them such a blow; but it came about
in a very natural way.

George Acton had, on the night of the shipwreck, swung himself from the
fast sinking vessel to a plank. Wind and waves soon carried him many
miles. Then the storm had subsided and a gentle wind had arisen. He
found himself very much exhausted, for it had taken all his strength to
cling to the plank.

After a while he managed to seat himself upon the board. At dawn, all he
could see on every side was water and sky. Completely drenched, and
faint from hunger and cold, he passed the day.

As the sun was beginning to sink, he felt that there was nothing for him
but death. He raised his eyes to heaven and prayed silently. Suddenly,
in the distance he saw the smoke-stacks of a ship, lighted by the rays
of the declining sun. The ship came nearer and nearer. At last, he was
spied by the captain and saved. His thanks to God and man for his rescue
were as hearty as his prayers had been fervent. When George had been
warmed and nourished, he begged the captain to land him at the nearest
port.

The captain expressed his willingness to do all that lay in his power;
but, said he, "This is an English warship. I dare not deviate one hair's
breadth from my appointed course. You will be obliged, unless we meet
another vessel, to continue with us on the journey to St. Helena."

The ship reached its destination, and after a weary wait of several
months, George was advised to take passage on board a coaling steamer,
then in port, and bound for Lisbon. "From there you can easily get to
London," said the captain.

George accepted this good advice, but found himself in a very great
dilemma. He, the son of a rich merchant, was, what he had never thought
possible, without one penny. As he sat lost in thought, the captain
aroused him and said: "What is it that troubles you?"

George looked up at him abashed, and said: "How can I make this trip
when I am entirely penniless?"

"Is that all?" said the captain. "Well, I have provided for that."
Whereupon he counted out to the astonished George a good round sum of
money. "Now all I want is a receipt."

"What?" cried George. "You intend to trust me, a person of whom you know
so little, with this large amount of money! You know nothing of my
circumstances, but what I have told you."

"I know your sentiments, your thoughts," said the captain, "and that is
sufficient. I would willingly give you more, if I had it to give. But
the amount will be sufficient to carry you to your destination. Were I
not able to trust a boy like you, I should not want to deal with anyone.
Now perhaps you would not mind doing a little favor for me. When you
arrive in London, please deliver this money to my old mother, who needs
my help." George promised faithfully to carry out the captain's wish.

On the morning of departure, George bade the captain and his crew
farewell, and after a devious journey, he at last arrived in London. He
hurried to the home of his father's friend, at whose house he had so
recently sojourned.

The merchant was speechless with astonishment when he recognized George,
whom he had reckoned among the dead. But greater still was George's
grief and despair when he learned that his kind, loving father had
passed away.

Without further delay, he transacted the business which the captain had
deputed to him, bought some clothing for himself, and sailed with the
next steamer to Havre. From there he took the train to his native town,
arriving late at night.

With a heavy heart, he walked through the streets to his father's house.
He expected to find it quiet and gloomy, but the brightly illuminated
windows were a painful sight. The joyous laughter and the music all
wounded his saddened heart. He could not resist the temptation to
present himself, unannounced, and end this wild revelry, this dreadful
disrespect for the dead. So, it happened that he appeared on the
threshold of the grand ball-room--an uninvited guest.




CHAPTER III

THE FLOWERING PLANT


On the following morning, George wended his way to the cemetery to visit
his father's grave. After wandering about for some time, he thought:
"How strange it is that I can not find it." At last he met a worker
there, to whom he said: "Friend, would you be so kind, as to direct me
to the tomb-stone that marks the grave of the late Mr. Acton."

The old grave-digger thrust his spade into the newly, upturned sod, and
said to George, whom he did not recognize, "Yes, I can show you the
grave, but the tomb-stone is still missing. His heirs have set up no
stone, and probably will never erect one. They have forgotten the good,
noble old soul."

By this time, they had reached the grave, which was graced by a
beautiful hydrangea, handsomer than any plant of its kind that George
had ever seen. A mass of beautiful flowers crowded forward between the
dark-green leaves and thousands of dew-drops hung on the plant and
sparkled in the morning sun.

George stood there silent, with his hands clasped tightly before him,
and his head bowed in grief, while the tears fell on the grave. The
beauty of the plant was a little comfort to him.

After he had spent some moments thinking of his departed father, he
turned to the grave-digger, and said: "Who planted this beautiful bush?"

"Oh, that good child, Lucy, the oldest daughter of Mr. Richmond who was
the book-keeper for the late Mr. Acton, she planted it. She was very
much concerned because it seemed as if the good man were never to have a
tomb-stone.

"'Oh, that we were rich' said she, 'then he certainly should have the
finest monument here in the church-yard. However, I will do what I can.
I will plant this bush and, though it be not costly like a monument, yet
it represents no less in good intentions.'

"She bought the bush last April and brought it here; and with the spade
I loaned her, she dug the earth with her tender hands and set it here.
You see it is a long distance from yonder stream and yet, she brought
the water that distance, to wet this plant whenever she visited the
grave. She really felt grateful to Mr. Acton for his kindness to her
father. All her people, too, loved him."

While George listened with interest to the grave-digger's recital, a
young man from the village happened along. He joined the group and
admired the bush. After a pause, he added; "I, too, remember Mr. Acton,
everyone speaks of his goodness. It would have been better for the old,
honest Mr. Richmond and his children had Mr. Acton lived a little
longer, for then, they would have suffered no want. Nor would Mr.
Richmond have been thrust out of business so shamelessly.

"As one misfortune seldom comes alone," continued the stranger, "so it
happened that Mr. Richmond had put all his savings into Mr. Acton's
business, where he thought it would be well invested. The heirs accused
him of falsifying the accounts and brought him to court. But the case
was deferred, and put on the calender for some distant date. In the
meantime Mr. Richmond lost his all.

"His daughter's needle is now his only support, as Mr. Richmond's
failing sight keeps him unemployed. The other members of the family are
too young to earn anything."

George had been deeply touched by these revelations. He picked a flower
from the bush, and put it into his button-hole. Then he slipped a golden
coin into the old man's hand, asked for the street and number of the
humble house where the Richmonds now resided, and turned his steps in
that direction.




CHAPTER IV

THE TWO FAMILIES


The report that George Acton had returned was the talk of the town and
had reached the ears of the Richmond family in their out-of-the-way
home. Mr. Richmond had gone forth in search of more facts on the
subject. He returned highly elated, with the good news confirmed, and
stood in the midst of his family relating it to them. Lucy stopped
sewing and her hands dropped in her lap, for the news was such a
wonderful surprise to her. Mr. Richmond closed his remarks by saying
that he regretted his inability to find George Acton anywhere, and
nobody seemed to know what had become of him. To search for him in the
cemetery had not occurred to anyone.

Just then a knock at the door announced a visitor. The door was opened,
and George stepped into their midst. Everyone was dumbfounded. The old
Mr. Richmond ran forward and pressed him to his breast. Lucy and her
brothers kissed his hands and wet them with their tears. "Oh, that your
father were with us," was all Mr. Richmond could say.

George then seated himself and learned the history of his father's last
days. Mr. Richmond told everything as he remembered, and every eye was
moist. He told, too, how rough, mean and cruel the heirs had been,
particularly Mr. Bond.

Hours passed like seconds to George, who listened breathlessly. He
assured them of his good will and promised them soon to return and
better their condition. He then left to make a few visits and to attend
to some important business.

In the meantime, the affairs in Mr. Bond's household were not very
agreeable. Following the unfortunate feast and revelry, Mr. Bond and his
wife and daughter had passed the remainder of the night planning what
they would do next.

"Nothing worse could have befallen me," said Mr. Bond, "than the return
of this boy. I would rather that this house had tumbled in on us, and
killed us all as we stood there. When I return my inheritance to George
Acton, I become a beggar. What we have wasted, is twice as much as we
ever had, and nothing will be left for us."

"Oh," said his wife, "then we must sell our jewels and our carriages,
and I must again walk to the theatres, like other ordinary people. I
shall never survive it!"

"You will, most likely, never get to a place of amusement," said Mr.
Bond. "What we have spent in one night for pleasure alone, will have to
support us for almost a year."

His daughter, who had been admiring her diamonds, then said: "Must I
return my diamonds, too?"

"Yes," said her father, "jewels, gold, silver, house, garden, money must
be returned and all luxury is at an end."

Suddenly the Bonds resolved upon a plan to flatter George Acton, beg his
pardon for their seeming disrespect, and invite him to a celebration in
honor of his return. As they were still devising how best to carry out
the plot, George Acton entered. They jumped to their feet, hastened to
greet him and assure him that his return gave them the greatest joy and
happiness, and informed him of the feast with which they proposed to
honor him.

George hesitated a moment. Then, as if it had suggested some new idea to
him, he agreed, with the understanding that he would be the host on that
occasion, and that he would reserve the rights to invite a few of his
old friends. He also requested that the feast be postponed for two
weeks, as he wished to pass that time quietly, out of respect to his
father.




CHAPTER V

THE FEAST


The day that was to be crowned by a night of joy at last arrived. Late
that afternoon, George Acton called upon his friends, the Richmonds and
invited them for a walk. Lucy begged for a few moments in which to
change her dress, but George dissuaded her, saying that her simple frock
of beautiful white linen could not be improved upon.

After strolling leisurely for some time, they came to the cemetery. "Let
us go in," said George, "and visit my father's grave."

Lucy felt awkward, for she feared that he would consider the planting of
the bush as audacious on her part, but she said nothing. He stepped
toward the grave and held his hat in his hand. All were silent. Only the
breeze sighed through the trees, and scattered here and there a leaf or
flower upon the grave. Every eye was wet with tears.

"Lucy," said George, turning toward her, "the first bit of comfort that
came to my heart after I learned of my father's death, was the sight of
this bush, planted here by your hands. I always respected your high and
worthy thoughts and I have learned now to respect them even more. Were
my dear father living, I would lead you to him, and say that next to him
I cared most for you, and ask him to give us his benediction. But, now I
lead you to his grave, which to you as well as to me, is holy ground,
and here I ask you to give me your hand, that I may care for you and
protect you while I live; and I will ask your parents for their
blessing."

Mr. Richmond, quickly recovering himself from his surprise, said: "My
boy, remember that you have millions and that my daughter is penniless."

"Your daughter's kind heart is worth more than millions." He then broke
a flower, and placing it in Lucy's hair, said: "This flower with which
Lucy decorated my father's grave, represents her dower. My dear Mr.
Richmond, add your blessings."

Recognizing George's earnestness, then Mr. Richmond said: "God bless
you, my children, and may He keep you as happy, as He has made us all
this day."

Silent and engrossed in deep thought, they approached George Acton's
house. "Here," said he, "I am expected. It grieves me that I must spend
this night in the company of relatives who have dealt so cruelly with
you, my good people, whom I love so dearly. But I must remain, for I
have given my word; and you must all accompany me."

With Lucy at his side, followed by the Richmond family, George Acton
stepped into the brilliantly illuminated room, which was gorgeously
decked with flowers. They were greeted by soft strains of sweet music.
The Bonds were all prepared with flattering speeches, but the sight of
the Richmond family surprised them as greatly as George Acton's return
had done, and words failed them.

"They have complained to him," whispered Mr. Bond, "and so he has
dragged them here in their shabby clothes. Such impertinence on their
part."

George stepped forward into the ball-room and beckoned to the musicians
to stop. The guests had risen by this time, and stood about him in a
circle.

Mr. Bond then addressed George saying: "I know why you come with these
good people. Probably, it is on account of the law-suit which I have
brought. It gives me great pain to think that any difference or
ill-feeling exists between Mr. Richmond and myself, but I shall certainly
call off the law-suit and I will pay him the money which belongs to him,
this very night." Turning to his servant, he said: "Summon my
book-keeper, at once."

"Don't bother any further about it," said George, "for it is no longer a
matter which concerns you, but me. I will see to it that Mr. Richmond's
rights are restored to him. It was not for that purpose that I brought
him here. I have an entirely different object in view. Where do you
think we have been? We come, just as we are, from the grave of my
beloved father."

Mr. Bond felt embarrassed and said: "Oh, I feel very much disturbed that
the idea of giving your father a tomb-stone has never been carried out,
but the stone-cutter disappointed me so often."

Then his daughter took up the thread of the conversation and said: "Yes,
we regret so much that this delay has arisen, for only two days ago I
visited your father's grave, and thought how beautiful a monument would
look there, if it were chiseled from Carrara marble."

"If you were there but two days ago," said George, "then you must have
noticed that it has a tombstone, though not of marble. How did it please
you?"

She paled and began to stammer: "I was--I don't know--it must have--"

Then followed a painful silence which was broken by George saying: "It
is evident that you never visited the grave. However, that monument has
stood there several months.

"It pains me deeply, Mr. Bond, that you did not consider my father, who
so generously enriched you, worthy of a slight token of your thanks. Let
me tell you that this night my relationship to you changes."

Turning to the other members of the party, George said: "I notice in
this gathering many true friends of my father who loved me and esteemed
me as a boy. I feel gratified that you have come to celebrate my return.
But I must tell you that this celebration has a double purpose; for this
is the night on which I present to you my future wife--Lucy Richmond.
She it was who planted the flowering bush on the grave of my father,
never dreaming that it would be recognized by any one. But I think more
of that flower, than of all the riches of the world."

His friends came forward and with hearty cheers cried: "Long live George
Acton and his bride."

"Now," said he, "as this house and all the fortune of which Mr. Bond
still holds the greatest share, falls again to me, I take upon myself
the rights of host, and heartily invite all those who are my friends, to
spend the rest of the night in celebration of this threefold event: My
return, the restoration of my fortune and Lucy to share it."

One by one, the Bond family quietly slipped out of the room.

Later in the evening, during the feast, Mr. Richmond offered a toast to
the health and happiness of George and his daughter, and ended by
saying: "Noble purposes and noble thoughts are the only foundation for
happiness; and yield at all times buds and blossoms unnumbered."




HOW IT HAPPENED




CHAPTERS.

I. THE WOODED ISLAND

II. FAR FROM HOME.

III. THE SMOKE.


[Illustration: "As soon as David saw that the boat was firm on the rocks
he hurried out."]




HOW IT HAPPENED




CHAPTER I

THE WOODED ISLAND


In a quaint little cottage not far from the sea-coast, David Duval first
saw the light of day. His father, a very industrious man, supported his
family by making willow baskets, and his children, as they grew able,
helped him considerably. David, the oldest child, was the father's
favorite, for he showed great skill in his work, was quick and obliging
and rendered his father considerable assistance. Although David gave
promise of being a great man some day, yet he had a very grave fault,
and this was his headstrong will. He always wanted to have his own way
in everything, would never yield to another's rights, and his parents
found great difficulty in teaching him to obey orders. His sisters, too,
suffered much from his bad temper and from his overbearing manner.

His rich uncle, Philip, gave him many invitations to dine with him.
David enjoyed nothing better than to have the feasts which his uncle
provided, but they made him dissatisfied with the simple fare of his own
modest little home. He grumbled all the while he was eating in his own
house, and did not think it worth while to thank God or his parents for
his food.

When he was reminded of his faults, he would promise to do better, but
in a little while he would fall back to his old ways. This saddened his
parents and they thought that the fond hopes which they held for his
future would all be blasted.

His uncle would often say to him: "David, David, take care! God will yet
send you to a special school, the 'School of Experience,' where He will
discipline you, in order to make something good of you."

From the hill upon which David's house stood, one could see a vast
expanse of water. A little island which lay not far from the coast lent
beauty to the scene by its wealth of verdure. No one lived upon it and
David's father visited it, from time to time, in order to gather willow
branches for his basket weaving.

David, who was now strong enough to help his father row and also to cut
down the branches, often accompanied him. One night his father said to
him: "If the sky and the sea stay propitious, we will both row over to
the island in the morning." David leaped for joy, and the prospect of
the trip would hardly let him sleep.

At dawn on the following day, as the sky began to glow and the morning
star grew paler and paler, David stood ready. He helped his mother carry
food and wraps into the little boat. It had once happened that the
weather had suddenly changed, and David and his father had been obliged
to remain on the island for three days, suffering much for the want of
food and covering; therefore, mother took the precaution to give them a
pot, a pan and some matches, so that they could start a fire and cook
something, if necessary.

As everything was now in readiness for the trip, David took his straw
hat, while his sister playfully pinned a feather in the ribbon.

"Oh," said his father; "get a couple of baskets, David; we'll need
them."

"What for?" asked David.

"You'll find that out soon enough," said his father, laughingly. "Don't
you trust that I well know to what use I will put them? You do the same
to me, as many people do to their Father in heaven. They always want to
know why this or that was ordered. Do what I tell you, and in the end it
will come out all right." David then hurried and brought back the
baskets.

They both seated themselves in the boat, and pushed from the shore.
Mother and daughter called after them: "A pleasant trip and a happy
return." David vied with his father in rowing, and it made him so warm
that he took off his coat.

Soon they reached the island and made a landing, while David tied the
boat to a tree stump. They hurried toward the willow trees, cut the
branches, tied them together in bundles and carried them to the little
boat. The father was delighted with David's helpfulness, and said: "That
is right; children should help their parents as much as their strength
will permit."

When they had gathered as many branches as were needed, the father said:
"Now, let us rest a while and eat some lunch. After labor, rest is
sweet, and one's food tastes so much better." When the meal was ended,
the father said: "Now I want to give you another pleasure. Get the
baskets and follow me." Soon they came to a beautiful walnut tree, whose
branches, spreading far out on all sides, were laden with nuts. David
was overjoyed at this sight, as he had never seen the tree before. He at
once filled his pockets with nuts and tried to crack one with his teeth
and get at the kernel. "Father," said he, "why did God put the sweet nut
between two shells, a bitter and a hard one?"

"My dear boy," said his father, "God had the wisest purpose for doing
this. He wanted to protect the sweet kernel, out of which such a
beautiful tree could grow and save it from the gnawing animals. This
teaches us how to take the bitter and hard trials of this life. As we do
not despise or throw away this sweet nut, because it has a bitter and a
hard shell, so we must not resent the sorrows and disagreeable
situations that come to us. The first experience we feel is that sorrows
are bitter and hard, but we must trust that the good and sweet kernel
which they have hidden within them will come to light at last, and will
be not only of use, but also a blessing to us."

The father then climbed the tree and began to shake it. David gathered
the nuts which rained down and put them into the baskets, which he
carried to the boat, where he emptied them, returning many times for
more.

"How your mother will rejoice when she sees these nuts," said the
father, "and what shouts of joy we'll hear from your sisters when I
divide them. The thought of it pleases me now, for certainly there is no
joy greater than that of giving pleasure to others."

While David and his father were busy with their work, there crept over
the heavens heavy black clouds. Then there arose a dreadful wind storm,
just as David stood in the boat emptying his last basket of nuts. The
wind bent the trees and raised the waters into high waves. All at once,
a blast came, tore the boat from its moorings and took it far out to
sea.

David cried loudly, in horror. His frightened father hurried to the
shore and saw the boy in the boat, in the far distance. The waves
increased in size and soon the little boat could be seen, first on the
crest and then hidden in the trough. It was carried rapidly along.

The father saw his boy wringing his hands, but of his cries he could
hear nothing, for the sound of the roaring waters and rushing wind
drowned them.

The entire sky was now enveloped in black clouds and dark night hovered
over the sea. Flashes of lightning illuminated the heavens and dreadful
crashes of thunder filled the air. Seeing no more of his son or of the
boat, the father sank disheartened under the willow tree and spent the
night alone with his grief.

Meanwhile, his wife and other children were distracted with fear. As the
lightning broke forth, followed by thunderous crashes, and the island
was shrouded in rain, they prayed for the absent ones. When the storm
abated, they gazed long and patiently, in the hopes of getting a signal
of the returning boat. They saw and heard nothing. The mother spent the
night in sleepless anxiety.

As the morning broke forth in beautiful sunshine, and still no sign of
the little boat could be seen, the mother's fears grew greater and
greater. She ran crying to Philip, and told him her troubles. He knit
his brow and shook his head. "It is strange that they have not come back
yet. I'll just row over and see what has happened to them." He stepped
into his boat lying close at anchor, and, with his assistant, rowed over
to the little island. Mother and children stood watching them in anxiety
and dread.

At last, they saw the little boat, in the distance, returning with its
load. "Oh thanks," cried the mother. "Philip has other passengers in the
boat, besides his assistant. Now, it is all right." She hurried down to
the shore, but as the boat neared them she cried in fright: "Where is my
David?" The father, deathly pale, looked at her in silence. His deep
grief had made him dumb. Uncle Philip then spoke to her: "May God
comfort you, for our David has been drowned in the sea. Poor David had
his faults, but he was a good-hearted boy."

The mother could find no comfort and the children cried.




CHAPTER II

FAR FROM HOME


While David was being wept over as dead, he still lived. He had had a
dreadful shock, riding on the tumultuous waves, far, far out to sea. His
boat, over which the waves had dashed in fury, threatened each moment to
sink. At last, after hours and hours of torture, the wind drove his boat
upon the coast of a rocky island.

As soon as David was sure that the boat was firm on the rocks, he
hurried out, waded through the foaming, shallow water to the land and
climbed up the rocks, while his clothes dripped with rain and sea water.

After he had recovered a little from his shock and fear, he gazed out at
his little boat and wondered how it had been so well guided into the
clefts of the rocks. A good sailor could have made no better landing.
"Who steered this rudderless boat so safely into this haven? God's great
goodness and mercy has certainly led me to this safety, and all my life
I shall be grateful."

The storm had now been broken and the rain ceased. David thought he
could see the green island, with its trees but it seemed no bigger than
a bush, that he could easily have covered with his straw hat. The land,
still farther away, seemed to touch the horizon, and it looked like a
little cloud.

"Oh," cried David, "how dreadfully far I am from human help. This
island, on which I have been cast, cannot be seen by my people; I never
saw it when I looked out to sea. They will never think that I am here
and they will mourn me as dead. The men will go and get my father, but
no one will come for me. I have often heard them say, 'for fifty miles
out, there is no sign of land.'"

The waters, little by little, grew calmer, so David hurried down to his
boat; but, as he was about to step into it, he noticed that it had
sprung a leak. "Oh," cried he, "my little boat is useless now, and I am
a prisoner on this rocky island. I must stay here till I die and never
again shall I see my people." His face grew white with fear and the
tears rolled down his cheeks.

As David saw starvation staring him in the face, he collected the nuts
that were in the boat, put them into the baskets and carried them to
safety, where he also placed the few utensils that had not been washed
overboard. Then he pulled his little boat as far up on the rocks as he
could get it.

The fear through which he had passed had now exhausted him. He felt
almost afraid to sleep, out in the open, all alone, but he prayed his
evening prayer as he had been accustomed to, lay down beside his nuts
and his few kitchen utensils, and soon was fast asleep. After a restless
night, filled with many strange dreams of home, he was awakened by the
noise of sea birds, fluttering overhead. As he gazed before him and saw
nothing but the boundless sea, he uttered a loud cry.

A bevy of birds flew toward the land. "Oh, dear birds, I wish you could
carry a message to my people and tell them that I am here. My good
father and uncle would risk their lives to get me."

After he had breakfasted on a few nuts and a little piece of bread, he
decided to examine the island. "Perhaps I shall find some fruit trees
that will afford me nourishment till God delivers me from this
captivity; and maybe I shall find some people living here who will take
me to my home."

He wrapped a few pieces of bread and nuts in his handkerchief, tied the
bundle to the end of a stick, slung it over his shoulder and started
forth. It was a dangerous, weary journey that gave no signs of human
life. Nor did he see any of the narrow paths usually made by animals.
Numberless trees were there, but none that bore fruit.

"If I have to stay long on this island, I'll die of starvation," said
he, as the perspiration rolled down his cheeks. "But before hunger kills
me, I know I'll die from thirst." As he continued his way, he heard a
murmuring sound, like that of water. He hurried in the direction of the
sound, and found a little spring, cold and clear as crystal. He seated
himself beside it to cool off, and then drank to his heart's content. He
had never before noticed what a blessing from God water really is; but
now he appreciated the drink and offered his thanks for it.

He proceeded on his way, and at last reached the highest point of the
island. It filled him with dread, as he saw the entire island covered
with trees, and lying there, at his very feet and on every side--the
immeasureable sea. Now he realized that he was all alone and far from
help. "I will come to this point every day and watch. Perhaps a passing
steamer will pick me up and take me home."

The sun began to sink and colored the heavens with gold-rimmed rays of
purple and red. As David stood gazing at the beauties of the sky which
he had never before noticed, he prayed to the Creator to send him help
and guide some ship to this lonely island. Then he descended the rocks
and retraced his steps. Soon he lay down under a clump of trees and fell
fast asleep. When he awoke, he ate a few nuts and some bread.

Each day he wandered to the rocky summit and watched for a ship. But all
in vain, for on the great, wide sea no ship was to be seen. He saw the
necessity of eating sparingly, or his food would not last; so he took
his little knife and made cuts across his bread, showing how much he
could eat daily, and only when he was very hungry. The little piece of
bread had become very hard and he had to soften it in the water from the
spring.

"Oh," cried he, "how many good things I had at my father's table, that I
grumbled about and for which I never thanked God." As he sat thinking
about himself and all his ingratitude, he saw the fishes swimming in the
water. "I'd catch some fish," said David, "if I only had a line."
Picking up his straw hat, he ripped out the thread, and taking the pin
with which his sister had fastened the feather, he made a hook out of it
and tied the thread to it. He searched for some worms, and soon, he
began to angle. He tried again and again, but not a nibble could he get.
At last luck favored him, and soon he had three fishes. Remembering the
matches which his mother had put into the tin-covered pail, he decided
to start a fire and cook his fish, adding a little salty water for
seasoning. He relished this little repast more than the finest feast
served at his rich uncle's house.

One morning, as he again ascended the rocky summit, he saw a large ship
that seemed no more than a mile away. Its sails were all unfurled and
gilded with the rays of the bright sun. Hope filled his breast and he
trembled with fear. He watched it, as it came nearer and nearer.
Suddenly, he seized a stick, and tying his red handkerchief to it, moved
it to and fro like a signal of danger and distress. But before the ship
had come close enough to see the sign, it changed its direction and
sailed away into the far distance. David followed its course, till it
was lost to view, and then he sank upon the ground disheartened and
cried bitterly.

The hours of the day that were not used in fishing, cooking, or
chopping, he spent gathering shells, in which he often found pearls. As
no person had ever been there to gather them, he found them in
quantities. Then, too, he found many beautiful corals in the
moss-covered rocks. "If God permits me to return to my people," said he,
"I will bring them these pearls and corals, as presents."

He spent his time as best he could and often sighed for companionship.
For hours he would gaze at the friendly moon, at which he had never
before gazed more than a second. And the twinkling stars, too, seemed to
have a new meaning for him. "The heavens truly show God's wonderful
work," said David. Even the delicate green moss that he had never
deigned to notice now had its value, since it afforded him a soft bed.
"I see God's finger in everything about me," said he. "How well
everything has been ordered." Good thoughts were now awaking in his mind
and they were, like wings, carrying his heart to heaven.

"Loneliness must be sent for a good reason," thought he. "Perhaps God
sent me to this dreary, lonely place to make me see and feel what I
never understood before." David realized now that he had never been
grateful to his parents for their care. Nor as obedient to their wishes
as he should have been.

"Oh, if I ever get back to my home, I will be grateful and obedient to
my parents." He remembered, too, how disagreeable he had often been to
his sisters, and said: "Oh, how sorry I am. If God lets me return I will
ask their forgiveness and be a good brother to them. I never appreciated
my home, my parents, nor my sisters. God forgive me and let me return,
and I will try to repay them in kindness and love for all my
negligence."

An intense longing for his people filled David's heart; and it grew
stronger every minute. Each day he watched for ships and often sighted
one, but they never neared the island. At last he came to the conclusion
that the coast was rocky and dangerous, and so no ship would ever come
near it.

With this sad thought, he was retracing his steps one day, carrying some
wood to his little retreat. But what a terror seized him. He saw in the
direction of his little retreat thick, black, clouds of smoke ascending
to the heavens, and two red flaming brands of fire, like two church
spires. David had often heard of islands that were volcanic and sent
forth fire, and now he thought that this was one. He threw his wood to
the ground and with palpitating heart drew closer and closer: but all he
could see was smoke and flames. The crackling of the fire filled him
with more fear. At last he saw that it was not from the earth that the
fire issued. He realized that the wind had blown the flames of his
little fire, which he always kept lighted, against some bushes and had
set them on fire. Almost everything he owned was being destroyed and two
immense trees were being consumed.

When he considered, above all, the loss of his little fishing line that
meant so much to him, he cried aloud: "Oh, what a misfortune this is!
Now, I'll die of hunger. I often heard my father say that from
misfortune, fortune sometimes grows, but, when I look at this damage, it
doesn't seem possible that any luck could come from it.

"Oh, how good it is to live with people. How easily one can help the
injury to another. Oh, if ever I have the luck to get back to my family,
how willingly will I help them in times of need. But who will help me, a
poor, lost boy, on this lonely island? I am like a poor bird driven from
her nest." A mighty painful longing for his father's house again seized
him. "If only a ship would come and take me back," he said.




CHAPTER III

THE SMOKE


His people too, were mourning through these weary, weary weeks. One day
the father said to the mother: "I need some willow branches and although
it is very painful for me to go to that island, still, there is no other
place where I can get them."

"Then you must not go alone," said the mother. "Take the children with
you. They will be a help and a comfort to you." Soon they were all ready
and rowed over to the island. After landing, they sat under a tree for a
while.

"This poplar tree," said the father, "is the very one under which David
and I sat the last day we were here. And over in that direction,"
pointing toward the island, "he was carried in his little boat." Tears
stood in the father's eyes; the boy, Andreas, turned his head to wipe a
tear; while the girls cried.

"Let us go now and gather nuts," said the father, to cheer them again.
They soon filled their baskets and were about to return to the boat,
when the boy said: "Dear father, let us go to the top of the hill and
get a view. I've never been up there." "Oh, yes," begged the girls, "do
let us go."

The father consented and they all mounted the hill. It was a beautiful
day. The sky was cloudless and the air was so clear and dry, that one
could see distinctly far out into the distance. Suddenly Andreas
shouted: "Father, what is that I see? Isn't smoke coming up out of the
water?" The father looked in the direction pointed, and seeing smoke,
said: "I don't know what it is. I fear it is a steamer on fire. It
seems," continued he, shading his eyes, "that I see a dark spot, out of
which the smoke is ascending. Don't you see it?"

"Oh, yes," cried the girls, "and it has two sharp points at the top."

"I see it, too," cried Andreas. "One point is higher than the other."'

"That is no ship," said the father, "for a ship would have a different
shape, and wouldn't look so big from such a great distance. It must be
an island, but I am sure I never heard of it. People must live there, or
how could smoke arise from it."

"Oh, my," cried one of the girls, "wouldn't it be wonderful if our dear
David lived there."

"Maybe so," cried Andreas.

"Nothing is impossible with God," said the father. "We must leave
nothing undone in our search for him. We will ask Uncle Philip's advice
and get him to help us. Let us retrace our steps, now, for it is time
for us to return."

Little did they know how truly they had prophesied, for the smoke which
they saw was ascending from the fire on the rocky island--the same that
had cost David many tears of anguish and fear.

When they reached home, they told the mother their happy conjecture at
once, and a faint ray of hope filled her heart.

The neighbors were now called together, but their ideas on the subject
were varied.

"Nonsense," cried one. "How did that island get there. I never heard
about it in my life. It must be a burning ship."

"No," cried another, who always thought he knew better than anybody
else, "that's no ship, but a volcano sending out its fire. I have often
heard that such islands appear over night. We would come to a nice
place, if we should sail near such a fire-brand."

"It's either a ship or a volcano," said a third; "but for a hundred
dollars I wouldn't go over there in such little boats as we have."

"If you'll pay me," said a fourth, "I will go, but not otherwise."

The old, honest Uncle Philip raised his quiet voice, and said: "Brother,
I will go with you. Here is my hand on it. David was my beloved nephew.
It may not be certain that he lives, hardly probable, but still
possible. Therefore it is worth the trouble of undertaking the dangerous
trip; and God, who gives us courage to go ahead, will also see us
through."

Peter, a young, strong lad, shouted: "I will go too. I have often risked
my life for a fish, so I'll risk it now to save a human life, if I can.
I want no money, for as long as I live I would be happy in the thought
that I had helped to save David, and this thought would be a sufficient
reward."

"God give us all this joy," said Uncle Philip. "If wind and weather
continue favorable, we will set sail at daybreak." The other men
departed, shaking their heads and predicting misfortune.

Peter and Uncle Philip remained and discussed the matter a little
further. "I will take my sail boat and furnish the food," said Philip.

The following morning proved perfect and a light wind was blowing.
Mother and daughter accompanied the men to the boat landing, and said:
"God grant that you may return safely, bringing our David with you."

The men unfurled the sails and pushed off from the land, passing the
green island and going in the direction of the smoke. Nearer and nearer,
did they come, and at last Peter cried: "It is really an island. Let us
help with the oars." Suddenly Uncle Philip shouted: "Stop, and furl the
sails. There are many dangerous rocks in the sea. We must be very
careful or we will founder."

By means of the rudder and much care and pains, they at last made a
landing. Peter was the first to leap on shore, and cried: "Now we have
reached the island and perhaps we shall find David. Whatever is begun in
God's name and out of love to humanity, will succeed."

The other two men now stepped out and fastened the boat securely. Uncle
Philip looked at the rocks, shook his head and said: "This isn't a nice
place to live."

They began to search the island and climbed over the rocks and deep
clefts. At last they reached a little trodden path which led them to
David's retreat. Peter hurried ahead.

David had passed a sleepless night in fear and sadness. As the morning
sun shone over all, a little lightness had crept into his heart, and he
sank upon his knees and prayed.

As David was kneeling, the three men came behind him. But he was so
absorbed that he heard no steps.

Peter saw him first, and said to the others: "See, there is a hermit,
maybe he can direct us. Brother, can you tell us?"--he had no time to
finish his question, for David had risen to his feet. He recognized his
father, and cried: "Oh, my father! my father!" Then a silence broke over
them, for neither had the power to speak.

At last they controlled their emotion and thanked God in one voice, for
bringing them together. David then greeted his uncle and Peter and
gathering up his belongings, hastened with them to the boat.

On the homeward trip, David related all his adventures, and shed tears
of joy. Even his father had to dry his eyes several times. "You were
very wise, and helped yourself wonderfully. Necessity awakened your
understanding," said Peter.

"Don't you remember?" said his uncle, "what I once said to you that God
would send you to a special school? That's where you've been. In the
school of Experience. In this school you learned to know God, to pray to
Him, to love Him, and to thank Him for his blessings. What I find most
wonderful of all in your story is about the smoke which arose from your
island. What is more trivial than smoke, yet the smoke was like a sign
from heaven, that this was an island upon which some one lived. That was
God's finger." All silently gave thanks for the sign.

"I thought," said David, "that the fire was the worst thing that could
have happened to me, but now I see it was my greatest fortune."

Then Uncle Philip said: "Our beloved ones at home are watching and
waiting for our return." So, Peter quickly busied himself with a stick
upon which he fastened some ribbons.

"What are you going to do with that?" asked David.

"I promised your sisters if we succeeded in finding you, to raise this
banner. How they will rejoice when they see it." Then and there he
fastened it to the prow of the ship.

Each moment brought them nearer home and David's heart beat high with
hope, for on the shore his mother and sisters and all the villagers, big
and little, were gathered. As David stepped on land, a cry of joy arose
from the people; but the mother's joy at seeing her David was so intense
that she wept.

Men and women, boys and girls, shook his hand and wished him a thousand
times welcome. David's mother wanted to hear his story and was about to
drag him home but the people wouldn't let her. "We want to hear it too,"
and they led him to a big linden tree and bade him step upon the seat
and tell his story. All pressed around him. All eyes were on him. When
it was still, David began. He told them of his dangers, trials and
suffering, and said, in the end, that these had taught him the things
which he had never learned before. "I am grateful to God for my
deliverance and for the joy of being with you all again."

Thanking them for their interest in him and bidding them good-bye for
the present, he entered his father's house, where a hearty meal was
spread before him.

When the meal was over, David opened his little bundle and displayed his
pearls and corals and said: "I have brought you all a present from my
island." All stood in astonishment and admired them.

"My, my," cried Uncle Philip, examining them closely, "you have brought
some valuable things. These pearls and corals will yield much money, for
some of them are very large. Now you have helped your father out of all
his debts and trouble."

"No, no," said his father, "we will share them with Peter and yourself.
You shared the dangers of this trip with me, and you shall also share
the treasures. Philip, you take first choice, and then Peter next."

Two of the men who had offered to go on the trip for money, now entered
the room and wished they had gone for nothing. "For such a reward as
that," they said, "it would have been worth while."

"Go, go, you poor, miserable wretches," cried Philip, "you wouldn't move
a hand or foot to help a fellow man in trouble without being paid for
it. It serves you right that you get nothing."

"I wish none of this money," continued Philip, "I have enough and ask no
more. But Peter must take his share, for the spirit which he showed gave
all of us courage, and he must be rewarded. Besides, he needs it."

Deeply touched, Peter took the reward with thanks.

Then the grateful parents again urged Philip to take the pearls, but he
replied: "Let it be, as I said before. The pearls and corals are the
least that David brought back with him; for he has gathered unto himself
costlier treasures: 'Love for God and to humanity.' These are priceless
pearls."

Turning to David, he said: "Not only have you found these treasures for
us, but you have brought good fortune to our little community. For
pearls and corals can now be gathered by the men of this village, and
offered for sale. This will furnish a comfortable living for many of
them. So, you have become a public benefactor."

The little household soon resumed its usual routine and David entered
into the life and spirit of his home. He became a model of virtue for
the village youths, and the joy, staff and crown of his parent's life.
He grew to be a noble, pious man, full of love and helpfulness to his
fellow men; and his memory remains blessed.




FROM ROYAL PALACE TO LOWLY HUT




Chapter

I. The Suburbs

II. The Retreat

III. The Prison

IV. The Purchase

V. Reunited




FROM ROYAL PALACE TO LOWLY HUT




CHAPTER I

THE SUBURBS


During those unhappy times when the Empire of France was overthrown and
a number of the richest people were plunged into the deepest misery, a
very wealthy family, named Berlow, lived in a palace in Paris.

Count Berlow was a high-minded, honorable man, and his wife was good and
charitable. Their two children, Albert and Marguerite, were the exact
counterpart of their parents.

Just as those revolutionary times broke forth, Count Berlow, with his
family, moved from Paris to his mansion in the suburbs. Here he lived
quietly, surrounded by orchards of fruitful trees, free from the turmoil
of the noisy city. His family rejoiced at having him constantly in their
midst and he was glad at the opportunity of being the instructor of his
children, particularly in music.

One gloomy winter evening, the family was gathered in the brilliantly
lighted music room. Count Berlow had composed a pretty little poem, and
had fitted it to music. Albert had with difficulty mastered the playing
of it, but Marguerite could sing the song remarkably well. The children
had practised this piece faithfully and diligently and purposed to
surprise their mother by singing and playing it that very evening. After
the Count and Countess had sung several operatic selections, the father
turned to his children, saying: "Let us hear what you can do." Albert
seated himself at the piano and played, while Marguerite modestly sang
in a sweet tone.

The Countess was delighted over this, their first song. She embraced
both the children affectionately, and praised them for their efforts and
the pleasure which they had afforded her.

Suddenly, the door was thrust open, and armed soldiers crowded into the
room. The leader presented an order in which the Count was declared a
friend of the King and an enemy of freedom and equality, and in
consequence he was to be conducted to prison. Although the Countess,
weeping and lamenting, threw her arms about her husband's neck to hold
and guard him, and his children clung to his knees, the soldiers rudely
tore him from their embrace. The cries of the mother and children were
heart-rending.

The unhappy wife did everything in her power to save her dear husband.
She hastened to the city and appeared before the magistrate, to prove
the Count's innocence. She called upon all her neighbors to bear
testimony to her husband's quiet, retiring life, and to the fact that he
had taken no share in the affairs of his country, and had talked with no
one concerning them. But everything was in vain, and she was informed
that in a few days her husband would be sentenced to death.

After an absence of several days, the Countess returned to her country
seat and found her home occupied by soldiers, who had ransacked it and
reduced it to a common tavern to which admittance was denied her. Her
two children were nowhere to be found, and all her servants had been
driven away. It was late at night, and she knew not what to do next.

As she turned, she met Richard, her old, true and faithful servant, who
said to her: "My dear, good Countess Berlow, you, too, stand in danger
of suspicion this very minute, for you have been heard to speak of the
injustice and cruelty of the government. There is no escape for you,
except by secret flight. You cannot save your husband, and your presence
here will only bring trouble upon your own head. Your children are both
in one of the out-houses with my wife. Follow me there. My brother,
John, the old fisherman, has been notified, and I will take you to him
to-night. He will conduct you and your children across the river to
safety. In this way you will at least save your lives."

She entered Richard's house, but there a new trouble awaited her, for
Marguerite had become suddenly ill from the fright and the shock, and
lay unconscious, sick with a high fever. The Countess wished to nurse
her child back to health, but the doctor would not hear of it, and
advised her immediate flight. Richard and his good wife promised to care
for the sick child, as if it were their own.

Countess Berlow knelt beside the bedside of her beloved daughter, and
said: "If I must bow to this decree, I leave her in your care, my good
people, and ask God in His mercy to watch over her and restore her to me
in His good time." She paused for a moment, then rose quickly from her
knees, kissed her unconscious child, took her son by the hand, and
trembling and swaying, hastened out of the house, without one backward
look.




CHAPTER II

THE RETREAT


Richard now conducted the Countess and her son to John, the fisherman,
who quickly rowed them over the river to safety. As there was no time to
rest, with the help of a guide, the fisherman's friend, she hastened on
with her son to find the hut which Richard had suggested.

After days and weeks of journeying hither and thither, over hills and
through valleys, they found that their strength was almost exhausted. At
last they came to a little low hut in a thickly wooded country. The
guide pointed to it with his staff, saying: "That is the hut; there live
the old shepherd and his wife who will harbor you."

Countess Berlow sighed, and followed the narrow path to the hut.

The old shepherd, who had been expecting her, came forward with a
pleasant smile and welcoming, outstretched hands. To show his great
respect for her, he had dressed himself in a gray suit. Around his neck
he had tied a red handkerchief, and he wore a nice, green hat with a
little bent feather at its side.

"Greetings to you, noble lady," said he. "I consider it a great honor to
protect you and your son. This is my wife, and between us we will do all
in our power to make you feel contented."

So saying, he turned to his wife, who repeated his greetings, and
invited all to partake of her simple meal, which consisted of bread and
milk and a few apples.

The good shepherdess then conducted the Countess to a room which opened
on an adjoining room. These two rooms were to serve as bedrooms. The
larger one was meagerly furnished, and its only window looked out upon
the forest and two high mountain tops.

Countess Berlow was thankful for having been guided to this humble
retreat. She cared for her own rooms daily and spent the remaining time
in knitting, sewing or reading. But her greatest anxiety was to find
amusement for her son, Albert. She undertook to continue his
instruction, but she was at a loss for books.

One morning, as she sat musing over her wants, she was aroused from her
reverie by the ringing of the near-by church bell. The good, old
shepherdess came running into the room saying that the clergyman from
over the hill would hold services in the chapel that day. Countess
Berlow, with her son, hastened at once to attend.

The clergyman delivered a short sermon, every word of which touched the
hearts of his earnest listeners. After the services, the Countess sought
the clergyman and engaged him in conversation. She found him to be a
thoughtful, devout, kind-hearted old man. He showed great interest in
Albert. He promised to supply the much needed books for his use, and
offered to give the boy two hours' instruction each day, provided Albert
would take the trouble to journey over the hills to his house.

Albert promised to come, overjoyed at the prospect of continuing his
studies under such an able teacher. He could scarcely wait each day for
the hour when, with his books under his arm, he would set out over the
hills, whistling lively tunes and keeping step to his music.

On rainy days, when the roads were heavy and ofttimes dangerous, he was
obliged to forego his visits. His mother would then suggest some
recreation for him, for she well knew that all work and no play would
tend to make him dull.

In this locality, large numbers of canary birds were raised and sold and
sent far and wide to other countries. Even the old shepherd had many of
these birds. Albert begged his mother to purchase one of them for him.
"Marguerite always had one," said he, "and I would dearly love to own
one, too. It would remind us of her and our own dear home."

His mother agreed, and Albert chose a bird that closely resembled the
one belonging to his sister. The bird with its beautiful yellow plumage,
its clear, brilliant, coal-black eyes, afforded Albert much pleasure.
Soon the bird became tame, flew upon Albert's outstretched finger and
ate seeds from his lips.

Whenever Albert wrote, the bird would alight on his penholder and peck
his fingers. Though he enjoyed the bird's presence and tricks, yet he
was obliged at times to cage him, in order to carry on his work
undisturbed. Later, when the bird began to sing, Albert could not praise
it enough.

"You must teach it to whistle nice songs," said the old shepherd one
day.

Albert thought the old man was joking. He did not yet know that one can
teach a bird to imitate. The old man then brought out a flute and
presented it to him.

"Oh, what a fine flute! How glad I am to own one," said Albert.

The old shepherd took the flute, played a waltz upon it, and showed
Albert how to use the stops, Albert was pleased with the light, clear
tones of the flute, and as he had talent for music and had a good ear,
he soon mastered the difficulties of the instrument.

Often he played tirelessly for the bird and always a song which his
father had taught him. After striving for hours and days and weeks to
teach the bird, lo! his wonderful patience was rewarded. The bird began
to sing the song, and sang it through without a mistake.

[Illustration: "Soon the bird became tame and flew upon Albert's
outstretched finger."]

Albert leaped with joy and thanks. He praised the bird, over and over
again, and rewarded it with lettuce, apple and hemp seed. The little
flute and the little bird helped Albert and his mother to while away
many an hour.

As the months rolled along, the sorrows of the Countess still lay
heavily on her heart. Many a night she spent in tears and sleeplessness,
and many a day was sad and dreary. She tried very hard to cloak her woe,
and hide it from her son. In her unselfishness, she choked back her
tears and grief, filled each day with work, and gave strict attention to
her son's comfort, instruction and diversions. She always had a pleasant
word and smile for the old shepherd and his wife, whose life, though
lonely, was spent in the satisfaction of right living and lending a
helping hand. The joy that comes from doing one's best is the only
lasting joy, for every other pleasure fades and passes away.

Countess Berlow tried in every way to get news of the Count, but she had
not been very successful, although some news was printed in the daily
papers. The thoughtful old clergyman sent her a copy of the news, once
each week, as he did not receive it any oftener.

One night Albert returned carrying the paper, and said: "The good
clergyman did not have time to read it through, but he noticed from the
head lines, that the paper contains much good news."

The Countess took it and read anxiously. Finding the news somewhat
encouraging, she built hopes that soon she might return to her much
loved home; but, alas, in the very last column of the paper, she read
that many noblemen were to be sentenced to death for their loyalty to
the king. In the list, she found the name of her worthy husband, Count
Berlow. She reeled as if struck by a thunder-bolt, the paper fell from
her hands and she sank in a swoon.

A few minutes passed before the good shepherdess came in response to
Albert's cry, and brought the Countess back to consciousness. She had to
be carried to her bed, and it seemed as if she would never recover. Poor
Albert, who rarely left her bedside for a moment, began to fail and fade
day by day.

The old shepherd often said, shaking his head at the same time: "The
coming fall will surely scatter its leaves upon the grave of the
Countess, and her poor son will doubtless never see the spring."




CHAPTER III

THE PRISON


The faithful old Richard had waited on that memorable day of the flight
for the return of his brother John, the fisherman. He was elated when he
heard of the safety of the Countess. Richard's greatest trouble now was
how to save his master, the good Count Berlow. He considered it very
unjust and cruel that an honest and right-living citizen should be
sentenced to death for loyalty to his king.

On the following morning, Richard hurried to the city where his son,
Robert, served in the National Guard. With help he hoped to gain a
meeting with this good-natured, intelligent boy, who from time to time
acted as sentinel before the prison. He would try to secure his son's
aid in releasing the Count, so unjustly imprisoned. At last the
opportunity presented itself, and father and son had a hasty talk over
the situation. Robert found no chance, however, and gave up hope of
saving the Count.

At last the day arrived when the Count's sentence was to be carried out.
Sleepless and sad, with his head resting on his hands, the Count sat in
his lonely cell. The warden had not considered it worth while to bring
him a light, and heavy darkness enveloped him. He thought of his wife
and his children. Not for himself did he suffer so much, but for those
who were so dear to him. He knew not where they were, and he was greatly
troubled about their condition.

While the noble Count sat lost in these thoughts, a loud shouting arose
in the corridors. Soldiers ran here and there, crying: "Save yourselves,
if you can. Fire! Fire!" This reached the Count's ears. All at once the
door of his cell was thrown wide open. Thick volumes of smoke and dust
poured in and dreadful flashes of light illumined his dark cell. A young
soldier stood before him, and cried: "Save yourself!"

Through the carelessness of a drunken servant, a fire had started in the
building. The soldiers had torn off their coats and weapons and had
hurried to put it out. Robert had seized the first opportunity that
afforded itself, had taken the clothing and weapons of a soldier, and
had hastened to the Count with them, saying to himself: "The only chance
to save him is to dress him as a soldier."

"Hurry, put on these clothes," said Robert. He helped the Count pull on
the coat, placed the hat on his head, buckled on his knapsack, and gave
him a musket. The Count's face had not been shaved during his
imprisonment, so that this gave him the wild appearance which all
soldiers had at that time.

"Now," said Robert, "hasten down the steps and out of the front door.
With this outfit, I trust you will easily get through the crowd
unnoticed. Then go directly to John, the fisherman, and there you will
meet my father."

Count Berlow knew exactly how to act his part. Earnestly, as if he had
some urgent business to transact, he hurried down the steps and shouted
in haughty tones to the men who were carrying buckets, "Aside, aside!"
At last he reached the street without being detected. With quick strides
and fast-beating heart, he made his way to the city gate and continued
on, as Robert had taken care to give him the pass-word.

At midnight, he reached the fisherman's hut. He knocked at the window.
The fisherman came to the door, but stepped back frightened at seeing a
soldier who might wish to arrest him or his brother. He based his fears
on the fact that they had both made many enemies on account of their
fidelity to the Berlow family. When John recognized the Count, he raised
his hands and exclaimed, "Oh, it's you, Count Berlow; how happy I am to
be able to help you!" Richard, who had waited and watched there for the
last ten nights, rushed into the room and shouted: "Oh, my master!" and
both embraced and wept.

The first question which the Count asked was for his wife and children.
Richard quickly related the details of their flight and the illness of
Marguerite, who had now recovered and was sleeping in the adjoining
room. The noise, however, had awakened her, and recognizing her father's
voice, she rushed into the room. With great joy she hurried into his
outstretched arms. He kissed her rosy cheeks and looked at her long and
tenderly.

The Count decided to continue his flight that very night from the land
which once had been to him a paradise but was now only a murderers' den.
On the same boat that had safely carried his wife and son, he now took
passage. The old fisherman led the way and Richard followed last. The
night was clear and the heavens bright with stars. Suddenly they heard
sounds of shooting, and voices shouting: "Halt! Halt!--Halt, halt!--You
are deserters!"

It so happened that when the fire in the prison had been extinguished,
the soldiers had carefully searched each cell, to find if anyone had
escaped. To their great astonishment, they found the cell of Count
Berlow empty. The soldier who had lost his uniform cried loudly with
rage: "He has flown with my clothing and my weapons. Up and follow him!"
The pursuers soon found a clue to the Count's route.

[Illustration: "On the same boat that had safely carried his wife and
son he now took passage."]

The poor Count and Richard were almost stupefied when they heard the
distant shouting, but they seized the oars all the more firmly and rowed
with every muscle strained to the utmost. Soon the soldiers reached the
shore and began to fire upon the occupants of the boat. Marguerite crept
under the seat, while the men tried to dodge the bullets. One bullet
pierced the Count's hat, two pierced Richard's oar. The little boat,
which was scarcely an inch above the water, rocked and rolled and almost
capsized, but the occupants escaped without injury and finally reached
the opposite shore in safety.

Count Berlow was thankful for his escape, and so were Richard and
Marguerite. They seated themselves on an overturned tree trunk, to
recover a little strength. When they had rested a little, the Count
quickly threw off his uniform and donned some old clothes belonging to
Richard. With a staff in his hand and a bundle on his back, Richard now
led the way, while the Count and Marguerite followed. In order to allay
all suspicion, Richard took a roundabout course through the
thickly-wooded country.




CHAPTER IV

THE PURCHASE


Count Barlow's greatest desire was to see his wife and son. "I shall not
have a restful moment," said he to Richard, "until I shall have found
them. You tell me they are safe in a shepherd's lowly hut, but how shall
we reach them? My daughter cannot go on foot, and I have not the means
to ride there."

Then Richard drew out of his bundle a bag of gold. "You are not as poor
as you think, my noble master," said he. "This money is all yours."
Count Berlow stared first at the gold and then at his faithful servant.

"You see," said Richard, "while you were rich, you paid me well and
presented me with large gifts of money. Many people, too, were
generously aided by you. During the time you were imprisoned, I set out
to gather in as much money from these people as I could possibly move
them to give you. 'Tis true we often find people who never feel grateful
for any good they receive, but I must confess that these grateful souls
not only returned all you ever gave them, but out of love and deep
thankfulness added much more thereto."

Count Berlow counted the money. "It is a very, very large amount," said
he, and raised his eyes in thanks to heaven. "But how long can even this
last us?"

"We will economize," said Richard, "in every possible way, but let me
first of all purchase a horse and wagon," This was soon accomplished.
The wagon was provided with a canvas covering, which served to shield
the occupants from view, and also to protect them from the sun and rain.

They rode for days and days, and the way was long and dreary. Owing to
the rough handling which the Count had received in the prison, the
terror which his death sentence had caused him, the sorrow and fear of
his flight, and the weariness of the journey, he soon became very much
weakened and was forced to stop at a little village and rest for a
while.

Richard hired a few rooms and bought the food. As he was well trained in
all household duties, he took upon himself the care of their temporary
home. Marguerite helped, as best she could, and from morning till night
performed each task willingly, always wearing a sunny smile.

Count Berlow was confined to his bed for many weeks, and it was a long
time before he could sit up, even for a little while. Marguerite cared
for her father, read to him, cheered him, and thus made the time pass
pleasantly. Her father returned his thanks with every evidence of love
and contentment.

Marguerite's birthday was now at hand. When she awoke one morning, she
found the window-sills filled with potted geraniums, her favorite
flowers, and a beautiful canary bird hanging above them in a pretty
golden cage. The bird exactly resembled the one which she had had at
home. She thanked her father in the tenderest tones for his selection.

"Take these simple gifts, my child, for at present I can give you no
more."

Richard now served dinner and all seemed once more to be bright and
happy. When the meal was ended, the Count drank to the health of his
daughter and his absent wife and son. "I wonder, my child," said he to
Marguerite, "where your mother and brother are this day, and how they
are celebrating your birthday? What has befallen them? I always had a
happy heart; but now I often have many troubled hours. I fear--I fear."

Marguerite threw her arms about her father's neck and tried to reassure
him. "Be comforted, dear father," said she. "We shall be brought
together again, for surely God cares for us."

"Yes, that is true," he said, and dried his eyes.

All was silent. It was a deep, solemn, soul-stirring moment.

All at once the canary bird began to sing a song--the song which father
and daughter recognized at once as the one which the Count had composed
and taught his children. No one else had ever heard it or played it.

Marguerite clapped her hands and shouted: "What can this mean! That is
the first piece that you taught us, dear father." All gazed at the bird
in astonishment. The bird repeated the song, twice, thrice. "It is our
song. No note is missing."

"This is truly wonderful," said the Count. "Certainly no one could have
taught that song to the bird but my boy Albert; but how? I do not know.
Now, Richard, where did you get this bird?"

Richard then related how he had purchased the canary on the preceding
night from a bird fancier in the village.

"Hasten to the village and possibly he may be able to tell you more
about the bird."

Richard ran to the village, and was gone what seemed an interminable
time. At last he returned with the information that the fancier had
bought the bird from a little boy who lived with his mother, many miles
beyond, and who had trained this little bird to sing and whistle. The
fancier described the boy and mother so well that all were unanimous in
their decision that this was the boy and mother for whom they were
seeking.




CHAPTER V

REUNITED


Preparations were now made for a hasty departure, for the Count seemed
suddenly stronger. Richard packed their belongings and placed them in
the wagon. The bird was hung from a hook fastened in the top of the
vehicle. Everything was soon in readiness.

On the following morning they started off. The Count and Marguerite were
regaled on the journey by the sweet song of the canary. It cheered them
and seemed to make the time pass all the more quickly. After a journey
of twenty miles, they reached the village, at sunset.

They repaired at once to the clergyman's house, where they learned that
the Countess and Albert Berlow lived in the shepherd's lowly hut, some
miles distant. "The Countess holds her husband as dead," said the
clergyman, "and no joy can now penetrate her heart. Her health has
failed and it seems as if she would not last very long."

Count Berlow asked how she could have received such incorrect news. The
clergyman then brought out a package of newspapers, searched for one
sheet, and laid it before the Count. He read that, on such a day, and at
such an hour, Count Berlow, with twenty others, had been hung. "Strange
it is," said the Count, "either they forgot to cross my name from the
list, or else they did not wish to, in the hope that in that way they
would not be answerable for my escape."

It pained the Count sorely that this false news had brought much
suffering to the Countess, for death seemed almost to have enrolled her,
too. The clergyman advised them to proceed slowly and cautiously, lest
the joyful news of the Count's return should be too great a shock to
her.

Intending to follow the good clergyman's advice, they continued their
journey. Soon they reached the summit of a wooded hill, and from the
distance they discerned the low hut with its flat, thatch-covered roof
and smoking chimney. Richard then went hurriedly ahead.

Countess Berlow, dressed in black, sat knitting at the fireside, the
light of which illuminated the room, which had been slowly filling with
the shadows of the approaching twilight. Albert sat at her side, reading
from her favorite volume. As she saw her faithful servant enter, she
uttered a loud cry and her work fell from her hands. She hastened toward
him, and with a thousand exclamations of joy and pain, she greeted him
heartily, as if he were her dear father. Albert, too, was deeply
affected.

Countess Berlow then pointed to a chair which Albert had drawn close to
the fire, and said: "My good, true friend, be seated. So we see each,
other again. Over the death of my dear husband let us draw a veil. The
memory of it is too painful for me. But tell me, how is my daughter! Did
she die, as the doctor said she might?"

Richard then explained that the doctor had diagnosed the case as more
serious than it really was, in order at that time to hurry the mother's
flight; and that Marguerite had very shortly after recovered and had
remained well ever since. The Countess was greatly pleased with this
report, and her eyes gleamed with joy.

"But," said she earnestly, and with a clouded brow, "why did you not
bring her with you? Why did you not tear her from the unhappy
fatherland where no hour of her life could be safe? How could you leave
without her--you hard, cruel man? Why did you not--" she could say no
more, for the door opened, and Marguerite rushed to her mother and
embraced and kissed her as if nothing could ever again tear them
asunder. Albert joined them and gladder tears were never shed than those
which the Countess wept in her exceeding happiness.

Alas, the joy soon melted into yearning. "Oh, that my dear, true husband
still lived," said the Countess, as she looked to heaven, "for then my
measure of joy would be full. Now, my dear children, you are poor and
fatherless. The sight of you fills the heart of your oppressed mother
with pain. For what can I, a poor, lonely widow, do for you?"

Then Richard interrupted the conversation with the glad news of the
Count's rescue. The Countess proved herself more self-controlled than
Richard had anticipated, for the great joy of having seen her true
servant, the greater joy of again clasping her daughter in her arms was
for this woman the preparation for the greatest of joys--the joy of
again seeing the husband whom she had mourned as dead.

The Count had long stood, with palpitating heart, waiting before the
door of the hut, where each word had fallen distinctly on his ear.

Richard's last words had scarcely been uttered when the Countess cried:
"He lives; he has been saved from the hands of his oppressors." The
Count then opened the door, and overcome with emotion, fell at the feet
of the Countess.

Timid and fearful, as if she half doubted that he really lived, she
gazed at him long and steadily as the light of the fire irradiated his
face. She could scarcely express her rapture. Then after a long pause
she said: "Oh, the joy of again seeing my loved ones for whom I have
wept so long!"

Father and mother, son and daughter, and faithful servant spent a
peaceful, joyous evening in the little, lowly hut. The old shepherd and
his good wife shared in the contentment which filled their little home
to overflowing.

On the following morning, there was brought into this lowly hut another
guest who had rendered such helpful service in the speedy reuniting of
the separated family--the little canary bird.

Albert was delighted to see his bird again, for during his mother's
illness he had found it impossible to care properly for it, and had
reluctantly disposed of it at the fancier's in a distant village.

Count Berlow then related at length the circumstances which had brought
the bird into his possession and how it had helped to give him the
needed hope and strength to continue the journey which had ended so
successfully in their reunion.

Albert joined in the conversation, and said, "Wasn't it a happy thought
to teach the bird that particular song, when I knew so many songs? But
then, you see, it was the song nearest and dearest to my heart. It was
my father's song. Little did I think, when I had to part with my pet,
that it would be taken from me only to restore my father and sister to
me."

"So we see," said the Count, "how through a little trial we may find a
great joy. I trust that through our losses we all have gained in
humility and sympathy, which have a lasting worth; and perhaps God will
return to us our past fortune, just as he has returned your canary to
you."

Count Berlow was obliged to spend the winter under the roof of this
lowly hut, and Richard was housed in a neighboring one.

The canary bird was hung in the same place it had graced before it was
sold to the fancier. Marguerite cared for it daily and never neglected
to give it proper food and water.

Often, when the family was gathered together around the friendly
fireside, on a cold winter's evening, the bird would begin to sing the
song so acceptable to them. The children and the parents would join in
the chorus, and they found therein comfort and hope.

The noble family was forced to live for some time in these same narrow
quarters; but at last they were permitted to return to their fatherland,
where they again came into possession of their property. The Count and
Countess rejoiced in being wealthy once more, for now they could return
in measure full and overflowing, the goodness and kindness of the
friends who had proven themselves in the hour of need.

The good, faithful Richard, with his kind wife and their clever, honest
son; John, the brave old fisherman; and the helpful shepherd and
shepherdess, together with the devout clergyman, were among the first to
receive this reward--the expression of gratitude and love from a family
of loyal members.




THE UGLY TRINKET




CHAPTERS.

I. THE OPEN DOOR.

II. THE TEST.

III. REVERSES.


[Illustration: "Nursed her foster-mother with the tenderest care."]




THE UGLY TRINKET




CHAPTER I

THE OPEN DOOR


Respected and beloved by all her neighbors, Mrs. Linden, a rich widow,
lived a solitary life in her grand, old castle.

One day some urgent business called her to the city of Antwerp. Here she
was detained longer than she had expected, and during her stay she
visited the principal points of interest, among them an old cathedral,
famed far and wide for its beauty.

With deep reverence, she entered this time-honored house of worship. Its
high, vaulted roof, its long rows of stately columns, its beautifully
painted windows, the altar in the distance, and the twilight and the
stillness of the holy place filled her with admiration and awe. In her
heart arose a feeling of the nearness of God, and she knelt and prayed.

Then she passed slowly on, stopping often to study the wonderful
paintings by the old masters, and the inscriptions upon tablets placed
on the walls in memory of notable men and women long since passed away.

Suddenly she stopped and read a tablet. It had been placed there in
honor of a pious woman who had suffered much in her life, but had always
striven to do good; and these words were written there: "She rests from
her cares, and her good deeds live after her."

Mrs. Linden then and there resolved that as long as she lived she would
bear all her troubles and trials patiently, and do good to all, so far
as lay within her power.

As she neared the altar of this grand cathedral, she noticed a little
girl eight years of age, clad in black, who was kneeling there and
praying fervently. Her eyes were riveted on her hands, tightly clasped
before her, so she noticed nothing of Mrs. Linden's presence. Tears were
rolling down her cheeks and her face had a look of sorrow and reverence.

Mrs. Linden was at once moved to pity. She did not wish to disturb her,
but as the child arose, she said softly: "You seem sad, my little one!
Why do you cry?"

"I lost my father a year ago, and a few days ago they buried my mother,"
said the child, as the tears rolled the faster.

"And for what did you pray so earnestly?" asked Mrs. Linden.

"I asked for help. 'Tis true I have some relatives in the city, and I
would like one of them to take me. The clergyman says that it is their
duty, but they do not want the trouble. I can't blame them, for they
have children enough of their own."

"Poor child," said Mrs. Linden, "no wonder you feel sad."

"Truly, I was much sadder when I entered this cathedral," said the girl,
"but all at once I feel much better."

These words pressed on Mrs. Linden's heart and she said, in a motherly
way, "I think that God has answered your prayer. Come with me."

"But where? For I must return to my house."

"Let us go to the clergyman. I know him well, and I will ask his
advice," continued Mrs. Linden. Then she offered her hand to the child,
and led the way.

The aged clergyman arose with astonishment from his chair, as he saw the
woman enter with this child.

Mrs. Linden explained to him how and where she had met the little one,
at the same time asking the girl to step aside while she engaged the old
man in quiet conversation.

"I have decided to adopt this little girl and be a mother to her. My own
dear children died when they were infants and my heart tells me that I
could give the love that I had for my own to this little orphan; but I
would like you to advise me further. Do you think that my care would be
given in vain?"

"No," said the clergyman, "a greater deed of charity you could not do;
nor could you easily find such a good, well-mannered child. Her parents
were right-living people, and they gave this, their only daughter, a
good training. Never will I forget her mother's last words: 'Father, I
know that Thou wilt care for my little one, and send her another
mother.' Her words are now being fulfilled. You have been sent to do
this."

The old clergyman then called the little girl into the room, and said:
"Amy, this good, kind woman wishes to be your mother. Do you want to go
with her and be a good daughter to her!"

"Yes, yes," said Amy, and cried for joy.

"That is right," said the clergyman. "Be to this gracious woman, the new
mother whom God has sent to you, as good and obedient a child as you
were to your own mother. Remember that trouble and sorrow may come into
your life, as they must come into every life; but if you pray with the
same trust in God as you prayed to-day, help will surely be sent in the
same way."

Her relatives were then summoned and acquainted with the fact, and not
one of them objected; instead, they were very much pleased.

When Mrs. Linden said that she would take the child just as she stood
there, and that they could have all of her clothing for their own
children, they were more than delighted.

But Amy begged to keep just a few books which her mother had given her,
and which she cherished; and this wish was granted.

On the next morning, Mrs. Linden and Amy started for the castle home.
The servant, who had expected them, had everything in readiness. After
the evening meal had been served, Mrs. Linden showed Amy to her room.

Amy was charmed with her home and her new mother. With tears of thanks
she prayed, and soon was fast asleep. When she awoke, she found the sun
streaming into the room. She walked to the window and gazed out into the
lovely, sunny grounds and wooded walks surrounding the castle. In the
distance, she could see the spire of the grand cathedral.

After a few days, Mrs. Linden sent Amy to school. When she returned each
afternoon, she helped in the garden and in the kitchen as much as her
years would permit; for Mrs. Linden wished to train her to a useful,
industrious life. Often, when the opportunity offered, she taught her to
sew and knit and care for the house, something she thought that every
girl should learn. Under the guidance of such a kind, loving woman, Amy
grew to girlhood, simple and modest.




CHAPTER II

THE TEST


Ten years passed by, filled with joy and happiness. Then suddenly Mrs.
Linden became dangerously ill.

Amy nursed her foster-mother with the tenderest care and bestowed as
much love upon her as if she were her own mother. She entered the sick
room noiselessly; spoke in soft, gentle tones; opened and closed the
doors without the least sound, so that Mrs. Linden preferred to have Amy
rather than a nurse.

Often Amy would sit in the darkened room and watch over her charge
during the long, weary hours of the night. Days and weeks passed, and
the invalid grew no better; still Amy nursed her with the same untiring
patience and care.

Mrs. Linden was very thankful that she had taken Amy into her home and
heart, and realized it more and more each day, and said: "My dear Amy,
you do so much for me. A daughter could do no more. God will reward you.
I, too, will not forget you; and you shall see that I am not
ungrateful."

Amy bade her speak no more about it.

Mrs. Linden said no more on the subject. After a lingering illness, she
became very weak, and at last passed away.

Amy cried as bitterly at this loss as she had done at the loss of her
own mother.

In the course of the week, many of Mrs. Linden's rich relatives were
summoned to the house, where her will was to be read. The lawyer
unfolded the document, and Amy was greatly surprised to learn that her
foster-mother had bequeathed to her five thousand dollars, with the
instructions to choose from her treasures the costliest, as a
remembrance.

The rich relatives were not pleased with this bequest, nor did they wish
Amy to take any of the rings, pearls or jewels. Amy had never been
covetous; and when she was told to select, she said: "It is not at all
necessary for me to have a valuable remembrance. The smallest piece will
suffice. Knowing that it comes from such a good woman, it will have
great value in my eyes. It is more than enough that she has bequeathed
to me such a large sum of money which I have not earned. Therefore, I
choose the old, tarnished, clumsy locket which she held in her hand and
wet with her tears as she bade me good-bye. This will be the most
precious treasure for me, and I know her blessing will go with it."

One of the onlookers laughed and said to Amy: "What a silly girl. Why
didn't you take the diamond ring? That ugly old locket, what good is
that! How ridiculous for you to choose such a worthless thing!"

But Amy was more than satisfied and perfectly contented; while the rich
relatives quarreled over the distribution of the other trinkets and had
more disappointment out of it than pleasure.

The relative to whom the castle had been bequeathed gave orders to Amy
to find a new home. This she had in a measure expected, of course, but
she did not know just where to go. At last the old gardener and his
good, kind wife offered to share their home with her. She thanked them
heartily and gladly accepted.

Amy now invested her money in a business house in the city, and although
her income was not large, still she had enough for her simple wants.

One year went by in quietude and peace, in the simple surroundings of
the old gardener's home. But as the new occupants of the castle no
longer wished the services of a man as old as he was, he received orders
to leave. This meant to give up his life-long work and the home which
had become so dear to him.

"Be comforted," said Amy, "for I will collect my money and buy a little
house near the city. Then I will take in some sewing, and we can all
three still live together contentedly." They soon found a house which
suited them exactly.

As Amy had not been able to get her money from the merchant, they were
obliged, for the time being, to borrow it from another man, to whom she
promised payment when her money fell due.

The house was bought and renovated to suit them. It was small and
simple, but ample for their wants. Amy kept the home bright and
comfortable; flowers graced the windows, and the old people basked in
the sunshine of her smiles and helpfulness.

Although they could see the castle in the distance, where they had spent
so many years of their lives, and from which they had all three been so
rudely cast, they never longed to return; for their little home was
filled with happiness and contentment. As joy and sorrow, however, must
change places with each other now and then here upon earth, so this
little household was called upon to meet an unwelcome friend, "Trouble."




CHAPTER III

REVERSES


One morning, after almost a year's sojourn in the little home, the news
was brought that the large business house in the city where Amy had
invested her money had failed, and that the whole amount was lost to
her. The time was almost due to pay the debt on the house. Where would
the money come from, now that they could no longer give security?

Sad, troubled days had dawned for them.

On the eve of the day when the payment on the house was due, Amy went up
to the attic, where she could be alone and cry out her grief, and pray.

In her anxiety and nervousness, she clutched the old, ugly locket that
hung from a chain--the little reminder of the time of her joys, her
sorrows, her patience, her trust and her gratitude, while she lived with
her good foster-mother.

In one moment of intense feeling, she pressed the locket tightly in an
agony of grief. Lo! as she unfolded her hand in utter helplessness, the
locket fell apart. Into her lap rolled one little stone after another.
When she took them up to look at them, she discovered that each stone
was a diamond, seemingly of great worth.

She raised her thankful eyes to heaven and poured out her grateful
heart. She paused, then gathering her treasure in her hands, she
hastened with joyous steps to acquaint her two companions of her
wonderful discovery.

The good, old people were overcome with joy, and thanked God, again and
again. Then the old man said: "With the money that these jewels will
bring you, you can pay for the house and still have enough left to keep
you comfortably."

Early the next morning, Amy hurried to the clergyman, her very best
friend, to show him the jewels and tell him how accidentally she had
found them.

"May I," said she, "keep these costly jewels or must I return them to
Mrs. Linden's heirs? I think they are the most valuable of all the
trinkets that she left."

"No," said he, "the jewels belong to you. Mrs. Linden intended them for
you, I am sure, when she gave you the right to choose first, and take
the best. When you selected the least attractive trinket, you
unknowingly chose a treasure which to you was only valuable because worn
by the one whom you hold dearest. God sent you this secret treasure; and
it is worth many thousand dollars, at least. Take it, sell it, and enjoy
the benefits which you derive therefrom. But always keep the locket, as
a memento of Mrs. Linden and her great benevolence."










End of Project Gutenberg's After Long Years and Other Stories, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AFTER LONG YEARS AND OTHER STORIES ***

***** This file should be named 8111.txt or 8111.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/1/1/8111/

Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Tiffany Vergon, Tonya Allen,
Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

