The Project Gutenberg EBook of Chronicle Of The Cid, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Chronicle Of The Cid

Author: Various

Posting Date: September 14, 2014 [EBook #8491]
Release Date: July, 2005
First Posted: July 16, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRONICLE OF THE CID ***




Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Tiffany Vergon, Marvin A.
Hodges, Charles Franks, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team










CHRONICLE OF THE CID

Translated from the Spanish

BY ROBERT SOUTHEY



WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY HENRY MORLEY LL.D.,

PROFESSOR OF ENGLISH LITERATURE, UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, LONDON






INTRODUCTION.


Robert Southey's "Chronicle of the Cid" is all translation from the
Spanish, but is not translation from a single book. Its groundwork is
that part of the _Cronica General de Espana_, the most ancient of the
Prose Chronicles of Spain, in which adventures of the Cid are fully
told. This old Chronicle was compiled in the reign of Alfonso the Wise,
who was learned in the exact science of his time, and also a
troubadour. Alfonso reigned between the years 1252 and 1284, and the
Chronicle was written by the King himself, or under his immediate
direction. It is in four parts. The first part extends from the
Creation of the World to the occupation of Spain by the Visigoths, and
is dull; the second part tells of the Goths in Spain and of the
conquest of Spain by the Moors, and is less dull; the third part brings
down the story of the nation to the reign of Ferdinand the Great, early
in the eleventh century; and the fourth part continues it to the date
of the accession of Alfonso himself in the year 1252. These latter
parts are full of interest. Though in prose, they are based by a poet
on heroic songs and national traditions of the struggle with the Moors,
and the fourth part opens with an elaborate setting forth of the
history of the great hero of mediaeval Spain, the Cid Campeador. The
Cid is the King Arthur, or the Roland, of the Spaniards, less mythical,
but not less interesting, with incidents of a real life seen through
the warm haze of Southern imagination. King Alfonso, in his Chronicle,
transformed ballads and fables of the Cid into a prose digest that was
looked upon as history. Robert Southey translated this very distinct
section of the Chronicle, not from the _Cronica General_ itself, but
from the _Chronica del Cid_, which, with small variation, was extracted
from it, being one in substance with the history of the Cid in the
fourth part of the General Chronicle, and he has enriched it. This he
has done by going himself also to the Poem of the Cid and to the
Ballads of the Cid, for incidents, descriptions, and turns of thought,
to weave into the texture of the old prose Chronicle, brightening its
tints, and adding new life to its scenes of Spanish chivalry.

"The Poem of the Cid," the earliest and best of the heroic songs of
Spain, is a romance of history in more than three thousand lines,
celebrating the achievements of the hero little more than fifty years
after his death. Ruy Diaz, or Rodrigo Diaz de Bivar, was born at Burgos
about the year 1040, and died in the year 1099. He was called the
_Cid_, because five Moorish Kings acknowledged him in one battle as
their _Seid_, or Lord and Conqueror, and he was _Campeador_ or Champion
of his countrymen against the Moors. Thus he was styled The Lord
Champion--_El Cid Campeador_. The Cid died at the end of the eleventh
century, and "The Poem of the Cid" was composed before the end of the
twelfth. It was written after the year 1135, but before the year 1200.

The Cid is also the foremost hero of the ancient Spanish Ballads. The
ballads invent or record more incidents of his life than are to be
found in the Poem and the Chronicle; and of these Southey, in the
translation here reprinted, has made frequent and skilful use. Thus it
is from the Chronicle, the Poem, and the whole group of Ballads, as
collated by an English poet with a fine relish for Spanish literature
and a keen sense of the charm of old historical romance, that we get
the translation from the Spanish which Southey published at the age of
thirty-four, in the year 1808, as "The Chronicle of the Cid."

Robert Southey was born at Bristol on the 12th of August, 1774. He was
the son of an unprosperous linen-draper, and was cared for in his
childhood and youth by two of his mother's relations, a maiden aunt,
with whom he lived as a child, and an uncle, the Rev. Herbert Hill, who
assisted in providing for his education. Mr. Hill was Chaplain to the
British Factory at Lisbon, and had a well-grounded faith in Southey's
genius and character. He secured for his nephew some years of education
at Westminster School, and when Southey was expelled by an unwise
headmaster for a boyish jest, his uncle's faith in him held firm, and
he was sent on to Balliol College, Oxford. Those were days of wild hope
among the young. They felt all that was generous in the aspiration of
idealists who saw the golden cities of the future in storm-clouds of
revolution. Robert Southey at Oxford dreamed good dreams as a poetical
Republican. He joined himself with other young students--Coleridge
among them--who planned an experiment of their own in ideal life by the
Susquehanna. He became engaged, therefore, at Bristol in mysterious
confabulation with strange youths. This alarmed his maiden aunt. Uncle
Hill, then in England, and about to return to his work at Lisbon,
shrewdly proposed to set his nephew right, and draw him out of any
confederacy that he might be in, by tempting him with an offer that
would take strong hold of his imagination. He offered to take him for a
run through Spain and Portugal. That was a chance not to be lost.
Southey went to Lisbon with his uncle, but secured, before he went, the
accomplishment of what he considered the best part of his design, by
secretly marrying Miss Edith Fricker. During that first run over ground
with which he became afterwards familiar, the young husband wrote
letters to his wife, thriftily planned for future publication in aid of
housekeeping. They were published in 1797, as "Letters from Spain and
Portugal." It was thus that Southey was first drawn to Spanish studies.
When he came back, and had to tell his aunt that he was married, he and
his wife were thrown upon their own resources. He worked manfully; his
uncle still abiding by him. In 1800 Southey went with his wife to visit
Mr. Hill, in Lisbon.

While winning his place among the English poets, Robert Southey more
than once turned to account his Spanish studies. He produced versions
of the old Spanish romances of chivalry. "Amadis of Gaul" he published
in 1803, and in 1807 "Palmerin of England." In 1807 he also published
"Espriella's Letters," an original book of his own, professing to
translate the letters of a Spaniard, who gave, as a traveller, his view
of life in England. This was a pleasant book, designed, like
Goldsmith's "Citizen of the World," to help us to see ourselves as
others see us. In the following year, 1808, Southey--already known as
the author of "Thalaba," published in 1802, and of "Madoc," published
in 1805--produced this "Chronicle of the Cid." It was a time for him of
energetic production and of active struggle, with a manly patience to
sustain it through years rich in gentle thoughts and kindly deeds that
kept his heart at rest. Sara Coleridge, to whom Southey was giving a
father's care and shelter in the days when the Chronicle was being
prepared, saw in him "upon the whole the best man she had ever known."
All qualities that should make a good translator of such a Chronicle as
this were joined in Robert Southey. As for the true Cid, let us not ask
whether he was ever--as M. Dozy, in his excellent _Recherches sur
l'Histoire Politique et Litteraire de l'Espagne pendant le Moyen Age_,
says that he could be--treacherous and cruel. What lives of him is all
that can take form as part of the life of an old and haughty nation,
proud in arms. Let the rest die.

HENRY MORLEY.

August, 1883.





THE CHRONICLE OF THE CID




BOOK I.


I. King Don Ferrando succeeded to the states of Castille after the
death of his father King Don Sancho el Mayor, in the era 1072, which
was the year of the Incarnation 1034, and from the coming of the
Patriarch Tubal to settle in Spain 3197, and from the general deluge
3339, and from the creation of the world 4995, according to the
computation of the Hebrews, and from the beginning of the false sect of
the Moors 413. And in the year 1037 Ferrando slew Bermudo the King of
Leon in battle, who was his wife's brother, and conquered his kingdom,
and succeeded to it in right of his wife Dona Sancha. So he was the
first person who united the states of Castille and Leon, and the first
who was called King of Castille; for till this time the lords of that
country had been called Counts. He was a good king, and one who judged
justly and feared God, and was bold in all his doings. Before he
reigned he had by Dona Sancha his wife the Infanta Dona Urraca, his
eldest daughter, who was a right excellent lady, of good customs and
bounty and beauty; and after her he had the Infante Don Sancho, his
eldest son and heir; and then the Infanta Dona Elvira, whom after the
death of the King her father, her brother King Don Alfonso married to
the Count Don Garci de Cabra. And after he became King he had the
Infante Don Alfonso, and the Infante Don Garcia, who was the youngest
of all. And he put his sons to read, that they might be of the better
understanding, and he made them take arms, and be shown how to demean
themselves in battle, and to be huntsmen. And he ordered that his
daughters should be brought up in the studies beseeming dames, so that
they might be of good customs, and instructed in devotion and in all
things which it behoved them to know.

II. In those days arose Rodrigo of Bivar, who was a youth strong in
arms and of good customs; and the people rejoiced in him, for he
bestirred himself to protect the land from the Moors. Now it behoves
that ye should know whence he came, and from what men he was descended,
because we have to proceed with his history. Ye are to know therefore,
that after the treason which King Don Ordono the Second committed upon
the Counts of Castille, that country remained without a chief: the
people therefore chose two judges, of whom the one was called Nuno
Rasuera, and the other Layn Calvo, who married Nuno's daughter, Elvira
Nunez. From Nuno Rasuera King Don Ferrando descended, and from Layn
Calvo, Diego Laynez, who took to wife Dona Teresa Rodriguez, the
daughter of Don Rodrigo Alvarez, Count and Governor of Asturias, and
had by her this Rodrigo. In the year of the Incarnation 1026 was
Rodrigo born, of this noble lineage, in the city of Burgos, and in the
street of St. Martin, hard by the palace of the Counts of Castille,
where Diego Laynez had his dwelling. In the church of St. Martin was he
baptized, a good priest of Burgos, whose name was Don Pedro de
Pernegas, being his godfather: and to this church Rodrigo was always
greatly affectionate, and he built the belfry tower thereof.

III. At this time it came to pass that there was strife between Count
Don Gomez the Lord of Gormaz, and Diego Laynez the father of Rodrigo;
and the Count insulted Diego and gave him a blow. Now Diego was a man
in years, and his strength had passed from him, so that he could not
take vengeance, and he retired to his home to dwell there in solitude
and lament over his dishonour. And he took no pleasure in his food,
neither could he sleep by night, nor would he lift up his eyes from the
ground, nor stir out of his house, nor commune with his friends, but
turned from them in silence as if the breath of his shame would taint
them. Rodrigo was yet but a youth, and the Count was a mighty man in
arms, one who gave his voice first in the Cortes, and was held to be
the best in the war, and so powerful that he had a thousand friends
among the mountains. Howbeit all these things appeared as nothing to
Rodrigo when he thought of the wrong done to his father, the first
which had ever been offered to the blood of Layn Calvo. He asked
nothing but justice of Heaven, and of man he asked only a fair field;
and his father seeing of how good heart he was, gave him his sword and
his blessing. The sword had been the sword of Mudarra in former times,
and when Rodrigo held its cross in his hand, he thought within himself
that his arm was not weaker than Mudarra's. And he went out and defied
the Count and slew him, and smote off his head and carried it home to
his father. The old man was sitting at table, the food lying before him
untasted, when Rodrigo returned, and pointing to the head which hung
from the horse's collar, dropping blood, he bade him look up, for there
was the herb which should restore to him his appetite. The tongue,
quoth he, which insulted you is no longer a tongue, and the hand which
wronged you is no longer a hand. And the old man arose and embraced his
son and placed him above him at the table, saying, that he who had
brought home that head should be the head of the house of Layn Calvo.

IV. After this Diego being full of years fell asleep and was gathered
to his fathers. And the Moors entered Castille, in great power, for
there came with them five Kings, and they past above Burgos, and crost
the mountains of Oca, and plundered Carrion, and Vilforado, and Saint
Domingo de la Calzada, and Logrono, and Najara, and all that land; and
they carried away many captives both male and female, and brood mares,
and flocks of all kinds. But as they were returning with all speed,
Rodrigo of Bivar raised the country, and came up with them in the
mountains of Oca, and fell upon them and discomfited them, and won back
all their booty, and took all the five Kings prisoners. Then he went
back to his mother, taking the Kings with him, and there he divided the
whole spoil with the hidalgos and his other companions, both the
Moorish captives and all the spoil of whatever kind, so that they
departed right joyfully, being well pleased with what he had done. And
he gave thanks to God for the grace which had been vouchsafed to him,
and said to his mother, that he did not think it good to keep the Kings
in captivity, but to let them go freely; and he set them at liberty and
bade them depart. So they returned each to his own country, blessing
him for their deliverance, and magnifying his great bounty; and
forthwith they sent him tribute and acknowledged themselves to be his
vassals.

V. King Don Ferrando was going through Leon, putting the Kingdom in
order, when tidings reached him of the good speed which Rodrigo had had
against the Moors. And at the same time there came before him Ximena
Gomez, the daughter of the Count, who fell on her knees before him and
said, Sir, I am the daughter of Count Don Gomez of Gormaz, and Rodrigo
of Bivar has slain the Count my father, and of three daughters whom he
has left I am the youngest. And, Sir, I come to crave of you a boon,
that you will give me Rodrigo of Bivar to be my husband, with whom I
shall hold myself well married, and greatly honoured; for certain I am
that his possessions will one day be greater than those of any man in
your dominions. Certes, Sir, it behoves you to do this, because it is
for God's service, and because I may pardon Rodrigo with a good will.
The King held it good to accomplish her desire; and forthwith ordered
letters to be drawn up to Rodrigo of Bivar, wherein he enjoined and
commanded him that he should come incontinently to Palencia, for he had
much to communicate to him, upon an affair which was greatly to God's
service, and his own welfare and great honour.

VI. When Rodrigo saw the letters of his Lord the King, he greatly
rejoiced in them, and said to the messengers that he would fulfil the
King's pleasure, and go incontinently at his command. And he dight
himself full gallantly and well, and took with him many knights, both
his own and of his kindred and of his friends, and he took also many
new arms, and came to Palencia to the King with two hundred of his
peers in arms, in festival guise; and the King went out to meet him,
and received him right well, and did him honour; and at this were all
the Counts displeased. And when the King thought it a fit season, he
spake to him and said, that Dona Ximena Gomez, the daughter of the
Count whom he had slain, had come to ask him for her husband, and would
forgive him her father's death; wherefore he besought him to think it
good to take her to be his wife, in which case he would show him great
favour. When Rodrigo heard this it pleased him well, and he said to the
King that he would do his bidding in this, and in all other things
which he might command; and the King thanked him much. And he sent for
the Bishop of Palencia, and took their vows and made them plight
themselves each to the other according as the law directs. And when
they were espoused the King did them great honour, and gave them many
noble gifts, and added to Rodrigo's lands more than he had till then
possessed: and he loved him greatly in his heart, because he saw that
he was obedient to his commands, and for all that he had heard him say.

VII. So Rodrigo departed from the King, and took his spouse with him to
the house of his mother, and gave her to his mother's keeping. And
forthwith he made a vow in her hands that he would never accompany with
her, neither in the desert nor in the inhabited place, till he had won
five battles in the field. And he besought his mother that she would
love her even as she loved him himself, and that she would do good to
her and show her great honour, for which he should ever serve her with
the better good will, his mother promised him so to do: and then he
departed from them and went out against the frontier of the Moors.

VIII. Now the history relates that King Don Ferrando contended with
King Don Ramiro of Aragon for the city of Calahorra, which each claimed
as his own; in such guise that the King of Aragon placed it upon the
trial by combat, confiding in the prowess of Don Martin Gonzalez, who
was at that time held to be the best knight in all Spain, King Don
Ferrando accepted the challenge, and said that Rodrigo of Bivar should
do battle on his part, but that he was not then present. And they
plighted homage on both parts to meet and bring each his knight, and
the knight who conquered should win Calahorra for his Lord. Having
ratified this engagement, they returned into their own lands. And
immediately Ferrando sent for Rodrigo of Bivar, and told him all the
matter as it then stood, and that he was to do battle. Well pleased was
Rodrigo when he heard this, and he accorded to all that the King had
said that he should, do battle for him upon that cause; but till the
day arrived he must needs, he said, go to Compostella, because he had
vowed a pilgrimage; and the King was content therewith, and gave him
great gifts.

IX. Rodrigo forthwith set out upon the road, and took with him twenty
knights. And as he went he did great good, and gave alms, feeding the
poor and needy. And upon the way they found a leper, struggling in a
quagmire, who cried out to them with a loud voice to help him for the
love of God; and when Rodrigo heard this, he alighted from his beast
and helped him, and placed him upon the beast before him, and carried
him with him in this manner to the inn where he took up his lodging
that night. At this were his knights little pleased. And when supper
was ready he bade his knights take their seats, and he took the leper
by the hand, and seated him next himself, and ate with him out of the
same dish. The knights were greatly offended at this foul sight,
insomuch that they rose up and left the chamber. But Rodrigo ordered a
bed to be made ready for himself and for the leper, and they twain
slept together. When it was midnight and Rodrigo was fast asleep, the
leper breathed against him between his shoulders, and that breath was
so strong that it passed through him, even through his breast; and he
awoke, being astounded, and felt for the leper by him, and found him
not; and he began to call him, but there was no reply. Then he arose in
fear, and called for light, and it was brought him; and he looked for
the leper and could see nothing; so he returned into the bed, leaving
the light burning. And he began to think within himself what had
happened, and of that breath which had passed through him, and how the
leper was not there. After a while, as he was thus musing, there
appeared before him one in white garments, who said unto him, Sleepest
thou or wakest thou, Rodrigo? and he answered and said, I do not sleep;
but who art thou that bringest with thee such brightness and so sweet
an odour? Then said he, I am Saint Lazarus, and know that I was the
leper to whom thou didst so much good and so great honour for the love
of God; and because thou didst this for his sake hath God now granted
thee a great gift; for whensoever that breath which thou hast felt
shall come upon thee, whatever thing thou desirest to do, and shalt
then begin, that shalt thou accomplish to thy heart's desire, whether
it be in battle or aught else, so that thy honour shall go on
increasing from day to day; and thou shalt be feared both by Moors and
Christians, and thy enemies shall never prevail against thee, and thou
shalt die an honourable death in thine own house, and in thy renown,
for God hath blessed thee;--therefore go thou on, and evermore
persevere in doing good; and with that he disappeared. And Rodrigo
arose and prayed to our lady and intercessor St. Mary, that she would
pray to her blessed son for him to watch over both his body and soul in
all his undertakings; and he continued in prayer till the day broke.
Then he proceeded on his way, and performed his pilgrimage, doing much
good for the love of God and of St. Mary.

X. Now the day came which had been appointed for the combat concerning
Calahorra, between Rodrigo and Don Martin Gonzalez, and Rodrigo was not
arrived; therefore his cousin Alvar Fanez Minaya undertook the battle
in his stead, and ordered his horse to be harnessed right well. While
he was arming himself Rodrigo came up and took the horse of Alvar
Fanez, and entered the lists; Don Martin Gonzalez did the same, and the
judges placed them fairly, each in his place, so that neither should
have the sun in his eyes. They ran their career, one against the other,
and met so fiercely that their lances brake, and both were sorely
wounded; but Don Martin began to address Rodrigo, thinking to dismay
him: Greatly dost thou now repent, Don Rodrigo, said he, that thou hast
entered into these lists with me: for I shall so handle thee that never
shalt thou marry Dona Ximena thy spouse, whom thou lovest so well, nor
ever return alive to Castille. Rodrigo waxed angry at these words, and
he replied, You are a good knight, Don Martin Gonzalez, but these words
are not suitable to this place, for in this business we have to contend
with hands and not with empty speeches; and the power is in God who
will give the honour as he thinketh best. And in his anger he made at
him, and smote him upon his helmet, and the sword cut through and
wounded as much of the head as it could reach, so that he was sorely
hurt and lost much blood. And Don Martin Gonzalez struck at Rodrigo,
and the sword cut into the shield, and he plucked it towards him that
with main force he made Rodrigo lose the shield; but Rodrigo did not
forget himself, and wounded him again in the face. And they both became
greatly enraged, and cruel against each other, striking without mercy,
for both of them were men who knew how to demean themselves. But while
they thus struggled Don Martin Gonzalez lost much blood, and for very
weakness he could not hold himself upon his horse, but fell from his
horse upon the ground; and Rodrigo alighted and went to him and slew
him; and when he had slain him he asked the judges if there was any
thing more to be done for the right of Calahorra: and they made answer
that there was not. Then came the King Don Ferrando to him, and
alighted by him, and helped to disarm him, and embraced him much; and
when he was disarmed he went with him from the field, he and all the
Castillians greatly rejoicing; but as great as was the pleasure of King
Don Ferrando and his people, so great was the sorrow of King Don Ramiro
of Aragon and of his. And he ordered them to take up Don Martin
Gonzalez, and they carried the body into his own lands, and he went
with it, and Calahorra remained in the power of King Don Ferrando.

XI. But when the Counts of Castille saw how Rodrigo increased day by
day in honour, they took counsel together that they should plot with
the Moors, and fix a day of battle with them on the day of the Holy
Cross in May, and that they should invite Rodrigo to this battle, and
contrive with the Moors that they should slay him; by which means they
should be revenged upon him, and remain masters of Castille, which now
because of him they could not be. This counsel they sent to communicate
to the Moors and to the Moorish Kings who were Rodrigo's vassals, being
those whom he had made prisoners and set at liberty. But they, when
they saw this counsel and the falsehood which was devised, took the
letters of the Counts, and sent them to Rodrigo their Lord, and sent to
tell him all the secret of the treason. And Rodrigo thanked them
greatly for their good faith, and took the letters and carried to the
King, and showed him all the enmity of the Counts, and especially of
the Count Don Garcia, who was afterwards called of Cabra. When the King
saw this as it was, he was astonished at their great falsehood, and he
issued his letters in which he ordered them to leave his dominions;
then he went to Santiago on a pilgrimage, and ordered Rodrigo to cast
these Counts out of the land; and Rodrigo did as the King commanded
him. Then Dona Elvira his kinswoman, the wife of the Count Don Garcia,
came and fell on her knees before him; but Rodrigo took her by the hand
and raised her up, and would not hear her till she was arisen. And when
he had raised her up she said. I beseech you, cousin, since you have
banished me and my husband, that you would give us a letter to some
King who is one of your vassals, enjoining him to befriend us, and give
us something for your sake whereon we may live. So he gave her a letter
to the King of Cordova, who received her and her husband well for the
love of Rodrigo, and gave Cabra to him, that he and his people might
dwell therein. This Count was afterwards so ungrateful to the King of
Cordova that he made war upon him from Cabra which the King had given
him, till Rodrigo came and took it.

XII. The history relateth that at this time while the King was in
Galicia, the Moors entered Estremadura, and the people called upon
Rodrigo of Bivar to help them. And when he heard the summons he made no
delay, but gathered together his kinsmen and his friends, and went
against the misbelievers. And he came up with them between Atienza and
San Estevan de Gormaz, as they were carrying away a great booty in
captives and in flocks, and there he had a brave battle with them in
the field; and in fine Rodrigo conquered, smiting and slaying, and the
pursuit lasted for seven leagues, and he recovered all the spoil, which
was so great that two hundred horses were the fifth, for the whole
spoil was worth a hundred times a thousand maravedis. Rodrigo divided
the whole among his people without covetousness, and returned with
great honour.

XIII. Now the greater part of these Moors had been they of Merida,
Badajoz, Beja and Evora, and the King was minded to requite them in
their own land according to their deeds; and he entered into the heart
of their country, carrying with him fire and sword, and pressed them
sorely so that they yielded vassalage. Then turning through Portugal,
he won the town of Sea, which was upon the western slope of the Serra
da Estrella; and also another town called Gamne, the site whereof
cannot now be known, for in course of years names change and are
forgotten. And proceeding with his conquests he laid siege to the city
of Viseu, that he might take vengeance for the death of King Don
Alfonso, his wife's father, who had been slain before that city. But
the people of Viseu, as they lived with this fear before their eyes,
had fortified their city well, and stored it abundantly with all things
needful, and moreover, they put their trust in their Alcayde, who was
an African, by name Cid Alafum, a man tried in arms. He encouraged
them, saying that the city could not be taken in ten years, by a
greater power than the Christians; and there were many good arbalisters
in the city, who shot so strong that neither shield nor armour availed
against their quarrels. King Don Ferrando therefore ordered mantles to
be made, and also pavaises to protect his people; and moreover he
enjoined them to fasten boards upon their shields, so that the quarrels
from the crossbows might not pierce through. And he continued for
eighteen days to combat the city, keeping such good watch, that neither
could they within receive help from without, nor themselves issue
forth; and on the eighteenth day, which was the Vesper of St. Peter's,
he won the city by force of arms; and few were they who escaped from
the sword of the conquerors, except those who retreated with Alafum
into the castle. And on the following day at the hour of tierce they
also came to terms, and yielded themselves to his mercy, saving their
lives. In this manner was Viseu recovered by the Christians, and never
after did that city fall into the hands of the barbarians. And the Moor
who had slain King Don Alfonso fell into Ferrando's power, and the King
took vengeance and punished him in all the parts which had offended; he
cut off the foot which had prest down the Armatost, and lopt off the
hands which had held the bow and fitted the quarrel, and plucked out
the eyes which had taken the mark; and the living trunk was then set up
as a butt for the archers.

XIV. In all these wars there was not a man who bore greater part, or
did better feats in arms, than Rodrigo of Bivar. And the King went up
against Lamego, and besieged it. Now Zadan Aben Huim, son of Huim
Alboazem, the King thereof, was mightier than all the Kings who had
reigned before him in Lamego, and he had peopled many places from the
Douro even to the rivers Tavora and Vouga. And because he was well
beloved and his city well stored and strong, all the chief Moors in
that district being dismayed by the fall of Viseu, retired into it, to
be under his protection. But maugre all their power. King Don Ferrando
girt the city round about, and brought against it so many engines, and
so many bastilles, that Zadan submitted, and opened his gates on the
twenty-second of July, the day of St. Mary Magdalene, being twenty-five
days after the capture of Viseu. And Zadan became tributary to the
King, and the King took with him many of the Moors, to be employed in
building up the churches which had fallen to ruin since the land was
lost.

XV. All this while was Coimbra in the power of the misbelievers. And
the Abbot of Lorvam took counsel with his Monks, and they said, Let us
go to King Ferrando and tell him the state of the city. And they chose
out two of the brethren for this errand. When the Moors therefore who
came to hunt among the mountains took up their lodging in the Monastery
as they were wont to do, these twain said unto them, We would go to the
holy _Dominicum_, to say prayers there for our sins. So feigning this
to be their errand they set forth, and came to the King in the town of
Carrion, and spake unto him in council, saying, Sir King, we come to
you through waters and over mountains and by bad ways, to tell you
concerning Coimbra in what plight it is, if you desire to know, and in
what guise the Moors dwell therein, what they are and how many, and
with how little heed they keep the city. And he said unto them. I
beseech ye, for the love of God, say on. Then told they him what they
knew: and the King took counsel upon this matter with Rodrigo of Bivar,
and Rodrigo said, that certes the Lord would help him to win the city;
and he said that he would fain be knighted by the King's hand, and that
it seemed to him now that he should receive knighthood at his hand in
Coimbra. A covenant was then made with the two Monks, that they should
go with the army against the city in the month of January without fail.
Now this was in October. Incontinently the King sent to summon his
knights and people, and when one part of them had assembled at Santa
Maria, he bade them do all the damage they could against Coimbra, and
ravage the country, which accordingly they did. In the meantime the
King made a pilgrimage to Santiago, as Rodrigo had exhorted him to do;
and he remained there three days and nights in prayer, offering great
gifts, and taking upon himself great devotion, that it might please God
to fulfil his desire. And with the help of Santiago he gathered
together a great host, and went up against Coimbra in the month of
January, even as he had covenanted, and laid siege to it. And he fought
against the city all February, and March, and April, May and June, five
months did he fight, and could not prevail against it. And when July
came the food of the besiegers failed them, insomuch that they had only
the dole for a few days left; then the baggage was made ready, and the
sumpter-beasts and serving-men were ordered to depart for Leon, and
proclamation was made in the camp that the army should remain yet four
days, and on the fifth they might break up and depart every one to his
own house. But then the Monks of Lorvam and the Abbot consulted
together and said, Let us now go to the King and give him all the food
which we have, both oxen and cows, and sheep and goats and swine, wheat
and barley and maize, bread and wine, fish and fowl, even all that we
have; for if the city, which God forbid, should not be won, by the
Christians, we may no longer abide here. Then went they to the King and
gave him all their stores, both of flocks and herds, and pulse, and
wine beyond measure, which they had for a long time stored. Then was
there abundance in the camp; but they who were within the city waxed
feeble for hunger long suffering, because the Christians beset them on
all sides, and warred upon them hotly, and brought their engines to
bear on every part, and the walls of the city were broken down. When
the Moors saw this they came to the King, and fell at his feet, and
besought him of his mercy that he would let them depart, leaving to him
the city and all that they had therein, for they asked for nothing but
their lives. And the King had compassion upon them and granted their
prayer; and the city was yielded to him on a Sunday at the hour of
tierce, which was before a week had run out since the Monks of Lorvam
had succoured the host.

XVI. Now it came to pass that while the King lay before Coimbra, there
came a pilgrim from the land of Greece on pilgrimage to Santiago; his
name was Estiano, and he was a Bishop. And as he was praying in the
church he heard certain of the townsmen and of the pilgrims saying that
Santiago was wont to appear in battle like a knight, in aid of the
Christians. And when he heard this it nothing pleased him, and he said
unto them, "Friends, call him not a knight, but rather a fisherman."
Upon this it pleased God that he should fall asleep, and in his sleep
Santiago appeared to him with a good and cheerful countenance, holding
in his hand a bunch of keys, and said unto him, "Thou thinkest it a
fable that they should call me a knight, and sayest that I am not so:
for this reason am I come unto thee that thou never more mayest doubt
concerning my knighthood; for a knight of Jesus Christ I am, and a
helper of the Christians against the Moors." While he was thus saying a
horse was brought him the which was exceeding white, and the Apostle
Santiago mounted upon it, being well clad in bright and fair armour,
after the manner of a knight. And he said to Estiano, "I go to help
King Don Ferrando who has lain these seven months before Coimbra, and
to-morrow, with these keys which thou seest, will I open the gates of
the city unto him at the hour of tierce, and deliver it into his hand."
Having said this he departed. And the Bishop when he awoke in the
morning called together the clergy and people of Compostella, and told
them what he had seen and heard. And as he said, even so did it come to
pass; for tidings came that on that day, and at the hour of tierce, the
gates of the city had been opened.


XVII. King Don Ferrando then assembled his Counts and chief captains,
and told them all that the Monks of Lorvam had done, in bringing him to
besiege the city, and in supplying his army in their time of need: and
the Counts and chief captains made answer and said, Certes, O King, if
the Monks had not given us the stores of their Monastery, thou couldest
not have taken the city at this time. The King then called for the
Abbot and the brethren, for they were with him in the host, and said
the hours to him daily, and mass in St. Andre's, and buried there and
in their Monastery as many as had died during the siege, either of
arrow-wounds or by lances, or of their own infirmities. So they came
before him and gave him joy of his conquest; and he said unto them,
Take ye now of this city as much as ye desire, since by God's favour
and your council I have won it. But they made answer, Thanks be to God
and to you, and to your forefathers, we have enough and shall have, if
so be that we have your favour and dwell among Christians. Only for the
love of God, and for the remedy of your own soul, give us one church
with its dwelling-houses within the city, and confirm unto us the gifts
made to us in old times by your forefathers, and the good men to whom
God give a happy rest. With that the King turned to his sons and his
soldiers, and said, Of a truth, by our Creator, these who desire so
little are men of God. I would have given them half the city, and they
will have only a single church! Now therefore, since they require but
this, on the part of God Almighty let us grant and confirm unto them
what they ask, to the honour of God and St. Mamede. And the brethren
brought him their charters of King Ramiro, and King Bermudo, and King
Alfonso, and of Gonzalo Moniz, who was a knight and married a daughter
of King Bermudo, and of other good men. And the King confirmed them,
and he bade them make a writing of all which had passed between him and
them at the siege of Coimbra; and when they brought him the writing,
they brought him also a crown of silver and of gold, which had been
King Bermudo's and which Gonzalo Moniz had given to the Monastery in
honour of God and St. Mamede. The King saw the crown, how it was set
with precious stones, and said to them, To what end bring ye hither
this crown? And they said, That you should take it, Sire, in return for
the good which you have done us. But he answered, Far be it from me
that I should take from your Monastery what the good men before me have
given to it! Take ye back the crown, and take also ten marks of silver,
and make with the money a good cross, to remain with you for ever. And
he who shall befriend you, may God befriend him; but he who shall
disturb you or your Monastery, may he be cursed by the living God and
by his Saints. So the King signed the writing which he had commanded to
be made, and his sons and chief captains signed it also, and in the
writing he enjoined his children and his children's children, as many
as should come after him, to honour and protect the Monastery of
Lorvam, upon his blessing he charged them so to do, because he had
found the brethren better than all the other Monks in his dominions.

XVIII. Then King Don Ferrando knighted Rodrigo of Bivar in the great
mosque of Coimbra, which he dedicated to St. Mary. And the ceremony was
after this manner: the King girded on his sword, and gave him the kiss,
but not the blow. To do him more honour the Queen gave him his horse,
and the Infanta Dona Urraca fastened on his spurs; and from that day
forth he was called Ruydiez. Then the King commanded him to knight nine
noble squires with his own hand; and he took his sword before the
altar, and knighted them. The King then gave Coimbra to the keeping of
Don Sisnando, Bishop of Iria, a man, who having more hardihood than
religion, had by reason of his misdeeds gone over to the Moors, and
sorely infested the Christians in Portugal. But during the siege he had
come to the King's service, and bestirred himself well against the
Moors; and therefore the King took him into his favour, and gave him
the city to keep, which he kept, and did much evil to the Moors till
the day of his death. And the King departed and went to Compostella to
return thanks to Santiago.

XIX. But then Benalfagi, who was the Lord of many lands in Estremadura,
gathered together a great power of the Moors and built up the walls of
Montemor, and from thence waged war against Coimbra, so that they of
Coimbra called upon the King for help. And the King came up against the
town, and fought against it, and took it. Great honour did Ruydiez win
at that siege; for having to protect the foragers, the enemy came out
upon him, and thrice in one day was he beset by them; but he, though
sorely prest by them, and in great peril, nevertheless would not send
to the camp for succour, but put forth his manhood and defeated them.
And from that day the King gave more power into his hands, and made him
head over all his household.

XX. Now the men of Leon besought the King that he would repeople
Zamora, which had lain desolate since it was destroyed by Almanzor. And
he went thither and peopled the city, and gave to it good privileges.
And while he was there came messengers from the five Kings who were
vassals to Ruydiez of Bivar, bringing him their tribute; and they came
to him, he being with the King, and called him Cid, which signifyeth
Lord, and would have kissed his hands, but he would not give them his
hand till they had kissed the hand of the King. And Ruydiez took the
tribute and offered the fifth thereof to the King, in token of his
sovereignty; and the King thanked him, but would not receive it, and
from that time he ordered that Ruydiez should be called the Cid,
because the Moors had so called him.

XXI. In those days Pope Victor II. held a council at Florence, and the
Emperor Henry there made his complaint against King Don Ferrando, that
he did not acknowledge his sovereignty, and pay him tribute like all
other Kings; and he besought the Pope to admonish him so to do. And the
Pope being a German, and the friend of Henry, sent to the King to
admonish him, and told him that unless he obeyed he would proclaim a
crusade against him; and in like manner the Emperor, and the King of
France, and the other Kings, sent to exhort him to obedience, defying
him if he should refuse. When the King saw their letters he was
troubled, for he knew that if this thing were done, great evil would
follow to Castille and Leon. And he took counsel with his honourable
men. They seeing on the one hand the great power of the Church, and on
the other the great evil that it would be if Castille and Leon should
be made tributary, knew not what counsel to give: howbeit at length
they said to him that he should do the Pope's bidding. At this council
the Cid was not present, for he had lately completed his marriage with
Dona Ximena Gomez, and was then with her; but at this time he arrived,
and the King showed him the letters, and told him the matter how it
then stood, and what had been the advice of his good men, and besought
him to speak his advice, as a good and true vassal to his Lord. When
the Cid heard what had passed it grieved him to the heart, more for the
counsel which had been given to the King, than because of the Pope's
commands; and he turned to the King and said, In an ill day, Sir, were
you born in Spain, if it be in your time to be made tributary, which it
never was before; for all the honour which God hath given you, and
whatever good he hath done to you, is lost if it should be so. And,
Sir, whoever hath given you this counsel is not a true man, neither one
who regardeth your honour nor your power. But send to defy them since
they will have it so, and let us carry the war home to them. You shall
take with you five thousand knights, all of whom are hidalgos, and the
Moorish Kings who are your vassals will give you two thousand knights;
and, Sir, you are such a one as God loves, and he will not that your
honour should perish. And the King thought that he was well counselled
by him, for the King was of a great heart.

XXII. Then the King ordered letters to be written, in which he besought
the Pope not to proceed farther against him without just cause, for
Spain had been conquered by those who dwelt therein, by the blood of
them and of their fathers, and they had never been tributary, and never
would be so, but would rather all die. Moreover he sent his letters to
the Emperor and to the other Kings, telling them that they well knew
the wrong which the Emperor did him, having no jurisdiction over him,
nor lawful claim; and he besought them to let him alone that he might
continue to wage war against the enemies of the faith; but if they
persisted to speak against him he then sent them back their friendship,
and defied them, and where they all were there would he go seek them.
While this reply was on its way he gathered together his people, as he
and the Cid had advised, and set forward with eight thousand and nine
hundred knights, both of his own and of the Cid, and the Cid led the
advanced guard. When they had passed the passes of Aspa they found that
the country was up, and the people would not sell them food; but the
Cid set his hand to, to burn all the country before him, and plunder
from those who would not sell, but to those who brought food he did no
wrong. And after such manner did he proceed, that wherever the King and
his army arrived they found all things of which they could stand in
need; and the news went sounding throughout all the land, so that all
men trembled.

XXIII. Then Count Remon, Lord of Savoy, with the power of the King of
France, gathered together twenty thousand knights and came beyond
Tolosa, to hold the road against King Don Ferrando. And he met with his
harbinger the Cid, who went before him to prepare lodgings, and they
had a hard battle; and the men of the Count were discomfited, and he
himself made prisoner and many with him, and many were slain. And the
Count besought the Cid of his mercy to set him free, saying that he
would give him a daughter he had, the which was right fair; and the Cid
did as he besought him, and the daughter was given to him, and he set
the Count free. And by this woman King Don Ferrando had his son the
Cardinal Ferrando, who was so honourable a man.

XXIV. After this the Cid had another battle with all the power of
France, and discomfited them, and at neither of these battles did the
King and his main army arrive. So the news went sounding before them to
the council, of the fierceness of the Cid; and as they all knew that he
was the conqueror of battles, they knew not what to advise; and they
besought the Pope that he would send to them, begging them to turn
back, and saying that they did not require tribute. These letters came
to the King when he had past Tolosa, and he took counsel with the Cid
and with his good men, and they advised that he should send two of his
good men to the Pope, who should tell him to send a Cardinal with power
to make a covenant, that this demand should never again be made upon
Spain; and that persons from the Emperor and from the other Kings also
should come to ratify this, and meanwhile he would abide where he was.
But if they did not come he would go on to them. Count Don Rodrigo, and
Alvar Fanez Minaya, and certain learned men, were sent with this
bidding. And when they came to the Pope and gave him their letters, he
was much dismayed, and he assembled the good and honourable men of the
council, and asked of them what he should do. And they made answer that
he must do as the King willed him, for none was so hardy as to fight
against the good fortune of his vassal the Cid. Then the Pope sent
Master Roberto, the Cardinal of St. Sabina, with full powers, and the
representatives of the Emperor and of the other Kings came also and
signed the covenant, that this demand should never again be made upon
the King of Spain. And the writings which they made were confirmed by
the Pope and by the Emperor and the other Kings, and sealed with their
seals.

XXV. While this was doing the King abode where he was, beyond Tolosa;
six months did he abide there. And the Pope sent to ask of him the
daughter of Count Remon; and she was then five months gone with child;
and by the advice of his vassal the Cid the King sent her, and sent to
tell the Pope the whole truth, requesting that he would see she was
taken care of; and the Pope ordered that she should be taken care of
till the event should be. And she was delivered of the Abbot Don
Ferrando; the Pope was his godfather, and brought him up right
honourably, and dispensed with his bastardry that he might hold any
sacred dignity; and in process of time he was made an honourable
Cardinal. So the King returned with great honour into his own land, and
from that time he was called Don Ferrando the Great, the Emperor's
Peer; and it was said of him in songs that he had passed the passes of
Aspa in despite of the Frenchmen.

XXVI. Many other things did King Don Ferrando, which are written in the
book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Spain, enriching churches and
monasteries, and honouring the saints and martyrs, and making war upon
the misbelievers. And it came to pass when he was waxed old, that as he
was one day saying his prayers, the confessor St. Isidro appeared unto
him, and told him the day and hour when he should die, to the intent
that he might make ready and confess his sins, and make atonement for
them, and take thought for his soul, that so he might appear clean from
offence before the face of God. From that day he, being certain that
his end was at hand, began to discharge his soul. And he devised within
himself how to dispose of the kingdoms which God had given him, that
there might be no contention between his sons after his death; and he
thought it best to divide his lands among them; but this which he
thought best proved to be the worst, and great evil came thereof, for
better had it been that he had left all to the eldest. Howbeit it was
his pleasure to divide them: he had three sons, Don Sancho who was the
eldest, and Don Alfonso who was the second born, and Don Garcia who was
the youngest; and two daughters, Dona Urraca and Dona Elvira. The
manner in which he divided his lands was this: he gave to Don Sancho
the kingdom of Castille as far as to the river Pisuerga, on the side of
Leon, with the border, which included the dioceses of Osma, and
Segovia, and Avila, and on the side of Navarre as far as the Ebro, as
he had won it from his nephew Don Sancho Garcia, King of Navarre. To
Don Alfonso he gave the kingdom of Leon, and in Asturias as far as the
river Deva, which runs by Oviedo, and part of Campos as far as Carrion
and the river Pisuerga, with the border, which contained the dioceses
of Zamora, Salamanca, and Ciudad Rodrigo, and the city of Astorga, and
other lands in Galicia, with the town of Zebreros. To Don Garcia he
gave the kingdom of Galicia, and all the lands which he had won in
Portugal, with the title of King of Galicia, which country had had no
King of its own since the kingdom of the Suevi had been overthrown by
King Leovegildo. And to Dona Urraca he gave the city of Zamora with all
its dependencies, and with half the Infantazgo: and the other half,
with the city of Toro and its dependencies, to Dona Elvira.

XXVII. When the Infante Don Sancho knew that the King his father had
made this allotment it displeased him, for he was the eldest son; and
he said to his father that he neither could nor ought to make this
division; for the Gothic Kings had in old time made a constitution for
themselves, that the kingdom and empire of Spain never should be
divided, but remain one dominion under one Lord. But the King replied
that he would not for this forbear to do as he had resolved, for he had
won the kingdom; then the Infante made answer, Do as you will, being my
father and Lord; but I do not consent unto it. So the King made this
division against the right of the Infante Don Sancho, and it displeased
many in the kingdom, and many it pleased; but they who were of good
understanding perceived the evil which would arise.

XXVIII. After this the King fell sick with the malady whereof he died.
And he made himself be carried to Leon, and there on his knees before
the bodies of the saints he besought mercy of them. And putting his
crown upon his head before the holy body of St. Isidro he called upon
God, saying, O Lord Jesus Christ, thine is the power over all, and
thine is the kingdom, for thou art King of all kingdoms, and of all
Kings, and of all nations, and all are at thy command. And now Lord I
return unto thee the kingdom which thou hast given me, but I beseech
thee of thy mercy that my soul may be brought to the light which hath
no end. Having said thus, he stript himself of the royal robes adorned
with gold in which he was arrayed, and took the crown from his head and
placed it upon the altar; and he put sackcloth upon the carrion of his
body, and prayed to God, confessing all the sins which he had committed
against him, and took his acquittal from the Bishops, for they absolved
him from his sins; and forthwith he there received extreme unction, and
strewed ashes upon himself. After this, by his own order he was carried
to St. Mary of Almazan in pilgrimage, and there he remained thrice nine
days, beseeching St. Mary that she would have mercy upon him and
intercede with her blessed Son for his soul. From thence they carried
him to Cabezon, and there the Abbot Don Ferrando came to him, an
honourable man, and many other honourable men of his realms, and the
Cid Ruydiez, whom the King commended to the Infante Don Sancho, his
son. And after he had put all his affairs in order he remained three
days lamenting in pain, and on the fourth, being the day of St. John
the Evangelist, he called for the Cardinal Abbot, and commended Spain
and his other sons to him, and gave him his blessing, and then at the
hour of sexts he rendered up his soul without stain to God, being full
of years. So they carried him to Leon and buried him near his father,
in the Church of St. Isidro, which he had built. Thirty and one years
did King Don Ferrando the Great who was peer with the Emperor, Reign
over Castille. The Queen his wife lived two years after him, leading a
holy life; a good Queen had she been and of good understanding, and
right loving to her husband: alway had she counselled him well, being
in truth the mirror of his kingdoms, and the friend of the widows and
orphans. Her end was a good end, like that of the King her husband: God
give them Paradise for their reward. Amen.




BOOK II


I. The history relates how after the death of King Don Ferrando, the
three Kings his sons reigned each in his kingdom, according to the
division made by their father, who had divided that which should all by
right have descended to the King Don Sancho. Now the Kings of Spain
were of the blood of the Goths, which was a fierce blood, for it had
many times come to pass among the Gothic Kings, that brother had slain,
brother upon this quarrel; from this blood was King Don Sancho
descended, and he thought that it would be a reproach unto him if he
did not join together the three kingdoms under his own dominion, for he
was not pleased with what his father had given him, holding that the
whole ought to have been his. And he went through the land setting it
in order, and what thing soever his people asked at his hand that did
he grant them freely, to the end that he might win their hearts.

II. Now when King Don Sancho of Navarre saw that there was a new King
in Castille, he thought to recover the lands of Bureva and of Old
Castille as far as Laredo, which had been lost when the King his father
was defeated and slain at Atapuerca in the mountains of Oca. And now
seeing that the kingdom of Ferrando was divided, he asked help of his
uncle Don Ramiro, King of Aragon; and the men of Aragon and of Navarre
entered Castille together. But King Don Sancho gathered together his
host, and put the Cid at their head; and such account did he give of
his enemies, that he of Navarre was glad to enjoy Rioja in peace, and
lay no farther claim to what his father had lost. Now the King of
Castille was wroth against the King of Aragon, that he should thus have
joined against him without cause; and in despite of him he marched
against the Moors of Zaragoza, and laying waste their country with fire
and sword, he came before their city, and gave orders to assault it,
and began to set up his engines. When the King of Zaragoza saw the
great will which the King had to do evil unto him, and that there was
none to help him, he thought it best to come to his mercy, paying
tribute, or serving him, or in any manner whatsoever. And he sent
interpreters to King Don Sancho saying, that he would give him much
gold and silver, and many gifts, and be his vassal, and pay him tribute
yearly. The King received them right honourably, and when he had heard
their bidding he answered resolutely, being of a great heart, All this
which the King of Zaragoza sends to say unto me is well, but he hath
another thing in his heart. He sends to bid me break up the siege and
depart from his land, and as soon as I should have departed, he would
make friends unto himself among Christians and among Moors, and fail me
in all which he covenants. Nevertheless I will do this thing which your
King requires of me; but if in the end he lie, I will come back upon
him and destroy him, trusting in God that he cannot defend himself
against me. And when the interpreters heard this they were greatly
dismayed, and they returned and told their King all that he had said.
And the Moors seeing that they could not help themselves, made such
terms with him as it pleased him to grant, and gave him hostages that
they might not be able to prove false. And they gave him gold and
silver and precious stones in abundance, so that with great riches and
full honourably did he and all his men depart from the siege.

III. Greatly was the King of Aragon displeased at this which King Don
Sancho had done, thinking that it was to his great injury and
abasement, for Zaragoza he held to be within his conquest. And he came
out with all his power to cut off the King's return, and took
possession of the way, and said unto him that he should not pass till
he had made amends for the great dishonour which he had wrought him, in
coming into his conquest and against his vassals: the amends which he
required was, that he should yield unto him all the spoil, and all
which the King of Zaragoza had given him, else should he not pass
without battle. When King Don Sancho heard this, being a man of great
heart, he made answer, that he was the head of the kingdoms of Castille
and Leon, and all the conquests in Spain were his, for the Kings of
Aragon had no conquests appertaining unto them, being by right his
tributaries, and bound to appear at his Cortes. Wherefore he counselled
him to waive this demand, and let him pass in peace. But the King of
Aragon drew up his host for battle, and the onset was made, and heavy
blows were dealt on both sides, and many horses were left without a
master. And while the battle was yet upon the chance, King Don Sancho
riding light bravely through the battle, began to call out Castille!
Castille! and charged the main body so fiercely that by fine force he
broke them; and when they were thus broken, the Castillians began
cruelly to slay them, so that King Don Sancho had pity thereof, and
called out unto his people not to kill them, for they were Christians.
Then King Don Ramiro being discomfited, retired to a mountain, and King
Don Sancho beset the mountain round about, and made a covenant with him
that he should depart, and that the King of Zaragoza should remain
tributary to Castille; and but for this covenant the King of Aragon
would then have been slain, or made prisoner. This was the battle
whereof the Black Book of Santiago speaketh, saying, that in this year,
on the day of the Conversion of St. Paul, was the great slaughter of
the Christians in Porca. In all these wars did my Cid demean himself
after his wonted manner; and because of the great feats which he
performed the King loved him well, and made him his Alferez; so that in
the whole army he was second only to the King. And because when the
host was in the field it was his office to chuse the place for
encampment, therefore was my Cid called the Campeador.

IV. While King Don Sancho was busied in these wars, King Don Garcia of
Galicia took by force from Dona Urraca his sister a great part of the
lands which the King their father had given her. And when she heard
this she began to lament aloud, saying, Ah King Don Ferrando, in an
evil hour didst thou divide thy kingdom, for thereby will all the land
be brought to destruction. And now also will be accomplished that which
my fosterer Arias Gonzalo said, for now that King Don Garcia who is my
younger brother, hath dispossessed me and broken the oath which he made
unto my father, what will not the elder do, who made the vow by
compulsion, and alway made protestation against the division! God send
that as thou hast disherited me, thou mayest speedily thyself in like
manner be disherited, Amen! But when King Don Sancho heard what his
brother had done he was well pleased thereat, thinking that he might
now bring to pass that which he so greatly desired; and he assembled
together his Ricos-omes and his knights, and said unto them, The King
my father divided the kingdoms which should have been mine, and therein
he did unjustly; now King Don Garcia my brother hath broken the oath
and disherited Dona Urraca my sister; I beseech ye therefore counsel me
what I shall do, and in what manner to proceed against him, for I will
take his kingdom away from him. Upon this Count Don Garcia Ordonez
arose and said, There is not a man in the world, Sir, who would counsel
you to break the command of your father, and the vow which you made
unto him. And the King was greatly incensed at him and said, Go from
before me, for I shall never receive good counsel from thee. The King
then took the Cid by the hand and led him apart, and said unto him,
Thou well knowest my Cid, that when the King my father commended thee
unto me, he charged me upon pain of his curse that I should take you
for my adviser, and whatever I did that I should do it with your
counsel, and I have done so even until this day; and thou hast alway
counselled me for the best, and for this I have given thee a county in
my kingdom, holding it well bestowed. Now then I beseech you advise me
how best to recover these kingdoms, for if I have not counsel from you
I do not expect to have it from any man in the world.

V. Greatly troubled at this was the Cid, and he answered and said, Ill,
Sir, would it behove me to counsel you that you should go against the
will of your father. You well know that when I went to Cabezon unto
him, after he had divided his kingdoms, how he made me swear to him
that I would alway counsel his sons the best I could, and never give
them ill counsel; and while I can, thus must I continue to do. But the
King answered, My Cid, I do not hold that in this I am breaking the
oath made to my father, for I ever said that the partition should not
be, and the oath which I made was forced upon me. Now King Don Garcia
my brother hath broken the oath, and all these kingdoms by right are
mine: and therefore I will that you counsel me how I may unite them,
for from so doing there is nothing in this world which shall prevent
me, except it be death. Then when the Cid saw that he could by no means
turn him from that course, he advised him to obtain the love of his
brother King Don Alfonso, that he might grant him passage through his
kingdom to go against Don Garcia: and if this should be refused he
counselled him not to make the attempt. And the King saw that his
counsel was good, and sent his letters to King Don Alfonso beseeching
him to meet him at Sahagun. When King Don Alfonso received the letters
he marvelled to what end this might be: howbeit he sent to say that he
would meet him. And the two kings met in Sahagun. And King Don Sancho
said, Brother, you well know that King Don Garcia our brother hath
broken the oath made unto our father, and disherited our sister Dona
Urraca: for this I will take his kingdom away from him, and I beseech
you join with me. But Don Alfonso answered that he would not go against
the will of his father, and the oath which he had sworn. Then King Don
Sancho said, that if he would let him pass through his kingdom he would
give him part of what he should gain: and King Don Alfonso agreed to
this. And upon this matter they fixed another day to meet; and then
forty knights were named, twenty for Castille and twenty for Leon, as
vouchers that this which they covenanted should be faithfully fulfilled
on both sides.

VI. Then King Don Sancho gathered together a great host, Castillians
and Leonese, and they of Navarre and Biscay, Asturians, and men of
Aragon and of the border. And he sent Alvar Fanez, the cousin of the
Cid, to King Don Garcia, to bid him yield up his kingdom, and if he
refused to do this to defy him on his part. Alvar Fanez, albeit
unwillingly, was bound to obey the bidding of his Lord, and he went to
King Don Garcia and delivered his bidding. When King Don Garcia heard
it he was greatly troubled, and he cried out in his trouble and said,
Lord Jesus Christ, thou rememberest the oath which we made to our
father! for my sins I have been the first to break it, and have
disherited my sister. And he said to Alvar Fanez, Say to my brother
that I beseech him not to break the oath which he made to our father;
but if he will persist to do this thing I must defend myself as I can.
And with this answer Alvar Fanez returned. Then King Don Garcia called
unto him a knight of Asturias, whose name was Ruy Ximenez, and bade him
go to his brother King Don Alfonso and tell him what had past, and how
King Don Sancho would take away his kingdom from him; and to beseech
him as a brother that he would not let him pass through his dominions.
And King Don Alfonso replied, Say to my brother that I will neither
help King Don Sancho, nor oppose him; and tell him that if he can
defend himself I shall be well pleased. And with this answer, Ruy
Ximenez returned, and bade the King look to himself for defence, for he
would find no help in his brother.

VII. Now Don Garcia was not beloved in his kingdom of Galicia, neither
in Portugal, for as much as he showed little favour to the hidalgos,
both Galegos and Portugueze, and vexed the people with tributes which
he had newly imposed. The cause of all this was a favourite, by name
Verna, to whom the King gave so much authority, that he displeased all
the chief persons in his dominions, and hearkened unto him in all
things; and by his advice it was that he had despoiled his sister Dona
Urraca of her lands, and his sister Dona Elvira also, and had done
other things, whereby Portugal and Galicia were now in danger to be
lost. And the knights and hidalgos took counsel together how they might
remedy these evils, and they agreed that the King should in the name of
them all be advised how ill he was served, and intreated to put away
his favourite. Don Rodrigo Frojaz was the one named to speak unto the
King; for being a man of approved valour, and the Lord of many lands,
it was thought that the King would listen more to him than to any
other. But it fell out otherwise than they had devised, for Verna had
such power over the mind of the King, that the remonstrance was ill
received, and Don Rodrigo and the other hidalgos were contumeliously
treated in public by the King. Don Rodrigo would not bear this, being a
right loyal and valiant man; and he went one day into the palace, and
finding Verna busied in affairs of state, he drew forth his sword and
slew him; then leaving the palace, for none cared to lay hands on him,
he left Portugal, and took the road toward France; many of his vassals
and kinsmen and friends following him, to seek their fortunes in a
country where valour would be esteemed, for they were weary of the bad
Government of King Don Garcia.

VIII. But when King Don Garcia knew of the league which his brethren
had made to divide his kingdom between them, it was a greater trouble
to him than the death of Verna, and he called his chief captains
together and consulted with them; and they advised him that he should
send to recall Don Rodrigo Frojaz, for having him the realm would be
secure, and without him it was in danger to be lost. So two hidalgos
were sent after him, and they found him in Navarre, on the eve of
passing into France. But when he saw the King's letters, and knew the
peril in which he then stood, setting aside the remembrance of his own
wrongs, like a good and true Portugueze, he turned back, and went to
the King at Coimbra. In good time did he arrive, for the captains of
King Don Sancho had now gained many lands in Galicia and in the
province of Beira, finding none to resist them, and the Count Don Nuno
de Lara, and the Count of Monzon, and Don Garcia de Cabra, were drawing
nigh unto Coimbra. When Don Rodrigo heard this and knew that the
Castillians were approaching, and who they were, he promised the King
either to maintain his cause, or die for it; and he besought him not to
go into the battle himself, having so many vassals and so good; for it
was not fitting that he should expose himself when there was no King
coming against him. And it came to pass that when the scouts gave
notice that the Castillians were at hand, he ordered the trumpets to be
sounded, and the Portugueze sallied, and a little below the city, at
the place which is now called Agoa de Mayas, the two squadrons met.
Then was the saying of Arias Gonzalo fulfilled, that kinsmen should
kill kinsmen, and brother fall by his brother's hand. But the
Portugueze fought so well, and especially Don Rodrigo, and his brothers
Don Pedro and Don Vermui Frojaz, that at length they discomfited the
Castillians, killing of them five hundred and forty, of whom three
hundred were knights, and winning their pennons and banners. Howbeit
this victory was not obtained without great loss to themselves: for two
hundred and twenty of their people were left upon the field, and many
were sorely wounded, among whom, even to the great peril of his life,
was Don Rodrigo Frojaz, being wounded with many and grievous wounds. In
this battle was slain the Count Don Fafes Sarracem de Lanhoso, with
many of his vassals, he from whom the Godinhos are descended: he was a
right good knight.

IX. A sorrowful defeat was that for King Don Sancho, more for the
quality of the slain than for their number; and he put himself at the
head of his army, and hastened through the midst of Portugal, to go
against his brother. And King Don Garcia hearing of his approach,
called together his knights and hidalgos, and said unto them, Friends,
we have no land whereunto to fly from the King Don Sancho my brother,
let us therefore meet him in battle, and either conquer him or die; for
better is it to die an honourable death than to suffer this spoiling in
our country. And to the Portugueze he said, Friends, ye are right noble
and haughty knights, and it is your custom to have among you few lords
and good ones; now therefore make me a good one, which will be to your
own great honour and profit; and if I come out of this struggle well, I
shall guerdon ye well, so that ye shall understand the will I have to
do good towards ye. And they made answer and said that they would stand
by him to the last, and that he should not be put down by their
default. Then spake he to the Galegos and said. Friends, ye are right
good and true knights, and never was it yet said that lord was forsaken
by you in the field. I put myself in your hands, being assured that ye
will well and loyally advise me, and help me to the utmost of your
power. Ye see how King Don Sancho my brother presses upon us, and we
have nothing left us but to die or to conquer; but if ye know any other
counsel. I beseech ye tell it now. And the Galegos answered, that they
would serve and defend him loyally, and that they held it best to
fight. Nevertheless they were too few in number to stand against the
King Don Sancho: so they retired before him. And Don Garcia took with
him three hundred horsemen, and went to the Moors, and besought them to
lend him aid against his brother, saying that he would give them the
kingdom of Leon. And the Moors made answer, O King, thou canst not
defend thyself; how then canst thou give unto us the kingdom of Leon?
Howbeit they did him honour and gave him great gifts, and he returned
to his people and recovered many of the castles which he had lost.

X. Then King Don Sancho came against his brother, to besiege him in
Santarem. And the Portugueze and Galegos took counsel together what
they should do; for some were of advice that it was better to defend
the cities and fortresses which they held, and so lengthen out the war;
others that they should harass the army of the Castillians with
frequent skirmishes and assaults, and never give them battle power to
power, thinking that in this manner they might baffle them till the
winter came on. Don Rodrigo Frojaz was at this time recovering of the
wounds which he had received at Agoa de Mayas, and he said unto the
King that it behoved him above all things to put his kingdom upon the
hazard of a battle; for his brother being a greater lord of lands than
he, and richer in money and more powerful in vassals, could maintain
the war longer than he could do, who peradventure would find it
difficult another year to gather together so good an army as he had now
ready. For this cause he advised him to put his trust in God first, and
then in the hidalgos who were with him, and without fear give battle to
the King his brother, over whom God and his good cause would give him
glorious victory. And to show his own good will to the King, he
besought of him the leading of the van for himself and the Counts Don
Pedro and Don Vermui Frojaz his brethren, and his two nephews. Greatly
was the King Don Garcia encouraged by his gallant cheer, and he bade
his host make ready to give battle to King Don Sancho, as soon as he
should arrive; and he marched out from the city, and took his stand
near unto it in a field where afterwards were the vineyards of the
town. And when the banners of the Castillians were seen advancing, the
Galegos and Portugueze drew up in battle array, Don Rodrigo and his
brethren having the van, as he had requested, and a body of chosen
knights with them.

XI. Count Don Garcia came in the front of King Don Sancho's army, and
in the one wing was the Count de Monzon and Count Don Nuno de Lara; and
the Count Don Fruela of Asturias in the other; and the King was in the
rear, with Don Diego de Osma, who carried his banner: and in this
manner were they arrayed on the one side and on the other, being ready
for the onset. And King Don Garcia bravely encouraged his men, saying,
Vassals and friends, ye see the great wrong which the King my brother
doth unto me, taking from me my kingdom; I beseech ye help me now to
defend it; for ye well know that all which I had therein I divided
among ye, keeping ye for a season like this. And they answered, Great
benefits have we received at your hands, and we will serve you to the
utmost of our power. Now when the two hosts were ready to join battle,
Alvar Fanez came to King Don Sancho and said to him, Sir, I have played
away my horse and arms; I beseech you give me others for this battle,
and I will be a right good one for you this day; if I do not for you
the service of six knights, hold me for a traitor. And the Count Don
Garcia, who heard this, said to the King, Give him, Sir, what he
asketh; and the King ordered that horse and arms should be given him.
So the armies joined battle bravely on both sides, and it was a sharp
onset; many were the heavy blows which were given on both sides, and
many were the horses that were slain at that encounter, and many the
men. Now my Cid had not yet come up into the field.

XII. Now Don Rodrigo Frojaz and his brethren and the knights who were
with them had resolved to make straight for the banner of the King of
Castille. And they broke through the ranks of the Castillians, and made
their way into the middle of the enemy's host, doing marvellous feats
of arms. Then was the fight at the hottest, for they did their best to
win the banner, and the others to defend it; the remembrance of what
they had formerly done, and the hope of gaining more honours, heartened
them; and with the Castillians there was their King, giving them brave
example as well as brave words. The press of the battle was here; here
died Gonzalo de Sies, a right valiant Portugueze, on the part of Don
Garcia; but on Don Sancho's part the Count Don Nuno was sorely wounded
and thrown from his horse; and Count Don Garcia Ordonez was made
prisoner, and the banner of King Don Sancho was beaten down, and the
King himself also. The first who encountered him was Don Gomes
Echiguis, he from whom the old Sousas of Portugal derived their
descent; he was the first who set his lance against King Don Sancho,
and the other one was Don Moninho Hermigis, and Don Rodrigo made way
through the press and laid hands on him and took him. But in the
struggle his old wounds burst open, and having received many new ones
he lost much blood, and perceiving that his strength was failing, he
sent to call the King Don Garcia with all speed. And as the King came,
the Count Don Pedro Frojaz met him and said, An honourable gift, Sir,
hath my brother Don Rodrigo to give you, but you lose him in gaining
it. And tears fell from the eyes of the King, and he made answer and
said, It may indeed be that Don Rodrigo may lose his life in serving
me, but the good name which he hath gained, and the honour which be
leaveth to his descendants, death cannot take away. Saying this, he
came to the place where Don Rodrigo was, and Don Rodrigo gave into his
hands the King Don Sancho his brother, and asked him three times if he
was discharged of his prisoner; and when the King had answered Yes, Don
Rodrigo said, For me, Sir, the joy which I have in your victory is
enough; give the rewards to these good Portugueze, who with so good a
will have put their lives upon the hazard to serve you, and in all
things follow their counsel, and you will not err therein. Having said
this he kissed the King's hand, and lying upon his shield, for he felt
his breath fail him, with his helmet for a pillow, he kissed the cross
of his sword in remembrance of that on which the incarnate Son of God
had died for him, and rendered up his soul into the hands of his
Creator. This was the death of one of the worthy knights of the world,
Don Rodrigo Frojaz. In all the conquests which King Don Ferrando had
made from the Moors of Portugal, great part had he borne, insomuch that
that King was wont to say that other Princes might have more dominions
than he, but two such knights as his two Rodrigos, meaning my Cid and
this good knight, there was none but himself who had for vassals.

XIII. Then King Don Garcia being desirous to be in the pursuit himself,
delivered his brother into the hands of six knights that they should
guard him, which he ought not to have done. And when he was gone King
Don Sancho said unto the knights, Let me go and I will depart out of
your country and never enter it again; and I will reward ye well as
long as ye live; but they answered him, that for no reward would they
commit such disloyalty, but would guard him well, not offering him any
injury, till they had delivered him to his brother the King Don Garcia.
While they were parleying Alvar Fanez Minaya came up, he to whom the
King had given horse and arms before the battle; and he seeing the King
held prisoner, cried out with a loud voice, Let loose my Lord the King:
and he spurred his horse and made at them; and before his lance was
broken he overthrew two of them, and so bestirred himself that he put
the others to flight; and he took the horses of the two whom he had
smote down, and gave one to the King, and mounted upon the other
himself, for his own was hurt in the rescue; and they went together to
a little rising ground where there was yet a small body of the knights
of their party, and Alvar Fanez cried out to them aloud, Ye see here
the King our Lord, who is free; now then remember the good name of the
Castillians, and let us not lose it this day. And about four hundred
knights gathered about him. And while they stood there they saw the Cid
Ruydiez coming up with three hundred knights, for he had not been in
the battle, and they knew his green pennon. And when King Don Sancho
beheld it his heart rejoiced, and he said, Now let us descend into the
plain, for he of good fortune cometh: and he said, Be of good heart,
for it is the will of God that I should recover my kingdom, for I have
escaped from captivity, and seen the death of Don Rodrigo Frojaz who
took me, and Ruydiez the fortunate one cometh. And the King went down
to him and welcomed him right joyfully, saying, In happy time are you
come, my fortunate Cid; never vassal succoured his Lord in such season
as you now succour me, for the King my brother had overcome me. And the
Cid answered, Sir, be sure that you shall recover the day, or I will
die; for wheresoever you go, either you shall be victorious or I will
meet my death.

XIV. By this time King Don Garcia returned from the pursuit, singing as
he came full joyfully, for he thought that the King his brother was a
prisoner, and his great power overthrown. But there came one and told
him that Don Sancho was rescued and in the field again, ready to give
him battle a second time. Bravely was that second battle fought on both
sides; and if it had not been for the great prowess of the Cid, the end
would not have been as it was: in the end the Galegos and Portugueze
were discomfited, and the King Don Garcia taken in his turn. And in
that battle the two brethren of Don Rodrigo Frojaz, Don Pedro and Don
Vermui, were slain, and the two sons of Don Pedro, so that five of that
family died that day. And the King Don Sancho put his brother in better
ward than his brother three hours before had put him, for he put him in
chains and sent him to the strong castle of Luna.

XV. When King Don Sancho had done this he took unto himself the kingdom
of Galicia and of Portugal, and without delay sent to his brother King
Don Alfonso, commanding him to yield up to him the kingdom of Leon, for
it was his by right. At this was the King of Leon troubled at heart;
howbeit he answered that he would not yield up his kingdom, but do his
utmost to defend it. Then King Don Sancho entered Leon, slaying and
laying waste before him, as an army of infidels would have done; and
King Don Alfonso sent to him to bid him cease from this, for it was
inhuman work to kill and plunder the innocent: and he defied him to a
pitched battle, saying that to whichsoever God should give the victory,
to him also would he give the kingdom of Leon: and the King of Castille
accepted the defiance, and a day was fixed for the battle, and the
place was to be Lantada, which is near unto Carrion. The chief
counsellor of King Don Alfonso was Don Pero Ansures, a notable and
valiant knight, of the old and famous stock of the Ansures, Lords of
Monzon, which is nigh unto Palencia; the same who in process of time
was Count of Carrion and of Saldana and Liebana, and Lord of
Valladolid, a city which was by him greatly increased. This good knight
commanded the army of his King Don Alfonso, and on the part of King Don
Sancho came Ruydiez the Cid. Both Kings were in the field that day, and
full hardily was the battle contested, and great was the mortality on
either side, for the hatred which used to be between Moors and
Christians was then between brethren. And that day also was the saying
of Arias Gonzalo fulfilled. But in the end the skill and courage of my
Cid prevailed, and King Don Alfonso was fain to avail himself of his
horse's feet to save himself.

XVI. Nevertheless the power of King Don Alfonso was not yet destroyed,
and he would not yield up his kingdom: and he sent to his brother a
second time to bid him battle, saying that whosoever conquered should
then certainly remain King of Leon; and the place appointed was at
Vulpegera, beside the river Carrion. And the two armies met and joined
battle, and they of Leon had the victory, for my Cid was not in the
field. And King Don Alfonso had pity upon the Castillians because they
were Christians, and gave orders not to slay them; and his brother King
Don Sancho fled. Now as he was flying, my Cid came up with his green
pennon; and when he saw that the King his Lord had been conquered it
grieved him sorely: howbeit he encouraged him saying, This is nothing,
Sir! to fail or to prosper is as God pleases. But do you gather
together your people who are discomfited, and bid them take heart. The
Leonese and Galegos are with the King your brother, secure as they
think themselves in their lodging, and taking no thought of you; for it
is their custom to extol themselves when their fortune is fair, and to
mock at others, and in this boastfulness will they spend the night, so
that we shall find them sleeping at break of day, and will fall upon
them. And it came to pass as he had said. The Leonese lodged themselves
in Vulpegera, taking no thought of their enemies, and setting no watch;
and Ruydiez arose betimes in the morning and fell upon them, and
subdued them before they could take their arms. King Don Alfonso fled
to the town of Carrion, which was three leagues distant, and would have
fortified himself there in the Church of St. Mary, but he was
surrounded and constrained to yield.

XVII. Now the knights of Leon gathered together in their flight, and
when they could not find their King they were greatly ashamed, and they
turned back and smote the Castillians; and as it befell, they
encountered King Don Sancho and took him prisoner, not having those in
his company whom he should have had, for his people considered the
victory as their own, and all was in confusion. And thirteen knights
took him in their ward and were leading him away,--but my Cid beheld
them and galloped after them: he was alone, and had no lance, having
broken his in the battle. And he came up to them and said, Knights,
give me my Lord and I will give unto you yours. They knew him by his
arms, and they made answer, Ruydiez, return in peace and seek not to
contend with us, otherwise we will carry you away prisoner with him.
And he waxed wroth and said, Give me but a lance and I will, single as
I am, rescue my Lord from all of ye: by God's help I will do it. And
they held him as nothing because he was but one, and gave him a lance.
But he attacked them therewith so bravely that he slew eleven of the
thirteen, leaving two only alive, on whom he had mercy; and thus did he
rescue the King. And the Castillians rejoiced greatly at the King's
deliverance: and King Don Sancho went to Burgos, and took with him his
brother prisoner.

XVIII. Great was the love which the Infanta Dona Urraca bore to her
brother King Don Alfonso, and when she heard that he was made prisoner,
she feared least he should be put to death: and she took with her the
Count Don Peransures, and went to Burgos. And they spake with the Cid,
and besought him that he would join with them and intercede with the
King that he should release his brother from prison, and let him become
a Monk at Sahagun. Full willing was the Cid to serve in any thing the
Infanta Dona Urraca, and he went with her before the King. And she
knelt down before the King her brother, and besought mercy for Don
Alfonso, his brother and hers. And the King took her by the hand and
raised her from her knees, and made her sit beside him, and said unto
her, Now then, my sister, say what you would have. And she besought him
that he would let their brother Don Alfonso take the habit of St.
Benedict, in the royal Monastery of Sahagun, and my Cid, and Count
Peransures and the other chief persons who were there present, besought
him in like manner. And the King took my Cid aside, and asked counsel
of him what he should do; and the Cid said, that if Don Alfonso were
willing to become a Monk, he would do well to set him free upon that
condition, and he besought him so to do. Then King Don Sancho, at my
Cid's request, granted to Dona Urraca what she had asked. And he
released King Don Alfonso from prison, and Don Alfonso became a Monk in
the Monastery at Sahagun, more by force than of free will. And being in
the Monastery he spake with Don Peransures, and took counsel with him,
and fled away by night from the Monks, and went among the Moors to King
Alimaymon of Toledo. And the Moorish King welcomed him with a good
will, and did great honour to him, and gave him great possessions and
many gifts.

XIX. When Dona Urraca knew that her brother King Don Alfonso had fled
to Toledo, she sent to him three good men of the kingdom of Leon, that
they should be his counsellors, for she loved him well. These were Don
Pero Ansures, and Don Ferran Ansures, and Don Gonzalo Ansures, all
three brethren: and they went with King Don Sancho's permission, for it
was God's pleasure. Now Alimaymon rejoiced in the King Don Alfonzo, and
loved him as if he had been his own son. And Don Alfonso made a
covenant with him to love him and defend him and serve him alway, so
long as he should remain with him, and not to depart from him without
his leave; and the King covenanted on his side to love him and honour
him, and defend him to the utmost of his power. And Alimaymon ordered
fair palaces to be edified for him, by the wall of the Alcazar, on the
outer part, that the Moors of the city might do no displeasure neither
to him nor to his companions: and they were hard by a garden of the
King's, that he might go out and disport himself therein whensoever it
pleased him. And for these things King Don Alfonso loved to serve King
Alimaymon. Nevertheless when he saw the great honour of the King of
Toledo, and how powerful he was, and that he was the Lord of so great
chivalry, and of the noblest city which had belonged unto the Gothic
Kings, from whom he himself was descended, it grieved him in his heart
to see that city in the hands of the Moors: and he said within his
heart, Lord God and Father Jesus Christ, it is wholly in thy power to
give and to take away, and right it is that thy will should be done,
even as thou hast done it to me, to whom thou gavest a kingdom, and it
was thy will to take it away from me, and thou hast made me come hither
to serve the enemies who were at the service of the King my father.
Lord, I put my hope in thee that thou wilt deliver me from this
servitude, and give me a land and kingdom to command, and that thou
wilt show unto me such favour that this land and this city shall by me
be won, that thy holy body may be sacrificed in it to the honour of
Christendom. This prayer he made with great devotion and with many
tears; and the Lord God heard him, as hereafter you shall hear in this
history. In those days King Alimaymon was at war with other Moorish
Kings his enemies, and King Don Alfonso fought against them on his
side, and did such good service that he quelled their power, and they
durst no longer offend him. And in time of peace Don Alfonso and his
companions went fowling along the banks of the Tagus, for in those days
there was much game there, and venison of all kinds; and they killed
venison among the mountains. And as he was thus spoiling he came to a
place which is now called Brihuega, and it pleased him well, for it was
a fair place to dwell in, and abounded with game, and there was a
dismantled castle there, and he thought that he would ask the King for
this place. And he returned to Toledo and asked it of the King, and
King Alimaymon gave it him, and he placed there his huntsmen and his
fowlers who were Christians, and fortified the place as his own. And
the lineage of these people continued there till Don Juan, the third
archbishop of Toledo, enlarged it, and peopled the parish of St. Pedro.

XX. It came to pass after this that both the Kings one day came out of
Toledo, and past over the bridge of Alcantara, and went into the royal
garden to disport themselves therein and take their pleasure. And at
evening Don Alfonso lay down upon a bed to sleep, and King Alimaymon
fell in talk with his favourites concerning his city of Toledo, how
strong it was and how well provided with all things, and that he feared
neither war of Moor nor Christian against it; and he asked them if it
could, by any, means be lost in war. Then one of them answered and
said, Sir, if you would not hold it ill, I would tell you how it might
be lost, and by no other manner in the world could it be so. And the
King bade him say on. And the favourite then said, If this city were
beset for seven years, and the bread and the wine and the fruits should
be cut down year by year, it would be lost for lack of food. All this
King Don Alfonso heard, for he was not sleeping, and he took good heed
of it. Now the Moors knew not that he was lying there. And when they
had thus spoken, Alimaymon arose to walk in the palace, and he saw King
Don Alfonso lying there as if he were sleeping: and it troubled him,
and he said to his favourites, We did not heed Alfonso who is lying
there, and has heard all that we have said. And the favourites made
answer, Kill him, Sir. But the King said, How shall I go against my
true promise? moreover he sleepeth, and peradventure hath heard
nothing. And they said to him, Would you know whether or not he
sleepeth? and he answered, Yea: and they said, Go then and wake him,
and if he have drivelled he hath slept, but if not he hath been awake
and hath heard us. Then King Don Alfonso immediately wetted the pillow,
and feigned himself hard to be awakened, so that Alimaymon thought he
slept.

XXI. And when the Easter of the Sheep was come, which the Moors
celebrate, the King of Toledo went out of the city to kill the sheep at
the place accustomed, as he was wont to do, and King Don Alfonso went
with him. Now Don Alfonso was a goodly personage and of fair demeanour,
so that the Moors liked him well. And as he was going by the side of
the King, two honourable Moors followed them, and the one said unto the
other, How fair a knight is this Christian, and of what good customs!
well doth he deserve to be the lord of some great land. And the other
made answer, I dreamed a dream last night, that this Alfonso entered
the city riding upon a huge boar, and many swine after him, who rooted
up all Toledo with their snouts, and even the Mosques therein: Certes,
he will one day become King of Toledo. And while they were thus
communing every hair upon King Don Alfonso's head stood up erect, and
Alimaymon laid his hand upon them to press them down, but so soon as
his hand was taken off they rose again; and the two Moors held it for a
great token, and spake with each other concerning it, and one of King
Alimaymon's favourites heard all which they said. And after the sheep
had been sacrificed they returned into the city, and the favourite told
the King what he had heard the two Moors say; and the King sent for
them forthwith, and questioned them, and they repeated to him what they
had said, even as ye have heard. And King Alimaymon said unto them,
What then shall I do? and they made answer, that he should put Don
Alfonso to death; but the King replied, that this he would not do, nor
go against the true promise which he had given him, but that he would
so deal that no evil should ever come towards himself from Alfonso. So
he sent for Don Alfonso and bade him swear that he would never come
against him, nor against his sons, and that no evil should come against
them from him; and King Don Alfonso did as Alimaymon required, and did
him homage to this effect. And thenceforth was the King of Toledo more
secure of him, and held him even in greater favour than before. All
this while did King Don Alfonso govern himself by the advice of Count
Peransures, who alway advised him discreetly and well.

XXII. But when King Don Sancho heard how his brother had fled from the
Monastery, he drew out his host and went against the city of Leon. The
Leonese would fain have maintained the city against him, but they could
not, and he took the city of Leon, and all the towns and castles which
had been under the dominion of his brother King Don Alfonso. And then
he put the crown upon his head, and called himself King of the three
kingdoms. He was a fair knight and of marvellous courage, so that both
Moors and Christians were dismayed at what they saw him do, for they
saw that nothing which he willed to take by force could stand against
him. And when the Infanta Dona Urraca, and the men of Zamora, saw that
he had quiet possession of both his brother's kingdoms, they feared
that he would come against them and disherit his sister also. And for
this reason they took Don Arias Gonzalo to be their chief captain, Dona
Urraca's foster-father, that by his means they might protect
themselves, if need should be. And it came to pass as they had feared,
for King Don Sancho knew that his sisters greatly loved Don Alfonso,
and he thought that by their counsel he had fled from the Monastery,
especially by Dona Urraca's, because Don Alfonso guided himself in all
things by her counsel, holding her in place of a mother, for she was a
lady of great understanding. And he went forth with his army, and took
from the Infanta Dona Elvira the half of the Infantazgo which she
possessed, and also from Dona Urraca the other half. And he went
against Toro, the city of Dona Elvira, and took it; and then he went to
Zamora to Dona Urraca, bidding her yield him up the city, and saying
that he would give her lands as much as she required in the plain
country. But she returned for answer, that she would in no manner yield
unto him that which the King her father had given her; and she besought
him that he would suffer her to continue to dwell peaceably therein,
saying that no disservice should ever be done against him on her part.

XXIII. Then King Don Sancho went to Burgos, because it was not the
season for besieging a town, being winter. And he sent his letters
through all the land, calling upon his vassals to assemble together
upon the first day of March in Sahagun, upon pain of forfeiting his
favour. Now though the King was yet but a young man, whose beard was
but just coming, he was of so great courage that the people feared him,
and dared not do otherwise than as he commanded. And they assembled
together in Sahagun on the day appointed; and when the King heard in
what readiness they were, it gladdened him, and he lifted up his hands
to God and said, Blessed be thy name, O Lord, because thou hast given
me all the kingdoms of my father. And when he had said this he ordered
proclamation to be made through the streets of Burgos, that all should
go forth to protect the host and the body of the King their Lord. And
the day in which they left Burgos they took up their lodging at
Fromesta; and the next day they came to Canion, but the King would not
lodge there, and he went on to Sahagun, where the army awaited him, and
took up his lodging without the town; and on the following morning he
bade the host advance, and they made such speed that in three days they
arrived before Zamora, and pitched their tents upon the banks of the
Douro; and he ordered proclamation to be made throughout the host that
no harm should be done until he had commanded it. And he mounted on
horseback with his hidalgos and rode round the town, and beheld how
strongly it was situated upon a rock, with strong walls, and many and
strong towers, and the river Douro running at the foot thereof; and he
said unto his knights, Ye see how strong it is, neither Moor nor
Christian can prevail against it; if I could have it from my sister
either for money or exchange, I should be Lord of Spain.

XXIV. Then the King returned to his tents, and incontinently he sent
for the Cid, and said unto him, Cid, you well know how manifoldly you
are bound unto me, both by nature, and by reason of the breeding which
the King my father gave you; and when he died he commended you to me,
and I have ever shown favour unto you, and you have ever served me as
the loyalest vassal that ever did service to his Lord; and I have for
your good deserts given unto you more than there is in a great county,
and have made you the chief of all my household. Now therefore I
beseech you as my friend and true vassal, that you go to Zamora to my
sister Dona Urraca, and say unto her again, that I beseech her to give
me the town either for a price, or in exchange, and I will give to her
Medina de Rio-seco, with the whole Infantazgo, from Villalpando to
Valladolid, and Tiedra also, which is a good Castle; and I will swear
unto her, with twelve knights of my vassals, never to break this
covenant between us; but if she refuseth to do this I will take away
the town from her by force. And my Cid kissed the hand of the King and
said unto him, This bidding, Sir, should be for other messenger, for it
is a heavy thing for me to deliver it; for I was brought up in Zamora
by your father's command, in the house of Don Arias Gonzalo, with Dona
Urraca and with his sons, and it is not fitting that I should be the
bearer of such bidding. And the King persisted in requiring of him that
he should go, insomuch that he was constrained to obey his will. And he
took with him fifteen of his knights and rode towards Zamora, and when
he drew nigh he called unto those who kept guard in the towers not to
shoot their arrows at him, for he was Ruydiez of Bivar, who came to
Dona Urraca with the bidding of her brother King Don Sancho. With that
there came down a knight who was nephew to Arias Gonzalo, and had the
keeping of the gate, and he bade the Cid enter, saying that he would
order him to be well lodged while he went to Dona Urraca to know if she
would be pleased to see him. So the Cid went in, and the knight went to
the Infanta, and told her that Ruydiez of Bivar was come with a message
from King Don Sancho; and it pleased her well that he should be the
messenger, and she bade him come before that she might know what was
his bidding; and she sent Arias Gonzalo and the other knights of her
party to meet him and accompany him. And when the Cid entered the
palace Dona Urraca advanced to meet him, and greeted him full well, and
they seated themselves both upon the Estrado. And Dona Urraca said unto
him, Cid, you well know that you were brought up with me here in
Zamora, in the house of Don Arias Gonzalo, and when my father was at
the point of death he charged you that you should alway counsel his
sons the best you could. Now therefore tell me I beseech you what is it
which my brother goes about to do, now that he has called up all Spain
in arms, and to what lands he thinks to go, whether against Moors or
Christians. Then the Cid answered and said, Lady, to messenger and a
letter no wrong should be done; give me safe assurance and I will tell
unto you that which the King your brother hath sent me to say. And she
said she would do as Don Arias Gonzalo should advise her. And Don Arias
answered that it was well to hear what the King her brother had sent to
say: Peradventure, said he, he goeth against the Moors, and requires
aid of you, which it would be right to give; and for such service I and
my sons would go with him, and I would give fifteen of my people well
mounted and armed, and supply them with food for ten years, if he
needed them. Dona Urraca then said to the Cid, that he might speak his
bidding safely. Then said my Cid, The King your brother sends to greet
you, and beseeches you to give him this town of Zamora, either for a
price or in exchange; and he will give to you Medina de Rio-seco, with
the whole Infantazgo, from Villalpando to Valladolid, and the good
castle of Tiedra, and he will swear unto you, with twelve knights his
vassals, never to do you hurt or harm; but if you will not give him the
town, he will take it against your will.

XXV. When Dona Urraca heard this she was sorely grieved, and in her
great sorrow she lamented aloud, saying, Wretch that I am, many are the
evil messages which I have heard since my father's death! He hath
disherited my brother King Don Garcia of his kingdom, and taken him,
and now holds him in irons as if he were a thief or a Moor; and he hath
taken his lands from my brother King Don Alfonso, and forced him to go
among the Moors, and live there exiled, as if he had been a traitor;
and would let none go with him except Don Peransures and his brethren,
whom I sent; and he hath taken her lands from my sister Dona Elvira
against her will, and now would he take Zamora from me also! Now then
let the earth open and swallow me, that I may not see so many troubles!
And with that, in her strong anger against her brother King Don Sancho,
she said, I am a woman, and well know that I cannot strive with him in
battle; but I will have him slain either secretly or openly. Then Don
Arias Gonzalo stood up and said, Lady Dona Urraca, in thus complaining
and making lamentation you do inconsiderately; for in time of trouble
it befits us to take thought of what best is to be done, and so must we
do. Now then, Lady, give order that all the men of Zamora assemble in
St. Salvador's and know of them whether they will hold with you, seeing
that your father gave them to you to be your vassals. And if they will
hold with you, then give not you up the town, neither for a price, nor
in exchange; but if they will not, let us then go to Toledo among the
Moors, where your brother King Don Alfonso abideth. And she did as her
foster-father had advised, and it was proclaimed through the streets
that the men of Zamora should meet in council at St. Salvador's. And
when they were all assembled, Dona Urraca arose and said, Friends and
vassals, ye have seen how my brother King Don Sancho hath disherited
all his brethren, against the oath which he made to the King my father,
and now he would disherit me also. He hath sent to bid me give him
Zamora, either for a price or in exchange. Now concerning this I would
know whereunto ye advise me, and if you will hold with me as good
vassals and true, for he saith that he will take it from me whether I
will or no; but if ye will keep my career I think to defend it by God's
mercy and with your help. Then by command of the council there rose up
a knight who was called Don Nuno, a man of worth, aged, and of fair
speech; and he said, God reward you, Lady, this favour which you have
shown us in thinking good to come to our council, for we are your
vassals, and should do what you command. And we beseech you give not up
Zamora, neither for price nor for exchange, for he who besieges you
upon the rock would soon drive you from the plain. The council of
Zamora will do your bidding, and will not desert you neither for
trouble nor for danger which may befall them, even unto death. Sooner,
Lady, will we expend all our possessions, and eat our mules and horses,
yea sooner feed upon our children and our wives, than give up Zamora,
unless by your command. And they all with one accord confirmed what Don
Nuno had said. When the Infanta Dona Urraca heard this she was well
pleased, and praised them greatly; and she turned to the Cid and said
unto him, You were bred up with me in this town of Zamora, where Don
Arias Gonzalo fostered you by command of the King my father, and
through your help it was that the King my father gave it unto me to be
my inheritance. I beseech you help me now against my brother, and
intreat him that he will not seek to disherit me; but if he will go on
with what he hath begun, say to him that I will rather die with the men
of Zamora, and they with me, than give him up the town, either for
price or exchange. And with this answer did the Cid return unto the
King.

XXVI. When King Don Sancho heard what the Cid said, his anger kindled
against him, and he said, You have given this counsel to my sister
because you were bred up with her. And my Cid answered and said,
Faithfully have I discharged your bidding, and as a true vassal.
Howbeit, O King, I will not bear arms against the Infanta your sister,
nor against Zamora, because of the days which are passed;--and I
beseech you do not persist in doing this wrong. But then King Don
Sancho was more greatly incensed, and he said unto him, If it were not
that my father left you commended to me, I would order you this instant
to be hanged. But for this which you have said I command you to quit my
kingdom within nine days. And the Cid went to his tent in anger, and
called for his kinsmen and his friends, and bade them make ready on the
instant to depart with him. And he set forth with all the knights and
esquires of his table, and with all their retainers horse and foot,
twelve hundred persons, all men of approved worth, a goodly company;--and
they took the road to Toledo, meaning to join King Don Alfonso
among the Moors. And that night they slept at Castro Nuno. But when the
Counts and Ricos-omes, and the other good men of the host saw this,
they understood the great evil and disservice which might arise to the
King, and to the land, from the departure of the Cid, who went away in
wrath. And they went to the King and said unto him, Sir, wherefore
would you lose so good a vassal, who has done you such great service?
If he should go unto your brother Don Alfonso among the Moors, he would
not let you besiege this city thus in peace. And the King perceived
that they spake rightly, and he called for Don Diego Ordonez, the son
of Count Don Bermudo, who was the son of the Infante Don Ordono of
Leon, and bade him follow the Cid, and beseech him in his name to
return; and whatever covenant he should make it should be confirmed
unto him; and of this he ordered his letters of credence to be made
out. And Don Diego Ordonez went to horse, and rode after the Cid, and
overtook him between Castro Nuno and Medina del Campo. And when it was
told unto the Cid that Don Diego Ordonez was coming, he turned to meet
him, and greeted him well, and asked him wherefore he was come. And he
delivered the King's bidding, and showed unto him his letters of
credence, and said unto him that the King besought him not to bear in
mind the words which he had spoken unto him, being in anger. Then the
Cid called together his kinsmen and friends, and asked them what they
should do. And they counselled him that he should return to the King,
for it was better to remain in his land and serve God, than to go among
the Moors. And he held their counsel good, and called for Don Diego,
and said unto him that he would do the will of the King: and Don Diego
sent to the King to tell him how he had sped. And when the Cid drew
nigh unto the host, the King went out with five hundred knights to meet
him, and received him gladly, and did him great honour. And the Cid
kissed his hand and asked him if he confirmed what Don Diego had said;
and the King confirmed it before all the knights who were there
present, promising to give him great possessions. And when they came to
the army great was the joy because of the Cid's return, and great were
the rejoicings which were made: but as great was the sorrow in Zamora,
for they who were in the town held that the siege was broken up by his
departure. Nevertheless my Cid would not bear arms against the Infanta,
nor against the town of Zamora, because of the days which were past.

XXVII. And the King ordered proclamation to be made throughout the host
that the people should make ready to attack the town. And they fought
against it three days and three nights so bravely that all the ditches
were filled up, and the barbicans thrown down, and they who were within
fought sword in hand with those without, and the waters of the Douro,
as they past below the town, were all discoloured with blood. And when
Count Don Garcia de Cabra saw the great loss which they were suffering,
it grieved him; and he went unto the King and told him that many men
were slain, and advised him to call off the host that they should no
longer fight against the town, but hold it besieged, for by famine it
might soon be taken. Then the King ordered them to draw back, and he
sent to each camp to know how many men had died in the attack, and the
number was found to be a thousand and thirty. And when the King knew
this he was greatly troubled for the great loss which he had received,
and he ordered the town to be beleagered round about, and in this
manner he begirt it, that none could enter into it, neither go out
therefrom; and there was a great famine within the town. And when Don
Arias Gonzalo saw the misery, and the hunger, and the mortality which
were there, he said to the Infanta Dona Urraca, You see, Lady, the
great wretchedness which the people of Zamora have suffered, and do
every day suffer to maintain their loyalty; now then call together the
Council, and thank them truly for what they have done for you, and bid
them give up the town within nine days to the King your brother. And
we, Lady, will go to Toledo to your brother King Don Alfonso, for we
cannot defend Zamora; King Don Sancho is of so great heart and so
resolute, that he will never break up the siege, and I do not hold it
good, that you should abide here longer. And Dona Urraca gave orders
that the good men of Zamora should meet together in Council; and she
said unto them, Friends, ye well see the resoluteness of King Don
Sancho my brother; and already have ye suffered much evil and much
wretchedness for doing right and loyally, losing kinsmen and friends in
my service. Ye have done enough, and I do not hold it good that ye
should perish; I command ye therefore give up the town to him within
nine days, and I will go to Toledo to my brother King Don Alfonso. The
men of Zamora when they heard this had great sorrow, because they had
endured the siege so long, and must now give up the town at last; and
they determined all to go with the Infanta, and not remain in the town.

XXVIII. When Vellido Dolfos heard this, he went to Dona Urraca and
said, Lady, I came here to Zamora to do you service with thirty
knights, all well accoutred, as you know; and I have served you long
time, and never have I had from you guerdon for my service, though I
have demanded it: but now if you will grant my demand I will relieve
Zamora, and make King Don Sancho break up the siege. Then said Dona
Urraca, Vellido, I shall repeat to thee the saying of the wise man, A
man bargains well with the slothful and with him who is in need; and
thus you would deal with me. I do not bid thee commit any evil thing,
if such thou hast in thy thought; but I say unto you, that there is not
a man in the world to whom if he should relieve Zamora, and make the
King my brother raise the siege, I would not grant whatsoever he might
require. And when Vellido heard this he kissed her hand, and went to a
porter who kept one of the gates of the town, and spake with him,
saying, that he should open the gate unto him when he saw him flying
toward it, and he gave him his cloak. Then went he to his lodging and
armed himself, and mounted his horse, and rode to the house of Don
Arias Gonzalo, and cried with a loud voice, We all know the reason, Don
Arias Gonzalo, why you will not let Dona Urraca exchange Zamora with
her brother; it is because you deal with her as a harlot, like an old
traitor. When Arias Gonzalo heard this, it grieved him to the heart,
and he said, In an evil day was I born, that so shameful a falsehood as
this should be said to me in mine old age, and there should be none to
revenge me! Then his sons arose and armed themselves hastily, and went
after Vellido, who fled before them toward the gate of the town. The
porter when he saw him coming opened the gate, and he rode out and
galloped into the camp of the King Don Sancho, and the others followed
him till they were nigh the camp, but farther they did not venture. And
Vellido went to the King and kissed his hand, and said unto him these
false words with a lying tongue: Sir, because I said to the Council of
Zamora that they should yield the town unto you, the sons of Arias
Gonzalo would have slain me, even as you have seen. And therefore come
I to you, Sir, and will be your vassal, if I may find favour at your
hands. And I will show you how in a few days you may have Zamora, if
God pleases; and if I do not as I have said, then let me be slain. And
the King believed all that he said, and received him for his vassal,
and did him great honour. And all that night they talked together of
his secrets, and he made the King believe that he knew a postern by
means of which he would put Zamora into his hands.

XXIX. On the morrow in the morning, one of the knights who were in the
town went upon the wall, and cried out with a loud voice, so that the
greater part of the host heard him, King Don Sancho, give ear to what I
say; I am a knight and hidalgo, a native of the land of Santiago; and
they from whom I spring were true men and delighted in their loyalty,
and I also will live and die in my truth. Give ear, for I would
undeceive you, and tell you the truth, if you will believe me, I say
unto you, that from this town of Zamora there is gone forth a traitor
to kill you; his name is Vellido Dolfos; he is the son of Adolfo, who
slew Don Nuno like a traitor, and the grandson of Laino, another
traitor, who killed his gossip and threw him into the river; and this
is as great a traitor as the rest of his race; look to yourself
therefore and take heed of him. I say this to you, that if peradventure
evil should befall you by this traitor, it may not be said in Spain
that you were not warned against him. Now the name of this knight was
Bernal Dianez de Ocampo. And the men of Zamora sent also to the King to
bid him beware of Vellido, and the king took their warning in good
part, and sent to say unto them, that when he had the town he would
deal bountifully with them, for this which they had done; nevertheless
he gave no heed to the warning. And Vellido, when he heard this went to
the King, and said, Sir, the old Arias Gonzalo is full crafty, and hath
sent to say this unto you, because he knows that by my means you would
have won the town. And he called for his horse, feigning that he would
depart because of what had been said. But the King took him by the hand
and said, Friend and vassal, take no thought for this; I say unto you,
that if I may have Zamora, I will make you chief therein, even as Arias
Gonzalo is now. Then Vellido kissed his hand and said, God grant you
life, Sir, for many and happy years, and let you fulfil what you
desire. But the traitor had other thoughts in his heart.

XXX. After this Vellido took the King apart and said to him, If it
please you, Sir, let us ride out together alone; we will go round
Zamora, and see the trenches which you have ordered to be made; and I
will show unto you the postern which is called the Queen's, by which we
may enter the town, for it is never closed. When it is night you shall
give me a hundred knights who are hidalgos, well armed, and we will go
on foot, and the Zamorans because they are weak with famine and misery,
will let us conquer them, and we will enter and open the gate, and keep
it open till all your host shall have entered in; and thus shall we win
the town of Zamora. The King believed what he said, and they took horse
and went riding round the town, and the King looked at the trenches,
and that traitor snowed him the postern whereof he had spoken. And
after they had ridden round the town the King had need to alight upon
the side of the Douro and go apart; now he carried in his hand a light
hunting spear which was gilded over, even such as the Kings from whom
he was descended were wont to bear; and he gave this to Vellido to hold
it while he went aside, to cover his feet. And Vellido Dolfos, when he
saw him in that guise, took the hunting spear and thrust it between his
shoulders, so that it went through him and came out at his breast. And
when he had stricken him he turned the reins and rode as fast as he
could toward the postern; this was not the first treason which he had
committed, for he had killed the Count Don Nuno treacherously. Now it
chanced that the Cid saw him riding thus, and asked him wherefore he
fled, and he would not answer; and then the Cid understood that he had
done some treason, and his heart misgave him that he had slain the
King; and he called in haste for his horse, but while they were
bringing it, Vellido had ridden far away; and the Cid being eager to
follow him, took only his lance and did not wait to have his spurs
buckled on. And he followed him to the postern and had well nigh
overtaken him, but Vellido got in; and then the Cid said in his anger,
Cursed be the knight who ever gets on horseback without his spurs. Now
in all the feats of the Cid never was fault found in him save only in
this, that he did not enter after Vellido into the town; but he did not
fail to do this for cowardice, neither for fear of death, or of
imprisonment; but because he thought that peradventure this was a
device between him and the King, and that he fled by the King's
command; for certes, if he had known that the King was slain, there was
nothing which would have prevented him from entering the town, and
slaying the traitor in the streets, thereright.

XXXI. Now the history saith, that when Vellido Dolfos had got within
the postern, he was in such fear both of those who were in the town and
of those who were without, that he went and placed himself under the
mantle of the Infanta Dona Urraca. And when Don Arias Gonzalo knew this
he went unto the Infanta and said, Lady, I beseech you that you give up
this traitor to the Castillians, otherwise be sure that it will be to
your own harm; for the Castillians will impeach all who are in Zamora,
and that will be greater dishonour for you and for us. And Dona Urraca
made answer, Counsel me then so that he may not die for this which he
hath done. Don Arias Gonzalo then answered, Give him unto me, and I
will keep him in custody for three days, and if the Castillians impeach
us we will deliver him into their hands; and if they do not impeach us
within that time, we will thrust him out of the town so that he shall
not be seen among us. And Don Arias Gonzalo took him from thence, and
secured him with double fetters, and guarded him well.

XXXII. Meantime the Castillians went to seek their King, and they found
him by the side of the Douro, where he lay sorely wounded, even unto
death; but he had not yet lost his speech, and the hunting spear was in
his body, through and through, and they did not dare to take it out
least he should die immediately. And a master of Burgos came up who was
well skilled in these things, and he sawed off the ends of the spear,
that he might not lose his speech, and said that he should be
confessed, for he had death within him. Then Count Don Garcia de Cabra,
the curley-haired one of Granon, said unto him, Sir, think of your
soul, for you have a desperate wound. And the King made answer, Blessed
be you, Count, who thus counsel me, for I perceive that I am slain; the
traitor Vellido has killed me, and I well know that this was for my
sins, because I broke the oath which I made unto the King my father.
And as the King was saying this the Cid came up and knelt before him
and said, I, Sir, remain more desolate than any other of your vassals,
for for your sake have I made your brethren mine enemies, and all in
the world who were against you, and against whom it pleased you to go.
The King your father commended me to them as well as to you, when he
divided his kingdoms, and I have lost their love for your sake, having
done them great evil. And now neither can I go before King Don Alfonso,
your brother, nor remain among the Christians before Dona Urraca your
sister, because they hold that whatsoever you have done against them was
by my counsel. Now then, Sir, remember me before you depart. The King
then commanded that they should raise him up in the bed, and the Counts
and Ricos-omes stood round about him, and the Bishops and Archbishops
who had come thither to make accord between him and his sister Dona
Urraca, and they heard what the Cid said, and knew that he said truly;
for whatever good speed King Don Sancho had had in his doings was all
by means of my Cid. And the King said unto them, I beseech all ye who
are here present, Counts and Ricos-omes, and all my other vassals, that
if my brother King Don Alfonso should come from the land of the Moors,
ye beseech him to show favour unto you, my Cid, and that he always be
bountiful unto you, and receive you to be his vassal; and if he alway
doth this and listen unto you, he will not be badly advised. Then the
Cid arose and kissed his Wand, and all the chief persons who were there
present did the like. And after this the King said unto them, I beseech
ye intreat my brother King Don Alfonso to forgive me whatever wrong I
have done him, and to pray to God to have mercy upon my soul. And when
he had said this he asked for the candle, and presently his soul
departed. And all who were there present made great lamentation for the
King.




BOOK III.


I. Now when the King was dead, the townsmen who were in the camp
forsook their tents and fled, and much did they lose in their flight;
but the noble Castillians, thinking rather of what they were bound to
do as men who had always preserved their loyalty, like their ancestors
before them, would not depart from Zamora, nor break up the siege
thereof, but remained bravely before it, though they had lost their
Lord. And they summoned all the Bishops, and took the body of the King
and sent it full honourably to the Monastery of Ona, and buried him
there as beseemed a King: and while one part of the chief men of the
host accompanied the body, the rest remained in the camp before Zamora.
And when the prelates and good men had returned to the army, they took
counsel together how they should proceed against the men of Zamora for
this great treason which had been committed. Then Count Don Garcia de
Cabra arose and said, Friends, ye see that we have lost our Lord the
King Don Sancho; the traitor, Vellido, being his vassal, slew him, and
they of Zamora have received and harboured him within their walls; and
therefore as we think, and as has been said unto us, he did this
treason by their counsel. Now then if there be one here who will
impeach them for this thing, we will do whatever may be needful that he
may come off with honour, and the impeachment be carried through. Then
Don Diego Ordonez arose, the son of Count Don Ordono, a man of royal
lineage and great hardihood; and he said unto them, If ye will all
assent to this which ye have heard, I will impeach the men of Zamora,
for the death of the King our Lord: and they all assented, promising to
fulfil what had been said. Now my Cid did not make this impeachment
against the people of Zamora, because of the oath which he had sworn.

II. Then Don Diego Ordonez went to his lodging and armed himself well,
and armed his horse also, and mounted and rode toward Zamora. And when
he drew nigh unto the town, he covered himself with his shield that
they might not hurt him from the walls, and began to cry aloud, asking
if Don Arias Gonzalo were there, for he would speak with him. A squire
who was keeping guard upon the wall went to Don Arias and told him that
there was a knight well armed calling for him, without the walls, and
he said that if it pleased Don Arias he would shoot at him with a
cross-bow, and strike him or kill his horse; but Don Arias forbade him,
saying that he should no ways harm him. And Don Arias Gonzalo went with
his sons upon the wall to see who called for him, and he spake to the
knight, saying, Friend, what wouldest thou? And Don Diego Ordonez
answered, The Castillians have lost their Lord; the traitor Vellido
slew for him, being his vassal, and ye of Zamora have received Vellido
and harboured him within your walls. Now therefore I say that he is a
traitor who hath a traitor with him, if he knoweth and consenteth unto
the treason. And for this I impeach the people of Zamora, the great as
well as the little, the living and the dead, they who now are and they
who are yet unborn; and I impeach the waters which they drink and the
garments which they put on; their bread and their wine, and the very
stones in their walls. If there be any one in Zamora to gainsay what I
have said, I will do battle with him, and with God's pleasure conquer
him, so that the infamy shall remain upon you. Don Arias Gonzalo
replied, If I were what thou sayest I am, it had been better for me
never to have been born; but in what thou sayest thou liest. In that
which the great do the little have no fault, nor the dead for the deeds
of the living, which they neither see nor hear: but setting aside these
and the things which have no understanding, as to the rest I say that
thou liest, and I will do battle with thee upon this quarrel, or give
thee one in my stead. But know that you have been ill advised in making
this impeachment, for the manner is, that whosoever impeacheth a
Council must do battle with five, one after another, and if he conquer
the five he shall be held a true man, but if either of the five conquer
him, the Council is held acquitted and he a liar. When Don Diego heard
this it troubled him; howbeit he dissembled this right well, and said
unto Don Arias Gonzalo, I will bring twelve Castillians, and do you
bring twelve men of Zamora, and they shall swear upon the Holy Gospel
to judge justly between us, and if they find that I am bound to do
battle with five, I will perform it. And Don Arias made answer that he
said well, and it should be so. And truce was made for three times nine
days, till this should have been determined and the combat fought.

III. Then when the truce was made, Don Arias Gonzalo went out from the
town into the host of the Castillians, and his sons with him, and many
of the knights of the town; and all the Ricos-omes and knights who were
in the host assembled together with them, and consulted what was to be
done in this impeachment. And they chose out twelve alcades on the one
part, and twelve on the other, who should decide in what manner he was
bound to perform combat who impeached a Council. And the four and
twenty alcades accorded concerning what was the law in this case; and
two of them who were held the most learned in these things arose, the
one being a Castillian and the other of Zamora, and said that they had
found the law as it was written to be this: That whosoever impeacheth
the Council of a town which was a bishop's seat, must do battle with
five in the field, one after another; and that after every combat there
should be given unto him fresh arms and horse, and three sops of bread,
and a draught either of wine or of water, as he chose. And in this
sentence which the twain pronounced, the other twenty and two accorded.

IV. On the morrow before the hour of tierce, the four and twenty
alcades marked out the lists upon the sand beside the river, at the
place which is called Santiago, and in the middle of the lists they
placed a bar, and ordained that he who won the battle should lay hand
on the bar, and say that he had conquered: and then they appointed a
term of nine days for the combatants to come to those lists which had
been assigned. And when all was appointed as ye have heard, Don Arias
returned to Zamora, and told the Infanta Dona Urraca all that had been
done, and she ordered a meeting to be called, at which all the men of
the town assembled. And when they were gathered together, Don Arias
Gonzalo said unto them, Friends, I beseech ye, if there be any here
among ye who took counsel for the death of King Don Sancho, or were
privy thereunto, that ye now tell me, and deny it not; for rather would
I go with my sons to the land of the Moors, than be overcome in the
field, and held for a traitor. Then they all replied, that there was
none there who knew of the treason, nor had consented unto it. At this
was Don Arias Gonzalo well pleased, and he bade them go each to his
house; and he went to his house also with his sons, and chose out four
of them to do combat, and said that he would be the fifth himself; and
he gave them directions how to demean themselves in the lists, and
said, that he would enter first; and if, said he, what the Castillian
saith be true, I would die first, not to see the infamy; but if what he
saith be false, I shall conquer him, and ye shall ever be held in
honour.

V. When the day appointed was come, Don Arias Gonzalo early in the
morning armed his sons, and they armed him; and it was told him that
Don Diego Ordonez was already in the lists. Then he and his sons
mounted their horses, and as they rode through the gates of their
house, Dona Urraca, with a company of dames met them, and said to Don
Arias, weeping, Remember now how my father, King Don Ferrando, left me
to your care, and you swore between his hands that you would never
forsake me; and lo! now you are forsaking me. I beseech you remain with
me, and go not to this battle, for there is reason enough why you
should be excused, and not break the oath which you made unto my
father. And she took hold on him, and would not let him go, and made
him be disarmed. Then came many knights around him, to demand arms of
him, and request that they might do battle in his stead; nevertheless
he would give them to none. And he called for his son Pedro Arias, who
was a right brave knight, though but of green years, and who had
greatly intreated his father before this, that he would suffer him to
fight in his stead. And Don Arias armed him compleatly with his own
hands, and instructed him how to demean himself, and gave him his
blessing with his right hand, and said unto him, that in such a point
he went to save the people of Zamora, as when our Lord Jesus Christ
came through the Virgin Mary, to save the people of this world, who
were lost by our father Adam. Then went they into the field, where Don
Diego Ordonez was awaiting them, and Pedrarias entered the lists, and
the judges placed them each in his place, and divided the sun between
them, and went out, leaving them in the lists.

VI. Then they turned their horses one against the other, and ran at
each other full bravely, like good knights. Five times they
encountered, and at the sixth encounter their spears brake, and they
laid hand upon their swords, and dealt each other such heavy blows that
the helmets failed; and in this manner the combat between them
continued till noon. And when Don Diego Ordonez saw that it lasted so
long, and he could not yet conquer him, he called to mind that he was
there fighting to revenge his Lord, who had been slain by a foul
treason, and he collected together all his strength. And he lifted up
his sword and smote Pedrarias upon the helmet, so that he cut through
it, and through the hood of the mail also, and made a wound in the
head. And Pedrarias with the agony of death, and with the blood which
ran over his eyes, bowed down to the neck of the horse; yet with all
this he neither lost his stirrups, nor let go his sword. And Don Diego
Ordonez seeing him thus, thought that he was dead, and would not strike
him again; and he called aloud, saying, Don Arias, send me another son,
for this one will never fulfil your bidding. When Pedrarias heard this,
grievously wounded as he was, he wiped the blood away with the sleeve
of his mail, and went fiercely against him: and he took the sword in
both hands, and thought to give it him upon his head; but the blow
missed, and fell upon the horse, and cut off great part of his
nostrils, and the reins with it; and the horse immediately ran away
because of the great wound which he had received. And Don Diego had no
reins wherewith to stop him, and perceiving that he should else be
carried out of the lists, he threw himself off. And while he did this,
Pedrarias fell down dead, just without the mark. And Don Diego Ordonez
laid hand on the bar, and said. Praised be the name of God, one is
conquered. And incontinently the judges came and took him by the hand,
and led him to a tent and disarmed him, and gave him three sops, and he
drank of the wine and rested awhile. And afterwards they gave him other
arms, and a horse that was a right good one, and went with him to the
lists.

VII. Then Don Arias Gonzalo called for another son, whose name was
Diego Arias, and said unto him, To horse! and go fight to deliver this
Council and to revenge the death of your brother; and he answered, For
this am I come hither. Then his father gave him his blessing and went
with, him to the lists. And the judges took the reins of the two
champions and led them each to his place, and went out and left them in
the lists. And they ran against each other with such force that both
shields failed, and in another career they brake their lances. Then
laid they hand on their good swords, and delivered such blows that
their helmets were cut away, and the sleeves of the mail. And at
length Diego Arias received such a blow near the heart that he fell
dead. And Don Diego Ordonez went to the bar and laid hold on it, and
cried out to Don Arias Gonzalo, Send me another son, for I have
conquered two, thanks be to God. Then the judges came and said that the
dead knight was not yet out of the lists, and that he must alight and
cast him out. And Don Diego Ordonez did as they had directed him, and
alighted from his horse and took the dead man by the leg, and dragged
him to the line, and then letting the leg fall he thrust him out of the
lists with his feet. And then he went and laid hand upon the bar again,
saying that he had liefer fight with a living man than drag a dead one
out of the field. And then the judges came to him, and led him to the
tent, and disarmed him, and gave him the three sops and the wine, as
they had done before, and sent to say to Don Arias Gonzalo that this
son also was slain, and that he should send another.

VIII. Then Don Arias Gonzalo, in great rage and in great trouble called
for his son Rodrigo Arias, who was a good knight, right hardy and
valiant, the elder of all the brethren; he had been in many a
tournament, and with good fortune. And Don Arias said unto him, Son, go
now and do battle with Diego Ordonez, to save Dona Urraca your Lady,
and yourself, and the Council of Zamora; and if you do this, in happy
hour were you born. Then Rodrigo Arias kissed his hand and answered,
Father, I thank you much for what you have said, and be sure that I
will save them, or take my death. And he took his arms and mounted, and
his father gave him his blessing, and went with him to the lists; and
the judges took his reins and led him in. And when the judges were gone
out, they twain ran at each other, and Don Diego missed his blow, but
Rodrigo Arias did not miss, for he gave him so great a stroke with the
lance that it pierced through the shield, and broke the saddle-bow
behind, and made him lose his stirrups, and he embraced the neck of his
horse. But albeit that Don Diego was sorely bested with that stroke, he
took heart presently, and went bravely against him, and dealt him so
great a blow that he broke the lance in him; for it went through the
shield and all his other arms, and great part of the lance remained in
his flesh. After this they laid hand to sword, and gave each to the
other great blows, and great wounds with them. And Rodrigo Arias gave
so great a wound to Diego Ordonez, that he cut his left arm through to
the bone. And Don Diego Ordonez, when he felt himself so sorely
wounded, went against Rodrigo Arias and delivered him a blow upon the
head which cut through the helmet and the hood of the mail, and entered
into his head. When Rodrigo Arias felt himself wounded to death, he let
go the reins and took his sword in both hands, and gave so great a blow
to the horse of Don Diego that he cut his head open. And the horse in
his agony ran out of the lists, and carried Don Diego out also, and
there died. And Rodrigo Arias fell dead as he was following him. Then
Don Diego Ordonez would have returned into the field to do battle with,
the other two, but the judges would not permit this, neither did they
think good to decide whether they of Zamora were overcome in this third
duel or not. And in this manner the thing was left undecided.
Nevertheless, though no sentence was given, there remained no infamy
upon the people of Zamora. But better had it been for Don Arias Gonzalo
if he had given up Vellido to the Castillians, that he might have died
the death of a traitor; he would not then have lost these three sons,
who died like good men, in their duty. Now what was the end of Vellido
the history sayeth not, through the default of the Chroniclers; but it
is to be believed, that because the impeachment was not made within
three days, Don Arias Gonzalo thrust him out of the town as Dona Urraca
had requested, and that he fled into other lands, peradventure among
the Moors. And though it may be that he escaped punishment in this
world, yet certes he could not escape it in hell where he is tormented
with Dathan and Abiram, and with Judas the Traitor, for ever and ever.

IX. In the meantime the Infanta Dona Urraca wrote letters secretly and
sent messengers with them to Toledo to King Don Alfonso, telling him
that King Don Sancho his brother was dead, and had left no heir, and
that he should come as speedily as he could to receive the kingdoms,
And she bade her messengers deliver these privately that the Moors
might not discover what had taken place, lest they should seize upon
King Don Alfonso, whom she dearly loved. Moreover the Castillians
assembled together and found that as King Don Sancho had left no son to
succeed him they were bound by right to receive King Don Alfonso as
their Lord; and they also sent unto him in secret. Howbeit, certain of
those spies who discover to the Moors whatever the Christians design to
do, when they knew the death of King Don Sancho, went presently to
acquaint the Moors therewith. Now Don Peransures, as he was a man of
great understanding and understood the Arabick tongue, when he knew the
death of King Don Sancho, and while he was devising how to get his Lord
away from Toledo, rode out every day, as if to solace himself, on the
way towards Castille, to see whom he might meet, and to learn tidings.
And it fell out one day that he met a man who told him he was going
with news to King Alimaymon, that King Don Sancho was dead; and Don
Peransures took him aside from the road as if to speak to him, and cut
off his head. And Peransures returned into the road and met another man
coming with the same tidings to the King, and he slew him in like
manner. Nevertheless the tidings reached King Alimaymon. Now Peransures
and his brethren feared that if the Moor knew this he would not let
their Lord depart, but would seize him and make hard terms for his
deliverance; and on the other hand, they thought that if he should
learn it from any other than themselves, it would be yet worse. And
while they were in doubt what they should do, King Don Alfonso,
trusting in God's mercy, said unto them, When I came hither unto this
Moor, he received me with great honour, and gave to me abundantly all
things of which I stood in need, even as if I had been his son; how
then should I conceal from him this favour which it hath pleased God to
show me? I will go and tell it unto him. But Don Peransures besought
him not to tell him of his brother's death. And he went to King
Alimaymon and said unto him, that he would fain go into his own
country, if it pleased him, to help his vassals, who stood greatly in
need of him, and he besought him that he would give him men. The death
of King Don Sancho he did not make known. And King Alimaymon answered
that he should not do this, because he feared that King Don Sancho his
brother would take him. And King Don Alfonso said, that he knew the
ways and customs of his brother, and did not fear him, if it pleased
the King to give him some Moors to help him. Now Alimaymon had heard of
the death of King Don Sancho, and he had sent to occupy the roads and
the passes, that King Don Alfonso might be stopt if he should attempt
to depart without his knowledge. Howbeit he did not fully believe the
tidings, seeing that King Don Alfonso did not speak of it; and he
rejoiced in his heart at what the King said, and he said unto him, I
thank God, Alfonso, that thou hast told me of thy wish to go into thine
own country; for in this thou hast dealt loyally by me, and saved me
from that which might else have happened, to which the Moors have alway
importuned me. And hadst thou departed privily thou couldest not have
escaped being slain or taken. Now then go and take thy kingdom; and I
will give thee whatever thou hast need of to give to thine own people
and win their hearts that they may serve thee. And he then besought him
to renew the oath which he had taken, never to come against him nor his
sons, but alway to befriend them; and this same oath did the King of
Toledo make unto him. Now Alimaymon had a grandson whom he dearly
loved, who was not named in the oath, and King Don Alfonso therefore
was not bound to keep it towards him. And King Don Alfonso made ready
for his departure, and Alimaymon and the chief persons of the court
went out from the city with him and rode with him as far as the Sierra
del Dragon, which is now called Valtome; and he gave him great gifts,
and there they took leave of each other with great love.

X. As soon as King Don Alfonso arrived at Zamora, he pitched his tents
in the field of Santiago, and took counsel with his sister. And the
Infanta Dona Urraca, who was a right prudent lady and a wise, sent
letters throughout the land, that a Cortes should assemble and receive
him for their Lord. And when the Leonese and the Gallegos knew that
their Lord King Don Alfonso was come, they were full joyful, and they
came to Zamora and received him for their Lord and King. And afterwards
the Castillians arrived, and they of Navarre, and they also received
him for their Lord and King, but upon this condition, that he should
swear that he had not taken counsel for the death of his brother King
Don Sancho. Howbeit they did not come forward to receive the oath, and
they kissed his hands in homage, all, save only Ruydiez, my Cid. And
when King Don Alfonso saw that the Cid did not do homage and kiss his
hand, as all the other chief persons and prelates and Councils had
done, he said, Since now ye have all received me for your Lord, and
given me authority over ye, I would know of the Cid Ruydiez why he will
not kiss my hand and acknowledge me; for I would do something for him,
as I promised unto my father King Don Ferrando, when he commended him
to me and to my brethren. And the Cid arose and said, Sir, all whom you
see here present, suspect that by your counsel the King Don Sancho your
brother came to his death; and therefore, I say unto you that, unless
you clear yourself of this, as by right you should do, I will never
kiss your hand, nor receive you for my Lord. Then said the King, Cid,
what you say pleases me well; and here I swear to God and to St. Mary,
that I never slew him, nor took counsel for his death, neither did it
please me, though he had taken my kingdom from me. And I beseech ye
therefore all, as friends and true vassals, that ye tell me how I may
clear myself. And the chiefs who were present said, that he and twelve
of the knights who came with him from Toledo, should make this oath in
the church at St. Gadea at Burgos, and that so he should be cleared.

XI. So the King and all his company took horse and went to Burgos. And
when the day appointed for the oath was come, the King went to hear
mass in the church of Gadea, and his sisters the Infantas Dona Urraca
and Dona Elvira with him, and all his knights. And the King came
forward upon a high stage that all the people might see him, and my Cid
came to him to receive the oath; and my Cid took the book of the
Gospels and opened it, and laid it upon the altar, and the King laid
his hands upon it, and the Cid said unto him, King Don Alfonso, you
come here to swear concerning the death of King Don Sancho your
brother, that you neither slew him nor took counsel for his death; say
now you and these hidalgos, if ye swear this. And the King and the
hidalgos answered and said, Yea, we swear it. And the Cid said, If ye
knew of this thing, or gave command that it should be done, may you die
even such a death as your brother the King Don Sancho, by the hand of a
villain whom you trust; one who is not a hidalgo, from another land,
not a Castillian; and the King and the knights who were with him said
Amen. And the king's colour changed; and the Cid repeated the oath unto
him a second time, and the King and the twelve knights said Amen to it
in like manner, and in like manner the countenance of the King was
changed again. And my Cid repeated the oath unto him a third time, and
the King and the knights said Amen; but the wrath of the King was
exceeding great, and he said to the Cid, Ruydiez, why dost thou thus
press me, man? To-day thou swearest me, and to-morrow thou wilt kiss my
hand. And from that day forward there was no love towards my Cid in the
heart of the King.

XII. After this was King Don Alfonso crowned King of Castille, and
Leon, and Galicia, and Portugal; and he called himself King and Emperor
of all Spain, even as his father had done before him. And in the
beginning of his reign he did in all things according to the counsel of
the Infanta Dona Urraca his sister; and he was a good King, and kept
his kingdom so well, that rich and poor alike dwelt in peace and
security, neither did one man take arms against another, nor dare to do
it, if he valued the eyes in his head. And if the King was noble and
high of lineage, much more was he of heart; and in his days justice
abounded in the land so, that if a woman had gone alone throughout the
whole of his dominions, bearing gold and silver in her hand, she would
have found none to hurt her, neither in the waste, nor in the peopled
country. The merchants and pilgrims also who passed through his lands
were so well protected, that none durst do them wrong. Never while the
kingdom was his, had they of his land to do service to any other Lord.
And he was a comforter of the sorrowful, and an increaser of the faith,
and a defender of the churches, and the strength of the people; a judge
without fear; there was not in Spain a consoler of the poor and of
those who were oppressed, till he came. Now there was a mortal enmity
between my Cid and Count Garcia Ordonez, and in this year did my Cid
gather together those of his table, and all his power, and entered into
the lands of Logrono, and Navarre, and Calahorra, burning and spoiling
the country before him. And he laid siege to the Castle of Faro and
took it. And he sent messengers to the Count his enemy, to say that he
would wait for him seven days, and he waited. And the mighty men of the
land came to the Count Don Garcia, but come against my Cid that they
dared not do, for they feared to do battle with him.

XIII. In the second year of the reign of King Don Alfonso, the King of
Cordova made war upon Alimaymon, King of Toledo, and did great damage
in his land, and held him besieged in Toledo; and King Don Alfonso drew
forth a great host and went to help the King of Toledo. When Alimaymon
knew that he was coming with so great a power, he was greatly dismayed,
thinking that he came against him; and he sent to remind him of the
love and the honour which he had shown unto him in the days of his
brother King Don Sancho, and of the oath which he had taken; and to
beseech him that he would continue in peace with him. And the King
detained his messengers, giving them no reply, and went on advancing
into the land, doing no hurt therein. And when he came to Olias, he
ordered the whole army to halt. And when the King of Cordova knew that
King Don Alfonso was coming, he rose up from before Toledo, and fled
away, and the men of Toledo pursued him, and inflicted great loss upon
him in his flight.

XIV. And when the army had halted at Olias, the King called for the
messengers of Alimaymon, and took with him five knights, and rode to
Toledo. And when they came to the gate which is called Visagra, the
messengers who went with him made him enter the town, and he sent one
of them to tell the King that he was there, and went on in the meantime
towards the Alcazar. And when King Alimaymon heard this, he would not
wait till a beast should be brought him that he might ride, but set out
on foot and went to meet him; and as he was going out he met King Don
Alfonso, and they embraced each other. And the King of Toledo kissed
King Don Alfonso's shoulder, for the joy and pleasure that he had in
his heart at seeing him; and he gave thanks to God for what he had done
to King Don Alfonso, and thanked him also for the truth which was in
him, in coming thus to his deliverance, and for remembering the oath
which they had made each to the other. And they rejoiced together all
that night, and great was the joy of the people of Toledo, because of
the love which King Don Alfonso bore toward their Lord. But great was
the sorrow in the host of the Castillians, for they never thought to
see their Lord again; and they thought that he had committed a great
folly in thus putting himself into the power of the Moors.

XV. On the morrow, King Don Alfonso besought King Alimaymon that he
would go and eat with him at Olias, and see how he came to help him.
And they went both together with a little company, and when they of the
host saw their Lord they were all right joyful, and the two Kings went
through the camp, and they sat down to eat in the tent of the King,
which was a large one. And while they were at meat King Don Alfonso
gave order in secret that five hundred knights should arm themselves
and surround the tent. And when the King of Toledo saw these armed
knights, and that the tent was surrounded, he was in great fear, and he
asked of King Don Alfonso what it should be; and the King bade him eat,
and said, that afterwards they would tell him. And after they had
eaten, King Don Alfonso said to Alimaymon, You made me swear and
promise when you had me in Toledo in your power that no evil should
ever come against you on my part: now since I have you in my power I
will that you release me from this oath and covenant. And the King of
Toledo consented to release him, and besought him to do him no other
wrong, and he acquitted him from the promise three times. And when he
had done this King Don Alfonso called for the book of the Gospels, and
said unto him, Now then that you are in my power, I swear and promise
unto you, never to go against you, nor against your son, and to aid you
against all other men in the world. And I make this oath unto you
because there was reason why I should have broken that other one,
seeing that it was made when I was in your hands; but against this I
must not go, for I make it when you are in mine, and I could do with
you even whatever pleased me; and he laid his hands upon the book, and
swore even as he had said. Right joyful was the King of Toledo at this
which King Don Alfonso had done, for the loyalty which he had shown
towards him. And they remained that night together; and on the morrow
Alimaymon returned to his city full gladly, and King Don Alfonso made
his host move on towards Cordova, and Alimaymon went with him; and they
overran the land, and burnt towns and villages, and destroyed castles,
and plundered whatever they could find; and they returned each into his
own country with great spoils. And from thenceforward the King of
Cordova durst no more attack the King of Toledo.

XVI. In the following years, nothing is found to be related, save that
my Cid did battle by command of the King with a knight called Ximen
Garcia de Tiogelos, who was one of the best of Navarre: they fought for
the castle of Pazluengas, and for two other castles, and my Cid
conquered him, and King Don Alfonso had the castles. And after this my
Cid did battle in Medina Celi, with a Moor called Faras, who was a good
knight in arms, and he defeated and slew him and another also. And in
the fifth year of the reign of King Don Alfonso, the King sent the Cid
to the Kings of Seville and of Cordova, for the tribute which they were
bound to pay him. Now there was at this time war between Almocanis,
King of Seville and Almundafar, King of Granada, and with Almundafar
were these men of Castille, the Count Don Garcia Ordonez and Fortun
Sanchez, the son-in-law of King Don Garcia, of Navarre, and Lope
Sanchez his brother, and Diego Perez, one of the best men of Castille;
and they aided him all that they could, and went against the King of
Seville, and when my Cid knew this it troubled him, and he sent unto
them requiring them not to go against the King of Seville, nor to
destroy his country, because he was King Don Alfonso's vassal;
otherwise the King must defend him. And the King of Granada and the
Ricos-omes who were with him cared nothing for his letters, but entered
boldly into the land of Seville, and advanced as far as Cabra, burning
and laying waste before them. When the Cid saw this he gathered
together what Christians he could and went against them. And the King
of Granada and the Christians who were with him, sent to tell him that
they would not go out of the country for him. And the wrath of the Cid
was kindled, and he went against them, and fought with them in the
field, and the battle lasted from the hour of tierce even until the
hour of sexts; and many died upon the part of the King of Granada, and
at length my Cid overcame them and made them, take to flight. And Count
Garcia Ordonez was taken prisoner, and Lope Sanchez, and Diego Perez,
and many other knights, and of other men so many that they were out of
number; and the dead were so many that no man could count them; and the
spoils of the field were very great. And the Cid held these good men
prisoners three days and then set them free, and he returned with great
honour and great riches to Seville. And King Almocanis received him
full honourably, and gave him great gifts for himself, and paid him the
full tribute for the King; and he returned rich to Castille, and with
great honour. And King Don Alfonso was well pleased with the good
fortune of the Cid in all his feats; but there were many who wished ill
to him, and sought to set the King against him.

XVII. After this King Don Alfonso assembled together all his power and
went against the Moors. And the Cid should have gone with him, but he
fell sick and perforce therefore abode at home. And while the King was
going through Andalusia, having the land at his mercy, a great power of
the Moors assembled together on the other side, and entered the land,
and besieged the castle of Gormaz, and did much evil. At this time the
Cid was gathering strength; and when he heard that the Moors were in
the country, laying waste before them, he gathered together what force
he could, and went after them; and the Moors, when they heard this,
dared not abide his coming, but began to fly. And the Cid followed them
to Atienza, and to Ciguenza, and Fita, and Guadalajara, and through the
whole land of St. Esteban, as far as Toledo, slaying and burning, and
plundering and destroying, and laying hands on all whom he found, so
that he brought back seven thousand prisoners, men and women; and he
and all his people returned rich and with great honour. But when the
King of Toledo heard of the hurt which he had received at the hands of
the Cid, he sent to King Don Alfonso to complain thereof, and the King
was greatly troubled. And then the Ricos-omes who wished ill to the
Cid, had the way open to do him evil with the King, and they said to
the King, Sir, Ruydiez hath broken your faith, and the oath and promise
which you made to the King of Toledo: and he hath done this for no
other reason but that the Moors of Toledo may fall upon us here, and
slay both you and us. And the King believed what they said, and was
wroth against the Cid, having no love towards him because of the oath
which he had pressed upon him at Burgos concerning the death of King
Don Sancho his brother. And he went with all speed to Burgos, and sent
from thence to bid the Cid come unto him.

XVIII. Now my Cid knew the evil disposition of the King towards him,
and when he received his bidding, he made answer that he would meet him
between Burgos and Bivar. And the King went out from Burgos and came
nigh unto Bivar; and the Cid came up to him and would have kissed his
hand, but the King withheld it, and said angrily unto him, Ruydiez,
quit my land. Then the Cid clapt spurs to the mule upon which he rode,
and vaulted into a piece of ground which was his own inheritance, and
answered, Sir, I am not in your land, but in my own. And the King
replied full wrathfully, Go out of my kingdoms without any delay. And
the Cid made answer, Give me then thirty days time, as is the right of
the hidalgos; and the King said he would not, but that if he were not
gone in nine days time he would come and look for him. The Counts were
well pleased at this; but all the people of the land were sorrowful.
And then the King and the Cid parted. And the Cid sent for all his
friends and his kinsmen and vassals, and told them how King Don Alfonso
had banished him from the land, and asked of them who would follow him
into banishment, and who would remain at home. Then Alvar Fanez, who
was his cousin-german, came forward and said, Cid, we will all go with
you, through desert and through peopled country, and never fail you. In
your service will we spend our mules and horses, our wealth and our
garments, and ever while we live be unto you loyal friends and vassals.
And they all confirmed what Alvar Fanez had said; and the Cid thanked
them for their love, and said that there might come a time in which he
should guerdon them.

XIX. And as he was about to depart he looked back upon his own home,
and when he saw his hall deserted, the household chests unfastened, the
doors open, no cloaks hanging up, no seats in the porch, no hawks upon
the perches, the tears came into his eyes, and he said, My enemies have
done this ... God be praised for all things. And he turned toward the
East and knelt and said, Holy Mary Mother, and all Saints, pray to God
for me, that he may give me strength to destroy all the Pagans, and to
win enough from them to requite my friends therewith, and all those who
follow and help me. Then he called for Alvar Fanez and said unto him,
Cousin, the poor have no part in the wrong which the King hath done us;
see now that no wrong be done unto them along our road: and he called
for his horse. And then an old woman who was standing at her door said,
Go in a lucky minute, and make spoil of whatever you wish. And with
this proverb he rode on, saying, Friends, by God's good pleasure we
shall return to Castilla with great honour and great gain. And as they
went out from Bivar they had a crow on their right hand, and when they
came to Burgos they had a crow on the left.

XX. My Cid Ruydiez entered Burgos, having sixty streamers in his
company. And men and women went forth to see him, and the men of Burgos
and the women of Burgos were at their windows, weeping, so great was
their sorrow; and they said with one accord, God, how good a vassal if
he had but a good Lord! and willingly would each have bade him come in,
but no one dared so to do. For King Don Alfonso in his anger had sent
letters to Burgos, saying that no man should give the Cid a lodging;
and that whosoever disobeyed should lose all that he had, and moreover
the eyes in his head. Great sorrow had these Christian folk at this,
and they hid themselves when he came near them because they did not
dare speak to him; and my Cid went to his Posada, and when he came to
the door he found it fastened, for fear of the King. And his people
called out with a loud voice, but they within made no answer. And the
Cid rode up to the door, and took his foot out of the stirrup, and gave
it a kick, but the door did not open with it, for it was well secured;
a little girl of nine years old then came out of one of the houses and
said unto him, O Cid, the King hath forbidden us to receive you. We
dare not open our doors to you, for we should lose our houses and all
that we have, and the eyes in our head. Cid, our evil would not help
you, but God and all his Saints be with you. And when she had said this
she returned into the house. And when the Cid knew what the King had
done he turned away from the door and rode up to St. Mary's, and there
he alighted and knelt down, and prayed with all his heart; and then he
mounted again and rode out of the town, and pitched his tent near
Arlanzon, upon the Glera, that is to say, upon the sands. My Cid
Ruydiez, he who in a happy hour first girt on his sword, took up his
lodging upon the sands, because there was none who would receive him
within their door. He had a good company round about him, and there he
lodged as if he had been among the mountains.

XXI. Moreover the King had given orders that no food should be sold
them in Burgos, so that they could not buy even a pennyworth. But
Martin Antolinez, who was a good Burgalese, he supplied my Cid and all
his company with bread and wine abundantly. Campeador, said he to the
Cid, to-night we will rest here, and to-morrow we will be gone. I shall
be accused for what I have done in serving you, and shall be in the
King's displeasure; but following your fortunes, sooner or later, the
King will have me for his friend, and if not, I do not care a fig for
what I leave behind. Now this Martin Antolinez was nephew unto the Cid,
being the son of his brother, Ferrando Diaz. And the Cid said unto him,
Martin Antolinez, you are a bold Lancier; if I live I will double you
your pay. You see I have nothing with me, and yet must provide for my
companions. I will take two chests and fill them with sand, and do you
go in secret to Rachel and Vidas, and tell them to come hither
privately; for I cannot take my treasures with me because of their
weight, and will pledge them in their hands. Let them come for the
chests at night, that no man may see them. God knows that I do this
thing more of necessity than of wilfulness; but by God's good help I
shall redeem all. Now Rachel and Vidas were rich Jews, from whom the
Cid used to receive money for his spoils. And Martin Antolinez went in
quest of them, and he passed through Burgos and entered into the
Castle; and when he saw them he said, Ah Rachel and Vidas, my dear
friends! now let me speak with ye in secret. And they three went apart.
And he said to them, Give me your hands that you will not discover me
neither to Moor nor Christian! I will make you rich men for ever. The
Campeador went for the tribute and he took great wealth, and some of it
he has kept for himself. He has two chests full of gold; ye know that
the King is in anger against him, and he cannot carry these away with
him without their being seen. He will leave them therefore in your
hands, and you shall lend him money upon them, swearing with great
oaths and upon your faith, that ye will not open them till a year be
past. Rachel and Vidas took counsel together and answered, We well knew
he got something when he entered the land of the Moors; he who has
treasures does not sleep without suspicion; we will take the chests,
and place them where they shall not be seen. But tell us with what will
the Cid be contented, and what gain will he give us for the year?
Martin Antolinez answered like a prudent man, My Cid requires what is
reasonable; he will ask but little to leave his treasures in safety.
Men come to him from all parts. He must have six hundred marks. And the
Jews said, We will advance him so much. Well then, said Martin
Antolinez, ye see that the night is advancing; the Cid is in haste,
give us the marks. This is not the way of business, said they; we must
take first, and then give. Ye say well, replied the Burgalese: come
then to the Campeador, and we will help you to bring away the chests,
so that neither Moors nor Christians may see us. So they went to horse
and rode out together, and they did not cross the bridge, but rode
through the water that no man might see them, and they came to the tent
of the Cid.

XXII. Meantime the Cid had taken two chests, which were covered with
leather of red and gold, and the nails which fastened down the leather
were well gilt; they were ribbed with bands of iron, and each fastened
with three locks; they were heavy, and he filled them with sand. And
when Rachel and Vidas entered his tent with Martin Antolinez, they
kissed his hand; and the Cid smiled and said to them, Ye see that I am
going out of the land, because of the King's displeasure; but I shall
leave something with ye. And they made answer, Martin Antolinez has
covenanted with us, that we shall give you six hundred marks upon these
chests, and keep them a full year, swearing not to open them till that
time be expired, else shall we be perjured. Take the chests, said
Martin Antolinez; I will go with you, and bring back the marks, for my
Cid must move before cock-crow. So they took the chests, and though
they were both strong men they could not raise them from the ground;
and they were full glad of the bargain which they had made. And Rachel
then went to the Cid and kissed his hand and said, Now, Campeador, you
are going from Castille among strange nations, and your gain will be
great, even as your fortune is. I kiss your hand, Cid, and have a gift
for you, a red skin: it is Moorish and honourable. And the Cid said, It
pleases me; give it me if ye have brought it, if not, reckon it upon
the chests. And they departed with the chests, and Martin Antolinez and
his people helped them, and went with them. And when they had placed
the chests in safety, they spread a carpet in the middle of the hall,
and laid a sheet upon it and they threw down upon it three hundred
marks of silver. Don Martin counted them, and took them without
weighing. The other three hundred they paid in gold. Don Martin had
five squires with him, and he loaded them all with the money. And when
this was done he said to them, Now Don Rachel and Vidas, you have got
the chests, and I who got them for you well deserve a pair of hose. And
the Jews said to each other, Let us give him a good gift for this which
he has done; and they said to him, We will give you enough for hose and
for a rich doublet and a good cloak; you shall have thirty marks. Don
Martin thanked them and took the marks, and bidding them both farewell,
he departed right joyfully.

XXIII. When Martin Antolinez came into the Cid's tent he said unto him,
I have sped well, Campeador! you have gained six hundred marks, and I
thirty. Now then strike your tent and be gone. The time draws on, and
you may be with your Lady Wife at St. Pedro de Cardena, before the cock
crows. So the tent was struck, and my Cid and his company went to horse
at this early hour. And the Cid turned his horse's head toward St.
Mary's, and with his right hand he blest himself on the forehead, and
he said, God be praised! help me, St. Mary. I go from Castille because
the anger of the King is against me, and I know not whether I shall
ever enter it again in all my days. Help me, glorious Virgin, in my
goings, both by night and by day. If you do this and my lot be fair, I
will send rich and goodly gifts to your altar, and will have a thousand
masses sung there. Then with a good heart he gave his horse the reins.
And Martin Antolinez said to him, Go ye on; I must back to my wife and
tell her what she is to do during my absence. I shall be with you in
good time. And back he went to Burgos, and my Cid and his company
pricked on. The cocks were crowing amain, and the day began to break,
when the good Campeador reached St. Pedro's. The Abbot Don Sisebuto was
saying matins, and Dona Ximena and five of her ladies of good lineage
were with him, praying to God and St. Peter to help my Cid. And when he
called at the gate and they knew his voice, God, what a joyful man was
the Abbot Don Sisebuto! Out into the court yard they went with torches
and with tapers, and the Abbot gave thanks to God that he now beheld
the face of my Cid. And the Cid told him all that had befallen him, and
how he was a banished man; and he gave him fifty marks for himself, and
a hundred for Dona Ximena and her children. Abbot, said he, I leave two
little girls behind me, whom I commend to your care. Take you care of
them and of my wife and of her ladies: when this money be gone, if it
be not enough, supply them abundantly; for every mark which you expend
upon them I will give the Monastery four. And the Abbot promised to do
this with a right good will. Then Dona Ximena came up and her daughters
with her, each of them borne in arms, and she knelt down on both her
knees before her husband, weeping bitterly, and she would have kissed
his hand; and she said to him, Lo now you are banished from the land by
mischief-making men, and here am I with your daughters, who are little
ones and of tender years, and we and you must be parted, even in your
life time. For the love of St. Mary tell me now what we shall do. And
the Cid took the children in his arms, and held them to his heart and
wept, for he dearly loved them. Please God and St. Mary, said he, I
shall yet live to give these my daughters in marriage with my own
hands, and to do you service yet, my honoured wife, whom I have ever
loved, even as my own soul.

XXIV. A great feast did they make that day in the Monastery for the
good Campeador, and the bells of St. Pedro's rung merrily. Meantime the
tidings had gone through Castille how my Cid was banished from the
land, and great was the sorrow of the people. Some left their houses to
follow him, others forsook their honourable offices which they held.
And that day a hundred and fifteen knights assembled at the bridge of
Arlanzon, all in quest of my Cid; and there Martin Antolinez joined
them, and they rode on together to St. Pedro's. And when he of Bivar
knew what a goodly company were coming to join him, he rejoiced in his
own strength, and rode out to meet them and greeted them full
courteously; and they kissed his hand, and he said to them, I pray to
God that I may one day requite ye well, because ye have forsaken your
houses and your heritages for my sake, and I trust that I shall pay ye
two fold. Six days of the term allotted were now gone, and three only
remained: if after that time he should be found, within the King's
dominions, neither for gold nor for silver could he then escape. That
day they feasted together, and when it was evening the Cid distributed
among them, all that he had, giving to each man according to what he
was; and he told them that they must meet at mass after matins, and
depart at that early hour. Before the cock crew they were ready, and
the Abbot said the mass of the Holy Trinity, and when it was done they
left the church and went to horse. And my Cid embraced Dona Ximena and
his daughters, and blest them; and the parting between them was like
separating the nail from the quick flesh: and he wept and continued to
look round after them. Then Alvar Fanez came up to him and said, Where
is your courage, my Cid? In a good hour were you born of woman. Think
of our road now; these sorrows will yet be turned into joy. And the Cid
spake again to the Abbot, commending his family to his care;--well did
the Abbot know that he should one day receive good guerdon. And as he
took leave of the Cid, Alvar Fanez said to him, Abbot, if you see any
who come to follow us, tell them what route we take, and bid them make
speed, for they may reach us either in the waste or in the peopled
country. And then they loosed the reins and pricked forward.

XXV. That night my Cid lay at Spinar de Can, and people flocked to him
from all parts, and early on the morrow he set out; Santestevan lay on
his left hand, which is a good city, and Ahilon on the right, which
belongs to the Moors, and he passed by Alcobiella, which is the
boundary of Castille. And he went by the Calzada de Quinea, and crost
the Douro upon rafts. That night, being the eighth, they rested at
Figeruela, and more adventurers came to join him. And when my Cid was
fast asleep, the Angel Gabriel appeared to him in a vision, and said,
Go on boldly and fear nothing; for everything shall go well with thee
as long as thou livest, and all the things which thou beginnest, thou
shalt bring to good end, and thou shalt be rich and honourable. And the
Cid awoke and blest himself; and he crost his forehead and rose from
his bed, and knelt down and gave thanks to God for the mercy which he
had vouchsafed him, being right joyful because of the vision. Early on
the morrow they set forth; now this was the last day of the nine. And
they went on towards the Sierra de Miedes. Before sunset the Cid halted
and took account of his company; there were three hundred lances, all
with streamers, besides foot-soldiers. And he said unto them, Now take
and eat, for we must pass this great and wild Sierra, that we may quit
the land of King Alfonso this night. To-morrow he who seeks us may find
us. So they passed the Sierra that night.




BOOK IV.


I. Now hath my Cid left the kingdom of King Don Alfonso, and entered
the country of the Moors. And at day-break they were near the brow of
the Sierra, and they halted there upon the top of the mountains, and
gave barley to their horses, and remained there until evening. And they
set forward when the evening had closed, that none might see them, and
continued their way all night, and before dawn they came near to
Castrejon, which is upon the Henares. And Alvar Fanez said unto the
Cid, that he would take with him two hundred horsemen, and scour the
country as far as Fita and Guadalajara and Alcala, and lay hands on
whatever he could find, without fear either of King Alfonso or of the
Moors. And he counselled him to remain in ambush where he was, and
surprise the castle of Castrejon: and it seemed good unto my Cid. Away
went Alvar Fanez, and Alvar Alvarez with him, and Alvar Salvadores, and
Galin Garcia, and the two hundred horsemen; and the Cid remained in
ambush with the rest of his company. And as soon as it was morning, the
Moors of Castrejon, knowing nothing of these who were so near them,
opened the castle gates, and went out to their work as they were wont
to do. And the Cid rose from ambush and fell upon them, and took all
their flocks, and made straight for the gates, pursuing them. And there
was a cry within the castle that the Christians were upon them, and
they who were within ran to the gates to defend them, but my Cid came
up sword in hand; eleven Moors did he slay with his own hand, and they
forsook the gate and fled before him to hide themselves within, so that
he won the castle presently, and took gold and silver, and whatever
else he would.

II. Alvar Fanez meantime scoured the country along the Henares as far
as Alcala, and he returned driving flocks and herds before him, with
great stores of wearing apparel, and of other plunder. He came with the
banner of Minaya, and there were none who dared fall upon his rear. And
when the Cid knew that he was nigh at hand he went out to meet him, and
praised him greatly for what he had done, and gave thanks to God. And
he gave order that all the spoils should be heaped together, both what
Alvar Fanez had brought, and what had been taken in the castle; and he
said to him, Brother, of all this which God hath given us, take you the
fifth, for you well deserve it; but Minaya would not, saying, You have
need of it for our support. And the Cid divided the spoil among the
knights and foot-soldiers, to each his due portion; to every horseman a
hundred marks of silver, and half as much to the foot-soldiers: and
because he could find none to whom to sell his fifth, he spake to the
Moors of Castrejon, and sent to those of Fita and Guadalajara, telling
them that they might come safely to purchase the spoil, and the
prisoners also whom he had taken, both men prisoners and women, for he
would have none with him. And they came, and valued the spoil and the
prisoners, and gave for them three thousand marks of silver, which they
paid within three days: they bought also much of the spoil which had
been divided, making great gain, so that all who were in my Cid's
company were full rich. And the heart of my Cid was joyous, and he sent
to King Don Alfonso, telling him that he and his companions would yet
do him service upon the Moors.

III. Then my Cid assembled together his good men and said unto them,
Friends, we cannot take up our abode in this castle, for there is no
water in it, and moreover the King is at peace with these Moors, and I
know that the treaty between them hath been written; so that if we
should abide here he would come against us with all his power, and with
all the power of the Moors, and we could not stand against him. If
therefore it seem good unto you, let us leave the rest of our prisoners
here, for it does not beseem us to take any with us, but to be as free
from all encumbrance as may be, like men who are to live by war, and to
help ourselves with our arms. And it pleased them well that it should
be so. And he said to them, Ye have all had your shares, neither is
there anything owing to any one among ye. Now then let us be ready to
take horse betimes on the morrow, for I would not fight against my Lord
the King. So on the morrow they went to horse and departed, being rich
with the spoils which they had won: and they left the castle to the
Moors, who remained blessing them for this bounty which they had
received at their hands. Then my Cid and his company went up the
Henares as fast as they could go, and they passed by the Alcarias, and
by the caves of Anquita, and through the waters, and they entered the
plain of Torancio, and halted between Fariza and Cetina: great were the
spoils which they collected as they went along. And on the morrow they
passed Alfama, and leaving the Gorge below them they passed Bobierca,
and Teca which is beyond it, and came against Alcocer. There my Cid
pitched his tents upon a round hill, which was a great hill and a
strong; and the river Salon ran near them, so that the water could not
be cut off. My Cid thought to take Alcocer: so he pitched his tents
securely, having the Sierra on one side, and the river on the other,
and he made all his people dig a trench, that they might not be
alarmed, neither by day nor by night.

IV. When my Cid had thus encamped, he went to look at the Alcazar, and
see if he could by any means enter it. And the Moors offered tribute to
him if he would leave them in peace; but this he would not do, and he
lay before the town. And news went through all the land that the Cid
was come among them, and they of Calatayud were in fear. And my Cid lay
before Alcocer fifteen weeks; and when he saw that the town did not
surrender, he ordered his people to break up their camp, as if they
were flying, and they left one of their tents behind them, and took
their way along the Salon, with their banners spread. And when the
Moors saw this they rejoiced greatly, and there was a great stir among
them, and they praised themselves for what they had done in
withstanding him, and said, that the Cid's bread and barley had failed
him, and he had fled away, and left one of his tents behind him. And
they said among themselves, Let us pursue them and spoil them, for if
they of Teruel should be before us the honour and the profit will be
theirs, and we shall have nothing. And they went out after him, great
and little, leaving the gates open and shouting as they went; and there
was not left in the town a man who could bear arms. And when my Cid saw
them coming he gave orders to quicken their speed, as if he was in
fear, and would not let his people turn till the Moors were far enough
from the town. But when he saw that there was a good distance between
them and the gates, then he bade his banner turn, and spurred towards
them, crying, Lay on, knights, by God's mercy the spoil is our own.
God! what a good joy was theirs that morning! My Cid's vassals laid on
without mercy;--in one hour, and in a little space, three hundred Moors
were slain, and the Cid and Alvar Fanez had good horses, and got
between them and the Castle, and stood in the gateway sword in hand,
and there was a great mortality among the Moors; and my Cid won the
place, and Pero Bermudez planted his banner upon the highest point of
the Castle. And the Cid said, Blessed be God and all his Saints, we
have bettered our quarters both for horses and men. And he said to
Alvar Fanez and all his knights, Hear me, we shall get nothing by
killing these Moors;--let us take them and they shall show us their
treasures which they have hidden in their houses, and we will dwell
here and they shall serve us. In this manner did my Cid win Alcocer,
and take up his abode therein.

V. Much did this trouble the Moors of Teca, and it did not please those
of Teruel, nor of Calatayud. And they sent to the King of Valencia to
tell him that one who was called Ruydiez the Cid, whom King Don Alfonso
had banished, was come into their country, and had taken Alcocer; and
if a stop were not put to him, the King might look upon Teca and Teruel
and Calatayud as lost, for nothing could stand against him, and he had
plundered the whole country, along the Salon on the one side, and the
Siloca on the other. When the King of Valencia, whose name was Alcamin,
heard this, he was greatly troubled. And incontinently he spake unto
two Moorish Kings who were his vassals, bidding them take three
thousand horsemen, and all the men of the border, and bring the Cid to
him alive, that he might make atonement to him for having entered his
land.

VI. Fariz and Galve were the names of these two Moorish Kings, and they
set out with the companies of King Alcamin from Valencia, and halted
the first night in Segorve, and the second night at Celfa de Canal. And
they sent their messengers through the land to all the Councils
thereof, ordering all men at arms, as well horsemen as footmen, to join
them, and the third night they halted at Calatayud, and great numbers
joined them; and they came up against Alcocer, and pitched their tents
round about the Castle. Every day their host increased, for their
people were many in number, and their watchmen kept watch day and
night; and my Cid had no succour to look for except the mercy of God,
in which he put his trust. And the Moors beset them so close that they
cut off their water, and albeit the Castillians would have sallied
against them, my Cid forbade this. In this guise were my Cid and his
people besieged for three weeks, and when the fourth week began, he
called for Alvar Fanez, and for his company, and said unto them. Ye see
that the Moors have cut off our water, and we have but little bread;
they gather numbers day by day, and we become weak, and they are in
their own country. If we would depart they would not let us, and we
cannot go out by night because they have beset us round about on all
sides, and we cannot pass on high through the air, neither through the
earth which is underneath. Now then if it please you let us go out and
fight with them, though they are many in number, and either defeat them
or die an honourable death.

VII. Then Minaya answered and said. We have left the gentle land of
Castille, and are come hither as banished men, and if we do not beat
the Moors they will not give us food. Now though we are but few, yet
are we of a good stock, and of one heart and one will; by God's help
let us go out and smite them to-morrow, early in the morning, and you
who are not in a state of penitence, go and shrieve yourselves and
repent ye of your sins. And they all held that what Alvar Fanez had
said was good. And my Cid answered, Minaya, you have spoken as you
should do. Then ordered he all the Moors, both men and women, to be
thrust out of the town, that it might not be known what they were
preparing to do; and the rest of that day and the night also they
passed in making ready for the battle. And on the morrow at sunrise the
Cid gave his banner to Pero Bermudez, and bade him bear it boldly like
a good man as he was, but he charged him not to thrust forward with it
without his bidding. And Pero Bermudez kissed his hand, being well
pleased. Then leaving only two foot-soldiers to keep the gates, they
issued out; and the Moorish scouts saw them and hastened to the camp.
Then was there such a noise of tambours as if the earth would have been
broken, and the Moors armed themselves in great haste. Two royal
banners were there, and five city ones, and they drew up their men in
two great bodies, and moved on, thinking to take my Cid and all his
company alive; and my Cid bade his men remain still and not move till
he should bid them.

VIII. Pero Bermudez could not bear this, but holding the banner in his
hand, he cried, God help you, Cid Campeador; I shall put your banner in
the middle of that main body; and you who are bound to stand by it--I
shall see how you will succour it. And he began to prick forward. And
the Campeador called unto him to stop as he loved him, but Pero
Bermudez replied he would stop for nothing, and away he spurred and
carried his banner into the middle of the great body of the Moors. And
the Moors fell upon him that they might win the banner, and beset him
on all sides, giving him many and great blows to beat him down;
nevertheless his arms were proof, and they could not pierce them,
neither could they beat him down, nor force the banner from him, for he
was a right brave man and a strong, and a good horseman, and of great
heart. And when the Cid saw him thus beset he called to his people to
move on and help him. Then placed they their shields before their
hearts, and lowered their lances with the streamers thereon, and
bending forward, rode on. Three hundred lances were they, each with its
pendant, and every man at the first charge slew his Moor. Smite them,
knights, for the love of charity, cried the Campeador. I am Ruydiez,
the Cid of Bivar! Many a shield was pierced that day, and many a false
corselet was broken, and many a white streamer dyed with blood, and
many a horse left without a rider. The Misbelievers called on Mahomet,
and the Christians on Santiago, and the noise of the tambours and of
the trumpets was so great that none could hear his neighbour. And my
Cid and his company succoured Pero Bermudez, and they rode through the
host of the Moors, slaying as they went, and they rode back again in
like manner; thirteen hundred did they kill in this guise. If you would
know who they were, who were the good men of that day, it behoves me to
tell you, for though they are departed, it is not fitting that the
names of those who have done well should die, nor would they who have
done well themselves, or who hope so to do, think it right; for good
men would not be so bound to do well if their good feats should be kept
silent. There was my Cid, the good man in battle, who fought well upon
his gilt saddle; and Alvar Fanez Minaya, and Martin Antolinez the
Burgalesa of prowess, and Muno Gustios, and Martin Munoz who held
Montemayor, and Alvar Alvarez, and Alvar Salvadores, and Galin Garcia
the good one of Aragon, and Felez Munoz the nephew of the Campeador.
Wherever my Cid went, the Moors made a path before him, for he smote
them down without mercy. And while the battle still continued, the
Moors killed the horse of Alvar Fanez, and his lance was broken, and he
fought bravely with his sword afoot. And my Cid, seeing him, came up to
an Alguazil who rode upon a good horse, and smote him with his sword
under the right arm, so that he cut him through and through, and he
gave the horse to Alvar Fanez, saying, Mount, Minaya, for you are my
right hand.

IX. When Alvar Fanez was thus remounted, they fell upon the Moors
again, and by this time the Moors were greatly disheartened, having
suffered so great loss, and they began to give way. And my Cid, seeing
King Fariz, made towards him, smiting down all who were in his way; and
he came up to him, and made three blows at him; two of them failed, but
the third was a good one, and went through his cuirass, so that the
blood ran down his legs. And with that blow was the army of the Moors
vanquished, for King Fariz, feeling himself so sorely wounded, turned
his reins and fled out of the field, even to Teruel. And Martin
Antolinez the good Burgalese came up to King Galve, and gave him a
stroke on the head, which scattered all the carbuncles out of his
helmet, and cut through it even to the skin; and the King did not wait
for another such, and he fled also. A good day was that for
Christendom, for the Moors fled on all sides. King Fariz got into
Teruel, and King Galve fled after him, but they would not receive him
within the gates, and he went on to Calatayud. And the Christians
pursued them even to Calatayud. And Alvar Fanez had a good horse; four
and thirty did he slay in that pursuit with the edge of his keen sword,
and his arm was all red, and the blood dropt from his elbow. And as he
was returning from the spoil he said, Now am I well pleased, for good
tidings will go to Castille, how my Cid has won a battle in the field.
My Cid also turned back; his coif was wrinkled, and you might see his
full beard; the hood of his mail hung down upon his shoulders, and the
sword was still in his hand. He saw his people returning from the
pursuit, and that of all his company fifteen only of the lower sort
were slain, and he gave thanks to God for this victory. Then they fell
to the spoil, and they found arms in abundance, and great store of
wealth; and five hundred and ten horses. And he divided the spoil,
giving to each man his fair portion, and the Moors whom they had put
out of Alcocer before the battle, they now received again into the
castle, and gave to them also a part of the booty, so that all were
well content. And my Cid had great joy with his vassals.

X. Then the Cid called unto Alvar Fanez and said, Cousin, you are my
right hand, and I hold it good that you should take of my fifth as much
as you will, for all would be well bestowed upon you; but Minaya
thanked him, and said, that he would take nothing more than his share.
And the Cid said unto him, I will send King Don Alfonso a present from
my part of the spoils. You shall go into Castille, and take with you
thirty horses, the best which were taken from the Moors, all bridled
and saddled, and each having a sword hanging from the saddle-bow; and
you shall give them to the King, and kiss his hand for me, and tell him
that we know how to make our way among the Moors. And you shall take
also this bag of gold and silver, and purchase for me a thousand masses
in St. Mary's at Burgos, and hang up there these banners of the Moorish
Kings whom we have overcome. Go then to St. Pedro's at Cardena, and
salute my wife Dona Ximena, and my daughters, and tell them how well I
go on, and that if I live I will make them rich women. And salute for
me the Abbot Don Sancho, and give him fifty marks of silver; and the
rest of the money, whatever shall be left, give to my wife, and bid
them all pray for me. Moreover the Cid said unto him, This country is
all spoiled, and we have to help ourselves with sword and spear. You
are going to gentle Castille; if when you return you should not find us
here, you will hear where we are.

XI. Alvar Fanez went his way to Castille, and he found the King in
Valladolid, and he presented to him the thirty horses, with all their
trappings, and swords mounted with silver hanging from the saddle-bows.
And when the King saw them, before Alvar Fanez could deliver his
bidding, he said unto him, Minaya, who sends me this goodly present;
and Minaya answered, My Cid Ruydiez, the Campeador, sends it, and
kisses by me your hands. For since you were wroth against him, and
banished him from the land, he being a man disherited, hath helped
himself with his own hands, and hath won from the Moors the Castle of
Alcocer. And the King of Valencia sent two Kings to besiege him there,
with all his power, and they begirt him round about, and cut off the
water and bread from us so that we could not subsist. And then holding
it better to die like good men in the field, than shut up like bad
ones, we went out against them, and fought with them in the open field,
and smote them and put them to flight; and both the Moorish Kings were
sorely wounded, and many of the Moors were slain, and many were taken
prisoners, and great was the spoil which we won in the field, both of
captives and of horses and arms, gold and silver and pearls, so that
all who are with him are rich men. And of his fifth of the horses which
were taken that day, my Cid hath sent you these, as to his natural
Lord, whose favour he desireth. I beseech you, as God shall help you,
show favour unto him. Then King Don Alfonso answered, This is betimes
in the morning for a banished man to ask favour of his Lord; nor is it
befitting a King, for no Lord ought to be wroth for so short a time.
Nevertheless, because the horses were won from the Moors, I will take
them, and rejoice that my Cid hath sped so well. And I pardon you,
Minaya, and give again unto you all the lands which you have ever held
of me, and you have my favour to go when you will, and come when you
will. Of the Cid Campeador, I shall say nothing now, save only that all
who choose to follow him may freely go, and their bodies and goods and
heritages are safe. And Minaya said, God grant you many and happy years
for his service. Now I beseech you, this which you have done for me, do
also to all those who are in my Cid's company, and show favour unto
them also, that their possessions may be restored unto them. And the
King gave order that it should be so. Then Minaya kissed the King's
hand and said, Sir, you have done this now, and you will do the rest
hereafter.

XII. My Cid remained awhile in Alcocer, and the Moors of the border
waited to see what he would do. And in this time King Fariz got well of
his wound, and my Cid sent to him and to the Moors, saying, that if
they would give him three thousand marks of silver, he would leave
Alcocer and go elsewhere. And King Fariz and the Moors of Techa, and of
Ternel, and of Calatayud, were right glad of this, and the covenant was
put in writing, and they sent him the three thousand marks. And my Cid
divided it among his company, and he made them all rich, both knights
and esquires and footmen, so that they said to one another, He who
serves a good Lord, happy man is his dole. But the Moors of Alcocer
were full sorry to see him depart, because he had been to them a kind
master and a bountiful; and they said unto him, Wherever you go, Cid,
our prayers will go before you; and they wept both men and women when
my Cid went his way. So the Campeador raised his banner and departed,
and he went down the Salon, and crossed it; and as he crossed the river
they saw good birds, and signs of good fortune. And they of Za and of
Calatayud were well pleased, because he went from them. My Cid rode on
till he came to the knoll above Monte-Real; it is a high hill and
strong, and there he pitched his tents, being safe on all sides. And
from thence he did much harm to the Moors of Medina and of the country
round about; and he made Daroca pay tribute, and Molina also, which is
on the other side, and Teruel also, and Celfa de Canal, and all the
country along the river Martin. And the news went to the King of
Zaragoza, and it neither pleased the King nor his people.

XIII. Ever after was that knoll called the Knoll of the Cid. And when
the perfect one had waited a long time for Minaya and saw that he did
not come, he removed by night, and passed by Teruel and pitched his
camp in the pine-forest of Tebar. And from thence he infested the Moors
of Zaragoza, insomuch that they held it best to give him gold and
silver and pay him tribute. And when this covenant had been made,
Almudafar, the King of Zaragoza, became greatly his friend, and
received him full honourably into the town. In three weeks time after
this came Alvar Fanez from Castille. Two hundred men of lineage came
with him, every one of whom wore sword girt to his side, and the
foot-soldiers in their company were out of number. When my Cid saw
Minaya he rode up to him, and embraced him without speaking, and kissed
his mouth and the eyes in his head. And Minaya told him all that he had
done. And the face of the Campeador brightened, and he gave thanks to
God and said, It will go well with me, Minaya, as long as you live!
God, how joyful was that whole host because Alvar Fanez was returned!
for he brought them greetings from their kinswomen and their brethren,
and the fair comrades whom they had left behind. God, how joyful was my
Cid with the fleecy beard, that Minaya had purchased the thousand
masses, and had brought him the biddings of his wife and daughters!
God, what a joyful man was he!

XIV. Now it came to pass that while my Cid was in Zaragoza the days of
King Almudafar were fulfilled: and he left his two sons Zulema and
Abenalfange, and they divided his dominions between them; and Zulema
had the kingdom of Zaragoza, and Abenalfange the kingdom of Denia. And
Zulema put his kingdom under my Cid's protection, and bade all his
people obey him even as they would himself. Now there began to be great
enmity between the two brethren, and they made war upon each other. And
King Don Pedro of Aragon, and the Count Don Ramon Berenguer of
Barcelona, helped Abenalfange, and they were enemies to the Cid because
he defended Zulema. And my Cid chose out two hundred horsemen and went
out by night, and fell upon the lands of Alcaniz; and he remained out
three days in this inroad, and brought away great booty. Great was the
talk thereof among the Moors: and they of Monzon and of Huesca were
troubled, but they of Zaragoza rejoiced; because they paid tribute to
the Cid, and were safe. And when my Cid returned to Zaragoza he divided
the spoil among his companions, and said to them, Ye know, my friends,
that for all who live by their arms, as we do, it is not good to remain
long in one place. Let us be off again to-morrow. So on the morrow they
moved to the Puerto de Alucant, and from thence they infested Huesca
and Montalban. Ten days were they out upon this inroad; and the news
was sent every where how the exile from Castille was handling them, and
tidings went to the King of Denia and to the Count of Barcelona, how my
Cid was over-running the country.

XV. When Don Ramon Berenguer the Count of Barcelona heard this, it
troubled him to the heart, and he held it for a great dishonour,
because that part of the land of the Moors was in his keeping. And he
spake boastfully saying, Great wrong doth that Cid of Bivar offer unto
me; he smote my nephew in my own court and never would make amends for
it, and now he ravages the lands which are in my keeping, and I have
never defied him for this nor renounced his friendship; but since he
goes on in this way I must take vengeance. So he and King Abenalfange
gathered together a great power both of Moors and Christians, and went
in pursuit of the Cid, and after three days and two nights they came up
with him in the pine-forest of Tebar, and they came on confidently,
thinking to lay hands on him. Now my Cid was returning with much spoil,
and had descended from the Sierra into the valley when tidings were
brought him that Count Don Ramon Berenguer and the King of Denia were
at hand, with a great power, to take away his booty, and take or slay
him. And when the Cid heard this he sent to Don Ramon saying, that the
booty which he had won was none of his, and bidding him let him go on
his way in peace: but the Count made answer, that my Cid should now
learn whom he had dishonoured, and make amends once for all. Then my
Cid sent the booty forward, and bade his knights make ready. They are
coming upon us, said he, with a great power both of Moors and
Christians, to take from us the spoils which we have so hardly won, and
without doing battle we cannot be quit of them; for if we should
proceed they would follow till they overtook us: therefore let the
battle be here, and I trust in God that we shall win more honour, and
something to boot. They come down the hill, drest in their hose, with
their gay saddles, and their girths wet; we are with our hose covered
and on our Galician saddles;--a hundred such as we ought to beat their
whole company. Before they get upon the plain ground let us give them
the points of our lances; for one whom we run through, three will jump
out of their saddles; and Ramon Berenguer will then see whom he has
overtaken to-day in the pine-forest of Tebar, thinking to despoil him
of the booty which I have won from the enemies of God and of the faith.

XVI. While my Cid was speaking, his knights had taken their arms, and
were ready on horseback for the charge. Presently they saw the pendants
of the Frenchmen coming down the hill, and when they were nigh the
bottom, and had not yet set foot upon the plain ground, my Cid bade his
people charge, which they did with a right good will, thrusting their
spears so stiffly, that by God's good pleasure not a man whom they
encountered but lost his seat. So many were slain and so many wounded,
that the Moors were dismayed forthwith, and began to fly. The Count's
people stood firm a little longer, gathering round their Lord; but my
Cid was in search of him, and when he saw where he was, he made up to
him, clearing the way as he went, and gave him such a stroke with his
lance that he felled him down to the ground. When the Frenchmen saw
their Lord in this plight they fled away and left him; and the pursuit
lasted three leagues, and would have been continued farther if the
conquerors had not had tired horses. So they turned back and collected
the spoils, which were more than they could carry away. Thus was Count
Ramon Berenguer made prisoner, and my Cid won from him that day the
good sword Colada, which was worth more than a thousand marks of
silver. That night did my Cid and his men make merry, rejoicing over
their gains. And the Count was taken to my Cid's tent, and a good
supper was set before him; nevertheless he would not eat, though my Cid
besought him so to do. And on the morrow my Cid ordered a feast to be
made, that he might do pleasure to the Count, but the Count said that
for all Spain he would not eat one mouthful, but would rather die,
since he had been beaten in battle by such a set of ragged fellows. And
Ruydiez said to him, Eat and drink, Count, of this bread and of this
wine, for this is the chance of war: if you do as I say you shall be
free; and if not you will never return again into your own lands. And
Don Ramond answered, Eat you, Don Rodrigo, for your fortune is fair and
you deserve it; take you your pleasure, but leave me to die. And in
this mood he continued for three days, refusing all food. But then my
Cid said to him, Take food, Count, and be sure that I will set you
free, you and any two of your knights, and give you wherewith to return
into your own country. And when Don Ramond heard this, he took comfort
and said, If you will indeed do this thing I shall marvel at you as
long as I live. Eat then, said Ruydiez, and I will do it: but mark you,
of the spoil which we have taken from you I will give you nothing; for
to that you have no claim neither by right nor custom, and besides we
want it for ourselves, being banished men, who must live by taking from
you and from others as long as it shall please God. Then was the Count
full joyful, being well pleased that what should be given him was not
of the spoils which he had lost; and he called for water and washed his
hands, and chose two of his kinsmen to be set free with him; the one
was named Don Hugo, and the other Guillen Bernalto. And my Cid sate at
the table with them, and said, If you do not eat well, Count, you and I
shall not part yet. Never since he was Count did he eat with better
will than that day! And when they had done he said, Now, Cid, if it be
your pleasure let us depart. And my Cid clothed him and his kinsmen
well with goodly skins and mantles, and gave them each a goodly
palfrey, with rich caparisons, and he rode out with them on their way.
And when he took leave of the Count he said to him, Now go freely, and
I thank you for what you have left behind; if you wish to play for it
again let me know, and you shall either have something back in its
stead, or leave what you bring to be added to it. The Count answered,
Cid, you jest safely now, for I have paid you and all your company for
this twelve months, and shall not be coming to see you again so soon.
Then Count Ramond pricked on more than apace, and many times looked
behind him, fearing that my Cid would repent what he had done, and send
to take him back to prison, which the perfect one would not have done
for the whole world, for never did he do disloyal thing.

XVII. Then he of Bivar returned to Zaragoza, and divided the spoil,
which was so great that none of his men knew how much they had. And the
Moors of the town rejoiced in his good speed, liking him well, because
he protected them so well that they were safe from all harm. And my Cid
went out again from Zaragoza, and rode over the lands of Monzon and
Huerta and Onda and Buenar. And King Pedro of Aragon came out against
him, but my Cid took the Castle of Monzon in his sight; and then he
went to Tamarit: and one day as he rode out hunting from thence with
twelve of his knights, he fell in with a hundred and fifty of the King
of Aragon's people, and he fought with them and put them to flight, and
took seven knights prisoners, whom he let go freely. Then he turned
towards the sea-coast, and won Xerica and Onda and Almenar, and all the
lands of Borriana and Murviedro; and they in Valencia were greatly
dismayed because of the great feats which he did in the land. And when
he had plundered all that country he returned to Tamarit, where Zulema
then was.

XVIII. Now Zulema had sent for my Cid, and the cause was this. His
brother the King of Denia had taken counsel with Count Ramon Berenguer,
and with the Count of Cardona, and with the brother of the Count of
Urgel, and with the chiefs of Balsadron and Remolin and Cartaxes, that
they should besiege the Castle of Almenar, which my Cid had refortified
by command of King Zulema. And they came up against it while my Cid was
away, besieging the Castle of Estrada, which is in the rivers Tiegio
and Sege, the which he took by force. And they fought against it and
cut off the water. And when my Cid came to the King at Tamarit, the
King asked him to go and fight with the host which besieged Almenar;
but my Cid said it would be better to give something to King
Abenalfange that he should break up the siege and depart; for they were
too great a power to do battle with, being as many in number as the
sands on the sea-shore. And the King did as he counselled him, and sent
to his brother King Abenalfange, and to the chiefs who were with him,
to propose this accord, and they would not. Then my Cid, seeing that
they would not depart for fair means, armed his people, and fell upon
them. That was a hard battle and well fought on both sides, and much
blood was shed, for many good knights on either party were in the
field; howbeit he of good fortune won the day at last, he who never was
conquered. King Abenalfange and Count Ramon and most of the others
fled, and my Cid followed, smiting and slaying for three leagues; and
many good Christian knights were made prisoners. Ruydiez returned with
great honour and much spoil, and gave all his prisoners to King Zulema,
who kept them eight days, and then my Cid begged their liberty and set
them free. And he and the King returned to Zaragoza, and the people
came out to meet them, with great joy, and shouts of welcome. And the
King honoured my Cid greatly, and gave him power in all his dominions.

XIX. At this time it came to pass that Almofalez, a Moor of Andalusia,
rose up with the Castle of Rueda, which was held for King Don Alfonso.
And because he held prisoner there the brother of Adefir, another Moor,
Adefir sent to the King of Castille, beseeching him to come to succour
him, and recover the Castle. And the King sent the Infante Don Ramiro
his cousin, and the Infante Don Sancho, son to the King of Navarre, and
Count Don Gonzalo Salvadores, and Count Don Nuno Alvarez, and many
other knights with them; and they came to the Castle, and Almofalez
said he would not open the gates to them, but if the King came he would
open to him. And when King Don Alfonso heard this, incontinently he
came to Rueda. And Almofalez besought him to enter to a feast which he
had prepared; howbeit the King would not go in, neither would his
people have permitted him so to have risked his person. But the Infante
Don Sancho entered, and Don Nuno, and Don Gonzalo, and fifteen other
knights; and as soon as they were within the gate, the Moors threw down
great stones upon them and killed them all. This was the end of the
good Count Don Gonzalo Salvadores, who was so good a knight in battle
that he was called He of the Four Hands. The bodies were ransomed,
seeing that there was no remedy, the Castle being so strong, and Don
Gonzalo was buried in the Monastery of Ona, according as he had
appointed in his will; and the Infante Don Sancho with his forefathers
the Kings of Navarre, in the royal Monastery of Naxara.

XX. Greatly was King Don Alfonso troubled at this villainy, and he sent
for the Cid, who was in those parts; and the Cid came to him with a
great company. And the King told him the great treason which had been
committed, and took the Cid into his favour, and said unto him that he
might return with him into Castille. My Cid thanked him for his bounty,
but he said he never would accept his favour unless the King granted
what he should request; and the King bade him make his demand. And my
Cid demanded, that when any hidalgo should be banished, in time to
come, he should have the thirty days, which were his right, allowed
him, and not nine only, as had been his case; and that neither hidalgo
nor citizen should be proceeded against till they had been fairly and
lawfully heard; also, that the King should not go against the
privileges and charters and good customs of any town or other place,
nor impose taxes upon them against their right; and if he did, that it
should be lawful for the land to rise against him, till he had amended
the misdeed. And to all this the King accorded, and said to my Cid that
he should go back into Castille with him: but my Cid said he would not
go into Castille till he had won that castle of Rueda, and delivered
the villainous Moors thereof into his hands, that he might do justice
upon them. So the King thanked him greatly, and returned into Castille,
and my Cid remained before the Castle of Rueda. And he lay before it so
long, and beset it so close, that the food of the Moors failed, and
they had no strength to defend themselves; and they would willingly
have yielded the castle, so they might have been permitted to leave it
and go whither they would; but he would have their bodies, to deliver
them up to the King. When they saw that it must be so, great part of
them came out, and yielded themselves prisoners; and then my Cid
stormed the Castle, and took Almofalez and they who held with him, so
that none escaped; and he sent him and his accomplices in the treason
to the King. And the King was right glad when they were brought before
him, and he did great justice upon them, and sent to thank my Cid for
having avenged him.

XXI. After my Cid had done this good service to King Don Alfonso, he
and King Zulema of Zaragoza entered Aragon, slaying, and burning, and
plundering before them, and they returned to the Castle of Monzon with
great booty. Then the Cid went into King Abenalfange's country, and did
much mischief there; and he got among the mountains of Moriella, and
beat down every thing before him, and destroyed the Castle of Moriella.
And King Zulema sent to bid him build up the ruined Castle of Alcala,
which is upon Moriella; and the Cid did so. But King Abenalfange being
sorely grieved hereat, sent to King Pedro of Aragon, and besought him
to come and help him against the Campeador. And the King of Aragon
gathered together a great host in his anger, and he and the King of
Denia came against my Cid, and they halted that night upon the banks of
the Ebro; and King Don Pedro sent letters to the Cid, bidding him leave
the castle which he was then edifying. My Cid made answer, that if the
King chose to pass that way in peace, he would let him pass, and show
him any service in his power. And when the King of Aragon saw that he
would not forsake the work, he marched against him, and attacked him.
Then was there a brave battle, and many were slain; but my Cid won the
day, and King Abenalfange fled, and King Don Pedro was taken prisoner,
and many of his Counts and knights with him. My Cid returned to
Zaragoza with this great honour, taking his prisoners with him; and he
set them all freely at liberty, and having tarried in Zaragoza a few
days, set forth for Castille, with great riches and full of honours.

XXII. Having done all these things in his banishment, my Cid returned
to Castille, and the King received him well, and gave him the Castle of
Duenas, and of Orcejon, and Ybia, and Campo, and Gana, and Berviesca,
and Berlanga, with all their districts. And he gave him privileges with
leaden seals appendant, and confirmed with his own hand, that whatever
castles, towns, and places, he might win from the Moors, or from any
one else, should be his own, quit and free for ever, both for him and
for his descendants. Thus was my Cid received into the King's favour,
and he abode with him long time, doing him great services, as his Lord.




BOOK V.


I. In these days King Yahia reigned in Toledo, the grandson of King
Alimaymon, who had been the friend of King Don Alfonso; for Alimaymon
was dead, and his son Hicem also. Now Yahia was a bad King, and one who
walked not in the ways of his fathers. Insolent he was towards the
elders, and cruel towards his people: and his yoke was so heavy that
all men desired to see his death, because there was no good in him. And
the people seeing that he did not protect them, and that their lands
were ravaged safely, went to him and said, Stand up, Sir, for thy
people and thy country, else we must look for some other Lord who will
defend us. But he was of such lewd customs that he gave no heed to
their words. And when they knew that there was no hope of him, the
Moors sent to the King of Badajoz, inviting him to come and be their
protector, saying that they would deliver the city into his hands in
spite of Yahia. And the Muzarabes who dwelt in the city sent to King
Don Alfonso, exhorting him to win Toledo, which he might well do, now
that he was no longer bound by his oath. Then both Kings came, thinking
to have the city: and the King of Badajoz came first, and the gates
were opened to him in despite of Yahia. Howbeit King Don Alfonso
speedily arrived, and the King of Badajoz, seeing that he could not
maintain Toledo against him, retreated, and King Don Aifonso pursued
him into his own dominions and gave orders that he should be attacked
along the whole of his border, and did not leave him till he had
plainly submitted. In this manner was Yahia delivered from the King of
Badajoz; but King Don Alfonso knowing how that city was to be taken,
contented himself with overrunning the country, and despoiling it, even
to the walls of the city; and thus he did for four years, so that he
was master of the land.

II. In all this time did my Cid do good service to King Don Alfonso.
And in these days King Don Alfonso fought at Consuegra with King
Abenalfange of Denia, and in this battle the Christians were defeated,
and Diego Rodriguez, the son of my Cid, was slain. Greatly was his
death lamented by the Christians, for he was a youth of great hope, and
one who was beginning to tread in the steps of his father. And King Don
Alfonso was fain to retire into the Castle of that town. And
Abenalfange gathered together the greatest power of the Moors that he
could, and entered the land of the Christians, and past the mountains,
and came even to Medina del Campo, and there Alvar Fanez Minaya met
him. Minaya had but five and twenty hundred horse with him, and of the
Moors there were fifteen thousand; nevertheless by God's blessing he
prevailed against them. And by the virtue of God Alvar Fanez gave King
Abenalfange a cruel wound in the face, so that he fled away. Great
honour did Minaya win for this victory.

III. Now had King Don Alfonso for many years cut down the bread and the
wine and the fruits in all the country round about Toledo, and he made
ready to go against the city. The tidings of this great enterprise
spread far and wide, and adventurers came from all parts lo be present;
not only they of Castille and Leon, Asturias and Nagera, Galicia and
Portugal, but King Sancho Ramirez of Aragon came also, with the flower
of Aragon and Navarre and Catalonia, and Franks and Germans and
Italians, and men of other countries, to bear their part in so great
and catholic a war. And the King entertained them well, being full
bountiful, insomuch that he was called He of the Open Hand. Never had
so goodly a force of Christians been assembled in Spain, nor so great
an enterprise attempted, since the coming of the Moors. And of this
army was my Cid the leader. So soon as the winter was over they began
their march. And when they came to a ford of the Tagus, behold the
river was swoln, and the best horsemen feared to try the passage. Now
there was a holy man in the camp, by name Lesmes, who was a monk of St.
Benedict's; and he being mounted upon an ass rode first into the ford,
and passed safely through the flood; and all who beheld him held it for
a great miracle.

IV. Greatly to be blamed are they who lived in those days for not
handing down to everlasting remembrance the worthy feats which were
atchieved at this siege. For not only was Toledo a strong city, both by
nature and in its walls and towers, but the flower of the chivalry of
all Spain and of all Christendom was there assembled, and the Moors of
Spain also, knowing that this was, as it were, the heart of their
empire, did all they could to defend it: greatly to be blamed are they
who neglected to transmit to us the memory of their deeds, and greatly
have they wronged the worthy knights whose exploits should else have
gained for them a never-dying renown. Nothing more, owing to their
default, can we say of this so notable a siege, than that when Don
Cabrian, the Bishop of Leon, was earnestly engaged in prayer for the
success of the Christian arms, the glorious St. Isidro appeared unto
him, and certified that in fifteen days the city should be surrendered;
and even so it came to pass, for the gates were opened to the King on
Thursday the twenty-fifth of May, in the year of the aeera 1123, which
is the year of Christ 1085. The first Christian banner which entered
the city was the banner of my Cid, and my Cid was the first Christian
Alcayde of Toledo. Of the terms granted unto the Moors, and how they
were set aside for the honour of the Catholic faith, and of the cunning
of the Jews who dwelt in the city, and how the Romish ritual was
introduced therein, this is not the place to speak; all these things
are written in the Chronicles of the Kings of Spain.

V. Now Yahai, when he saw that he could by no means hold Toledo,
because on the one hand the Moors would give it to the King of Badajoz,
and on the other King Don Alfonso warred against it, he made a covenant
with King Don Alfonso to yield the city to him, if he with the help of
Alvar Fanez would put him in possession of Valencia, which had belonged
unto Hicem and Alimaymon, his fathers, but which the Guazil Abdalla
Azis held now as his own, calling himself King thereof. And he
covenanted that King Don Alfonso should also put into his hand Santa
Maria de Albarrazin, and the kingdom of Denia; and the King assented to
the covenant, thinking that in this manner the land would be all his
own. Yahia therefore sent Abenfarat, who was his cousin, to Valencia,
to spy out what the Guazil would do, whether he would peaceably deliver
up the kingdom unto him, or whether he would oppose his coming, which
he greatly doubted, because it was rumoured that he was about to give
his daughter in marriage to the King of Zaragoza. Abenfarat went his
way, and took up his abode in the house of a Moor who was called
Abenlupo; and while he sojourned there the marriage of the Guazil's
daughter was effected, and the Guazil himself fell sick and died. Then
Abenfarat tarried yet awhile to see what would be the issue, for the
men of Valencia were greatly troubled because of the death of their
King. He left two sons, between whom there was no brotherly love during
his life, and now that he was dead there was less. And they divided
between them all that he had left, even the least thing did they
divide, each being covetous to possess all that he could; and they made
two factions in the town, each striving to possess himself of the power
therein. But the men of Valencia who were not engaged on their side,
and they also who held the castles round about, were greatly troubled
because of this strife which was between them; and they also were
divided between two opinions, they who were of the one wishing to give
the kingdom to the King of Zaragoza, and they who were of the other to
yield themselves unto Yahai the grandson of Alimaymon, because of the
covenant which King Don Alfonso had made with him. When Abenfarat knew
these things he returned unto Yahia, and told him all even as it was;
and Yahia saw that he should have the city, because of the discord
which was therein.

VI. Then Yahia gathered together all his people, knights, and cross-bow
men, and foot-soldiers, and they of his board, and the officers of his
household which are the eunuchs; and he set forward on the way toward
Valencia, and Alvar Fanez and his body of Christians with him. And he
sent to the townsmen greeting them, and saying that he was coming to
dwell among them and to be their King, and that he would deal
bountifully by them; and that he should wait awhile in the town which
was called Sera. The chief men of the town took counsel together what
they should do, and at length they agreed to receive him for their
Lord; and this they did more in fear of King Don Alfonso and of Alvar
Fanez than for any love towards him. This answer they sent him by
Aboeza the Alcayde. Now Aboeza would fain have departed from Valencia
when the Guazil Abdalla Azis died, because of the strife which was in
the city, and he thought to betake himself to his own Castle of
Monviedro and dwell there, away from the troubles which were to come.
Upon this purpose he took counsel with his friend Mahomed Abenhayen the
Scribe, for there was great love between them; and when the Scribe
heard what he purposed to do he was grieved thereat, and represented
unto him that it was not fitting for him to forsake the city at such a
time, so that Aboeza was persuaded. And they twain covenanted one to
the other, to love and defend each other against all the men in the
world, and to help each other with their persons and possessions; and
Aboeza sent trusty men of his kinsfolk and friends to keep the Castles
of Monviedo and Castro and Santa Cruz, and other Castles which were in
his possession, and he himself abode in Valencia. And now he went out
to Yahia to give unto him the keys of the city, and the good men of the
city went out with him, and they made obeisance to him and promised to
serve him loyally. Then Yahia, the grandson of Alimaymon, set forth
with all his company from Sera, and all the people of Valencia, high
and low, went out to meet him with great rejoicings. And Aboeza adorned
the Alcazar right nobly, that Yahia and his women and they of his
company might lodge within. The most honourable of his knights took up
their lodging in the town, and the cross-bow men and others of low
degree lodged round about the Alcazar, and in certain dwellings which
were between it and the Mosque, and Alvar Fanez and the Christians who
were with him, in the village which was called Ruzaf.

VII. Yahia being now King in Valencia, made Aboeza his Guazil, and gave
him authority throughout all his kingdom. Nevertheless he bore
displeasure against him in his heart, because he had served Abdalla
Azis; and on his part also Aboeza secretly feared the King, and knew
not whether it were better to depart from him, or not; howbeit he
thought it best to remain and serve him right loyally and well, that so
he might win his good will; and when the King perceived this, his anger
abated and was clean put out of mind. And he made Aboeza his favourite,
and made a vow unto him and confirmed it by a writing, that he would
never take away his favour from him, nor change him for another, nor do
any thing in his dominions without him. With this was Aboeza satisfied,
and the fear which he felt in his heart was removed. And they who held
the castles brought great gifts to Yahia, with much humility and
reverence, such as the Moors know how to put on. This they did to set
his heart at rest, that he might confide in them, and send away Alvar
Fanez into his own country, and not keep him and his people at so great
a charge, for it cost them daily six hundred maravedis, and the King
had no treasure in Valencia, neither was he so rich that he could
support his own company and supply this payment; and for this reason
the Moors complained of the great cost. But on the other hand, Yahia
feared that if he should send away Alvar Fanez, the Moors would rise
against him; and to maintain him he laid a great tax upon the city and
its district, saying that it was for barley. This tax they levied upon
the rich as well as the poor, and upon the great as well as the little,
which they held to be a great evil and breach of their privileges, and
thought that by his fault Valencia would be lost, even as Toledo had
been. This tribute so sorely aggrieved the people, that it became as it
were a bye word in the city, Give the barley. They say there was a
great mastiff, with whom they killed beef in the shambles, who,
whenever he heard, 'Give the barley,'began to bark and growl: upon
which a Trobador said, Thanks be to God, we have many in the town who
are like the mastiff.

VIII. When they who held the Castles sent presents to King Yahia, there
was one among them, by name Abenmazot, who held Xativa, who neither
sent him gifts, nor came to offer obedience. And the King sent to bid
him come before him. But then Abenmazot sent a messenger with letters
and full rich presents, saying that he could by no means come himself,
and this not from any feigning, and that he would alway do him service
with a true good will. And he besought him as his Lord to let him
remain in Xativa, and he would give him the rents thereof; but if it
was his pleasure to appoint some other in his stead, he besought that
he would then give him something for himself and his company to subsist
upon, seeing that he desired nothing but the King's favour to be well
with him. Then the King took counsel with Aboeza the Guazil, and the
Guazil advised him to do unto Abenmazot even as he had requested, and
let him keep Xativa; and to send away Alvar Fanez because of the great
charge it was to maintain him, and to live in peace, and put his
kingdom in order; in all which he advised him like a good counsellor
and a true. But the King would not give heed to him; instead thereof he
communicated his counsel to the two sons of Abdalla Azis who had
submitted unto him, and whom he had taken into his favour, and they
told him that Aboeza had advised him ill, and that it behoved him to
lead out his host and bring Abenmazot to obedience. And the King
believed them and went out and besieged Xativa. And the first day he
entered the lower part of the town, but Abenmazot retired to the
Alcazar and the fortresses, and defended the upper part; and the King
besieged him there for four months, attacking him every day, till food
began to fail both in the army of the King and in the town. And they of
Valencia could not supply what was to be paid to Alvar Fanez and his
company, much less what the King wanted. Then the King understood that
he had been ill advised, and for this reason he condemned one of the
sons of Abdalla Azis to pay Alvar Fanez for thirty days; and he seized
a Jew who was one of his Almoxarifes in Valencia, that is to say, one
who collected the taxes, and took from him all that he had, because he
had advised him ill, and while this lasted the people of Valencia had
some respite.

IX. When Abenmazot saw that the King was bent upon destroying him, and
that every day he prest him more and more, he sent to Abenalfange who
was King of Denia and Tortosa, saying, that if he would come and help
him, he would make him Lord of Xativa and of all his other Castles, and
would be at his mercy; and this he did to escape from the hands of
Yahia. When Abenalfange heard this it pleased him well, and he sent one
of his Alcaydes, who was called the Left-handed, to enter the Alcazar,
and help to defend it till he could collect a company of Christians who
might deal with Alvar Fanez. So that Left-handed one entered the
Alcazar with his company, and the Lord of the Castle which was called
Almenar, was already there to help Abenmazot, and encourage him that he
should not submit. Then Abenalfange gathered together all his host and
his cavalry, and brought with him Giralte the Roman, with a company of
French knights, and came towards Xativa, as a hungry lion goes against
a sheep, or like the coming of a flood in its hour; so that Vahia was
dismayed at the tidings of his approach, and fled as fast as he could
to the Isle of Xucar, and though that Isle was so near, he thought he
had done a great thing; and from thence he went to Valencia, holding
himself greatly dishonoured. Then Abenalfange had Xativa and all its
Castles, so that it was all one kingdom as far as Denia. And he took
Abenmazot with all his women and his household and all that he had, to
Denia, and gave him possessions there, and did him much honour. And
when it was seen that King Yahia was thus dishonoured, and that Alvar
Fanez had not helped him as had been looked for, they who held the
Castles lost all fear of him, so that their hearts were changed towards
him, as well they of Valencia as of the other Castles, and they said
that they would rather belong to Abenalfange than to him, because the
town could not bear the charge of the Christians, nor the oppressions
which they suffered because of them.

X. Abenalfange abode some days in Xativa, and then moved on towards
Valencia, thinking to win the city; for he knew how greatly the people
were oppressed because of the Christians, and that they could not bear
it, and that there was no love between them and their Lord. And he
passed by a place which was an oratory of the Moors in their festivals,
which they call in Arabic Axera, or Araxea; and he halted near
Valencia, so that they in the town might see him, and he went round
about the town, to the right and to the left, wheresoever he would. The
King of Valencia with his knights was near the wall watching him, and
Alvar Fanez and his company were in readiness lest the French should
defy them. And after Abenalfange had staid their awhile he drew off and
went his way to Tortosa. And Yahia was perplexed with Alvar Fanez, and
sought for means to pay him, and he threw the two sons of Abdalla Azis
into prison, and many other good men of the town also, and took from
them great riches. Then he made a covenant with Alvar Fanez, that he
should remain with him, and gave him great possessions. And when the
Moors saw that Alvar Fanez was in such power, all the ruffians and lewd
livers in the town flocked unto him, so that Valencia was in the hands
of him and his followers; and the Moors being desperate of remedy
deserted the town, and went whither they could, setting at nought their
inheritances, for no man was safe, neither in his goods nor person.
Then Alvar Fanez made an inroad into the lands of Abenalfange, and
overran the lands of Buriana, and other parts; and there went with him
a great company of those Moorish desperadoes who had joined him, and of
other Moorish Almogavares, and they stormed towns and castles, and slew
many Moors, and brought away flocks and herds both of cattle and of
brood mares, and much gold and silver, and store of wearing apparel,
all which they sold in Valencia.

XI. Now when one of the sons of Abdalla Azis was loosed from prison, he
placed his love upon Alvar Fanez and gave him goodly gifts, and upon
Aboeza the King's Guazil, and upon a Jew who was a messenger from King
Don Alfonso. And they all sent to King Don Alfonso to beseech him that
he would take the son of Abdalla Azis and all that he had under his
protection, so that Yahia might do no evil unto him, neither take by
force from him anything that was his; and for this protection he
promised to give the King thirty thousand maravedis yearly. This
request King Don Alfonso granted, and incontinently he took him under
his protection, and sent to the King of Valencia to request that he
would do him no wrong. Therefore the son of Abdalla Azis was from that
time held in more honour because of the love of King Don Alfonso;
nevertheless he was still kept under a guard in his own house, that he
should not issue forth. And because of this confinement not thinking
himself safe, he made a hole through the wall and got out by night in
woman's apparel, and lay hid all the next day in a garden, and on the
following night mounted on horseback and rode to Monviedro. When the
Guazil knew this he took his son and his uncle as sureties for him for
the thirty thousand maravedis, which the Jew was now come to receive
for King Don Alfonso. And they went to Monviedro to him, and communed
with him, and accorded with him that he should pay the one-half
immediately, and whenever he returned to Valencia and was safe there in
possession of all his rents and inheritances, that then he should pay
the remainder; so he paid the fifteen thousand forthwith in silver, and
in rings of gold, and in cloth, and in strings of pearls, and the Jew
returned therewith to King Don Alfonso. At this time his brother was
released from prison by desire of the King of Zaragoza, and he went
unto him; and many of the rich men of the city also betook themselves
to Monviedro, because they were not secure neither in their possessions
nor in their bodies.

XII. In these days the Almoravides arose in Barbary. The rise of this
people and all that they did in Spain are not for me to relate in this
place. Suffice it to say, that King Don Alfonso being in great danger,
sent for Alvar Fanez and all his company; and that he had so much to do
for himself that he took no thought for Valencia. And when they who had
the keeping of Yahia's Castles saw this they rose against him, so that
few remained unto him, and they of his vassals in whom he put the most
trust proved false, so that the heart of the King of Denia and Tortosa
grew, and he thought to win Valencia. The chief persons of the town
also sent unto him, saying that if he would come they would give the
city into his hands. So he gathered together his host, and a company of
French also, and sent them forward under the command of his uncle,
saying that he would follow and join them on a certain day. But they
went forward, and Yahia thinking that if he could conquer them he
should be secure, went out and fought against them; and he was defeated
and lost a great part of his people and of his arms, and returned into
the city with great loss. When Abenalfange, who was a day's journey
off, heard this, he marched all night, and came before Valencia. And
King Yahia knew not what to do, and was minded to yield up the town.
And he took counsel with his people, and they advised him to send for
help to King Don Alfonso, and also to the King of Zaragoza, and he did
accordingly. And an Arrayaz of Cuenca, whose name was Abencano, who was
a native of Valencia, went to Zaragoza, and told the King that if he
would go thither he would deliver the city into his hands, for it
appertained unto him rather than to Abenalfange.

XIII. And in those days my Cid gathered together a great force, and
went to the borders of Aragon, and crost the Douro, and lodged that
night in Fresno. From thence he went to Calamocha, where he kept
Whitsuntide. While he lay there the King of Albarrazin, being in great
fear of him, sent to him requesting that they might meet. And when they
saw each other they established great love between them, and the King
from that day became tributary to the Cid. Then the Cid went to
Zaragoza, where he tas full honourably received. And when Abencano came
to Zaragoza inviting King Almescahen to go and take Valencia, and King
Yahia sent also to beg succour at his hands, the King asked the Cid to
go with him, and gave him whatever he demanded. So greatly did this
King desire to have Valencia, that he looked not whether his force was
great or little, nor whether that of the Cid was greater than his own,
but went on as fast as he could. When the King of Denia heard that he
was coming and the Cid with him, he durst not abide them. And he
thought that the King of Zaragoza by the Cid's help would win the city,
and that he should remain with the labour he had undergone, and the
cost. Then he placed his love upon King Yahia, and sent him all the
food he had, and besought him to help him, saying that he would supply
him with whatever he needed. King Yahia was well pleased with this,
though he well understood the reason, and firm writings were made to
this effect, and then Abenalfange went to Tortosa.

XIV. And when the King of Zaragoza and the Cid drew nigh unto Valencia,
Yahia went out to Welcome them, and thanked them greatly for coming to
his assistance; and he lodged them in the great garden, which was
called the Garden of Villa Nueva, and honoured them greatly and sent
them great presents, and he invited them afterwards to come with their
honourable men and be his guests in the Alcazar. But the King of
Zaragoza all this while had his eye upon the town, thinking that it
would be given up to him as Abencano had promised; but he saw no sign
of this, neither knew he how he could win it. Moreover Yahia had placed
his love upon the Cid, and had sent him full noble gifts when he was
upon the road, in secret, so that the King of Zaragoza knew not
thereof. And the King of Zaragoza asked counsel of the Cid how he might
get Valencia into his hands, and besought the Cid to help him. But the
Cid made answer, how could that be, seeing that Yahia had received it
from the hands of King Don Alfonso, who had given it unto him that he
might dwell therein. If indeed King Don Alfonso should give it to the
King of Zaragoza, then might the King win it, and he would help him so
to do; otherwise he must be against him. When the King heard this he
perceived how the Cid stood in this matter, and he left an Alcayde with
a body of knights to assist King Yahia, and also to see if he could win
the town; and he himself returned to Zaragoza.

XV. Then the Cid went to besiege the Castle called Xerica, by advice of
the King of Zaragoza, that he might have a frontier against Monviedro.
This he did because, when the King came to relieve Valencia, Aboeza had
covenanted to give up Monviedro unto him, the which he had not done;
and the King thought that if he made war upon these Castles they must
either yield unto him, or be at his mercy, because they did not belong
to the King of Denia. But when Aboeza knew this he sent to Abenalfange
the King of Denia, saying that he would give him the Castle; and the
King of Denia incontinently came and took possession of it, and Aboeza
became his vassal. When the Cid saw this he understood that Valencia
must needs be lost, and thought in his heart that he could win the city
for himself, and keep it. Then sent he letters to King Don Alfonso, in
which he besought him of his mercy not to think it ill that the people
who were with him should remain with him, for he would do God service,
and maintain them at the cost of the Moors, and whensoever the King
stood in need of their service, he and they would go unto him and serve
him freely; and at other times they would make war upon the Moors, and
break their power, so that the King might win the land. Well was King
Don Alfonso pleased at this, and he sent to say that they who were in
the Cid's company might remain with him, and that as many as would
might go join him. And my Cid went to the King to commune with him, and
while my Cid was with him, Don Ramon Berenguer, Lord of Barcelona, came
to Zaragoza; and the King gave him great gifts, that he might not place
his love upon any other for want; for the King had now put away his
love from the Cid, thinking that because of him he had lost Valencia.
And presently he sent a force to besiege Valencia under Don Ramon
Berenguer; and he had two Bastilles built, one in Liria, which King
Yahia had given him when he came to relieve him, and the other in
Juballa, and he thought to build another on the side of Albuhera, so
that none might enter into the city, neither go out from it. And he
re-edified the Castle of Cebolla, that the Count might retire thither
if it should be needful; and every day the Count attacked the city, and
King Yahia defended himself, looking for the coming of the Cid to help
him, according to the covenant which was between them.

XVI. When the Cid returned from Castille and knew that Valencia was
besieged by the French, he went to Tares, which is near Monviedro, and
encamped there with his people, who were many in number. And when the
Count knew that the Cid was so near, he feared him, holding him to be
his enemy. And the Cid sent to him to bid him move from that place and
raise the siege of Valencia. The Count took counsel with his knights,
and they said that they would rather give battle to the Cid. Howbeit
the Cid had no wish to fight with them, because the Count was related
to King Don Alfonso, and moreover he had defeated him and made him
prisoner heretofore: so he sent a second time, bidding him depart. And
the Count seeing that he could not abide there in the Cid's despite,
broke up the siege and went his way by Requena, for he would not pass
through Zaragoza. Then the Cid went to Valencia, and King Yahia
received him full honourably, and made a covenant with him to give him
weekly four thousand maravedis of silver, and he on his part was to
reduce the Castles to his obedience, so that they should pay the same
rents unto him as had been paid unto the former Kings of Valencia; and
that the Cid should protect him against all men, Moors or Christians,
and should have his home in Valencia, and bring all his booty there to
be sold, and that he should have his granaries there. This covenant was
confirmed in writing, so that they were secure on one side and on the
other. And my Cid sent to all those who held the Castles, commanding
them to pay their rents to the King of Valencia as they had done
aforetime, and they all obeyed his command, every one striving to have
his love.

XVII. When, the Cid had thus set the land in order he went against the
King of Denia, and warred against Denia and against Xativa, and he
abode there all the winter, doing great hurt, insomuch that there did
not remain a wall standing from Orihuela to Xativa, for he laid every
thing waste; and all his booty and his prisoners he sold in Valencia,
Then he went towards Tortosa, destroying every thing as he went; and he
pitched his camp near unto the city of Tortosa, in a place which in
Arabic is called Maurelet, and he cut down every thing before him,
orchards and vines and corn. When King Abenalfange saw that the land
was thus destroyed, and that neither bread, nor wine, nor flocks would
be left him, he sent to Count Ramon Berenguer, beseeching him to gather
together a great force, and drive the Cid out of the land, for which
service he would give him whatever he might stand in need of. And the
Count, thinking now to be revenged of the Cid for his former defeat,
and because he had taken from him the rents which he used to receive
from the land of Valencia, took what the King gave him, and assembled a
great host of the Christians. This was so great a power when the Moors
had joined, that they surely thought the Cid would fly before them; for
the Moors held that these Frenchmen were the best knights in the world,
and the best appointed, and they who could bear the most in battle.
When the Cid knew that they came resolved to fight him, he doubted that
he could not give them battle because of their great numbers, and
sought how he might wisely disperse them. And he got among the mountain
values, whereunto the entrance was by a narrow strait, and there he
planted his barriers, and guarded them well that the Frenchmen might
not enter. The King of Zaragoza sent to tell him to be upon his guard,
for Count Ramon Berenguer would without doubt attack him: and the Cid
returned for answer, Let him come. On the morrow the Count came nearer,
and encamped a league off, in sight of him, and when it was night he
sent his spies to view the camp of Ruydiez the Cid. The next day he
sent to bid him come out and fight, and the Cid answered, That he did
not want to fight nor to have any strife with him, but to pass on with
his people. And they drew nearer and invited him to come out, and
defied him, saying that he feared to meet them in the field; but he set
nothing by all this. They thought he did it because of his weakness,
and that he was afraid of them: but what he did was to wear out their
patience.

XVIII. Then the Count sent a letter to the Cid after this fashion: I
Count Don Ramon Berenguer of Barcelona, and all my vassals with me, say
unto thee, Ruydiez, that we have seen thy letter to King Almescahen of
Zaragoza, which thou toldest him to show unto us, that we might have
the more cause of quarrel against thee. Before this thou hast done
great displeasure unto us, so that we ought at all times to bear ill
will against thee. And now while thou hast our goods in thy possession
as booty, thou sendest thy letter to King Almescahen, saying that we
are like our wives. God give us means to show thee that we are not
such. And thou saidst unto him, that before we could be with thee thou
wouldst come to us; now we will not alight from our horses till we have
taken vengeance on thee, and seen what sort of Gods these mountain
crows and daws are, in whom thou puttest thy trust to fight with us;
whereas we believe in one God alone, who will give us vengeance against
thee. Of a truth, to-morrow morning we will be with thee, and if thou
wilt leave the mountain and come out to us in the plain, then wilt thou
be, as they call thee, Rodrigo the Campeador. But if thou wilt not do
this, thou wilt then be what according to the custom of Castille is
called _alevoso_, and _bauzador_ according to the custom of France;
that is to say, a false traitor. And if thou wilt not come down from
the mountain it shall not avail thee, for we will not depart from hence
till we have thee in our hands, either dead or alive, and we will deal
with thee as thou hast done by us, and God in his mercy now take
vengeance upon thee for his churches which thou hast destroyed.

XIX. When the Cid had read this letter he wrote another in reply after
this manner: I Ruydiez and my vassals: God save you Count! I have seen
your letter in which you tell me that I sent one to King Almescahen of
Zaragoza speaking contumeliously of you and of all your vassals; and
true it is that I did so speak, and I will tell you for what reason.
When you were with him you spake contumeliously of me before him,
saying of me the worst you could, and affirming that I did not dare
enter the lands of Abenalfange for fear of you. Moreover Ramon de
Bajaran, and other of your knights who were with him, spake ill of me
and of my vassals before King Don Alfonso of Castille, and you also
after this went to King Don Alfonso, and said that you would have
fought with me, and driven me out of the lands of Abenalfange, but that
I was dismayed, and did not dare do battle with you; and you said unto
him, that if it had not been for the love of him, you would not have
suffered me to be one day in the land. Now then I say that I thank you
because you no longer let me alone for the love of him. Come! here I
am; this is the plainest ground among these mountains, and I am ready
to receive you. But I know you dare not come, for Moors and Christians
know that I conquered you once, and took you and your vassals, and took
from ye all that ye had with ye: and if ye come now ye shall receive
the same payment at my hands as heretofore. As for what thou sayest
that I am a false traitor, thou lyest, and art a false traitor thyself.

XX. Greatly was the Count enraged when he read this letter, and he took
counsel with his vassals, and in the night time took possession of the
mountain above the camp of the Cid, thinking that by this means he
might conquer him. On the morrow the Cid sent away certain of his
company as if they were flying, and bade them go by such ways that the
French might see them, and instructed them what to say when they should
be taken. When the French saw them, they pursued and took them, and
carried them before the Count, and he asked of them what the Cid would
do. Then made they answer that he meant to fly, and had only remained
that day to put his things in order for flight, and as soon as night
came he would make his escape by way of the mountain. Moreover they
said that the Cid did not think Count Ramon had it so much at heart to
give him battle, or he would not have awaited till his coming; and they
counselled the Count to send and take possession of the passes by which
he meant to escape, for so he might easily take him. Then the Frenchmen
divided their host into four parts, and sent them to guard the passes,
and the Count himself remained with one part at the entrance of the
straits. The Cid was ready with all his company, and he had sent the
Moors who were with him forward to the passes whither his men had
directed the Frenchmen, and they lay in ambush there; and when the
Frenchmen were in the strong places, and had begun to ascend, little by
little, as they could, they rose upon them from the ambush and slew
many, and took others of the best, and among the prisoners was
Guirabent, the brother of Giralte the Roman, who was wounded in the
face. And the Cid went out and attacked the Count, and the battle was a
hard one; the Count was beaten from his horse, nevertheless his men
remounted him, and he bade them stand to it bravely; and the battle
lasted long time; but at the end, he who was never conquered won the
day. And the Cid took a good thousand prisoners; among them was Don
Bernalte de Tamaris, and Giralte the Roman, and Ricarte Guillen. And he
put them all in irons, and reproached them saying, that he well knew
what his chivalry was, and his hardihood, and that he should thus beat
them all down; and he said to them that he was in God's service, taking
vengeance for the ills which the Moors had done unto the Christians,
and had done them no wrong; but they being envious of him, had come to
help the Moors, therefore God had helped him, because he was in his
service. And he took their tents, and their horses, and their arms,
which were many and good; and much gold and silver, and fine linen, and
all that they had, so that he and all his company were rich men with
the spoils. And when Count Ramon heard in his flight, that the Cid had
taken all his chief captains, and that well nigh all his power was
either slain or taken, he thought it best to come unto the Cid and
trust unto his mercy, and he came full humbly and put himself into his
hands. And the Cid received him full well and honoured him greatly, and
let him go into his own country. And the Count offered a price for the
prisoners which was a full great ransom, and moreover the swords
precious above all others, which were made in other times. Bountiful
was the Cid when he received this ransom, and great part of it he
returned unto them again, and showed them great courtesy, and they did
homage to him never to come against him with any man in the world.

XXI. When Abenalfange the King of Denia and Tortosa heard this, he was
so sorely grieved that he fell sick and died. He left one son who was a
little one, and the sons of Buxar were his guardians. One of these held
Tortosa for the child, and the other held Xativa, and one who was their
cousin held Denia. And they knowing that they could neither live in
peace, nor yet have strength for war, unless they could have the love
of the Cid, sent humbly to say unto him that if he would do no hurt to
their lands they would do whatever he pleased, and pay him yearly what
he should think good. And the Cid demanded of them fifty thousand
maravedis of silver, every year: and the covenant was made between
them, and the whole country from Tortosa to Orihuela was under his
protection and at his command. And he fixed the tribute which each
Castle was to pay, that it should be certain; and it was as you shall
be told. The Lord of Albarrazin was to pay ten thousand, according to
covenant as you heard heretofore, and the Lord of Alfuente ten
thousand, and Monviedro eight thousand, and Segorbe six thousand, and
Xerica four thousand, and Almenara three thousand. Liria at that time
paid nothing, for it was in the Lordship of Zaragoza; but the Cid had
it in his heart to fight with that King. For every thousand maravedis a
hundred more were paid for a Bishop, whom the Moors called Alat
Almarian. And you are to know that whatever my Cid commanded in
Valencia was done, and whatever he forbad was forbidden. And because
the King was sick of a malady which continued upon him long time, so
that he could not mount on horseback, and was seen by none, Valencia
remained under the command of his Guazil Abenalfarax, whom the Cid had
appointed. And then the Cid appointed trusty men in the city who should
know to how much the rents amounted, as well those of the land as of
the sea; and in every village he placed a knight to protect it, so that
none dared do wrong to another, nor take any thing from him. Each of
these knights had three maravedis daily. And the people complained
greatly of what they gave these knights, and of that also which they
paid to King Yahia. Yet were they withal abundantly supplied with
bread, and with flocks which the Christians brought in, and with
captives both male and female, and with Moorish men and women, who gave
great sums for their ransom.

XXII. Then the Cid sent to the King of Zaragoza, bidding him yield up
the Bastilles which he had built against Valencia; and the King
returned for answer that he would not until King Yahia had paid him the
whole cost which he had been at, when he came to his succour against
King Abenalfange. Then the Cid besieged Liria, and the people submitted
unto him, that they should pay him yearly two thousand maravedis. And
he overran the whole of the King of Zaragoza's country, and brought
great spoils to Valencia. Now at this time a Moor called Ali Abenaxa,
the Adelantado of the Almoravides, that is to say, of the Moors from
beyond sea, came with a great power of the Moors of Andalusia to
besiege the Castle of Aledo. This he did because he knew that King Don
Alfonso would come to its relief, and he thought that peradventure the
King would bring with him so small a force that he might slay or take
him. But when the King heard of it he assembled a great host, and sent
to the Cid, bidding him come and aid him. And the Cid went to Requena,
believing that he should meet the King there; but the King went another
way, and the Cid not knowing this tarried some days in Requena
expecting him, because that was the road. And when the Moors knew that
King Don Alfonso was coming with so great a host to relieve the Castle,
they departed, flying. And King Don Alfonso came to the Castle, and
when he came there he found that he was short of victuals, and returned
in great distress for want of food, and lost many men and many beasts
who could not pass the Sierra. Nevertheless he supplied the Castle well
with arms, and with such food as he could.

XXIII. Now they who hated the Cid spake leasing of him to King Don
Alfonso, saying that he had tarried in Requena, knowing that the King
was gone another way, that so he might give the Moors opportunity to
fall upon him. And the King believed them, and was wroth against the
Cid, and ordered all that he had in Castille to be taken from him, and
sent to take his wife, and his daughters. When the Cid heard this he
sent presently a knight to the King to defend himself, saying, that if
there were Count or Rico-ome or knight who would maintain that he had a
better and truer will to do the King service than he had, he would do
battle with him body to body, but the King being greatly incensed would
not hear him. And when they who hated the Cid saw this, and knew that
the Cid was gone against a Castle near Zaragoza, they besought the King
to give them force to go against him; howbeit this the King would not.
At this time Ali Abenaxa, the Adelantado of the Almoravides, besieged
Murcia, and there was a dearth in the city, and Alvar Fanez who should
have relieved them did not, and they were so closely beset that they
were compelled to yield up the town. As soon as he had taken Murcia he
went against the Castle of Aledo, of which you have heard, and
assaulted it vigorously, and took it by force and by famine. And when
he had won Murcia and Aledo, he wished to have Valencia also, and they
of Valencia, because of the yoke of the Cid, longed to be his vassals,
even as the sick man longeth after health. When King Don Alfonso heard
what Ali Abenaxa had done, he made ready to go against him. And the
Queen his wife, and certain knights who were friends to the Cid, wrote
to him that he should now come and serve the King in such a season,
that the King might thank him greatly and lay aside his wrath. Having
seen these letters the Cid set out from Zaragoza where he was, and went
his way with a great host, and advanced as far as Martos, where he
found the King. And the King received him honourably, and they
continued together till the King passed the Sierra de Elvira, and the
Cid went in the plain below before him. And they who wished ill to him
said to the King, The Cid came after you like one who was wearied, and
now he goes before you. And after this manner they set the King again
against him, so that his displeasure was greatly moved. And the Moors
did not venture to give him battle, but left the Castle of Aledo and
retreated to Murcia, and the King returned to Ubeda. And when the Cid
saw that the heart of the King was changed, he returned to Valencia,
and the King went back to Toledo.

XXIV. After this King Don Alfonso drew forth a great host and went
towards Valencia, and sent to all the Castles in that land, saying that
for five years they should pay him the tribute which they were wont to
pay unto the Cid. When the Cid knew this he sent to the King, saying,
he marvelled why the King should thus seek to dishonour him, and that
he trusted in God soon to make him know how ill he was advised by those
about him. And presently the Cid gathered together a full great host
both of Moors and of Christians, and entered the land of King Don
Alfonso, burning and destroying whatever he found, and he took Logrono,
and Alfaro also, and sacked it. While he was at Alfaro, Count Garci
Ordonez and certain other Ricos-omes of Castille sent to say to him,
that if he would tarry for them seven days, they would come and give
him battle. He tarried for them twelve days, and they did not dare to
come; and when the Cid saw this he returned to Zaragoza. Now when King
Don Alfonso knew what the Cid had done in his land, and that the
Ricos-omes had not dared fight against him, he saw that he had taken an
evil counsel when he set his heart against him. And he sent his letters
to the Cid saying, that he forgave him all that he had done, seeing
that he himself had given the occasion; and he besought him to come to
Castille, where he should find all things free which appertained unto
him. Much was the Cid rejoiced at these tidings, and he wrote to the
King thanking him for his grace, and beseeching him not to give ear to
bad counsellors, for he would alway be at his service.

XXV. Now it came to pass, that by reason of certain affairs the Cid
tarried a long time in Zaragoza. And they of Valencia being no longer
kept in awe by his presence, complained one to another of the
oppressions and wrongs which they endured from him and from his
servants, and from Abenalfarax, the Guazil whom he had appointed; and
they conspired with an Alcayde who was called Abeniaf. And when
Abenalfarax the Guazil understood how Abeniaf cast about to disturb the
peace of the city, he would have taken him and cast him in prison; but
this he dared not do till the Cid should come, and moreover he weened
that upon his coming the disturbance would cease. Now Abeniaf knew that
the Guazil was minded to seize him if he could have dared so to do, and
he sent his messengers to Ali Abenaxa the Adelantado of the
Almoravides, who was now Lord of Murcia, telling him to come to
Valencia, and he would deliver the city into his hands. Moreover he
took counsel with the Alcayde of Algezira de Xucar, that the Alcayde
also should send to Ali Abenaxa, exhorting him to make good speed
himself, or to send an Alcayde with a fitting power, and to come to
Algezira, which was near, and then presently proceed to Valencia. So
soon as Ali Abenaxa had received this message he made speed to come,
and as many Castles as were upon his road submitted unto him. When the
Alcayde of Denia heard of his coming, and that all these Castles had
submitted, he durst not abide there, but fled to Xativa; and Ali
Abenaxa took possession of Denia, and he sent his Alcayde to Algezira
de Xucar, and took possession of that also. When these tidings came to
Valencia, the Bishop who was there, and the forty knights who were with
the messenger of the King of Aragon because of the friendship between
their King and the Cid, and all the other Christians who were in the
city, would no longer abide there, but took of their goods each as much
as he could, and went away in fear. And the Guazil was greatly
dismayed, neither knew he what course to take, and Yahia, the King,
though he was now healed of his malady, neither mounted on horseback,
nor appeared abroad. Abenalfarax went unto him and told him the peril
in which they stood. And their counsel was, that they should remove all
that they had from Valencia and go to the Castle of Segorbe. Then they
sent away many beasts laden with goods and with riches, under the care
of a nephew of the Guazil and many others, to the Castle of Benaecab,
that is to say, the Castle of the Eagle, to be in charge of the Alcayde
thereof. And the King and the Guazil bestirred themselves and gathered
together foot-soldiers and cross-bow men to defend the Alcazar, and
sent speedily to Zaragoza, telling the Cid to come; but he could not
set forth so speedily as need was; and the stir which was in the city
endured for full twenty days. Then that Alcayde of Ali Abenaxa who was
in Algezira de Xucar set forward in the first of the night with twenty
horsemen of the Almoravides, and as many more of Algezira, all clad
alike in green, that they might all be taken for Almoravides; and they
came by day-break to Valencia, to the gate of Tudela, and sounded their
drums, and the rumour in the town was that there were full five hundred
knights of the Almoravides, and the Guazil was in great fear. And he
went to the Alcazar to take counsel with the King, and they gave order
that the gates of the town should be barred, and that the walls should
be manned.

XXVI. Then the King's soldiers went to the house of Abeniaf the Alcayde
who had sent for the Almoravides, and called unto him to come forth
that they might take him before the King; but he was trembling in great
fear, and would not come out. And the men of the town came to his help,
and when he saw the company that were on his side, he came forth and
went with them to the Alcazar, and entered it and took the Guazil of
the Cid. And the townsmen ran to the gates and drove away those of the
King's party who guarded them; and they strove to beat the gates down,
but they could not, and they set fire to them and burnt them. And
others let down ropes from the walls, and drew up the Almoravides. King
Yahia put on woman's apparel, and fled with his women, and hid himself
in a dwelling near unto a bath. And the Almoravides took possession of
the Alcazar, and plundered it. One Christian they slew who guarded the
gates, and another who was of St. Maria de Albarrazin, who guarded one
of the towers of the wall. In this manner was Valencia lost.

XXVII. Now when Abeniaf saw that all the people were on his side, and
obeyed him, his heart grew and he was puffed up, insomuch that he
despised those who were as good as himself or better. Albeit he was of
good parentage, for his fathers before him had all been Alcaydes ever
since Valencia was in the hands of the Moors. And because he knew that
the King had not fled out of the town, he made search for him, and
found him in the house where he had hidden himself with his women. Now
the King when he fled from the Alcazar had taken with him the best of
his treasures, pearls, among which was one the most precious and noble
that could be, so that nowhere was there a better one to be found, nor
so good; and precious stones, sapphires and rubies and emeralds; he had
with him a casket of pure gold full of these things; and in his girdle
he had hidden a string of precious stones and of pearls, such that no
King had so rich and precious a thing as that carkanet. They say that
in former times it had belonged to Queen Seleyda, who was wife to
Abanarrexit King of Belcab, which is beyond sea; and afterwards it had
come to the Kings called Benivoyas, who were Lords of Andalusia; after
that King Alimaymon of Toledo possessed it, and gave it to his wife,
and she gave it to the wife of her son, who was the mother of this
Yahia. Greatly did Abeniaf covet these treasures and this carkanet, and
incontinently he thought in his heart that he might take them and none
know thereof, which could no ways be done unless he slew King Yahia.
When therefore it was night he gave order to cut off his head, and to
throw it into a pond near the house in which he had been taken. This
was done accordingly, and Abeniaf took the treasures, and they who were
set over King Yahia to guard him and murder him, took also each what he
could, and concealed it. And the body lay where it had been slain till
the following day; but then a good man who grieved for the death of his
Lord took it up, and laid it upon the cords of a bed, and covered it
with an old horsecloth, and carried it out of the town, and made a
grave for it in a place where camels were wont to lie, and buried it
there, without gravecloaths and without any honours whatsoever, as if
the corpse had been the corpse of a villain.




BOOK VI.


I. When Abeniaf had slain his Lord, as you have heard, he became
haughty like a King, and gave no thought to anything save to building
his own houses, and setting guards round about them by day and by
night; and he appointed secretaries who should write his secret
letters, and chose out a body from among the good men of the city to be
his guard. And when he rode out he took with him many knights and
huntsmen, all armed, who guarded him like a King; and when he went
through the streets the women came out to gaze at him, and shouted and
rejoiced in him; and he being elated and puffed up with these vanities,
demeaned himself in all things after the manner of a King. This he did
for the sake of abasing a certain kinsman of his, who was chief
Alcayde, and who was better and wiser than he. Moreover he made no
account of the Alcayde of the Almoravides who held the Alcazar, neither
took counsel with him concerning anything, and he gave no heed to him
except to supply him and his company with their charges, which he did
right sparingly.

II. But when King Yahia was slain, his servants and eunuchs and they of
his household fled to Juballa, a Castle which was held by a kinsman of
the Guazil Abenalfarax, who lay in prison; other some fled to Zaragoza,
and told the Cid all that had befallen. The Cid was greatly grieved
when he heard it, and without delay he set forth with all his people,
and went as fast as he could go to Juballa, and there they who had
escaped from Valencia met him, and besought him to help them to revenge
the death of their Lord, saying that they would follow him for life or
for death, and do whatsoever he commanded them. Then the Cid sent
letters to Abeniaf, saying disdainfully unto him, that by God's help he
had kept his Lent well, and accomplished his fast with a worthy
sacrifice by murdering the King his master! and he reproached him for
the shame he had done the King in casting his head into the pond and
letting the body be buried in a dunghill; and at the end of the letter
he bade Abeniaf give him his corn which he had left in his granaries at
Valencia. Abeniaf returned for answer that his granaries had all been
plundered, and that the city now "belonged to the King of the
Almoravides;" and he said that if the Cid would serve that King he would
do his best to help him that he might win his love. When the Cid read
this letter he saw that Abeniaf was a fool, for he had sent to reproach
him for the death of his Lord, and the answer which he had returned was
concerning another matter; and he then knew that Abeniaf was not a man
to keep the power which he coveted. So he sent other letters to him,
calling him and all who were with him traitors, and saying that he
would never leave from making war against them till he had taken
vengeance for the death of King Yahia.

III. And the Cid sent letters to all the Castles round about, bidding
them supply his host with victuals, and do it speedily, or he would do
all he could to destroy them. And there was none to gainsay him; and
all obeyed his commands in this matter, saving Aboeza Abenlupo, for he
was a discreet man, and perceived what was to come, and in what this
was to end; moreover he feared that if he should not do as the Cid
commanded, the Cid would put him out of the world, and no one would be
able to protect him; and if he should do it, then he feared least he
should be banished. So he sent to the Cid to say he would do his
pleasure, and he sent also to Abenrazin, the Lord of Albarrazin, saying
that he would give him Monviedro and the other Castles in his
possession, and bidding him make his terms with the Cid, for as
touching himself, he desired to have no dispute, but to come off with
his company and his own person in peace. When Abenrazin heard this he
was well pleased; and he went to Monviedro with all speed, and took
possession of the Castle. From the time that King Yahia was slain till
this time, was twenty and six days. And when Abenrazin had got
possession of the Castle of Monviedro he came to the Cid, and
established love with him, and made a covenant that there should be
buying and selling between his Castles and the host, and that he would
provide food, and that the Cid should not make war upon him. And upon
this they made their writings, which were full fast; and Abenrazin
returned to his own land, and left one to keep Monviedro for him; and
Abenlupo went with him, taking with him his wives and his children and
his people and all that he had, and he thought himself well off that he
had escaped with his body, for he desired to have nothing to do with
the Cid. And the Cid lay before Juballa, and sent out his foragers
towards Valencia twice a day; one party went in the morning, and
another towards night; and they slew many Moors, and made many
prisoners, and made prey of all the flocks which they found without the
walls; nevertheless the Cid commanded that no hurt should be done to
those of the land of Moya, nor to the husbandmen, but that they who
laboured to produce bread and wine should be protected and encouraged;
and this he did thinking that what they raised would be for him when he
should lay siege unto the town; and he said this to his knights and
Adalides and Almocadenes, and took homage of them that they should obey
him therein. All this time the Cid held that Castle besieged, so that
none could enter in nor come out thereof; and it is said that terms had
secretly been made with him to yield it up, but that it was so to be
done that the other Moors might believe they had yielded from great
necessity, for it was not stored so as to be able to hold out long. And
while the Cid lay before Juballa, all the spoil which his Almogavares
took they brought to the host, and from the host it was taken and sold
at Monviedro. Many laden beasts came every day, and there was plenty in
the host.

IV. Abeniaf gathered together the knights who were natives of the city
and vassals to the King whom he had slain, and sent for others who were
in Denia, so that in all they were three hundred knights, and
maintained them with the bread which was in the granaries of the Cid
Ruydiez, and with the rents and possessions of those who had been the
King's officers, and who were gone from Valencia, and with the customs;
from all these did he give these knights whatsoever they stood in need
of. And he took no counsel with the Alcayde of the Almoravides
concerning any thing which he did, neither with any one, nor did he
care a jot for them. And when the Alcayde and the Almoravides saw that
he made himself master in the city, and how every thing that he did was
by his own will, they were offended therewith. The sons of Aboegib were
offended also: and they and the Almoravides placed their love upon each
other, and took counsel together against him, and became of one party,
and they bare great hatred against him, and he against them. All this
while the Cid lay before Juballa, and every day he scoured the country
to the gates of Valencia, early in the morning, and at noon day, and at
night, so that he never let them rest. And the three hundred knights
whom Abeniaf had collected went out against his foragers, with the men
of the town, and the Christians slew many of them, so that there were
lamentations daily within the walls, and wailings over the dead that
were brought in. And in one of these skirmishes, a rich Moor was taken
who was Alcayde of Acala, which is near Torralva, and they gave him
grievous torments till he ransomed himself for ten thousand marks of
silver; and moreover he gave the houses which he had in Valencia, which
were called the houses of Anaya, to be theirs if peradventure the town
should be yielded up.

V. When the Cid knew that there was great hatred between Abeniaf and
the Almoravides and the sons of Aboegib, he devised means how to set
farther strife between them, and sent privily to proffer his love to
Abenaif on condition that they should expel the Almoravides out of the
town; saying, that if he did this, he would remain Lord thereof, and
the Cid would help him in this, and would be good to him, as he knew he
had been to the King of Valencia, and would defend him. When Abeniaf
heard this he was well pleased, thinking that he should be King of
Valencia. And he took counsel with Abenalfarax the Guazii of the Cid,
whom he held prisoner, and Abenalfarax, with the hope of getting out of
prison, counselled him to do thus, and to accept the love of the Cid.
Then sent he to the Cid, saying that he would do all which he commanded
to gain his love, and he began to stop the allowance of the
Almoravides, saying that he could give them nothing, for he had nothing
whereof to give: this did he to the end that they might go their way,
for he lacked not means.

VI. At this time Ali Abenaxa, the Alcayde who was in Denia, sent to
Abeniaf, saying unto him that he should send of that treasure, and of
those jewels which he had taken from King Yahia, to the Miramamolin
beyond sea; with the which he would gather together a great power, and
cross the sea, and come against the Cid, to help the people of
Valencia, and protect them against the Cid, who did so much evil to
them all. And Abeniaf took counsel with the men of Valencia concerning
this matter, whether he should send this to the Miramamolin beyond sea
or not. And the old men advised him that he should, and the others that
he should not. And Abeniaf took the treasures, and hid the best part
thereof for himself, for none knew what it was; and the rest he sent by
his messengers, Abenalfarax the Guazil of the Cid being one; and they
took their departure from Valencia with great secresy, least the Cid
should know it and overtake them upon the road. But Abenalfarax devised
means to let the Cid know, and sent him a messenger. And the Cid sent
horsemen to follow their track, who caught them, and took the treasure,
and brought it to the Cid. Greatly did he thank Abenalfarax for having
served him so well at that season, and putting the treasure into his
hands, and he promised him goodly guerdon; and he made him chief over
all the Moors who were his subjects. At this time the Alcayde of
Juballa yielded up the Castle to the Cid, and the Cid placed another
therein, and went up with his host against Valencia, and encamped in a
village which is called Deroncada. And as the seed time was now over,
he burnt all the villages round about, and wasted all that belonged to
Abeniaf and his lineage, and he burnt the mills, and the barks which
were in the river. And he ordered the corn to be cut, for it was now
the season, and he beset the city on all sides, and pulled down the
houses and towers which were round about, and the stone and wood
thereof he sent to Juballa, to make a town there beside the Castle.

VII. At this time there came the Guazil of the King of Zaragoza to the
host of the Cid, bringing with him great treasures which the King had
sent for the redemption of the captives, for ruth which he had of them,
and also that he might have his reward from God in the other world. He
came also to talk with Abeniaf and counsel him that he should give up
the city to the King of Zaragoza, and they would send away the
Almoravides, and the King would protect him; but Abeniaf would give no
ear to this, and the Guazil said unto him that he would repent not
having taken this advice. On the second day after this Guazil had
arrived, the Cid attacked the suburb which is called Villa Nueva, and
entered it by force, and slew many Moors, both men of Andalusia and
Almoravides, and plundered all that they found, and pulled down the
houses, and the wood and stone the Cid sent to Juballa, and he set a
guard there that the Moors might not recover the place. On the morrow
the Cid attacked another suburb, which is called Alcudia, and there
were a great body of the Moors gathered together there. And he sent a
part of his host against the gate of Alcantara, bidding them attack the
gate, while he fought against them in Alcadia; and he thought that by
God's mercy peradventure he should enter the town. And the Cid with his
company rode among that great multitude of the Moors, smiting and
slaying without mercy, and the Cid's horse trampled over the dead, and
stumbled among them and fell, and the Cid remained afoot. Howbeit they
brought him to horse again, and he continued smiting and laying on
strenuously, so that the Moors were amazed at the great mortality which
he made among them, and maugre all they could do, were fain to fly into
the town. And they whom he had sent against the gate of Alcantara,
attacked it so bravely that they would have entered the city, if it had
not been for the boys and the women, who were upon the wall and in the
towers, and threw down stones upon them. And this while the cry went
forth in the city, and many horsemen sallied forth and fought with the
Christians before the bridge, and the battle lasted from morning until
midday, and when they separated, the Cid returned to his camp. And when
the Cid had taken food, he returned after the _siesta_ to attack the
suburb of Alcudia; and this attack was so vigorous that they who dwelt
therein thought the place would be forced, and they began to cry out,
Peace! Peace! being in great fear. Then, the Cid bade his men give over
the attack, and the good men of the suburb came out to him, and
whatsoever terms of security they asked, he granted them; and he took
possession of the suburb that night, and set his guards therein; and he
commanded his people that they should do no wrong to them of Alcudia,
and if any one offended he said that his head should be smitten off; so
he returned that night to the camp. And on the morrow he came there,
and assembled together the Moors of that place, and comforted them much
with his speeches, and promised that he would favour them greatly and
not oppress them, and bade them till their fields and tend their flocks
securely, saying that he would take only a tenth of the fruit thereof,
as their law directed. And he placed a Moor there named Yucef to be his
Almoxarife, that is to say, his Receiver. And he gave orders that all
Moors who would come and dwell therein might come securely, and they
also who would bring food thither for sale, and other merchandize. So
much food and much merchandize were brought there from all parts, and
that suburb became like a city, and there was plenty therein.

VIII. Now when the Cid Ruydiez had gotten possession of the suburbs, he
cut off from Valencia both the ingress and the egress, and they of the
town were greatly straightened, and knew not what they should do, and
they repented them that they had not listened to what the King of
Zaragoza sent to counsel them, for they had none to help them; and the
Almoravides were in the like straight, for they had none to look to,
and the pay which they were wont to receive failed, both to them and to
the other knights. All this time Abeniaf secretly continued his love
with the Cid, for he had not departed from the promise which he had
made him to send away the Almoravides, and put himself under his
protection. And they took counsel together in this distress, both the
Almoravides and the men of the town, how they might obtain the love of
the Cid, in whatever manner they could, so that they might remain in
peace in the city till they had sent to the Miramamolin beyond sea, and
received his commands; and they sent to the Cid to say this. But he
made answer that he would make no treaty with them till they had sent
away the Almoravides. And they of the town told the Almoravides what
the Cid had said, and these Africans were well pleased, being full
weary of that place, and said that they would go their way, and that it
would be the happiest day of their lives, that, wherein they should
depart. So they made their covenant that the Almoravides should be
placed in safety, and that they should pay the Cid for all the corn
which was in his granaries at the time when King Yahia was slain. And
moreover the thousand _maravedis_ per week, which they were wont to pay
him should be paid for the whole time which they had been in arms, and
also from that time forth. And that the suburb which he had won should
be his; and that his host should remain in Juballa so long as they
continued in that land. And upon this they made their writings, and
confirmed them. And the Almoravides departed from Valencia, and
horsemen were sent with them, who conducted them in safety, and the
Moors of Valencia were left in peace.

IX. Then the Cid went with all his host to Juballa, leaving none but
such as were to collect his rents with his Almoxarife. And Abeniaf cast
about how he might pay the Cid for the corn, and also what else was to
be given him. And he made terms with those who held the Castles round
about Valencia, that they should pay him the tenth of all their fruits
and of all their other rents. Now this was the season for gathering in
the fruit, and he appointed men in every place who should look to it,
and see it valued, and receive the tenth; a Moor and a Christian did he
appoint in every place, who were to receive this, and to gather the
corn also into the granaries: and this was done after such manner that
the Cid had his tribute well paid. At this time came tidings to
Valencia, that the Almoravides were coming again with a great power,
and the Cid devised how he might prevent their coming, or if they came
how he might fight against them. And he sent to tell Abeniaf to forbid
them from coming, for if they should enter the town he could not be
Lord thereof, which it was better he should be, and the Cid would
protect him against all his enemies. Well was Abeniaf pleased at this;
and he held a talk with the Alcayde of Xativa, and with him who held
the Castle of Carchayra; and they agreed to be of one voice. And they
came to Valencia, and the Cid came to his suburb; and they confirmed
love with him in great secrecy. But he who had the Castle of Algezira
would not be in this covenant with them and the Cid sent parties into
his lands, and did him much evil; and the Alcayde of Juballa went
against him, and cut down all his corn and brought it to Juballa, which
the Cid had made a great town with a church and with towers, and it was
a goodly place; and there he had his corn and his other things, and his
rents were all brought thither, and it abounded with all things; and
men held it for a great marvel that in so short time he had made so
great a town, which was so rich and so plentiful. And the Cid thought
to have Valencia if the Almoravides did not come, and for this reason
did all that he could to prevent their coming.

X. At this time Abenrazin the Lord of Albarrazin covenanted with the
King of Aragon that the King should help him to win Valencia, and he
would give him great treasures; and he gave him in pledge a Castle
which is called Toalba. And in this which he did he gained nothing, but
he lost the Castle. Now this Abenrazin had made covenant with the Cid,
so that they were friends, and the Cid had never done hurt in his
lands. And when he knew this that he had done with the King of Aragon,
he held himself to have been deceived and dealt falsely with; howbeit
he dissembled this, and let none of his company wit, till they had
gathered in all the corn from about Algezira de Xucar, and carried it
to Juballa. When this was done, he bade his men make ready, and he told
them not whither they were to go, and he set forward at night toward
Albarrazin, and came to the Fountain. Now that land was in peace, and
the dwellers thereof kept neither watch nor ward; and his foragers slew
many, and made many prisoners, and drove great flocks and herds, sheep
and kine, and brood mares, and prisoners all together, and they carried
away all the corn; and they sent all the spoil to Juballa, and it was
so great that Valencia and Juballa and all their dependencies were rich
with cattle and with other things. While the Cid lay before Albarrazin,
as he one day rode forth with five of his knights to disport himself,
there came twelve knights out of the town, thinking to slay him or take
him. And he pricked forward against them, and encountered them so
bravely that he slew twain, and other twain he overthrew, so that they
were taken, and the rest were put to flight: but he remained with a
wound in his throat from the push of a spear, and they thought he would
have died of that wound; and it was three weeks before it was healed.

XI. Now came true tidings to Valencia that the host of the Almoravides
were coming, and that they were now at Lorca, and the son in law of the
Miramamolin at their head, for he himself could not come, by reason
that he ailed. They of Valencia took courage at these tidings, and
waxed insolent, and began to devise how they should take vengeance upon
Abeniaf, and upon all those who had oppressed them. And Abeniaf was in
great trouble at this which was said openly concerning him, and he sent
privily to the Cid, telling him to come as soon as might be. The Cid
was then before Albarrazin, doing all the evil that he could, and he
brake up his camp and came with his host to Juballa; and Abeniaf and
the Alcaydes of Xativa and Carchayra came unto him, and they renewed
their covenant to stand by each other, and be of one voice. And they
took counsel and made a letter for the leader of the army of the
Almoravides, wherein they told him that the Cid had made a treaty with
the King of Aragon, whereby the King bound himself to help him against
them; and they bade him beware how he came towards Valencia, unless he
chose to do battle with eight thousand Christian horsemen, covered with
iron, and the best warriors in the world. This did they thinking that
he would be dismayed and turn back: but the Moor did not cease to
advance, notwithstanding this letter.

XII. There was a garden nigh unto Valencia which had belonged to
Abenalhazis, and the Cid asked Abeniaf to give it him, that he might
take his pleasure there when he was disposed to solace himself. This he
did cunningly, that when the Almoravides heard how this garden had been
given him which was so nigh unto the city, they should ween that the
men of Valencia had given it, and that they were better pleased with
his company than with theirs, Abeniaf granted it. And the Cid was wary,
and would not enter it till a gateway had been opened into the garden,
for the entrance was through narrow streets, and the Cid would not
trust himself in those strait places: so Abeniaf ordered the gate to be
made, and told the Cid that he would be his host on a day appointed.
And Abeniaf bedecked the gate of this garden full richly, and spread
costly carpets, and ordered the way to be strewn with rushes, and made
a great feast, and expected him all the day, but he did not come. And
when it was night he sent to say that he was sick and could not come:
and he prayed him to hold him excused. This he did to see whether they
of Valencia would murmur against him. And the sons of Aboegib and all
the people murmured greatly, and would fain in their hearts have risen
against Abeniaf, but they durst not because of the Cid, with whom they
would not fall out least he should lay waste all that was without the
walls. And they looked daily for the Almoravides, and one day they
said, Lo! now they are coming: and on the morrow they said, They are
coming not. And in this manner some days past on. And the murmur which
there had been concerning the garden died away; and then the Cid
entered it, and took possession of the whole suburb of Alcudia round
about it: and this he did peaceably, for the Moors and Christians dwelt
there together.

XIII. Now came true tidings that the host of the Almoravides, which was
at Lorca, was coming on through Murcia, and that the tarriance which
they had made had been by reason of their Captain, who had fallen sick,
but he was now healed, and they were advancing fast. And the sons of
Aboegib and great part of the people rejoiced in these tidings, and
took heart: and Abeniaf was in great fear, and he began to excuse
himself to the men of the town, and said unto them to pacify them, that
they did him wrong to complain of him for the garden which the Cid had
asked of him, inasmuch as he had only given it him to disport himself
therein for some days and take his pleasure, and that he would make him
leave it again whenever it should please them. Moreover he said, that
seeing they were displeased with what he had done, he would take no
farther trouble upon him; but would send to break off his covenant with the
Cid, and send to bid him look out for others to collect his payments,
for he would have the charge no longer. This he said in his cunning,
thinking that he should pacify them; but they understood his heart, and
they cried aloud against him that they would not stand to his covenant,
nor by his counsel, but that the sons of Aboegib should counsel them,
and whatsoever they should think good, that would they do. And they
gave order to fasten the gates of the town, and to keep watch upon the
towers and walls. When Abeniaf saw this he ceased to do as he had been
wont for fear of the people and of the sons of Aboegib, and took unto
himself a greater company to be his guard. And the war was renewed
between the Cid and the people of Valencia.

XIV. Now came true tidings that the host of the Almoravides was nigh
unto Xativa; and the people of Valencia were glad and rejoiced, for
they thought that they were now delivered from their great misery, and
from the oppression of the Cid. And when he heard these tidings he left
the garden and went to the place where his host was encamped, which was
called Xarosa, and remained there in his tents, and he was at a stand
what he should do, whether to abide the coming of the Almoravides, or
to depart; howbeit he resolved to abide and see what would befall. And
he gave order to break down the bridges and opea the sluices, that the
plain might be flooded, so that they could only come by one way, which
was a narrow pass. Tidings now came that the host of the Almoravides
was at Algezira de Xucar, and the joy of the people of Valencia
increased, and they went upon the walls and upon the towers to see them
come. And when night came they remained still upon the walls, for it
was dark, and they saw the great fires of the camp of the Almoravides,
which they had pitched near unto a place called Bacer; and they began
to pray unto God, beseeching him to give them good speed against the
Christians, and they resolved as soon as the Almoravides were engaged
in battle with the Cid, that they would issue forth and plunder his
tents. But our Lord Jesus Christ was not pleased that it should be so,
and he ordered it after another guise; for he sent such a rain that
night, with such a wind and flood as no man living remembered, and when
it was day the people of Valencia looked from the wall to see the
banners of the Almoravides and the place where they had encamped, and
behold they could see nothing: and they were full sorrowful, and knew
not what they should do, and they remained in such a state as a woman
in her time of childing, till the hour of tierce, and then came tidings
that the Almoravides had turned back, and would not come unto Valencia.
For the rains and floods had dismayed them, and they thought the waters
would have swept them away, and that the hand of God was against them,
and therefore they turned back. And when the people of Valencia heard
this they held themselves for dead men, and they wandered about the
streets like drunkards, so that a man knew not his neighbour, and they
smeared their faces with black like unto pitch, and they lost all
thought like one who falls into the waves of the sea. And then the
Christians drew nigh unto the walls, crying out unto the Moors with a
loud voice like thunder, calling them false traitors and renegados, and
saying, Give up the town to the Cid Ruydiez, for ye cannot escape from
him. And the Moors were silent, and made no reply because of their
great misery.

XV. Then Abenalfarax, a Moor of Valencia, he who wrote this history in
Arabic, took account of the food which was in the city, to see how long
it could hold out. And he says that the _cafiz_ of wheat was valued at
eleven _maravedis_, and the _cafiz_ of barley at seven _maravedis_, and
that of pulse or other grain at six; and the _arroba_ of honey at
fifteen _dineros_; and the _arroba_ of carobs the third of a
_maravedi_, and the _arroba_ of onions two thirds of a _maravedi_, and
the _arroba_ of cheese two _maravedis_ and a half, and the measure of
oil frhich the Moors call _maron_, a _maravedi_, and the _quintal_ of
figs five _maravedis_, and the pound of mutton six _dineros_ of silver,
and the pound of beef four. These _maravedis_ were silver ones, for no
other money was current among them. The Moors who dwelt in the suburbs
carried all the best of their goods into the city, and the rest they
buried. And when the Cid was certain that the Almoravides were not
coming, he returned again to lodge in the garden, and gave order to
spoil the suburbs, save that of Alcudia, because the inhabitants of
that had received him without resistance; and the Moors fled into the
city with their wives and children. And when the Christians began to
plunder the suburbs they of the town came out and plundered also those
houses which were nearest unto the walls, so that every thing was
carried away and nothing but the timbers left; and then the Christians
took that to build them lodgments in the camp; and when the Moors saw
this they came out, and carried away what timber they could into the
city. And the Christians pulled down all the houses, save only such as
could be defended with arrows, and these which they dared not pull down
they set fire to by night. And when all the houses had been levelled
they began to dig in the foundations, and they found great wealth
there, and store of garments, and hoards of wheat; and when the Cid saw
this he ordered them to dig every where, so that nothing might be lost.
And when all had been dug up the Cid drew nearer to the city, and girt
it round about, and there was fighting every day at the barriers, for
the Moors came out and fought hand to hand, and many a sword-stroke was
given and many a push with the spear. While the Moors were thus
beleagered came letters from the Captain of the Almoravides, saying
that he had not turned back to Algezira de Xucar for fear, nor for
cowardice, neither as one who fled, but for lack of food, and also by
reason of the waters; and that it was his set purpose at all events to
succour them and deliver them from the oppression which they endured,
and he was preparing to do this with all diligence. And he bade them
take courage, and maintain the city. And when the Moors of Valencia
heard, these letters they took heart, and joined with the sons of
Aboegib, and their resolve was that they would be firm and maintain the
city. And they said that Abeniaf had made the Almoravides retreat,
because he had told them that there was discord in the town. And
Abeniaf kept great watch, having a great guard to secure him, least the
people should attempt aught against him. And the price of all things in
Valencia was doubled.

XVI. Then the Cid drew nearer to the walls, so that no man could either
enter in or issue out, but whosoever attempted it was either slain or
taken. And he gave orders to till all the lands which lay round about
Alcudia, for this was now become a great place, even like a city, and
the Moors who dwelt there were safe; and tents and shops were made
there for all kinds of merchandize, and merchants came there safely
from all parts to buy and to sell, so that they who dwelt there were
greatly enriched. And justice was administered to all full righteously,
so that there was none who could complain of the Cid nor of his
Almoxarife, nor of any of his people; and the Moors were judged by
their own law, and were not vexed, and he took from them only a tenth.
Now came true tidings from Denia that the Almoravides had returned into
their own country, and that there was no hope of succour at their
hands. And when they of Valencia heard this they were greatly troubled.
And they who held the Castles round about came humbly to the Cid, to
place their love upon him, and besought him that he would accept
tribute from them, and have them under his protection; and he gave
orders that they might travel the roads in peace: and in this manner
his rents increased, so that he had plenty to give. And he sent to them
who held the Castles, bidding them provide him with cross-bow men, and
foot-soldiers, to fight against the city; and there was none who dared
disobey his bidding, and they sent him cross-bow men and foot-men in
great numbers, with their arms and provisions. Thus was Valencia left
desolate, and forsaken by all the Moorish people; and it was attacked
every day, and none could enter in, neither could any come out; and
they were sore distressed, and the waves of death compassed them round
about.

XVII. Then was there a Moor in the city who was a learned man and a
wise, and he went upon the highest tower, and made a lamentation, and
the words with which he lamented he put in writing, and it was rendered
afterwards from the Arabic into the Castillian tongue, and the
lamentation which he made was this:

Valencia! Valencia! trouble is come upon thee, and thou art in the hour
of death; and if peradventure thou shouldst escape, it will be a wonder
to all that shall behold thee.

But if ever God hath shown mercy to any place, let him be pleased to
show mercy unto thee; for thy name was joy, and all Moors delighted in
thee and took their pleasure in thee.

And if it should please God utterly to destroy thee now, it will be for
thy great sins, and for the great presumption which thou hadst in thy
pride.

The four corner stones whereon thou art founded would meet together and
lament for thee, if they could!

Thy strong wall which is founded upon these four stones trembles, and
is about to fall, and hath lost all its strength.

Thy lofty and fair towers which were seen from far, and rejoiced the
hearts of the people,...little by little they are falling.

Thy white battlements which glittered afar off, have lost their truth
with which they shone like the sunbeams.

Thy noble river Guadalaver, with all the other waters with which thou
hast been served so well, have left their channel, and now they run
where they should not.

Thy water courses, which were so clear and of such great profit to so
many, for lack of cleansing are choked with mud.

Thy pleasant gardens which were round about thee;...the ravenous wolf
hath gnawn at the roots, and the trees can yield thee no fruit.

Thy goodly fields, with so many and such fair flowers, wherein thy
people were wont to take their pastime, are all dried up.

Thy noble harbour, which was so great honour to thee, is deprived of
all the nobleness which was wont to come into it for thy sake.

The fire hath laid waste the lands of which thou wert called Mistress,
and the great smoke thereof reacheth thee.

There is no medicine for thy sore infirmity, and the physicians despair
of healing thee.

Valencia! Valencia! from a broken heart have I uttered all these things
which I have said of thee.

And this grief would I keep unto myself that none should know it, if it
were not needful that it should be known to all.

XVIII. Now all the trouble and distress which the men of Valencia
endured, pleased Abeniaf well, because they had forsaken him and
followed the sons of Aboegib; and he said that it did not behove a man
to give advice unto those who would not listen to it, and that if the
people had hearkened to him they would not have been brought to this
misery; and what evil they endured was because of the sons of Aboegib,
who lacked wit to be well with any one, or to do any thing. These
things Abeniaf said daily to all who came to visit him: so that the
people great as well as little began to talk thereof, saying that
Abeniaf spake truly. And the Christians fought against them every day,
and prest them close, and the price of food increased daily: and they
withdrew themselves from the love of the sons of Aboegib, and thought
that they had been ill advised to follow their counsel, and that
because of them all this evil was come upon them, and they held them
for fools. And the people cried out upon Abeniaf that he should forgive
them for having forsaken him, and that he should protect them, and
devise means for their deliverance from this great trouble. And Abeniaf
said that he would have nothing to do with them more than as one of
them; for if they were in trouble, so was he: and what they stood in
fear of, that did he fear also; and that he could not give counsel to
men who were divided among themselves; and he said unto them that they
must agree among themselves, and be all of one mind to do one of these
two things;...either to forsake the sons of Aboegib and their counsel;
or to stand by it. And when he should see that they no longer opposed
him with their evil counsels and the bad way in which they were going
on, that he would then take counsel for them in such guise that they
should be at peace; for they knew how they had sped so long as they let
him direct them, and he trusted in God so to speed as that they should
have no war with the Cid, neither with any other. And they made answer
with one accord that they would trust in him and obey him, and do all
which he should command, for it had alway been well with them when they
followed his advice.

XIX. Then the men of Valencia made Abeniaf their Adelantado, and
promised to abide by his counsel; howbeit this could not lightly be
done, for many of the people held with the others. And when Abeniaf saw
that they would have him for their chief, he said that they should make
a writing, and the chief persons of the town confirm it with their
names; and the people accorded that it should be so, and it was done
accordingly. Then he made offers to the Cid that they should pay him
tribute, and took counsel with him how to put the sons of Aboegib, and
those who held with them, out of the town; and their counsel was, that
the Cid should draw nigh to the walls, and speak unto the men of the
town, saying, that so long as they followed after the ways of the sons
of Aboegib, he would never grant them his love; and that all the evil
which he did unto them was because of them, and because they were
guided by them and by their evil counsel. And if they desired to speed
well they should send away the sons of Aboegib, and take Abeniaf to be
their chief, and give ear unto him. And the Cid came nigh unto the
walls and said these things, and moreover that he had great ruth for
them, for he loved them well; and if they would do according to his
words he would help them and protect them, as he had been wont to do in
the days of King Yahia; and he bade them look well to what they were
doing, and not suffer themselves to be brought to destruction. And
Abeniaf also said these things to those of his household and to all
those who talked with him, and asked of them why they would let
themselves be brought to destruction by the counsel of foolish men and
unwise. And this he said so often that they thought it was truth, and
they besought him that as he was their Adelantado now, he would devise
means for their deliverance, and how they might live in peace; and he
made answer that they were not to think he had forgotten this, for he
had laboured greatly with the Cid to obtain his love for them, but the
Cid had sworn that they should never have his love till they had put
the sons of Aboegib out of the town; when they had done that, he would
do whatsoever they should think good, but till they had done it there
should be no covenant between him and them. But when the men of the
town heard this they murmured greatly, and said that he demanded a hard
thing, and that it were better they should all die than do this; and
they talked concerning this matter three days, being in doubt what they
should do. And when Abeniaf saw that the people were thus at a stand,
he took counsel privily with the Cid, and with the knights, and the
good men who were on his side, how he might take them. And one of the
chief persons of Abeniaf's household went out with a great company of
horse and foot to seize the sons of Aboegib; and they when they knew
this, took shelter in the house of an Alfaqui, that is to say, one
learned in the law, who was held in much honour by the Moors; and in
this house, which was surrounded with an embattled wall, they thought
with the little company that they had with them, to defend themselves,
till the cry could go forth through the city, and their friends come to
their succour. And they who went to take them set fire to the outer
gates, and many of the baser sort gathered together to see what the
stir was. And they ascended the roof and threw down tiles upon the
assailants till they made them take shelter under the eaves, and then
the house was forced, and they plundered all that they could find, and
laid hands on the sons of Aboegib and carried them to prison. All this
was done before the cry could go forth through the town; and all the
kinsmen of the sons of Aboegib were taken also: they were kept that day
in prison, and when it was night they were taken to the Cid, to his
lodging in Alcudia, and delivered into his hands.

XX. On the morrow there was a great stir among the men of the town, and
they were greatly troubled at this foul thing which Abeniaf had done.
But Abeniaf thinking that he should now have his desire, and that all
was done, took horse and rode forth with all his company to the
Bridge-end, to see Ruydiez the Cid. And the Bishop, as he was called,
of Albarrazin, came to meet him with a great company of knights, being
the chiefs of the company of the Cid, and they did great honour unto
him, thinking that he would give them something. And they brought him
to the lodging of the Cid, which was in the Garden of the New Town; and
the Cid came out to meet him at the garden gate, and embraced him, and
made much of him. And the first thing which he said, was, to ask him
why he had not put on kingly garments, for King he was: and he bade him
take off the coif which he wore, for it was not what beseemed him now,
and made semblance as if he would have held his stirrups. And they
stood talking awhile. Now the Cid thought that Abeniaf would not come
to him with empty hands, and looked that he should give him of the
treasures and jewels that he had taken from King Yahia whom he had
slain; but when he saw that he brought nothing, then began the Cid to
talk of terms, and said unto him that if he desired to have his love,
and that there should be peace between them, he must divide with him
the rents of the town, as well what was collected within as without,
and that he would have his own Almoxarife to see to this and collect
his share. And Abeniaf made answer that it should be so. And the Cid
demanded of him his son as hostage, that he might keep him in Juballa,
for otherwise he said he could not be secure. And Abeniaf agreed to
this also; so they parted for that day, having appointed that they
should meet on the morrow, and confirm this covenant by writings so
that it should be good. Then Abeniaf returned into the city, full
sorrowful and taking great thought; and then he saw the foolishness
that he had done in sending away the Almoravides out of the land, and
in putting his trust in men of another law. And on the morrow the Cid
sent for him that he should come out and confirm the covenant; but
Abeniaf sent him word that he would not give him his son, even though
he knew he should lose his head for refusing. And the Cid sent him a
letter with great threats, saying, that since he had thus deceived him,
there should never more be love between them, nor would he ever believe
aught which he should say. And then the hatred between them waxed very
great. And the Cid sent unto that Moor who had taken the sons of
Aboegib and bade him leave the town, and go unto the Castle which was
called Alcala; and he obeyed and went thither, for he dared not do
otherwise than as the Cid commanded. And he did great honours to the
sons of Aboegib and to their kinsmen, and gave orders that they should
be provided with all things which they needed, and gave them garments,
and promised that he would be their great friend. At this time three
good men of Valencia died, who were the most honourable of the town and
of the most discretion, and Abeniaf was left as Chief, for there was
none to gainsay him.

XXI. And the Cid made war afresh upon the city as cruelly as he could,
and the price of bread was now three times as great as it had been at
the beginning; the load of wheat was worth an hundred _maravedis_ of
silver, and the pound of flesh was a _maravedi_. And the Cid drew nigh
unto the walls, so as to fight hand to hand with the townsmen. And
Abeniaf waxed proud and despised the people, and when any went to make
complaint before him, and ask justice at his hands, he dishonoured
them, and they were evil entreated by him. And he was like a King,
retired apart, and trobadors and gleemen and masters disported before
him which could do the best, and he took his pleasure. And they of the
town were in great misery, from the Christians who warred upon them
from without, and the famine whereof they died within. Moreover Abeniaf
oppressed them greatly, and he took unto himself all the goods of those
who died, and he made all persons equal, the good and the bad, and took
from all all that he could; and those who gave him nothing he ordered
to be tormented with stripes, and cast into rigorous prisons, till he
could get something from them. And he had no respect neither for
kinsman nor friend. There was but one measure for all, and men cared
nothing now for their possessions, so that the sellers were many and
the buyers none. And with all these miseries the price of food became
exceeding great, for the _cafiz_ of wheat was priced at ninety
_maravedis_, and that of barley at eighty, and that of painick eighty
and five, and that of all pulse sixty, and the _arroba_ of figs seven,
and of honey twenty, and of cheese eighteen, and of carobs sixteen, and
of onions twelve, and the measure of oil twenty: flesh there was none,
neither of beast nor of anything else; but if a beast died, the pound
was worth three _maravedis_. And they were so weak with hunger that the
Christians came to the walls and threw stones in with the hand, and
there was none who had strength to drive them back.

XXII. And the Cid having it at heart to take the town, let make an
engine, and placed it at one of the gates, and it did great hurt both
to the walls and within the town; and the Moors made other engines,
with the which they brake that of the Cid. And the Cid in his anger let
make three engines, and placed them at the three gates of the town, and
they did marvellous great hurt. And food waxed dearer every day, till
at last dear nor cheap it was not to be had, and there was a great
mortality for famine; and they eat dogs and cats and mice. And they
opened the vaults and privies and sewers of the town, and took out the
stones of the grapes which they had eaten, and washed them, and ate
them. And they who had horses fed upon them. And many men, and many
women, and many children watched when the gates were open, and went out
and gave themselves into the hands of the Christians, who slew some,
and took others, and sold them to the Moors in Alcudia; and the price
of a Moor was a loaf and a pitcher of wine: and when they gave them
food, and they took their fill, they died. Them that were stronger they
sold to merchants who came there by sea from all parts. And the Moors
of Alcudia, and of the town which the Cid had made there, had plenty of
all things, and as great as was their abundance, even so great was the
misery of those in the town: and they spake the verse which sayeth, If
I go to the right the water will destroy me, and if I go to the left
the lion will kill me, and if I turn back there is the fire.

XXIII. Now the Moors of Valencia being in this great misery because of
the siege which the Cid laid unto the town, Abeniaf bethought him that
he would send a messenger to the King of Zaragoza, and beseech him to
come to his succour, even as he had succoured the grandson of
Alimaymon, when the Lord of Denia and Tortosa came against him. And the
good men of the town took counsel whether they should say in these
letters, To you the King, or whether they should humble themselves
before him and call him Lord; and they debated upon this for three
days, and agreed that they would call him Lord, that he might have the
more compassion upon them. And though Abeniaf was troubled at heart at
this determination, nevertheless he said in the letter as they had
appointed. And he called a Moor who spake the mixed language, and
instructed him how to get out of the city by night, so that the
Christians might not see him, and told him that when he had given that
letter to the King of Zaragoza, the King would give him garments, and a
horse, and a mule to ride on, and that he himself would show favour
unto him as long as he lived. So the messenger departed with the
letter. And the famine in the town waxed greater, and food was not now
bought by the _cafiz_, neither by the _fanega_, but by ounces, or at
most by the pound. And the pound of wheat cost a _maravedi_ and a half,
and that of barley a _maravedi_, and that of painick a _maravedi_ and a
quarter, and of pulse a _maravedi_, and of flax-seed three parts of a
_maravedi_, and of cheese three _dineros_, and of honey three, and of
figs one; and the _panilla_ of oil was eight _dineros_, and the pound
of colewort five, and the ounce of carobs three parts of a _dinero_,
and the ounce of onions the same, and the head of garlick the same; and
a pound of beast's flesh was six _maravedis_, and grape-stones were
half a _dinero_ the pound, and the skins of kine and of beasts five
_dineros_; the _dinero_ was silver, for there was no money current save
silver and gold.

XXIV. When the King of Zaragoza saw the letter which Abeniaf and the
men of Valencia had sent him, he gave no heed to it, neither cared he
for the messenger, neither did he give him even a draught of water for
his reward. And the messenger waited for his answer from day to day for
three weeks, and he dared not depart without it for fear least Abeniaf
should slay him; and he thought also that some of the King's people
would come out after him and slay him upon the way; and he was urgent
for his answer, and began at last to cry aloud at the gate of the
King's house, so that the King asked of what that messenger was making
his complaint. Then they told the King that he wanted his answer that
he might be gone. And the King wrote an answer and said, that this aid
which they besought of him he could not give till he had sent to ask
help of King Don Alfonso of Castille, for he could not else venture to
do battle with the Cid. And he exhorted them to defend themselves the
best they could while he procured horsemen from King Don Alfonso to
help them, and that they should from time to time send him word how
they went on. So the messenger returned in great sorrow that he had
sped no better, and that nothing had been given him as Abeniaf had
promised: and all this which the King of Zaragoza said was only delay,
and meant nothing. And the famine now waxed so great, that there was no
food to sell, and many died of hunger. And many for great misery went
out to the Christians, recking not whether they should be made captive,
or slain, for they thought it better to be slain than to perish for
lack of food. And Abeniaf searched all the houses in the town for food,
and where he found any store, he left only what would suffice for a
fortnight, and took the rest, saying that in that time the King of
Zaragoza would come and relieve them, for that he only tarried to
collect great store of food, that he might bring it with him. This he
said to keep the people quiet, and to encourage them. And of the food
which he carried away he took the most part for himself and for his
guards, and the rest he ordered to be sold in such manner that none
should buy more than would suffice him for the day. And what he took he
did not pay for, and when the people demanded payment he put them off
till another day; and he bade them not complain, for they would be
relieved from this misery, and then he would pay them well. And they
who had any food left buried it for fear, and for this reason there was
none to be bought, neither dear nor cheap. And they who had nothing
else, ate herbs, and leather, and electuaries from the apothecaries
which they bought at a great price, and the poor ate the dead bodies.

XXV. Now Abeniaf had no hope of succour save only from the King of
Zaragoza, who had sent to bid him hold out; and he sent to him every
night to tell him of the great misery which there was in Valencia, and
the King of Zaragoza returned for answer that King Don Alfonso had sent
him a great body of horsemen with Garcia Ordonez, and would come
himself after them; and he sent in this letter another letter written
with his own hand, and which was to be shown to the good men of the
town, privily; and he said therein, with great oaths to confirm it,
that he would without fail come and deliver them, for it was a great
grief to him to think what they endured, and that this was as great
sorrow to him, as theirs could be. And certain of the King's favourites
wrote to Abeniaf also after the same manner, telling him that he would
surely come; howbeit one of his favourites who had compassion upon the
men of Valencia sent a covert message to warn them, saying, That the
King of Zaragoza would build a tower in Alcudia de Tudela; the meaning
of this was, that all the King said, was only to put them off. Abeniaf
did not understand it, and sent to ask him what it was that he had
said; but the other made him no reply. Then the King of Zaragoza sent
two messengers to the Cid with jewels and rich presents, and besought
him that he would not distress the men of Valencia so greatly, and also
that he would let his messengers enter the town that they might speak
with Abeniaf. This the Cid would not permit; howbeit they found means
to send in a letter, saying, Wit ye that I send to entreat the Cid that
he will not do so great evil unto you, and I give him jewels and rich
presents that he may do my will in this, and I believe that he will do
it. But if he should not, I will gather together a great host, and
drive him out of the land. Howbeit these were but dissembling words,
for the King of Zaragoza and the Cid were friends and were of one
accord, that the Cid should take Valencia and give it the King, who
should give him great treasures in return.

XXVI. Then the Cid began to treat with a great Moor of the town, named
Abenmoxiz that he should rise up against Abeniaf, and kill him or
deliver him into his hands, and that he would make him Lord over
Valencia, and the country as far as Denia. And Abenmoxiz took counsel
with his friends, and they advised him that he should do this: but
Abeniaf knew of their counsel, and took them, and put them in prison,
and gave them in charge to two of his household in whom he had great
trust. And Abenmoxiz talked with his keepers, and told them all that he
proposed to do, and promised them, if they would release him, to reward
them greatly when he had succeeded, saying, that he undertook this with
the consent and advice of the King of Zaragoza: so they were persuaded
and promised to join with him. And when it was night Abenmoxiz and his
friends and the two keepers agreed to seize the Alcazar, which was the
place wherein they were imprisoned, and to beat the alarm, and raise a
cry for the King of Zaragoza; and they thought the men of the town
would join with them, and then they would go to the house of Abeniaf
and lay hands on him. And they did accordingly, and beat a drum, and
sent a cryer upon the tower of the Mosque to bid all the people
assemble at the Alcazar. And when the people heard that drum and that
cryer they were in great fear, and knew not what to think: and they
assembled some to guard their own houses, other some to guard the
tower, till they knew what it was. And when Abeniaf heard it, he was
greatly dismayed, and he asked of all whom he found at his gates, what
the uproar was, and what this thing might be. In short time all they
who were on his side, both horse and foot, assembled together, and then
they knew what it was; and he bade them go to the Alcazar and take
Abenmoxiz, and all that held with him. Abenmoxiz this while was at the
gate of the Alcazar with his little company, thinking that the whole
town would join him; and behold Abeniaf's company came up and charged
him; and he thought to defend himself with the few that were with him,
but the most part fled, and he with four others were taken; and they
led them with great shame to the house of Abeniaf, who sent him to
prison, and gave orders to smite off the heads of the others. And
Abeniaf sent to lay hands on all whom he suspected, and took from them
all that they had. And he sent messengers to the King of Zaragoza, to
tell him what had chanced, and they took with them Abenmoxiz prisoner,
and they were charged to remain at Zaragoza, and send him true tidings
from thence.

XXVII. Now there was no food to be bought in the city, and the people
were in the waves of death: and men were seen to drop and die in the
streets, and the Place of the Alcazar round about the walls thereof was
full of graves, and there was no grave which had fewer than ten bodies
in it. As many as could fled out of the town, and delivered themselves
up to the Christians to be made prisoners. The Cid thought that they
who were the Chiefs within the walls, thrust out the poor and feeble,
that they might be able to hold out longer; and it troubled him, for he
thought to take the town by starving it, and he feared the coming of
the Almoravides. Sometimes it troubled him, and at other times he
seemed pleased that the Moors should come out and give themselves
prisoners to his people. Now it befel that once, at such time as it
seemed to please him, some of the chief men of the town came out in
this manner, and counselled him that he should attack it, for they said
the men at arms were few, and weak for hunger, and that he might
presently win it: and the Cid took thought upon this matter, and
resolved to do as they said; and he gathered together his host and
advanced against the gate which is called Belfanhanes, that is to say,
the Gate of the Snake, and they drew nigh unto the wall. And all the
people of the town assembled, even all the force which was therein, and
threw down stones from the gate and from the wall, and shot their
arrows, so that neither stone nor arrow fell in vain; and the Cid and
they who had advanced with him went into a bath which was near the
wall, to be under cover from the arrows. And Abeniaf's company opened
the gate and sallied out, seeing that the stones and arrows from the
wall had hurt many, and made the Christians draw back; and the Cid and
they who were with him remained in the bath, being shut up there, for
they could not go out by the door where at they had entered, and they
broke through the wall on the other side, and the Cid escaped that way,
being thus put to rout. Then he thought himself ill advised in having
attacked the town, and in putting himself into a place from whence he
had escaped with such great danger; and he held that the worst war
which he could make upon the men of Valencia was to let them die of
hunger. So he ordered proclamation to be made so loud that all the
Moors upon the walls could hear, bidding all who had come out from the
town to return into it, or he would burn as many as he should find; and
saying also that he would slay all who came out from that time forth.
Nevertheless they continued to let themselves down from the walls, and
the Christians took them without his knowledge. But as many as he found
he burnt alive before the walls, so that the Moors could see them; in
one day he burnt eighteen, and cast others alive to the dogs, who tore
them in pieces. They who could hide any sent them away by sea and by
land to be sold; the most whom they sent were young men and girls, for
others they would not take; and many virgins they kept for themselves.
And if they knew that any who came out, had left kinsmen or friends in
the town who would give any thing for them, they tortured them before
the walls, or hung them from the towers of the Mosques which were
without the city, and stoned them; and when they in the town saw this
they gave ransom for them, that they might be permitted to dwell in
Alcudia with the Moors who were in peace with the Cid. This continued
for two months, till there were only four beasts left in the town, and
one was a mule of Abeniaf's, and another was a horse of his son's; and
the people were so wasted that there were but few who had strength to
mount the wall.

XXVIII. The company of Abeniaf and of his kinsmen despaired now of
holding out, and of the help of the King of Zaragoza, or of the
Almoravides, and they desired rather to die than endure this misery.
And the good men of the city, as many as were left, went to an Alfaqui,
who was a good man, and one who was held in great esteem, and besought
him to give them counsel, for he saw their great distress, and how they
were out of all hope of succour; and they besought him that he would go
to Abeniaf, and know of him what he thought to do, or what hope he had,
that he let them all perish thus. The Alfaqui gave ear to them, and
said that if they would all hold together, and be of one heart, and
show great anger at having been brought to this misery, he would do all
he could to relieve them; and they promised to do whatever he should
advise. Now Abeniaf knew of the talk which the good men of the town had
had with the Alfaqui, and understood that it was because of the great
misery which they endured; and he thought in his heart that he would
humble himself, and do whatever his people should think good. And the
Alfaqui thought that happy man was his dole now that the people had
committed themselves to his guidage, and he went to Abeniaf and
communed with him, and their accord was to give up all hope of succour.
And Abeniaf put himself in the hands of the Alfaqui, that he should go
between him and the Cid and the people of Valencia, and make the best
terms for them that he could, seeing that they could no longer hold
out, and maintain the town.

XXIX. Here the history relates that at this time Martin Pelaez the
Asturian came with a convoy of laden beasts, carrying provisions to the
host of the Cid; and as he passed near the town the Moors sallied out
in great numbers against him; but he, though he had few with him,
defended the convoy right well, and did great hurt to the Moors,
slaying many of them, and drove them into the town. This Martin Pelaez
who is here spoken of, did the Cid make a right good knight, of a
coward, as ye shall hear. When the Cid first began to lay siege to the
city of Valencia, this Martin Pelaez came unto him; he was a knight, a
native of Santillana in Asturias, a hidalgo, great of body and strong
of limb, a well made man and of goodly semblance, but withal a right
coward at heart, which he had shown in many places when he was among
feats of arms. And the Cid was sorry when he came unto him, though he
would not let him perceive this; for he knew he was not fit to be of
his company. Howbeit he thought that since he was come he would make
him brave whether he would or not. And when the Cid began to war upon
the town, and sent parties against it twice and thrice a day, as ye
have heard, for the Cid was alway upon the alert, there was fighting
and tourneying every day. One day it fell out that the Cid and his
kinsmen and friends and vassals were engaged in a great encounter, and
this Martin Pelaez was well armed; and when he saw that the Moors and
Christians were at it, he fled and betook himself to his lodging, and
there hid himself till the Cid returned to dinner. And the Cid saw what
Martin Pelaez did, and when he had conquered the Moors he returned to
his lodging to dinner. Now it was the custom of the Cid to eat at a
high table, seated on his bench, at the head. And Don Alvar Fanez, and
Pero Bermudez, and other precious knights, ate in another part, at high
tables, full honourably, and none other knights whatsoever dared take
their seats with them, unless they were such as deserved to be there;
and the others who were not so approved in arms ate upon _estrados_, at
tables with cushions. This was the order in the house of the Cid, and
every one knew the place where he was to sit at meat, and every one
strove all he could to gain the honour of sitting to eat at the table
of Don Alvar Fanez and his companions, by strenuously behaving himself
in all feats of arms; and thus the honour of the Cid was advanced. This
Martin Pelaez, thinking that none had seen his badness, washed his
hands in turn with the other knights, and would have taken his place
among them. And the Cid went unto him, and took him by the hand and
said, You are not such a one as deserves to sit with these, for they
are worth more than you or than me; but I will have you with me: and he
seated him with himself at table. And he, for lack of understanding,
thought that the Cid did this to honour him above all the others. On
the morrow the Cid and his company rode towards Valencia, and the Moors
came out to the tourney; and Martin Pelaez went out well armed, and was
among the foremost who charged the Moors, and when he was in among them
he turned the reins, and went back to his lodging; and the Cid took
heed to all that he did, and saw that though he had done badly he had
done better than the first day. And when the Cid had driven the Moors
into the town he returned to his lodging, and as he sate down to meat
he took this Martin Pelaez by the hand, and seated him with himself,
and bade him eat with him in the same dish, for he had deserved more
that day than he had the first. And the knight gave heed to that
saying, and was abashed; howbeit he did as the Cid commanded him: and
after he had dined he went to his lodging and began to think upon what
the Cid had said unto him, and perceived that he had seen all the
baseness which he had done; and then he understood that for this cause
he would not let him sit at board with the other knights who were
precious in arms, but had seated him with himself, more to affront him
than to do him honour, for there were other knights there better than
he, and he did not show them that honour. Then resolved he in his heart
to do better than he had done heretofore. Another day the Cid and his
company and Martin Pelaez rode toward Valencia, and the Moors came out
to the tourney full resolutely, and Martin Pelaez was among the first,
and charged them right boldly; and he smote down and slew presently a
good knight, and he lost there all the bad fear which he had had, and
was that day one of the best knights there; and as long as the tourney
lasted there he remained, smiting and slaying and overthrowing the
Moors, till they were driven within the gates, in such manner that the
Moors marvelled at him, and asked where that Devil came from, for they
had never seen him before. And the Cid was in a place where he could
see all that was going on, and he gave good heed to him, and had great
pleasure in beholding him, to see how well he had forgotten the great
fear which he was wont to have. And when the Moors were shut up within
the town, the Cid and all his people returned to their lodging, and
Martin Pelaez full leisurely and quietly went to his lodging also, like
a good knight. And when it was the hour of eating the Cid waited for
Martin Pelaez, and when he came, and they had washed, the Cid took him
by the hand and said, My friend, you are not such a one as deserves to
sit with me from henceforth, but sit you here with Don Alvar Fanez, and
with these other good knights, for the good feats which you have done
this day have made you a companion for them; and from that day forward
he was placed in the company of the good. And the history saith that
from that day forward this knight Martin Pelaez was a right good one,
and a right valiant, and a right precious, in all places where he
chanced among feats of arms, and he lived alway with the Cid, and
served him right well and truly. And the history saith, that after the
Cid had won the city of Valencia, on the day when they conquered and
discomfited the King of Seville, this Martin Pelaez was so good a one,
that setting aside the body of the Cid himself, there was no such good
knight there, nor one who bore such part, as well in the battle as in
the pursuit. And so great was the mortality which he made among the
Moors that day, that when he returned from the business the sleeves of
his mail were clotted with blood, up to the elbow; insomuch that for
what he did that day his name is written in this history, that it may
never die. And when the Cid saw him come in that guise, he did him
great honour, such as he never had done to any knight before that day,
and from thenceforward gave him a place in all his actions and in all
his secrets, and he was his great friend. In this knight Martin Pelaez
was fulfilled the example which saith, that he who betaketh himself to
a good tree, hath good shade, and he who serves a good Lord winneth
good guerdon; for by reason of the good service which he did the Cid,
he came to such good state that he was spoken of as ye have heard: for
the Cid knew how to make a good knight, as a good groom knows how to
make a good horse. The history now leaves to speak of him, and returns
to the accord of the Alfaqui and Abeniaf, which they propounded unto
the Cid.

XXX. This Alfaqui sent his messengers to an Almoxarife of the Cid whose
name was Abdalla Adiz; who was a good man and one whom the Cid loved,
and who never left him after he had obtained his favour. And when
Abdalla Adiz heard that they wished to propose terms, he spake with the
Cid upon this matter, and the Cid bade him enter the town, and speak
with them, and know of them what they would have. And he went into the
town, and spake with them as the Cid had commanded, and came out again,
and reported unto him what they had said, till he had made terms
between them, Abeniaf sent three good men with him to confirm the terms
which were made, and the covenant was after this manner, that they of
Valencia should send messengers to the King of Zaragoza, and to Ali
Abenaxa who was Adelantado of the Almoravides and Lord of Murcia,
beseeching them to succour them within fifteen days; and if within that
time they were not succoured they should then give up the city to the
Cid, with such conditions, that Abeniaf should remain mighty in the
town, as he had been before, his person being secure and all that he
had, and his wives, and his children, and that he should remain
_Veedor_, that is to say. Overseer, of all the rents of the town, he
and the Almoxarife of the Cid, and a Moor who was called Musa should be
Guazil of the town; this Musa had looked after the affairs of the Cid
in the time of King Yabia, and never forsook him after the death of the
King his Lord; and the Cid made him Alcayde of a Castle, and alway
found him loyal, and at his service, and for this reason trusted he in
him so as to make him Guazil, who should keep the keys of the town,
with a guard of Almocadenes, and of Christian foot-men of Almogavares
who had been born in the land of the Moors. And it was appointed that
the Cid should dwell in Juballa, in the town which he had made, and
that he should alter none of their privileges, nor of their customs,
nor the rents which they paid, nor their money.

XXXI. Presently on the morrow they sent five good men as messengers to
the King of Zaragoza, and as many more to Murcia; and it had been
covenanted that neither of these messengers should take with him more
than fifty _maravedis_ for his journey, and that they should go by sea
as far as Denia, in a ship of the Christians, and from thence by land.
These messengers embarked with their company on board that ship, and
the Cid sent orders to the master thereof not to sail till he came; and
the Cid came himself in his own body and bade them search the
messengers to see if they took with them more than had been agreed; and
he found upon them great riches in gold and in silver and in pearls and
in precious stones; part was their own, and part belonged to other
merchants in the city, who thought to send it to Murcla, not being
minded to abide in Valencia: and he took it all, leaving them no more
than fifty _maravedis_ each, according to the covenant. This was the
price of food on the day when these messengers departed: the pound of
wheat was three _maravedis_, and the pound of barley one and a half,
and the pound of painick three, saving a quarter; the ounce of cheese
three _dineros_, and the ounce of hemp seed four, and the pound of
colewort one _maravedi_ and two _dineros_ of silver, and the pound of
neat-skin one _maravedi_. In the whole town there was only one mule of
Abeniaf's, and one horse: another horse which belonged to a Moor he
sold to a butcher for three hundred and eighty _doblas_ of gold,
bargaining that he should have ten pounds of the flesh. And the butcher
sold the flesh of that horse at ten _maravedis_ the short pound, and
afterwards at twelve, and the head for twenty _doblas_ of gold.

XXXII. The Moors of Valencia were now something comforted, for they
weened that they should receive help, and the Christians did not now
war upon them; nevertheless they kept guard, and went the rounds, as
before, and waited for the day appointed, as one who looked to be
released from prison. And for this reason men began to bring out the
food which they had hidden, and to sell of it, and thus they went on
til the time expired, and the messengers were not returned. And Abeniaf
besought them that they would wait yet three days more, but they made
answer that they would not, for they could bear it no longer. And the
Cid sent unto them bidding them yield up the town, as they had
covenanted to do; and he swore with great oaths, that if they delayed a
single hour after the time was expired, he would not keep the terms
which he had made, and moreover that he would slay the hostages;
nevertheless they let a day pass over and above the term. And then they
who made the covenant with the Cid went out unto him and besought him
to come and receive the town, but the Cid said wrathfully to them that
he was not bound to keep the terms, seeing they had let the time
appointed pass; and they yielded themselves into his hands that he
should do with them according to his pleasure; then he was moved to
compassion, and had pity upon them. And Abeniaf and other good men came
out, and the writings were made and were confirmed on both sides, by
the Chiefs of the Christians and of the Moors, and the gates were
opened at the hour of noon, upon Thursday the last day of June, after
the feast of St. John, which the Moors call Alhazaro. And when the gate
was opened Abeniaf was there within, with a great company round about
him, both of his own people and of those of the town; and the
Christians as they entered ascended the walls and towers. And Abeniaf
asked why so many went up, for it was not in the terms; but they would
not cease for that, and they took possession of all, little to his
liking.




BOOK VII.


I. And all the people of the town gathered together, like men risen
from their graves,...yea, like the dead when the trumpet shall sound
for the day of judgment, and men shall come out of their graves and be
gathered together before the Majesty of God. And hucksters came from
Alcudia and brought bread and pulse to sell, and others of the town
went out to Alcudia to buy food; and they who were poor, and had not
wherewith to buy, plucked of the herbs of the field and ate them, and
they held themselves rich because they could go out when they would,
and enter in again without fear. And such as were wise among them
abstained from taking much food, fearing what would happen, and they
took it little by little till they had gotten strength; all they who
took their fill died, and the mortality among them was so great that
all the fields were full of graves.

II. On the following day after the Christians had taken possession of
the town, the Cid entered it with a great company, and he ascended the
highest tower of the wall, and beheld all the city; and the Moors came
unto him, and kissed his hand, saying he was welcome. And the Cid did
great honour unto them. And then he gave order that all the windows of
the towers which looked in upon the town should be closed up, that the
Christians might not see what the Moors did in their houses; and the
Moors thanked him for this greatly. And he commanded and requested the
Christians that they should show great honour to the Moors, and respect
them, and greet them when they met: and the Moors thanked the Cid
greatly for the honour which the Christians did them, saying that they
had never seen so good a man, nor one so honourable, nor one who had
his people under such obedience.

III. Now Abeniaf thought to have the love of the Cid; and calling to
mind the wrath with which he had formerly been received, because he had
not taken a gift with him, he took now great riches which he had taken
from those who sold bread for so great a price during the siege of
Valencia, and this he carried to the Cid as a present. Among those who
had sold it were some men from the Islands of Majorca, and he took from
them all that they had. This the Cid knew, and he would not accept his
gifts. And the Cid caused proclamation to be made in the town and
throughout the whole district thereof, that the honourable men and
knights and castellans should assemble together in the garden of Villa
Nueva, where the Cid at that time sojourned. And when they were all
assembled, he went out unto them, to a place which was made ready with
carpets and with mats, and he made them take their seats before him
full honourably, and began to speak unto them, saying, I am a man who
have never possessed a kingdom, neither I nor any man of my lineage.
But the day when I first beheld this city I was well pleased therewith,
and coveted it that I might be its Lord; and I besought the Lord our
God that he would give it me. See now what his power is, for the day
when I sate down before Juballa I had no more than four loaves of
bread, and now by God's mercy I have won Valencia. And if I administer
right and justice here God will let me enjoy it, but if I do evil, and
demean myself proudly and wrongfully, I know that he will take it away.
Now then let every one go to his own lands, and possess them even as he
was wont to have and to hold them. He who shall find his field, or his
vineyard, or his garden, desert, let him incontinently enter thereon;
and he who shall find his husbanded, let him pay him that hath
cultivated it the cost of his labour, and of the seed which he hath
sown therein, and remain with his heritage, according to the law of the
Moors. Moreover I have given order that they who collect my dues take
from you no more than the tenth, because so it is appointed by the
custom of the Moors, and it is what ye have been wont to pay. And I
have resolved in my heart to hear your complaints two days in the week,
on the Monday and the Thursday; but if causes should arise which
require haste, come to me when ye will and I will give judgment, for I
do not retire with women to sing and to drink, as your Lords have done,
so that ye could obtain no justice, but will myself see to these
things, and watch over ye as friend over his friend, and kinsman over
his kinsman. And I will be Cadi and Guazil, and when dispute happens
among ye I will decide it. When he had said these things they all
replied that they prayed God to preserve him through long and happy
years, and four of the most honourable among them rose and kissed his
hands, and the Cid bade them take their seats again.

IV. Then the Cid spake unto them and said, It is told me that Abeniaf
hath done much evil, and committed great wrong toward some of ye, in
that he hath taken great riches from ye to present them to me, saying,
that this he did because ye sold food for a great price during the
siege. But I will accept of no such gift; for if I were minded to have
your riches, I could take them, and need not ask them neither from him,
nor from any other; but thing so unseemly as to take that which is his
from any one, without just cause, I will not do. They who have gotten
wealth thus, God hath given it them; let them go to Abeniaf, and take
back what he hath forced from them, for I will order him to restore the
whole. Then he said, Ye see the riches which I took from the messengers
who went to Murcia; it is mine by right, for I took it in war because
they brake the covenant which they had made, and would have deceived
me: nevertheless I will restore it to the uttermost farthing, that
nothing thereof shall be lost. And ye shall do homage to me that ye
will not withdraw yourselves, but will abide here, and do my bidding in
all things, and never depart from the covenant which ye make with me;
for I love ye, and am grieved to think of the great evil and misery
which ye endured from the great famine, and of the mortality which
there was. And if ye had done that before which ye have done now, ye
would not have been brought to these sufferings and have bought the
_cafiz_ of wheat at a thousand _maravedis_; but I trust in God to bring
it to one _maravedi_. Be ye now secure in your lands, and till your
fields, and rear cattle; for I have given order to my men that they
offer ye no wrong, neither enter into the town to buy nor to sell; but
that they carry on all their dealings in Alcudia, and this I do that ye
may receive no displeasure. Moreover I command them not to take any
captive into the town, but if this should be done, lay ye hands on the
captive and set him free, without fear, and if any one should resist,
kill him and fear not. I myself will not enter your city nor dwell
therein, but I will build me a place beside the Bridge of Alcantara,
where I may go and disport myself at times, and repair when it is
needful. When he had said these things he bade them go their way.

V. Well pleased were the Moors when they departed from him, and they
marvelled at the greatness of his promises, and they set their hearts
at rest, and put away the fear which they had had, thinking all their
troubles were over; for in all the promises which the Cid had made unto
them, they believed that he spake truth; but he said these things only
to quiet them, and to make them come to what he wished, even as came to
pass. And when he had done, he sent his Almoxarife, Abdalla Adiz, to
the Custom House, and made him appoint men to collect the rents of the
town for him, which vas done accordingly. And when the Cid had given
order concerning his own affairs at his pleasure, the Moors would fain
have entered again into possession of their heritages as he told them;
but they found it all otherwise, for of all the fields which the
Christians had husbanded; they would not yield up one; albeit they let
them enter upon such as were left waste; some said that the Cid had
given them the lands that year, instead of their pay, and other some
that they rented them and had paid rent for the year. So the Moors
seeing this, waited till Thursday, when the Cid was to hear complaints,
as he had said unto them. When Thursday came all the honourable men
went to the Garden, but the Cid sent to say unto them that he could not
come out that day, because of other causes which he had to determine;
and he desired that they would go their way for that time, and come
again on the Monday: this was to show his mastery. And when it was
Monday they assembled again in the Garden, and the Cid came out to
them, and took his seat upon the _estrado_, and the Moors made their
complaint. And when he had heard them, he began to make similitudes,
and offer reasons which were not like those which he had spoken the
first day, for he said to them, I ask of ye, whether it is weil that I
should be left without men? for if I were without them, I should be
like unto one who hath lost his right arm, or to a bird that hath no
wings, or to one who should do battle and hath neither spear nor sword.
The first thing which I have to look to is to the well-being of my
people, that they may live in wealth and honour, so that they may be
able to serve me, and defend my honour; for since it has pleased God to
give me the city of Valencia, I will not that there be any other Lord
here than me. Therefore I say unto you and command you, if you would be
well with me, and would that I should show favour unto you, that ye see
how to deliver that traitor Abeniaf into my hands. Ye all know the
great treason which he committed upon King Yahia, his Lord and yours,
how he slew him, and the misery which he brought upon you in the siege;
and since it is not fitting that a traitor who hath slain his Lord
should live among you, and that his treason should be confounded with
your loyalty, see to the obeyment of my command.

VI. When the honourable Moors heard this they were dismayed; verily
they knew that he spake truth touching the death of the King, but it
troubled them that he departed from the promise which he had made; and
they made answer that they would take counsel concerning what he had
said, and then reply. Then five of the best and most honourable among
them withdrew, and went to Abdalla Adiz, and said unto him, Areed us
thy reed now the best and truest that thou canst, for thou art of our
law, and oughtest to do this; and the reason why we ask counsel of thee
is this. The Cid promised us many things, and now behold he says
nothing to us of what he said before, but moveth other new reasons, at
which great dismay hath seized us. And because thou better knowest his
ways, tell us now what is his pleasure, for albeit we might wish to do
otherwise, this is not a time wherein anything but what he shall
command can be done. When the Almoxarife heard this he made answer,
Good men, it is easy to understand what he would have, and to do what
should be done. We all know the great treason which Abeniaf committed
against we all in killing your Lord the King: for albeit, at that time
ye felt the burden of the Christians, yet it was nothing so great as
after he had killed him, neither did ye suffer such misery. And since
God hath brought him who was the cause to this state, see now by all
means how ye may deliver him into the hands of the Cid. And fear not,
neither take thought for the rest; for though the Cid may do his
pleasure in some things, better is it to have him for Lord, than this
traitor who hath brought so much evil upon ye. Moreover the things of
this world soon pass away, and my heart tells me that we shall ere long
come out of the bondage of the Cid, and of the Christians, for the Cid
is well nigh at the full of his days, and we who remain alive after his
death, shall then be masters of our city. When the good men heard what
he said, they thanked him much, and held themselves to be well advised,
and said that they would do willingly what he bade them: and they
returned forthwith to the Cid, and said unto him that they would fulfil
his commandment. Incontinently did the good men dispeed themselves of
the Cid, and they went into the city, and gathered together a great
posse of armed men, and went to the place where Abeniaf dwelt; and they
assaulted the house and brake the doors, and entered in and laid hands
on him, and his son, and all his company, and carried them before the
Cid. And the Cid ordered Abeniaf to be cast into prison, and all those
who had taken counsel with him for the death of King Yahia.

VII. When this was done, the Cid said unto the good men, Now that ye
have fulfilled my bidding, I hold it good to show favour unto you in
that which ye yourselves shall understand to be fitting for me to
grant. Say therefore what ye would have, and I will do that which I
think behoveth me: but in this manner, that my dwelling place be within
the city of Valencia, in the Alcazar, and that my Christian men have
all the fortresses in the city. And when the good men heard this, they
were greatly troubled; howbeit they dissembled the sorrow which they
resented, and said unto him, Sir Cid, order it as you think good, and
we consent thereto. Then said he unto them that he would observe
towards them all the uses and customs of their law, and that he would
have the power, and be Lord of all; and they should till their fields
and feed their flocks and herds, and give him his tenth, and he would
take no more. When the Moors heard this they were well pleased, and
since they were to remain in the town, and in their houses and their
inheritances, and with their uses and customs, and that their Mosques
were to be left them, they held themselves not to be badly off. Then
they asked the Cid to let their Guazil be the same as he had first
appointed, and that he would give them for their Cadi the Alfaqui
Alhagi, and let him appoint whom he would to assist him in distributing
justice to the Moors; and thus he himself would be relieved of the
wearisomeness of hearing them, save only when any great occasion might
befall. This Alhagi was he who made the lamentation for Valencia, as ye
have heard; and when the Cid was peaceably established in Valencia, he
was converted, and the Cid made him a Christian. And the Cid granted
this which they required, and they kissed his hand, and returned into
the town. Nine months did the Cid hold Valencia besieged, and at the
end of that time it fell into his power, and he obtained possession of
the walls, as ye have heard. And one month he was practising with the
Moors that he might keep them quiet, till Abeniaf was delivered into
his hands; and thus ten months were fulfilled, and they were fulfilled
on Thursday the last day of June, in the year of the aera one thousand
one hundred and thirty and one, which was in the year one thousand
ninety and three of the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ. And when
the Cid had finished all his dealings with the Moors, on this day he
took horse with all his company in good array, his banner being carried
before him, and his arms behind: and in this guise, with great
rejoicings he entered the city of Valencia. And he alighted at the
Alcazar, and gave order to lodge all his men round about it, and he
bade them his banner upon the highest tower of the Alcazar.

Glad was the Campeador, and all they who were with him when they saw
his banner planted in that place. And from that day forth was the Cid
possessed of all the Castles and fortresses which were in the kingdom
of Valencia, and established in what God had given him, and lie and ail
Ins people rejoiced.

VIII. On the morrow the Cid sent Abeniaf to Juballa, and they gave him
great tortures till he was at the point of death; and they kept him
there two days, and then brought him to Valencia to the Garden of the
Cid, and the Cid gave order that he should write with his own hand an
account of all that he had. And he did this, and wrote down the
carkanets, and rings, and costly garments, and rich apparel which he
had, and also many other precious household things, and the debts which
were due unto him. This the Cid did that he might see if all was there
which Abeniaf had taken when he slew the King his Master; and the
writing was read before the Cid. And the Cid sent for certain Moors who
were good and honourable men, and made Abeniaf be brought before him,
and demanded of him if he had nothing more than what was there written
down; and he answered that he had not; and he bade him swear this
before the Moors, and Abeniaf swore accordingly. Then the Cid sent
privily to make search in all the houses of the friends of Abeniaf,
swearing unto them, that if they had anything of his and denied it, and
it should afterwards be discovered, he would put them to death, and
moreover take from them all that they had. And they when they heard
this, partly in the fear of the Cid, and partly that they might find
favour with him, brought each of them great riches, saying, Sir,
Abeniaf gave us this in keeping, that if it might be saved, he might
share it with us. And he gave order to search and dig in the houses of
Abeniaf, and they found great treasure there in gold and in silver, and
in pearls, and in precious stones, all which a servant discovered unto
them. And when the Cid saw it all before him it pleased him much, and
he called for the Moors before whom Abeniaf had taken the oath, and he
took his seat upon the _estrado_ full nobly, and there in the presence
of Christians and Moors he ordered Abeniaf and all the other prisoners
to be brought forth. And he bade that Alfaqui whom he had made Cadi,
and the other good men, judge by what death he who had slain his Lord
deserved to die, according to their law, and who moreover was perjured,
for he had sworn that he possessed nothing more than what he had set
down in writing: and the Cadi and the other Moors said that according
to their law, he and his accomplices should be stoned: This, they said,
we find in our law, but you will do as you think good. Nevertheless we
ask mercy of you for his son, who is but a child; may it please you to
set him free, for he hath no fault in what his father hath done. And
the Cid answered, that for the love of them he pardoned the child, but
that he should depart from the city, for he would not have the son of
a traitor dwell therein. And he commanded them that they should stone
Abeniaf and all them who had taken counsel with him for the death of
the King, according as they had given sentence. Then the honourable
Moors rose and kissed his feet and his hands for the mercy which he had
shown to the son of Abeniaf; and they took out Abeniaf to stone him,
and other twenty and two with him. And the Cid bade them come again to
him on the morrow, and he would appoint what should be the manner of
his dwelling among them.

IX. That night the Cid spake with Alvar Fanez and with Pero Bermudez,
and all them who were of his council, and they resolved in what manner
they would live among the Moors. And on the morrow the honourable Moors
of Valencia assembled together in the Alcazar as they had been
commanded to do, and the Cid took his seat upon the _estrado_, and all
the honourable men round about him, and he spake unto them after this
manner: Good men of the Aljama of Valencia, ye know how I served and
defended King Yahia your Lord, and ye also, until his death. And I had
great sorrow for him, and strove to revenge him, as ye know, and
endured great hardships in winning Valencia.

And since God hath thought it good that I should be Lord thereof, I
will have it for myself, and for those who have helpen me to win it,
saving the sovereignty of King Don Alfonso of Castille, my Lord, whom
God preserve for his service long and happy years. Ye are all now in my
power, to do with ye whatever I will, both with your persons and your
riches, and your wives and your children; but I will not do thus. And I
hold it good that the honourable men among ye who have alway been
loyal, remain in the city in their dwellings and with all their family;
and that none among ye keep more than one beast, which shall be a mule,
and that ye do not use arms, neither have them in your possession,
except when it is needful and I shall give command. And all the rest of
the people shall go out of the town and dwell in the suburb of Alcudia,
where I was wont to be. Ye shall have two Mosques, one in the city and
one in the suburb; and ye shall have your Alfaquis and follow your own
law; and ye shall have your Cadis, and your Guazil, as I have
appointed; and ye shall have your inheritances, and pay me the tenth of
the fruits thereof as your service; and the power of justice shall be
mine, and I will order such money to be coined as I shall think good.
Do ye therefore who are minded to abide with me in the land, abide: and
let those who are not, go, in God's name, and good luck with them, but
they shall take only their own persons, and I will give command to see
them escorted in safety. When the Moors of Valencia heard this they
were full sorrowful; howbeit it was now a time when they could do no
otherwise than as he commanded. And incontinently they began to go out
of the city with their wives and children, all except those whom the
Cid had commanded to abide there; and as the Moors went out the
Christians who dwelt in Alcudia entered in. And the history saith, that
so great was the multitude which departed, that they were two whole
days in going out. Great was the joy of the Cid and his people that
day, and from thenceforward he was called My Cid the Campeador, Lord of
Valencia.

X. Now was it bruited abroad throughout all lands, how the Cid Ruydiez
had won the noble city of Valencia. And when Ali Abenaxa the Adelantado
of the Almoravides knew it, he sent his son-in-law the King of Seville
to besiege him in Valencia, and gave him thirty thousand men at arms.
And this King came in great haste to Valencia, and besieged the Cid
therein. And the Cid made ready with all his people, and went out to
fight him. And the battle was nigh unto Valencia, beside the garden
which is called the Garden of Villa Nueva; and it was a good battle,
and at length he of the good fortune conquered; and the pursuit
continued as far as Xativa; even so far did the Christians pursue them,
smiting and slaying. And at the passage of the Xucar there might you
have seen confusion, and there the Moors without liking it drank plenty
of water. They say that fifteen thousand Moors died in the river; and
the King of Seville fled with three great blows. This day did Martin
Pelaez the Asturian approve himself a right good one: there was no
knight so good that day in arms as he, nor who bore away such honour.
And when the pursuit was ended the Cid returned to the field of battle,
and ordered the spoils of the field and of the tents to be collected.
Be it known that this was a profitable day's work. Every foot soldier
shared a hundred marks of silver that day. And the Cid returned full
honourably to Valencia. Great was the joy of the Christians in the Cid
Ruydiez, he who was born in a good hour. His beard was grown, and
continued to grow a great length. My Cid said of his chin, For the love
of King Don Alfonso, who hath banished me from his land, no scissars
shall come upon it, nor shall a hair be cut away, and Moors and
Christians shall talk of it.

XI. That night the Cid took counsel with Alvar Fanez, who departed not
from his side, and with the other honourable men who were of his
council, concerning what should be done: for now that his people were
all rich, he feared least they should return into their own country,
for my Cid saw that if they might go they would. And Minaya advised him
that he should cause proclamation to be made through the city, that no
man should depart without permission of the Cid, and if any one went
who had not dispeeded himself and kist his hand, if he were overtaken
he should lose all that he had, and moreover be fixed upon a stake. And
that they might be the more certain, he said unto Minaya that he would
take account of all the people who were with him, both horsemen and
foot, and Pero Bermudez and Martin Antolinez made the roll; and there
were found a thousand knights of lineage, and five hundred and fifty
other horsemen, and of foot soldiers four thousand, besides boys and
others; thus many were the people of my Cid, he of Bivar. And his heart
rejoiced, and he smiled and said, Thanks be to God, Minaya, and to Holy
Mary Mother!...we had a smaller company when we left the house of
Bivar!

XII. At this time there came a crowned one from the parts of the East,
that is to say, one who was shaven and shorn; his name was the Bishop
Don Hieronymo, a full learned man and a wise, and one who was mighty
both on horseback and a-foot: and he came enquiring for the Cid,
wishing that he might see himself with the Moors in the field, for if
he could once have his fill of smiting and slaying them, Christians
should never lament him. And when the Cid knew this it pleased him in
his heart, and he took horse and went to visit him, and rejoiced
greatly that he was come; and he resolved to make Valencia a bishopric
and give it to this good Christian. And they took counsel, and it was
that on the morrow the Bishop and his clergy should turn the Mosques
into Churches, wherein they might sing masses, and sacrifice the body
of Jesus Christ. And rents were appointed for the table of the Bishop
and for his Canons, and for all the clergy in the city of Valencia. And
nine parish Churches were made. And the greatest was called St.
Pedro's, and another was called St. Mary of the Virtues. This was near
the Alcazar, and there the Cid went oftenest to hear service. After
this manner the Cid ordered his city that it should be a Bishopric, for
the honour of the Catholic faith. God! how joyful was all Christendom
that there was a Lord Bishop in the land of Valencia!

XIII. Now the Cid bethought him of Dona Ximena his wife, and of his
daughters Dona Elvira and Dona Sol, whom he had left in the Monastery
of St. Pedro de Cardena; and he called for Alvar Fanez and Martin
Antolinez of Burgos, and spake with them, and besought them that they
would go to Castille, to King Don Alfonso his Lord, and take him a
present from the riches which God had given them; and the present
should be a hundred horses, saddled and bridled; and that they would
kiss the King's hand for him, and beseech him to send him his wife Dona
Ximena, and his daughters, and that they would tell the King all the
mercy which God had shown him, and how he was at his service with
Valencia and with all that he had. Moreover he bade them take a
thousand marks of silver to the Monastery of St. Pedro de Cardena, and
give them to the Abbot, and thirty marks, of gold for his wife and
daughters, that they might prepare themselves and come in honourable
guise. And he ordered three hundred marks of gold to be given them, and
three hundred marks of silver, to redeem the chests full of sand which
he had pledged in Burgos to the Jews; and he bade them ask Rachel and
Vidas to forgive him the deceit of the sand, for he had done it because
of his great need: and he said, You, Martin Antolinez, were aiding and
abetting herein, but praised be the name of the Lord for ever, he hath
let me quit myself truly; tell them that they shall have more profit
than they asked. And he bade them each take with him his whole company,
that they might be better advised and accompanied, and that Dona Ximena
might come with the greater honour: and the company was this: two
hundred knights who were of Don Alvar Fanez, and fifty of Martin
Antolinez: and he ordered money to be given them for their
disbursement, and for all things needful, in abundance.

XIV. Alvar Fanez and Martin Antolinez went their way, and they found
the King in the city of Palencia. When they arrived he was coming from
mass, and seeing this goodly company of horsemen he stopped in the
church porch, and asked who they were. And it was told him that they
were people of the Cid, who came to him with a full great present. And
Alvar Fanez and Martin Antolinez alighted, and came to the King, and
kissed his hand; and he received them right well, and said, What
tidings bring ye me of the Cid, my true vassal, the most honourable
knight that ever was knighted in Castille? Well was Minaya pleased when
he heard this, and he said, A boon, Sir King Don Alfonso, for the love
of your Maker: My Cid sendeth to kiss your hands and your feet, as his
natural Lord, at whose service he is, and from whom he expecteth much
bounty and good. You banished him from the land; but though in
another's country, he hath only done you service. Five pitched battles
hath he won since that time, some with Moors and some with bad
Christians; and he hath taken Xerica, and Ondra, and Almenar, and
Monviedro which is a bigger place, and Cebola also, and Castrejon, and
Pena Cadiella which is a strong eminence, and with all the right noble
city of Valencia, for the honour of the faith of Jesus Christ, and of
you our Lord and King; and he hath made it a Bishopric, and made the
Honourable Don Hieronymo Bishop thereof with his own hand. And behold
here are a hundred horses of the spoils which he hath won; they are
great and swift, and are all bridled and saddled, and he kisseth your
hand and beseecheth you as his natural Lord to receive them. When the
King heard this he was greatly astonished, and he lifted up his right
hand and blessed himself, and said, As St. Isidro shall keep me, I
rejoice in the good fortune of the Cid, and receive his gift full
willingly. But though this pleased the King it did not please Garci
Ordonez, and he said, It seemeth there is not a man left in the land of
the Moors, that the Cid can thus do his pleasure! And the King said
unto him, Hold thy peace, for in all things he serves me better than
thou.

Then Alvar Fanez kissed the King's hand again, and said, Sir, the Cid
beseecheth you of your bounty that he may have his wife Dona Ximena and
his two daughters, that they may go to Valencia unto him, from the
Monastery where he left them, for it is many days since he saw them,
and if it please you this would rejoice him. And the King made answer,
It pleases me well, and I will give them a guard throughout my
dominions, that they may be conducted honourably to the border: when
they have past it, the Campeador himself will look to them. And he
said, Hear me! all those whom I have disseized of their inheritances
for following the Campeador, I restore again to the possession thereof,
and all those who desire to serve him I freely licence: let them go in
the grace of God. Moreover the King said, I grant him Valencia and all
that he hath won and shall win hereafter, that he be called Lord
thereof, and that he hold it of no other Lordship save of me, who am
his liege Lord. Alvar Fanez and Martin Antolinez kissed his hand for
this in the Cid's name. And the King called a porter, who should go
with them, bearing a writing from the King, that all things needful
should be given unto them so long as they were in his lands. Then Alvar
Fanez and Martin Antolinez dispeeded themselves of the King, and took
their way towards Burgos.

XV. When they reached Burgos they sent for Rachel and for Vidas, and
demanded from them the chests, and paid unto them the three hundred
marks of gold and the three hundred of silver as the Cid had commanded,
and they besought them to forgive the Cid the deceit of the chests, for
it was done because of his great necessity. And they said they heartily
forgave him, and held themselves well paid; and they prayed God to
grant him long life and good health, and to give him power to advance
Christendom, and put down Pagandom. And when it was known through the
city of Burgos the goodness and the gentleness which the Cid had shown
to these merchants in redeeming from them the chests full of sand and
earth and stones, the people held it for a great wonder, and there was
not a place in all Burgos where they did not talk of the gentleness and
loyalty of the Cid; and they besought blessings upon him, and prayed
that he and his people might be advanced in honour. When they had done
this, they went to the Monastery of St. Pedro de Cardena, and the
porter of the King went with them, and gave order every where that
every thing which they wanted should be given them. If they were well
received, and if there was great joy in St. Pedro de Cardena over them,
it is not a thing to ask, for Dona Ximena and her daughters were like
people beside themselves with the great joy which they had, and they
came running out on foot to meet them, weeping plenteously for great
joy. And Alvar Fanez and Martin Antolinez, when they saw them coming,
leapt off their horses and went to them, and Minaya embraced Dona
Ximena and both his cousins, Dona Elvira and Dona Sol, and so great was
the rejoicing which they made together that no man can tell it you. And
when this great joy was somewhat abated, Dona Ximena asked how the Cid
fared, for since he had parted from her she had heard no news of him.
And Alvar Fanez said he had left him safe and sound in Valencia; and he
bade her and her daughters thank God for the great favour that he had
shown him, for he had won sundry castles from the Moors, and the noble
city of Valencia, whither he was now come to carry her and her
daughters, for the Cid had sent for them, and when he should see them
his heart's desire would be accomplished. When Dona Ximena and her
daughters heard this, they set their knees to the ground, and lifted up
their hands and thanked God for the favour he had shown to the Cid, and
to them with him, in giving him the Lordship of Valencia. While they
were preparing for the journey, Alvar Fanez sent three knights to the
Cid to tell him how they had sped with the King, and of the great
favour which they had found at his hands, and how he only tarried now
to equip Dona Ximena, that she might come full honourably. That good
one Minaya then began to deck them out for the journey with the best
trappings which could be found in Burgos: right noble garments did he
provide for them, and a great company of damsels, and good palfreys,
and great mules, which were not bad ones. And he gave the Abbot the
thousand marks of silver which the Cid had sent for the Monastery, with
which to discharge all the debt that Dona Ximena and his daughters had
contracted. Great was the stir throughout all that land of the honour
of the Cid, and of the licence which the King gave to as many as should
chuse to join him; and for this reason full sixty knights came to St.
Pedro de Cardena, and a great number of squires on foot. Don Alvar
Fanez was well pleased to see them, and he promised them that he would
obtain the Cid's grace for them, and would befriend them all he could.
Great dole did the Abbot make when they departed; and he said, As God
shall help you, Minaya, kiss the hand of the Campeador for me. This
Monastery will never forget him, to pray for him every day in the year.
The Cid will alway prosper more and more. Minaya promised to do this,
and dispeeded himself, and they went their way. Five days they
travelled, and then they came to Medina Celi; and alway the porter of
the King was with them, and made all that they wanted be given unto
them, even as the King had commanded.

XVI. Now the three knights whom Alvar Fanez had sent, came to the Cid
and delivered their message. When my Cid heard it his heart rejoiced
and he was glad, and he spake with his mouth and said, He who sends
good messengers looks for good tidings. Blessed be the name of God,
since King Don Alfonso rejoices in my good fortune. And he called for
Muno Gustios, and Pero Bermudez, and the Bishop Don Hieronymo, and bade
them take a hundred knights least there should be need to fight, and go
to Molina, to Abencano, who was his friend and vassal, and bid him take
another hundred knights, and go with them to Medina Celi as fast as
they could go. There, said he, ye will find Alvar Fanez and my wife and
daughters; bring them to me with great honour: I will remain here in
Valencia which has cost me so much; great folly would it be if I were
to leave it: I will remain in it, for I hold it for my heritage. And
they did as he commanded them. And when they came to Molina, Abencano
received them right well, and did them great honour; and though the Cid
had bidden him take only one hundred horse, he took two. On the morrow
they went to horse: they crossed the mountains which are great and
wild, and they passed Mata de Toranz without fear, and they thought to
come through the valley of Arbuxedo. There was good look out kept in
Medina, and Alvar Fanez sent two knights to know who they were. They
made no tarriance in doing this, for they had it at heart; one tarried
with them, and the other returned, and said it was the host of the
Campeador with Pero Bermudez, and Muno Gustios, and the Bishop
Hieronymo, and the Alcayaz Abencano. This instant, said Minaya, let us
to horse; incontinently this was done, for they would make no delay.
And they rode upon goodly horses with bells at their poitrals and
trappings of sandall silk, and they had their shields round their
necks, and lances with streamers in their hands. Oh, how Alvar Fanez
went out from Castille with these ladies! They who pricked forward,
couched their spears and then raised them, and great joy was there by
Salon where they met. The others humbled themselves to Minaya: when
Abencano carne up he kissed him on the shoulder, for such was his
custom. In a good day, Minaya, said he, do you bring these ladies, the
wife and daughters of the Cid, whom we all honour. Whatever ill we may
wish him we can do him none; in peace or in war he will have our
wealth, and he must be a fool who does not acknowledge this truth.
Alvar Fanez smiled and told him he should lose nothing by this
service which he had done the Cid: and now, said he, let us go rest,
for the supper is ready. Abencano said he was well pleased to partake
it, and that within three days he would return him the entertainment
two-fold. Then they entered Medina, and Minaya served them; all were
full glad of the service which they had undertaken, and the King's
porter paid for all. The night is gone, morning is come, mass is said,
and they go to horse. They left Medina and past the river Salon, and
pricked up Arbuxuelo, and they crost the plain of Torancio. That good
Christian the Bishop Don Hieronymo, night and day he guarded the
ladies; on a goodly horse he rode, and they went between him and Alvar
Fanez. They came to Molina and there were lodged in a good and rich
house, and Abencano the Moor waited on them. Nothing did they want
which they could wish to have; he even had all their beasts new shod,
and for Minaya and the ladies, Lord! how he honoured them! On the
morrow they left Molina, and the Moor went with them. When they were
within three leagues of Valencia, news of their coming was brought to
the Cid. Glad was the Cid, never was he more joyful, never had he such
joy, for tidings were come to him of what he loved best. Two hundred
knights did he order out to meet them, others he bade to keep the
Alcazar, and the other high towers, and all the gates and entrances.
And he commanded that they should bring him Bavieca. It was but a short
time since he had won this horse; my Cid, he who girt on sword in a
happy hour, did not yet know if he was a good goer, and if he stopt
well. The Bishop Don Hieronymo, he pricked forward and entered the
city. He left his horse and went to the Church, and collected all the
clergy; they put on their surplices, and with crosses of silver went
out to meet the ladies, and that good one Minaya. He who was born in
happy hour made no tarriance; they saddled him Bavieca and threw his
trappings on. My Cid wore light armour, and his surcoat over it: long
was his beard. He went out upon this horse, and ran a career with him;
Bavieca was the name of the horse, and when he was running all
marvelled at him: from that day Bavieca was famous all over Spain. At
the end of the course my Cid alighted and went toward his wife and his
daughters. Who can tell the joy that was made at their meeting? They
fell at his feet, and their joy was such that they could not speak. And
he raised them up and embraced them, and kissed them many times,
weeping for joy that he saw them alive. Hear what he said who was born
in happy hour! You dear and honoured wife, and ye my daughters, my
heart and my soul; enter with me into Valencia;...this is the
inheritance which I have won for you. While they were thus rejoicing
the Bishop Don Hieronymo came with the procession. Dona Ximena brought
good relicks and other sacred things, which she gave to ennoble the new
Church of Valencia. In this guise they entered the city. Who can tell
the rejoicings that were made that day, throwing at the board, and
killing bulls! My Cid led them to the Alcazar, and took them up upon
the highest tower thereof, and there they looked around and beheld
Valencia, how it lay before them, and the great Garden with its thick
shade, and the sea on the other side; and they lifted up their hands to
thank God. Great honour did the Cid do to Abencano the Lord of Molina,
for all the service which he had done to Dona Ximena. Then said
Abencano, This, Sir, I was bound to do, for since I have been your
vassal I have alway been respected, and defended from all my enemies,
and maintained in good estate; how then should I do otherwise than
serve you? If I did not, I should lack understanding. And the Cid
thanked him for what he had done, and what he had said, and promised
also to show favour unto him. And Abencano took his leave and returned
to Molina.

XVII. The winter is past, and March is coming in. Three months Dona
Ximena had been in Valencia, when tidings came to the Cid from beyond
sea, that King Yucef, the son of the Miramamolin, who dwelt in Morocco,
was coming to lay siege unto Valencia with fifty thousand men. When the
Cid heard this he gave command to store all his Castles, and had them
well repaired. And he had the walls of the city prepared, and stored it
well with food and with all things needful for war, and gathered
together a great power of Christians and of the Moors of his seignory.
Hardly had he done this before he heard that Yucef was near at hand,
and coming as fast as he could come. Then the Cid assembled together
the Christians in the Alcazar, and when they were assembled, he rose
upon his feet and said, Friends and kinsmen and vassals, praised be God
and holy Mary Mother, all the good which I have in the world I have
here in Valencia; with hard labour I won the city, and hold it for my
heritage, and for nothing less than death will I leave it. My daughters
and my wife shall see me fight, they shall see with their own eyes our
manner of living in this land, and how we get our bread. We will go out
against the Moors and give them battle, and God who hath thus far shown
favour unto us will still continue to be our helper. When they heard
this they cried out with one accord that they would do his bidding, and
go out with him and fight under his banner, for certain they were that
by his good fortune the Moors would be overthrown.

XVIII. On the morrow the Cid took Dona Ximena by the hand, and her
daughters with her, and made them go up upon the highest tower of the
Alcazar, and they looked toward the sea and saw the great power of the
Moors, how they came on and drew nigh, and began to pitch their tents
round about Valencia, beating their tambours and with great uproar. And
Ximena's heart failed her, and she asked the Cid if peradventure God
would deliver him from these enemies. Fear not, honoured woman, said
he; you are but lately arrived, and they come to bring you a present,
which shall help marry your daughters. Fear not, for you shall see me
fight by the help of God and holy Mary Mother; my heart kindles because
you are here! The more Moors the more gain! The tambours sounded now
with a great alarum, and the sun was shining. Cheer up, said my Cid;
this is a glorious day. But Ximena was seized with such fear as if her
heart would have broken; she and her daughters had never been in such
fear since the day that they were born. Then the good Cid Campeador
stroked his beard and said, Fear not, all this is for your good. Before
fifteen days are over, if it please God, those tambours shall be laid
before you, and shall be sounded for your pleasure, and then they shall
be given to the Bishop Don Hieronymo, that he may hang them up in the
Church of St. Mary, Mother of God. This vow the Cid Campeador made. Now
the Moors began to enter the gardens which were round about the town,
and the watchman saw them and struck the bell. My Cid looked back and
saw Alvar Salvadores beside him, and he said, go now, take two hundred
horse, and sally upon yonder Moors who are entering the gardens; let
Dona Xiraena and her daughters see the good will you have to serve
them. Down went Alvar Salvadores in great haste, and ordered a bell to
be rung which was a signal for two hundred knights to make ready; for
the history saith, that the Cid, by reason that he was alway in war,
had appointed, such signals for his people, that they knew when one
hundred were called for, and when two, and so forth. Presently they
were ready at the place of meeting, and the gate was opened which was
nearest the gardens where the Moors had entered, without order; and
they fell fiercely upon them, smiting and slaying. Great was the
pleasure of the Cid at seeing how well they behaved themselves. And
Dona Ximena and her daughters stood trembling, like women who had never
seen such things before: and when the Cid saw it he made them seat
themselves, so as no longer to behold it. Great liking had the Bishop
Don Hieronymo to see how bravely they fought. Alvar Salvadores and his
companions bestirred themselves so well that they drove the enemy to
their tents, making great mortality among them, and then they turned
back, whereat my Cid was well pleased; but Alvar Salvadores went on,
hacking and hewing all before him, for he thought the ladies were
looking on, and he pressed forward so far, that being without succour
he was taken. The others returned to the city, falling back in brave
order till they were out of reach of the enemy: and they had done no
little in that exploit, for they slew above two hundred and fifty
Moors. When my Cid saw that they who eat his bread were returned, he
went down from the tower, and received them right well, and praised
them for what they had done like good knights: howbeit he was full
sorrowful for Alvar Salvadores that he should be in the hands of the
Moors, but he trusted in God that he should deliver him on the morrow.

XIX. And the Cid assembled his chief captains and knights and people,
and said unto them, Kinsmen and friends and vassals, hear me: to-day
has been a good day, and to-morrow shall be a better. Be you all armed
and ready in the dark of the morning; mass shall be said, and the
Bishop Don Hieronymo will give us absolution, and then we will to
horse, and out and smite them in the name of the Creator and of the
Apostle Santiago. It is fitter that we should live than that they
should gather in the fruits of this land. But let us take counsel in
what manner we may go forth, so as to receive least hurt, for they are
a mighty power, and we can only defeat them by great mastery in war.
When Alvar Fanez Minaya heard this, he answered and said, Praised be
God and your good fortune, you have achieved greater things than this,
and I trust in God's mercy that you will achieve this also. Give me
three hundred horse, and we will go out when the first cock crows, and
put ourselves in ambush in the valley of Albuhera; and when you have
joined battle we will issue out and fall upon them on the other side,
and on one side or the other God will help us. Well was the Cid pleased
with this counsel, and he said that it should be so; and he bade them
feed their horses in time and sup early, and as soon as it was
cock-crow come to the Church of St. Pedro, and hear mass, and shrive
themselves, and communicate, and then take horse in the name of the
Trinity, that the soul of him who should die in the business might go
without let to God.

XX. Day is gone, and night is come. At cock-crow they all assembled
together in the Church of St. Pedro, and the Bishop Don Hieronymo sung
mass, and they were shriven and assoyled, and howselled. Great was the
absolution which the Bishop gave them: He who shall die, said he,
fighting face forward, I will take his sins, and God shall have his
soul. Then said he, A boon, Cid Don Rodrigo; I have sung mass to you
this morning: let me have the giving the first wounds in this battle!
and the Cid granted him this boon in the name of God. Then being all
ready they went out through the gate which is called the Gate of the
Snake, for the greatest power of the Moors was on that side, leaving
good men to guard the gates. Alvar Fanez and his company were already
gone forth, and had laid their ambush. Four thousand, lacking thirty,
were they who went out with my Cid, with a good will, to attack fifty
thousand. They went through all the narrow places, and bad passes, and
leaving the ambush on the left, struck to the right hand, so as to get
the Moors between them and the town. And the Cid put his battles in
good array, and bade Pero Bermudez bear his banner. When the Moors saw
this they were greatly amazed; and they harnessed themselves in great
haste, and came out of their tents. Then the Cid bade his banner move
on, and the Bishop Don Hieronymo pricked forward with his company, and
laid on with such guise, that the hosts were soon mingled together.
Then might you have seen many a horse running about the field with the
saddle under his belly, and many a horseman in evil plight upon the
ground. Great was the smiting and slaying in short time; but by reason
that the Moors were so great a number, they bore hard upon the
Christians, and were in the hour of overcoming them. And the Cid began,
to encourage them with a loud voice, shouting God and Santiago! And
Alvar Fanez at this time issued out from ambush, and fell upon them, on
the side which was nearest the sea; and the Moors thought that a great
power had arrived to the Cid's succour, and they were dismayed, and
began to fly. And the Cid and his people pursued, punishing them in a
bad way. If we should wish to tell you how every one behaved himself in
this battle, it is a thing which could not be done, for all did so well
that no man can relate their feats. And the Cid Ruydiez did go well,
and made such mortality among the Moors, that the blood ran from his
wrist to his elbow! great pleasure had he in his horse Bavieca that
day, to find himself so well mounted. And in the pursuit he came up to
King Yucef, and smote him three times: but the King escaped from under
the sword, for the horse of the Cid passed on in his course, and when
he turned, the King being on a fleet horse, was far off, so that he
might not be overtaken; and he got into a Castle called Guyera, for so
far did the Christians pursue them, smiting and slaying, and giving
them no respite, so that hardly fifteen thousand escaped of fifty that
they were. They who were in the ships, when they saw this great
overthrow, fled to Denia.

XXI. Then the Cid and his people returned to the field and began to
plunder the tents. And the spoil was so great that there was no end to
the riches, in gold and in silver, and in horses and arms, so that men
knew not what to leave and what to take. And they found one tent which
had been King Yucef's; never man saw so noble a thing as that tent was;
and there were great riches therein, and there also did they find Alvar
Salvadores, who had been made prisoner the yesterday, as ye have heard.
Greatly did the Cid rejoice when he saw him alive and sound, and he
ordered his chains to be taken off; and then he left Alvar Fanez to
look to the spoil, and went into Valencia with a hundred knights. His
wrinkled brow was seen, for he had taken off his helmet, and in this
manner he entered, upon Bavieca, sword in hand. Great joy had Dona
Ximena and her daughters, who were awaiting him, when they saw him come
riding in; and he stopt when he came to them, and said, Great honour
have I won for you, while you kept Valencia this day! God and the
Saints have sent us goodly gain, upon your coming. Look, with a bloody
sword, and a horse all sweat, this is the way that we conquer the
Moors! Pray God that I may live yet awhile for your sakes, and you
shall enter into great honour, and they shall kiss your hands. Then my
Cid alighted when he had said this, and the ladies knelt down before
him, and kissed his hand, and wished him long life. Then they entered
the Palace with him, and took their seats upon the precious benches.
Wife Dona Ximena, said he, these damsels who have served you so well, I
will give in marriage to these my vassals, and to every one of them two
hundred marks of silver, that it may be known in Castille what they
have got by their services. Your daughters'marriage will come in time.
And they all rose and kissed his hand: and great was the joy in the
Palace, and it was done according as the Cid had said.

XXII. Alvar Fanez this while was in the field writing and taking
account of the spoil: but the tents and arms and precious garments were
so many that they cannot be told, and the horses were beyond all
reckoning; they ran about the field, and there was no body to take
them, and the Moors of the land got something by that great overthrow.
Nevertheless so many horses were taken that the Campeador had to his
share of the good ones a thousand and five hundred. Well might the
others have good store when he had so many. And my Cid won in this
battle from King Yucef, his good sword Tizona, which is to say, the
firebrand. The tent of the King of Morocco, which was supported by two
pillars wrought with gold, he gave order not to be touched, for he
would send it to Alfonso the Castillian. The Bishop Don Hieronymo, that
perfect one with the shaven crown, he had his fill in that battle,
fighting with both hands; no one could tell how many he slew. Great
booty came to him, and moreover the Cid sent him the tithe of his
fifth. Glad were the Christian folk in Valencia for the great booty
which they had gotten, and glad was Dona Ximena and her daughters, and
glad were all those ladies who were married.

XXIII. King Yucef, after the pursuit was given over, and he saw that he
might come forth from the Castle, fled to Denia, and embarked in his
ships, and returned to Morocco. And thinking every day how badly he had
sped, and how he had been conquered by so few, and how many of his
people he had lost, he fell sick and died. But before he died he
besought his brother, who was called Bucar, that for the tie there was
between them, he would take vengeance for the dishonour which he had
received from the Cid Campeador before Valencia; and Bucar promised to
do this, and swore also upon the Koran, which is the book of their law.
And accordingly he came afterwards across the sea, with nine and twenty
Kings, as shall be related when the time comes.

XXIV. Then the Cid sent Alvar Fanez and Pero Bermudez with a present to
King Alfonso his Lord. And the present which he sent was two hundred
horses saddled and bridled, with each a sword hanging from the
saddle-bow: and also the noble tent which he had won from King Yucef of
Morocco. This present he gave, because the King had sent him his wife
and daughters when he asked for them, and because of the honour which
he had done them, and that the King might not speak ill of him who
commanded in Valencia. Alvar Fanez and Pero Bermudez went their way
towards Castille, over sierras and mountains and waters; and they asked
where the King was, and it was told them that he was at Valladolid, and
thither they went. And when they drew nigh unto the city, they sent to
let him know of their coming, and to ask of him whether he thought it
good for them to come into the city unto him, or if he would come out
to them, for they were a great company, and the present a full great
one, which he would see better without, than in the town. And the King
thought this best, and he went to horse, and bade all the hidalgos who
were with him do the like. Now the Infantes of Carrion were there,
Diego Gonzalez and Ferrando Gonzalez, the sons of Count Don Gonzalo.
And they found the company of the Cid about half a league from the
town, and when the King saw how many they were, he blest himself, for
they seemed like a host. And Minaya and Pero Bermudez pricked on when
they saw him, and came before him, and alighted, and knelt down, and
kissed the ground and kissed both his feet; and he bade them rise and
mount their horses, and would not hear them till they had mounted, and
taken their places one at his right hand, and the other at his left.
And they said, Sir, the Cid commends himself to your grace as his liege
Lord, and thanks you greatly for having sent him with such honour his
wife and daughters. And know. Sir, that since they arrived, he hath
achieved a great victory over the Moors, and their King Yucef of
Morocco, the Miramamolin, who besieged him in Valencia with fifty
thousand men. And he went out against them, and smote them, and hath
sent you these two hundred horses from his fifth. Then Alvar Fanez gave
order that the horses should be led forward. And this was the manner in
which they came. The two hundred horses came first, and every one was
led by a child, and every one had a sword hanging from the saddle, on
the left side; and after them came the pages of all the knights in
company, carrying their spears, and then the company, and after them,
an hundred couple with spears in rest. And when they had all past by,
the King blest himself again, and he laughed and said that never had so
goodly a present been sent before to King of Spain by his vassal. And
Alvar Fanez said moreover, Sir, he hath sent you a tent, the noblest
that ever man saw, which he won in this battle: and the King gave order
that the tent should be spread, and he alighted and went into it, he
and all his people, and he was greatly pleased; and they all said that
they had never seen so noble a tent as this; and the King said he had
won many from the Moors, but never such as this. But albeit that all
the others were well pleased, Count Don Garcia was not so; and he and
ten of his lineage talked apart, and said that this which the Cid had
done was to their shame, for they hated the Cid in their hearts. And
King Don Alfonso said, Thanks be to God and to Sir Saint Isidro of
Leon, these horses may do me good service; and he gave three of them to
Minaya, and Pero Bermudez, and bade them chuse, and he ordered food and
cloathing to be given them while they remained, and said that he would
give them compleat armour when they returned, such as was fit for them
to appear in before my Cid. And they were lodged, and all things that
were needful provided for them and their people.

XXV. When the Infantes of Carrion, Diego Gonzalez and Ferrando
Gonzalez, saw the noble present which the Cid had sent unto the King,
and heard how his riches and power daily increased, and thought what
his wealth must needs be when he had given those horses out of the
fifth of one battle, and moreover that he was Lord of Valencia: they
spake one with the other, and agreed, that if the Cid would give them
his daughters to wife, they should be well married, and become rich and
honourable. And they agreed together that they would talk with the King
in private upon this matter. And they went presently to him, and said,
Sir, we beseech you of your bounty to help us in a thing which will be
to your honour; for we are your vassals, and the richer we are the
better able shall we be to serve you. And the King asked of them what
it was they would have, and they then told him their desire. And the
King thought upon it awhile, and then came to them, and said, Infantes,
this thing which you ask lies not in me, but in the Cid; for it is in
his power to marry his daughters, and peradventure he will not do it as
yet. Nevertheless that he ye may not fail for want of my help, I will
send to tell him what ye wish. Then they kissed his hand for this
favour. And the King sent for Alvar Fanez and Pero Bermudez, and went
apart with them, and praised the Cid, and thanked him for the good will
which he had to do him service, and said that he had great desire to
see him. Say to him, he said, that I beseech him to come and meet me,
for I would speak with him concerning something which is to his good
and honour. Diego and Ferrando, the Infantes of Carrion, have said unto
me that they would fain wed with his daughters, if it seemeth good to
him; and methinks this would be a good marriage. When Alvar Fanez and
Pero Bermudez heard this, they answered the King, and said, Certain we
are, Sir, that neither in this, nor in anything else will the Cid do
aught but what you, Sir, shall command or advise. When ye have your
meeting ye will agree concerning it as is best. Then they kissed his
hand, and took their leave.

XXVI. On the morrow the messengers of the Cid departed from Valladolid,
and took their way towards Valencia; and when the Cid knew that they
were nigh at hand he went out to meet them, and when he saw them he
waxed joyful, and he embraced them, and asked what tidings of his Lord
Alfonso. And they told him how they had sped, and how greatly the King
loved him; and when we departed, said they, he bade us beseech you to
come and meet him anywhere where you will appoint, for he desireth to
speak with you, concerning the marriage of your daughters with the
Infantes of Carrion, if it should please you so to bestow them: now by
what the King said it seemeth unto us that this marriage pleaseth him.
And when the Cid heard this he became thoughtful, and he said to them
after awhile, What think ye of this marriage? And they answered him,
Even as it shall please you. And he said to them, I was banished from
my own country, and was dishonoured, and with hard labour gained I what
I have got; and now I stand in the King's favour, and he asketh of me
my daughters for the Infantes of Carrion. They are of high blood and
full orgullous, and I have no liking to this match; but if our Lord the
King adviseth it we can do no otherwise; we will talk of this, and God
send it for the best. So they entered Valencia, and the Cid spake with
Dona Ximena touching this matter, and when she heard it it did not
please her; nevertheless she said, if the King thought it good they
could do no otherwise. Then the Cid gave order to write letters to the
King, saying, that he would meet the King as he commanded, and whatever
the King wished that he would do. And he sealed the letters well, and
sent two knights with them. And when the King saw the letters he was
well pleased, and sent others to say that the time of their meeting
should be three weeks after he received these letters, and the place
appointed was upon the Tagus, which is a great river.

XXVII. Now began they to prepare on both sides for this meeting. He who
should relate to you the great preparations, and the great nobleness
which were made for the nonce, would have much to recount. Who ever saw
in Castille so many a precious mule, and so many a good-going palfrey,
and so many great horses, and so many goodly streamers set upon goodly
spears, and shields adorned with gold and with silver, and mantles, and
skins, and rich sendals of Adria? The King sent great store of food to
the banks of the Tagus, where the place of meeting was appointed. Glad
were the Infantes of Carrion, and richly did they bedight themselves;
some things they paid for, and some they went in debt for: great was
their company, and with the King there were many Leonese and Galegos,
and Castillians out of number. My Cid the Campeador made no tarriance
in Valencia; he made ready for the meeting: there was many a great
mule, and many a palfrey, and many a good horse, and many a goodly suit
of arms, cloaks, and mantles both of cloth and of peltry; ... great and
little are all clad in colours. Alvar Fanez Minaya, and Pero Bermudez,
and Martin Munoz, and Martin Antolinez that worthy Burgalese, and the
Bishop Don Hieronymo that good one with the shaven crown, and Alvar
Alvarez, and Alvar Salvadores, and Muno Gustios that knight of prowess,
and Galind Garcia of Aragon; all these and all the others made ready to
go with the Cid. But he bade Alvar Salvadores and Galind Garcia and all
those who were under them, remain and look with heart and soul to the
safety of Valencia, and not open the gates of the Alcazar neither by
day nor by night, for his wife and daughters were there, in whom he had
his heart and soul, and the other ladies with them; he like a good
husband gave order that not one of them should stir out of the Alcazar
till he returned. Then they left Valencia and pricked on more than
apace; more than a thousand knights, all ready for war, were in this
company. All those great horses that paced so well and were so soft of
foot, my Cid won; they were not given to him.

XXVIII. King Don Alfonso arrived first by one day at the place of
meeting, and when he heard that the Cid was at hand, he went out with
all his honourable men, more than a long league to meet him. When he
who was born in a good hour had his eye upon the King, he bade his
company halt, and with fifteen of the knights whom he loved best he
alighted, and put his hands and his knees to the ground, and took the
herbs of the field between his teeth, as if he would have eaten them,
weeping for great joy; ... thus did he know how to humble himself
before Alfonso his Lord; and in this manner he approached his feet and
would have kissed them. And the King drew back and said, The hand, Cid
Campeador, not the foot! And the Cid drew nigh upon his knees and
besought grace, saying, In this guise grant me your love, so that all
present may hear. And the King said that he forgave him, and granted
him his love with his heart and soul. And the Cid kissed both his
hands, being still upon his knees; and the King embraced him, and gave
him the kiss of peace. Well pleased were all they who beheld this, save
only Alvar Diez and Garcia Ordonez, for they did not love the Cid. Then
went they all toward the town, the King and the Cid talking together by
the way. And the Cid asked the King to eat with him, and the King
answered, Not so, for ye are not prepared; we arrived yesterday, and ye
but now. Eat you and your company therefore with me, for we have made
ready. To-day, Cid Campeador, you are my guest, and to-morrow we will
do as pleases you. Now came the Infantes of Carrion up and humbled
themselves before the Cid, and he received them well, and they promised
to do him service. And the company of the Cid came up, and kissed the
King's hand. So they alighted and went to meat; and the King said unto
the Cid that he should eat with him at his table; howbeit he would not.
And when the King saw that he would not take his seat with him, he
ordered a high table to be placed for the Cid and for Count Don
Gonzalo, the father of the Infantes of Carrion. All the while that they
ate the King could never look enough at the Cid, and he marvelled
greatly at his beard, that it had grown to such length. And when they
had eaten they were merry, and took their pleasure. And on the morrow
the King and all they who went with him to this meeting, ate with the
Cid, and so well did he prepare for them that all were full joyful, and
agreed in one thing, that they had not eaten better for three years.
There was not a man there who did not eat upon silver, and the King and
the chief persons ate upon dishes and trenchers of gold. And when the
Infantes saw this they had the marriage more at heart than before.

XXIX. On the morrow as soon as it was day, the Bishop Don Hieronymo
sung mass before the King, in the oratory of the Cid; and when it was
over, the King said before all who were there assembled, Counts and
Infanzones and knights, hear what I shall say unto the Cid. Cid
Ruydiez, the reason wherefore I sent for you to this meeting was
two-fold: first, that I might see you, which I greatly desired, for I
love you much because of the many and great services which you have
done me, albeit that at one time I was wroth against you and banished
you from the land. But you so demeaned yourself that you never did me
disservice, but contrariwise, great service both to God and to me, and
have won Valencia, and enlarged Christendom, wherefore I am bound to
show favour unto you and to love you alway. The second reason was, that
I might ask you for your two daughters Dona Elvira and Dona Sol, that
you would give them in marriage to the Infantes of Carrion, for this
methinks would be a fit marriage, and to your honour and good. When the
Cid heard this, he was in a manner bound to consent, having them thus
demanded from him; and he answered and said, Sir, my daughters are of
tender years and if it might please you, they are yet too young for
marriage. I do not say this as if the Infantes of Carrion were not
worthy to match with them, and with better than they. And the King bade
him make no excuse, saying, that he should esteem himself well served
if he gave his consent. Then the Cid said, Sir, I begat them, and you
give them in marriage; both I and they are yours, ... give them to whom
you please, and I am pleased therewith. When the King heard this he was
well pleased, and he bade the Infantes kiss the hand of the Cid
Campeador, and incontinently they changed swords before the King, and
they did homage to him, as sons-in-law to their father-in-law. Then the
King turned to the Cid, and said, I thank thee, Ruydiez, that thou hast
given me thy daughters for the Infantes of Carrion: and here I give
them to the Infantes to be their brides; I give them and not you, and I
pray God that it may please him, and that you also may have great joy
herein. The Infantes I put into your hands; they will go with you, and
I shall return from hence, and I order that three hundred marks of
silver be given to them for their marriage, and they and your daughters
will all be your children.

XXX. Eight days this meeting lasted; the one day they dined with the
King, and the other with the Cid. Then was it appointed that on the
morrow at sunrise every one should depart to his own home. My Cid then
began to give to every one who would take his gifts, many a great mule,
and many a good palfrey, and many a rich garment, ... every one had
what he asked, ... he said no to none. Threescore horses did my Cid
give away in gifts; well pleased were all they who went to that
meeting. And now they were about to separate, for it was night. The
King took the Infantes by the hand, and delivered them into the power
of my Cid the Campeador, ... See here your sons: from this day,
Campeador, you will know what to make of them. And the Cid answered,
Sir, may it please you, seeing it is you who have made this marriage
for my daughters, to appoint some one to whom I may deliver them, and
who may give them, as from your hand, to the Infantes. And the King
called for Alvar Fanez Minaya, and said. You are sib to the damsels; I
command you, when you come to Valencia, to take them with your own
hands, and give them to the Infantes, as I should do if that I were
there present: and be you the bride's father. Then said the Cid, Sir,
you must accept something from me at this meeting. I bring for you
twenty palfreys, these that are gaily trapped, and thirty horses fleet
of foot, these that are well caparisoned, ... take them, and I kiss
your hand. Greatly have you bound me, said King Don Alfonso; I receive
this gift, and God and all Saints grant that it may well be requited;
if I live you shall have something from me; Then my Cid sprung up upon
his horse Bavieca, and he said, Here I say before my Lord the King,
that if any will go with me to the wedding, I think they will get
something by it! and he besought the King that he would let as many go
with him as were so minded; and the king licensed them accordingly. And
when they were about to part, the company that went with the Cid was
greater than that which returned with the King. And the Cid kissed the
King's hand and dispeeded himself with his favour, and the King
returned to Castille.

XXXI. My Cid went his way toward Valencia, and he appointed Pero
Bermudez and Muno Gustios, than whom there were no better two in all
his household, to keep company with the Infantes of Carrion and be
their guard, and he bade them spy out what their conditions were; and
this they soon found out. The Count Don Suero Gonzalez went with the
Infantes; he was their father's brother, and had been their _Ayo_ and
bred them up, and badly had he trained them, for he was a man of great
words, good of tongue, and of nothing else good; and full scornful and
orgullous had he made them, so that the Cid was little pleased with
them, and would willingly have broken off the marriage; but he could
not, seeing that the King had made it. And when they reached Valencia,
the Cid lodged the Infantes in the suburb of Alcudia, where he had
formerly lodged himself; and all the company who were come to the
marriage were quartered with them. And he went to the Alcazar.

XXXII. On the morrow the Cid mounted his horse and rode into Alcudia,
and brought the Infantes his sons-in-law from thence with him into the
city to the Alcazar, that they might see their brides Dona Elvira and
Dona Sol. Dona Ximena had her daughters ready to receive them in full
noble garments, for since midnight they had done nothing but prink and
prank themselves. Full richly was the Alcazar set out that day, with
hangings both above and below, purple and samite, and rich cloth. The
Cid entered, between the Infantes, and all that noble company went in
after them; and they went into the chief hall of the Alcazar, where
Dona Ximena was with her daughters: and when they saw the Cid and the
Infantes, they rose up and welcomed them right well. And the Cid took
his seat upon his bench with one of the Infantes on one side of him,
and one on the other, and the other honourable men seated themselves on
the _estrados_, each in the place where he ought to be, and which
belonged to him; and they remained awhile silent. Then the Cid rose and
called for Alvar Fanez and said, Thou knowest what my Lord the King
commanded; fulfil now his bidding, ... take thy cousins, and deliver
them to the Infantes, for it is the King who gives them in marriage,
and not I. And Alvar Fanez arose and took the damsels one in each hand,
and delivered them to the Infantes, saying. Diego Gonzalez, and
Ferrando Gonzalez, I deliver unto you these damsels, the daughters of
the Cid Campeador, by command of King Don Alfonso my Lord, even as he
commanded. Receive you them as your equal helpmates, as the law of
Christ enjoineth. And the Infantes took each his bride by the hand, and
went to the Cid and kissed his hand, and the same did they to their
mother Dona Ximena Gomez: and the Bishop Don Hieronymo espoused them,
and they exchanged rings. When this was done, the Cid went and seated
himself on the _estrado_ with the ladies, he and Dona Ximena in the
middle, and beside him he placed Dona Elvira his eldest daughter, and
by her, her spouse the Infante Diego Gonzalez; and Dona Sol was seated
on the other side, by her mother, and the Infante Ferrando by her. And
when they had solaced themselves awhile, the Cid said that now they
would go eat, and that the marriage should be performed on the morrow,
and he besought and commanded the Bishop Don Hieronymo to perform it in
such a manner that no cost should be spared, but that every thing
should be done so compleatly, that they who came from Castille to this
wedding might alway have something to tell of.

XXXIII. On the morrow they went to the Church of St. Mary, and there
the Bishop Don Hieronymo sate awaiting them, and he blest them all four
at the altar. Who can tell the great nobleness which the Cid displayed
at that wedding, the feasts and the bull-fights, and the throwing at
the target, and the throwing canes, and how many joculars were there,
and all the sports which are proper at such weddings? As soon as they
came out of Church they took horse and rode to the Glera; three times
did the Cid change his horse that day; seven targets were set up on the
morrow, and before they went to dinner all seven were broken. Fifteen
days did the feasts at this wedding continue; then all they who had
come there to do honour to the Cid took leave of him and of the
Infantes. Who can tell the great and noble gifts which the Cid gave to
them, both to great and little, each according to his quality, vessels
of gold and silver, rich cloth, cloaks, furs, horses, and money beyond
all reckoning, so that all were well pleased. And when it was told in
Castille with what gifts they who had been to the wedding were
returned, many were they who repented that they had not gone there.




BOOK VIII.


I. Now the history relateth that Gilbert, a sage who wrote the history
of the Moorish Kings who reigned in Africa, saith, that Bucar
remembering the oath which he had made to his brother King Yucef, how
he would take vengeance for him for the dishonour which he had received
from the Cid Ruydiez before Valencia, ordered proclamation to be made
throughout all the dominions of his father, and gathered together so
great a power of Moors, that among the Captains of his host there were
twenty and nine Kings; this he could well do, for his father was
Miramamolin, which is as much as to say Emperor. And when he had
gathered together this mighty host, he entered into his ships and crost
the sea, and came unto the port of Valencia, and what there befell him
with the Cid the history shall relate in due time.

II. Two years after their marriage did the Infantes of Carrion sojourn
in Valencia in peace and pleasure, to their own great contentment, and
their uncle Suero Gonzalez with them; and at the end of those two
years, there came to pass a great misadventure, by reason of which they
fell out with the Cid, in whom there was no fault. There was a lion in
the house of the Cid, who had grown a large one, and a strong, and was
full nimble: three men had the keeping of this lion, and they kept him
in a den which was in a court yard, high up in the palace; and when
they cleansed the court they were wont to shut him up in his den, and
afterward to open the door that he might come out and eat: the Cid kept
him for his pastime, that he might take pleasure with him when he was
minded so to do. Now it was the custom of the Cid to dine every day
with his company, and after he had dined, he was wont to sleep awhile
upon his seat. And one day when he had dined there came a man and told
him that a great fleet was arrived in the port of Valencia, wherein
there was a great power of the Moors, whom King Bucar had brought over,
the son of the Miramamolin of Morocco. And when the Cid heard this, his
heart rejoiced and he was glad, for it was nigh three years since he
had had a battle with the Moors. Incontinently he ordered a signal to
be made that all the honourable men who were in the city should
assemble together. And when they were all assembled in the Alcazar and
his sons-in-law with them, the Cid told them the news, and took counsel
with them in what manner they should go out against this great power of
the Moors. And when they had taken counsel the Cid went to sleep upon
his seat, and the Infantes and the others sate playing at tables and
chess. Now at this time the men who were keepers of the lion were
cleaning the court, and when they heard the cry that the Moors were
coming, they opened the den, and came down into the palace where the
Cid was, and left the door of the court open. And when the lion had ate
his meat and saw that the door was open he went out of the court and
came down into the palace, even into the hall where they all were; and
when they who were there saw him, there was a great stir among them;
but the Infantes of Carrion showed greater cowardice than all the rest.
Ferrando Gonzalez having no shame, neither for the Cid nor for the
others who were present, crept under the seat whereon the Cid was
sleeping, and in his haste he burst his mantle and his doublet also at
the shoulders. And Diego Gonzalez, the other, ran to a postern door,
crying, I shall never see Carrion again! this door opened upon a court
yard where there was a wine press, and he jumped out, and by reason of
the great height could not keep on his feet, but fell among the lees
and defiled himself therewith. And all the others who were in the hall
wrapt their cloaks around their arms, and stood round about the seat
whereon the Cid was sleeping, that they might defend him. The noise
which they made awakened the Cid, and he saw the lion coming towards
him, and he lifted up his hand and said, What is this?... and the lion
hearing his voice stood still; and he rose up and took him by the mane,
as if he had been a gentle mastiff, and led him back to the court where
he was before, and ordered his keepers to look better to him for the
time to come. And when he had done this he returned to the hall and
took his seat again; and all they who beheld it were greatly
astonished.

III. After some time Ferrando Gonzalez crept from under the seat where
he had hidden himself, and he came out with a pale face, not having yet
lost his fear, and his brother Diego got from among the lees: and when
they who were present saw them in this plight you never saw such sport
as they made; but my Cid forbade their laughter. And Diego went out to
wash himself and change his garments, and he sent to call his brother
forth, and they took counsel together in secret, and said to each
other, Lo now, what great dishonour this Ruydiez our father-in-law hath
done us, for he let this lion loose for the nonce, to put us to shame.
But in an evil day were we born if we do not revenge this upon his
daughters. Badly were we matched with them, and now for the after-feast
he hath made this mockery of us! But we must keep secret this which we
bear in mind, and not let him wit that we are wroth against him, for
otherwise he would not let us depart from hence, neither give us our
wives to take with us, and he would take from us the swords Colada and
Tizona which he gave us.... We will therefore turn this thing into
merriment before him and his people, to the end that they may not
suspect what we have at heart. While they were thus devising their
uncle Suero Gonzalez came in, and they told him of their intent. And he
counselled them to keep their wrath secret, as they said, till this
stir of the Moors from beyond sea was over, and then they should demand
their wives of the Cid that they might take them to their own country;
This, said he, the Cid can have no reason to deny, neither for
detaining ye longer with him, and when ye are got away far out of his
land, then may ye do what ye will with his daughters, and ill will ye
do if ye know not how to revenge yourselves; so shall ye remove the
dishonour from yourselves, and cast it upon him and his children. This
wicked counsel did Suero Gonzalez give unto his nephews, which he might
have well excused giving, and then both he and they would not have come
off so badly as the history will in due season relate.

IV. After Suero Gonzalez and his nephews had taken this evil counsel
together, they went to their lodging, and on the morrow they went to
the Alcazar and came to the Cid where he was preparing for business.
And when they drew nigh, the Cid rose and welcomed them right well, and
they carried a good countenance towards him, and made sport of what had
happened about the lion. And the Cid began to give order in what array
they should go out to battle. While they were in this discourse, a
great cry was heard in the town and a great tumult, and this was
because King Bucar was come with his great power into the place which
is called the Campo del Quarto, which is a league from Valencia, and
there he was pitching his tents and when this was done the camp made a
mighty show, for the history saith that there were full five thousand
pavilions, besides common tents. And when the Cid heard this, he took
both his sons-in-law and Suero Gonzalez with them, and went upon the
highest tower of the Alcazar, and showed them the great power which
King Bucar of Morocco had brought; and when he beheld this great power
he began to laugh and was exceeding glad: but Suero Gonzalez and his
nephews were in great fear: howbeit they would not let it be seen. And
when they came down from the tower the Cid went foremost, and they
tarried behind, and said, If we go into this battle we shall never
return to Carrion. Now it so chanced that Muno Gustios heard them, and
he told it to the Cid, and it grieved the Cid at heart; but he
presently made sport of it, and turned to his sons-in-law, and said,
You my sons shall remain in Valencia and guard the town, and we who are
used to this business will go out to battle; and they when they heard
this were ashamed, for they weened that some one had overheard what
they said; and they made answer, God forefend, Cid, that we should
abide in Valencia! we will go with you to the work, and protect your
body as if we were your sons, and you were the Count Don Gonzalo Gomez
our father. And the Cid was well pleased hearing them say this.

V. While they were thus saying, word was brought to the Cid that there
was a messenger from King Bucar at the gate of the town, who would fain
speak with him. The name of this Moor was Ximen de Algezira, and the
Cid gave order that he should be admitted. Now the history saith, God
had given such grace to my Cid that never Moor beheld his face without
having great fear of him; and this Ximen began to gaze upon his
countenance, and said nothing, for he could not speak. And so great was
the fear which came upon him that the Cid perceived it, and bade him
take courage and deliver the bidding of his Lord, without fear or
shame, for he was a messenger. And when the Moor heard this he laid
aside his fear, and recovered heart, and delivered his bidding fully,
after this wise. Sir Cid Campeador, King Bucar my Lord hath sent me to
thee saying, great wrong hast thou done him in holding Valencia against
him, which belonged to his forefathers; and moreover thou hast
discomfited his brother King Yucef. And now he is come against thee
with twenty and nine Kings, to take vengeance for his brother, and to
win Valencia from thee in spite of thee and of all who are with thee.
Nevertheless, King Bucar saith, that inasmuch as he hath heard that
thou art a wise man and of good understanding, he will show favour unto
thee, and let thee leave Valencia with all the lands thereof, and go
into Castille, and take with thee all that is thine. And if thou wilt
not do this he sends to say that he will fight against Valencia, and
take thee and thy wife and thy daughters, and torment thee grievously,
in such manner that all Christians who shall hear tell of it shall talk
thereof for evermore. This is the bidding of my Lord King Bucar.

VI. When the Cid heard this, notwithstanding he was wroth at heart, he
would not manifest it, but made answer in few words and said, Go tell
thy Lord King Bucar I will not give him up Valencia: great labour did I
endure in winning it, and to no man am I beholding for it in the world,
save only to my Lord Jesus Christ, and to my kinsmen and friends and
vassals who aided me to win it. Tell him that I am not a man to be
besieged, and when he does not expect it I will give him battle in the
field; and would that even as he has brought with him twenty and nine
Kings, so he had brought all the Moors of all Pagandom, for with the
mercy of God in which I trust, I should think to conquer them all. Bear
this answer to your Lord, and come here no more with messages, neither
on this account nor on any other. When Ximen de Algezira, the Moorish
messenger, heard this, he left Valencia, and went unto his Lord and
told him before the twenty and nine Kings all that the Cid had said.
And they were astonished at the brave words of the Cid, for they did
not think that he would have resisted, so great was their power,
neither did they ween that he would so soon come out to battle. And
they began to give order to set their siege round about Valencia, as
the history, and as Gilbert also relateth. This King Bucar and his
brother King Yucef were kinsmen of Alimaymon, who had been King of
Toledo and Valencia, and this was the reason why Bucar said that
Valencia had belonged to his forefathers.

VII. No sooner had Ximen, the messenger of King Bucar, left the city,
than the Cid ordered the bell to be struck, at the sound of which all
the men at arms in Valencia were to gather together. Incontinently they
all assembled before the Cid, and he told them all to be ready full
early on the morrow to go out and give battle to the Moors. And they
made answer with one accord that they were well pleased to do this, for
they trusted in God and in his good fortune that they should overcome
them. On the morrow therefore at the first cock-crow, they confessed
and communicated, as was their custom, and before the morning brake
they went forth from Valencia. And when they had got through the narrow
passes among the gardens, the Cid set his army in array. The van he
gave to Alvar Fanez Minaya, and to Pero Bermudez who bore his banner;
and he gave them five hundred horsemen, and a thousand and five hundred
men a-foot. In the right wing was that honourable one with the shaven
crown, Don Hieronymo the Bishop, with the like number both of horse and
foot; and in the left Martin Antolinez of Burgos and Alvar Salvadores,
with as many more. The Cid came in the rear with a thousand horsemen
all in coats of mail, and two thousand five hundred men a-foot. And in
this array they proceeded till they came in sight of the Moors. As soon
as the Cid saw their tents he ordered his men to slacken their pace,
and got upon his horse Bavieca, and put himself in the front before all
his army, and his sons-in-law the Infantes of Carrion advanced
themselves with him. Then the Bishop Don Hieronymo came to the Cid and
said, This day have I said the mass of the Holy Trinity before you, I
left my own country and came to seek you, for the desire I had to kill
some Moors, and to do honour to my order and to my own hands. Now would
I be the foremost in this business; I have my pennon and my armorial
bearing, and will employ them by God's help, that my heart may rejoice.
And my Cid, if you do not for the love of me grant this I will go my
ways from you. But the Cid bade him do his pleasure, saying that it
would please him also. And then the great multitude of the Moors began
to come out of their tents, and they formed their battle in haste, and
came against the Christians, with the sound of trumpets and tambours,
and with a great uproar; and as they came out upon the alarm, not
expecting that the Cid would come against them so soon, they did not
advance in order, as King Bucar had commanded. And when the Cid saw
this, he ordered his banner to be advanced, and bade his people lay on
manfully. The Bishop Don Hieronynio he pricked forward; two Moors he
slew with the two first thrusts of the lance; the haft broke, and he
laid hand on his sword, God,... how well the Bishop fought! two he slew
with the lance and five with the sword; the Moors came round about him
and laid on load of blows, but they could not pierce his arms. He who
was born in happy hour had his eyes upon him, and he took his shield
and placed it before him, and lowered his lance, and gave Bavieca the
spur, that good horse. With heart and soul he went at them, and made
his way into their first battle; seven the Campeador smote down, and
four he slew. In short time they joined battle in such sort that many
were slain and many overthrown, on one side and on the other, and so
great was the din of strokes and of tambours that none could hear what
another said; and they smote away cruelly, without rest or respite.

VIII. Now it came to pass in this battle that the Infante Diego
Gonzalez encountered a Moor of Africa who was of great stature and full
valiant withal, and this Moor came fiercely against him; and when the
Infante saw how fiercely he was coming, he turned his back and fled. No
one beheld this but Felez Munoz the nephew of the Cid, who was a
squire; he set himself against the Moor with his lance under his arm,
and gave him such a thrust in the breast, that the streamer of the
lance came out all red with blood between his shoulders, and he down'd
with the dead man and took his horse by the bridle, and began to call
the Infante Diego Gonzalez. When the Infante heard himself called by
his name he turned his head to see who called him, and when he saw that
it was his cousin Felez Munoz, he turned and awaited him. And Felez
Munoz said, Take this horse, cousin Diego Gonzalez, and say that you
killed the Moor; nobody shall ever know otherwise from me, unless you
give just cause. While they were talking the Cid came up, after another
Moorish knight, whom he reached just as he came up to them, and smote
him with his sword upon the head, so that he split it down to the
teeth. When Felez Munoz saw the Cid, he said, Sir, your son-in-law Don
Diego Gonzalez hath great desire to serve and help you in this day's
work, and he hath just slain a Moor from whom he hath won this horse:
and this pleased the Cid much, for he weened that it was true. And then
they all three advanced themselves toward the midst of the battle,
giving great strokes, and smiting and slaying. Who can tell how
marvellously the Bishop Don Hieronymo behaved himself in this battle,
and how well all the rest behaved, each in his way, and above all, the
Cid Campeador, as the greatest and best of all! nevertheless the power
of the Moors was so great that they could not drive them to flight, and
the business was upon the balance even till the hour of nones. Many
were the Christians who died that day among the foot-soldiers; and the
dead, Moors and Christians together, were so many, that the horses
could scant move among their bodies. But after the hour of nones the
Cid and his people smote the Moors so sorely that they could no longer
stand against them, and it pleased God and the good fortune of the Cid
that they turned their backs; and the Christians followed, hewing them
down, and smiting and slaying; ana they tarried not to lay hands on
those whom they felled, but went on in the pursuit as fast as they
could. Then might you have seen cords broken, and stakes plucked up as
the Christians came to the tents; my Cid's people drove King Bucar's
through their camp, and many an arm with its sleeve-mail was lopt off,
and many a head with its helmet fell to the ground; and horses ran
about on all sides without riders. Seven full miles did the pursuit
continue. And while they were thus following their flight the Cid set
eyes upon King Bucar, and made at him to strike him with the sword; and
the Moorish King knew him when he saw him coming; Turn this way Bucar,
cried the Campeador, you who came from beyond sea, to see the Cid with
the long beard. We must greet each other and cut out a friendship! God
confound such friendship, cried King Bucar, and turned his bridle, and
began to fly towards the sea, and the Cid after him, having great
desire to reach him. But King Bucar had a good horse and a fresh, and
the Cid went spurring Bavieca who had had hard work that day, and he
came near his back; and when they were nigh unto the ships, and the Cid
saw that he could not reach him, he darted his sword at him, and struck
him between the shoulders; and King Bucar being badly wounded rode into
the sea, and got to a boat, and the Cid alighted and picked up his
sword. And his people came up, hewing down the Moors before them, and
the Moors in their fear of death ran into the sea, so that twice as
many died in the water as in the battle; nevertheless so many were they
who were slain in the field, that they were thought to be seventeen
thousand persons and upward: but a greater number died in the sea. And
so many were they who were taken prisoner, that it was a wonder; and of
the twenty and nine Kings who came with King Bucar, seventeen were
slain. And when the Cid saw that of the Moors some had gotten to the
ships and the others were slain or taken, he returned toward their
tents.

IX. My Cid Ruydiez the Campeador returned from the slaughter; the hood
of his mail was thrown back, and the coif upon his head bore the marks
of it. And when he saw his sons-in-law the Infantes of Carrion, he
rejoiced over them, and said to them to do them honour, Come here, my
sons, for by your help we have conquered in this battle. Presently
Alvar Fanez came up: the shield which hung from his neck was all
battered: more than twenty Moors had he slain, and the blood was
running from his wrist to his elbow. Thanks be to God, said he, and to
the Father who is on high, and to you, Cid, we have won the day. All
these spoils are yours and your vassals. Then they spoiled the field,
where they found great riches in gold, and in silver, and in pearls,
and in precious stones, and in sumptuous tents, and in horses, and in
oxen, which were so many that it was a wonder. The poorest man among
the Christians was made full rich that day. So great was the spoil that
six hundred horses fell to the Cid as his fifth, beside sumpter beasts
and camels, and twelve hundred prisoners; and of the other things which
were taken no man can give account, nor of the treasure which the Cid
won that day in the Campo del Quarto. God be praised! said the
Campeador...once I was poor, but now am I rich in lands and in
possessions, and in gold and in honour. And Moors and Christians both
fear me. Even in Morocco, among their Mosques, do they fear least I
should set upon them some night. Let them fear it! I shall not go to
seek them, but here will I be in Valencia, and by God's help they shall
pay me tribute. Great joy was made in Valencia for this victory, and
great was the joy of the Infantes of Carrion; five thousand marks came
to them for their portion of the spoil. And when they saw themselves so
rich, they and their uncle Suero Gonzalez took counsel together, and
confirmed the wicked resolution which they had taken.

X. One day the companions of the Cid were talking before him of this
victory, and they were saying who were the young knights that had
demeaned themselves well in the battle and in the pursuit, and who had
not; but no mention was made of the Infantes; for though some there
were who whispered to each other concerning them, none would speak ill
of them before the Cid. And the Infantes saw this, and took counsel
with their uncle, who ought not to have given them the evil counsel
that he did, and they determined forthwith to put their wicked design
in execution. So they went before the Cid, and Ferrando Gonzalez,
having enjoined silence, began to say thus. Cid, thou knowest well the
good tie which there is between thee and us, for we hold thee in the
place of a father, and thou didst receive us as thy sons on the day
when thou gavest us thy daughters to be our wives; and from that day we
have alway abode with thee, and have alway endeavoured to do that which
was to thy service; and if we have at any time failed therein it hath
not been wilfully, but for lack of better understanding. Now inasmuch
as it is long time since we departed from Castille, from our father and
from our mother, and because neither we know how it fares with them,
nor they how it fares with us, we would now, if you and Dona Ximena
should so think good, return unto them, and take our wives with us: so
shall our father and our mother and our kinsmen see how honourably we
are mated, and how greatly to our profit, and our wives shall be put in
possession of the towns which we have given them for their dower, and
shall see what is to be the inheritance of the children whom they may
have. And whensoever you shall call upon us, we will be ready to come
and do you service. Then the Cid made answer, weening that this was
spoken without deceit, My sons, I am troubled at what ye say, for when
ye take away my daughters ye take my very heart-strings: nevertheless,
it is fitting that ye do as ye have said. Go when ye will, and I will
give unto you such gifts that it shall be known in Gallicia and in
Castille and in Leon, with what riches I have sent my sons-in-law home.

XI. When the Cid had made this reply, he rose from his seat and went to
Dona Ximena his wife, and spake with her and with Alvar Fanez, and told
them what had passed with his sons-in-law, and what answer he had
given. Greatly was Dona Ximena troubled at this, and Alvar Fanez also,
that he had consented to what they asked; and she said, I do not think
it is wisely done to let them take our daughters from us, and carry
them into another country; for these our sons-in-law are traitorous and
false at heart, and if I areed them right they will do some dishonour
to our daughters, when there will be none there to call them to
account. And Alvar Fanez was of the same mind; but the Cid was
displeased at this, and marvelled greatly at what they said; and he
bade them speak no more thereof, for God would not let it be
so, ... neither were the Infantes of such a race as that they should do
this; neither, quoth he, would it come into their minds to do it, if
only because our Lord King Don Alfonso was he who made the marriage;
but if the Devil should tempt them, and they should commit this
wickedness, dearly would it cost them!

XII. So the Infantes of Carrion made ready for their departure, and
there was a great stir in Valencia. And the two sisters Dona Elvira and
Dona Sol, came and knelt before the Cid and before Dona Ximena their
mother, and said, You send us to the lands of Carrion, and we must
fulfil your command: now then give us your blessing, and let us have
some of your people with us in Carrion, we beseech you. And the Cid
embraced them and kissed them, and the mother kissed them and embraced
them twice as much, and they gave them their blessing, and their
daughters kissed their hands. And the Cid gave unto his sons-in-law
great store of cloth of gold, and of serge, and of wool, and an hundred
horses bridled and saddled, and an hundred mules with all their
trappings, and ten cups of gold, and an hundred vessels of silver, and
six hundred marks of silver in dishes and trenchers and other things.
When all this was done they took their departure and went out of
Valencia, and the Cid rode out a long league with them. He looked at
the birds, and the augury was bad, and he thought that these marriages
would not be without some evil. And his heart smote him, and he began
to think on what Dona Ximena had said, and to fear lest evil should
befall him from these sons-in-law, for the manner of their speech was
not as it was wont to be. Where art thou my nephew, where art thou
Felez Munoz? thou art the cousin of my daughters, said he, both in
heart and in soul. Go with them even unto Carrion, and see the
possessions which are given them, and come back with tidings thereof
And Felez Munoz said that he would do this. And the Cid bade him salute
the Moor Abengalvon in his name, with whom they should tarry a night at
Molina, and bid him do service unto his daughters, and his sons-in-law,
and accompany them as far as Medina; and for all that he shall do; said
the Cid, I will give him good guerdon. And when the ladies came to take
their leave of their father the Cid, and of their mother Dona Ximena,
great were the lamentations on both sides, as if their hearts had
divined the evil which was to come; and the Cid strove to comfort them,
saying, that he should alway think of them, and would maintain them in
good estate: and he gave them his blessing and turned back toward
Valencia, and they went their way with their husbands, and that parting
was like plucking the nail from the flesh.

XIII. So the Infantes of Carrion went their way, by the Campo del
Quarto to Chiva, and to Bonilla, and to Requena, and to Campo-Robres,
and they took up their lodging at Villa Taxo. And on the morrow they
took the road to Amaja, and leaving it on the right came to Adamuz, and
passed by Colcha, and rested at Quintana. And when Abengalvon knew that
the daughters of the Cid were coming, he went out joyfully from Molina
to meet them, and pitched tents for them in the field, and had food
brought there in abundance. God, how well he served them! and on the
morrow the Moor gave full rich and noble gifts to the daughters of his
Lord the Cid, and to each of the Infantes he gave a goodly horse. And
he took horse himself and rode on with them, having two hundred knights
in his company. They crossed the mountains of Luzon and passed
Arbuxuelo, and came to Salon, and the Moor lodged them in the place
which is called Ansarera; all this he did for the love of the Cid
Campeador. Now the Infantes seeing the riches which this Moor had with
him, took counsel together for treason, and said, Lo now if we could
slay this Moor Abengalvon, we should possess all these riches as safely
as if we were in Carrion, and the Cid could never take vengeance. And a
Moor who understood the Latin of the country, heard them and knew what
they said, and he went to Abengalvon, and said unto him, _Acaiaz_, that
is to say, Sire, take heed, for I heard the Infantes of Carrion
plotting to kill thee. Abengalvon the Moor was a bold Baron, and when
this was told him, he went with his two hundred men before the
Infantes, and what he said to them did not please them. Infantes of
Carrion, he said, tell me, what have I done? I have served ye without
guile, and ye have taken counsel for my death. If it were not for the
sake of my Cid, never should you reach Carrion! I would carry back his
daughters to the loyal Campeador, and so deal with you that it should
be talked of over the whole world. But I leave ye for traitors as ye
are. Dona Elvira and Dona Sol, I go with your favour. God grant that
this marriage may please your father! Having said this the good Moor
returned to Molina.

XIV. They went on by Valdespino, and by Parra, and Berrocal, and Val
de Endrinas, and they left Madina Celi on the right, and crost the
plain of Barahona, and past near Berlanga; and they crost the Douro by
a ford below the town, and rode on and came into the Oak-wood of
Corpes. The mountains were high, and the trees thick and lofty, and
there were wild beasts in that place. And they came to a green lawn in
the midst of that oak forest, where there was a fountain of clear
water, and there the Infantes gave order that their tents should be
pitched; and they passed the night there, making show of love to their
wives, which they badly fulfilled when the sun was risen, for this was
the place where they thought to put them to shame. Early in the morning
they ordered the sumpter beasts to be laden, and the tent struck, and
they sent all their company on, so that none remained with them,
neither man nor woman, but they and their wives were left alone that
they might disport with them at pleasure. And Dona Elvira said to her
husband, Why wouldst thou that we should remain alone in this place?
And he said, Hold thy peace, and thou shall see! And the Infantes tore
away the mantles from off their wives, and the garments which they
wore, save only their inner garment, and they held them by the hair of
their head with one hand, and with the other took the girths of their
horses. And the women said, Don Diego and Don Ferrando, ye have strong
swords and of sharp edge; the one is called Colado and the other
Tizona; cut off our heads and we shall become martyrs! But set not this
evil example upon us, for whatever shame ye do unto us shall be to your
own dishonour. But the Infantes heeded not what they said, and heat
them cruelly with the saddle-girths, and kicked them with their spurs,
so that their garments were torn, and stained with blood. Oh, if the
Cid Campeador had come upon them at that hour! And the women cried out,
and called upon God and Holy Mary to have mercy upon them; but the more
they cried, the more cruelly did those Infantes beat and kick them,
till they were covered with blood, and swooned away. Then the Infantes
took their mantles and their cloaks, and their furs of ermine and other
garments, and left them for dead, saying, Lie there, daughters of the
Cid of Bivar, for it is not fitting that ye should be our wives, nor
that ye should have your dower in the lands of Carrion! We shall see
how your father will avenge you, and we have now avenged ourselves for
the shame he did us with the Lion. And they rode away as they said
this, leaving them to the mountain birds and to the beasts of the
forest. Oh if the Cid Campeador had come upon them at that hour! And
the Infantes rode on glorying in what they had done, for they said that
the daughters of the Cid were worthy to be their harlots, but not their
wives.

XV. When the Infantes, before they committed this great cruelty,
ordered their company to ride forward, Felez Munoz the nephew of the
Cid, rode on with the rest: but this order nothing pleased him, and he
was troubled at heart, insomuch that he went aside from his companions,
and struck into the forest, and there waited privily till he should see
his cousins come, or learn what the Infantes had done to them.
Presently he saw the Infantes, and heard what they said to each other.
Certes if they had espied him he could not have escaped death. But they
pricked on not seeing him, and he rode back to the fountain, and there
he found the women lying senseless, and in such plight as ye have
heard. And he made great lamentation over them, saying, Never can it
please God that ye my cousins should receive such dishonour! God and
St. Mary give them who have done this an evil guerdon! for ye never
deserved this, neither are ye of a race to deserve that this or any
other evil should betide ye! By this time the women began to come to
themselves, but they could not speak, for their hearts were breaking.
And Felez Munoz called out to them, Cousins! Cousins! Dona Elvira! Dona
Sol! for the love of God rouse yourselves that we may get away before
night comes, or the wild beasts will devour us! and they came to
themselves and began to open their eyes, and saw that he who spake to
them was Felez Munoz; and he said to them, For the love of God take
heart and let us be gone; for the Infantes will soon seek for me, and
if God do not befriend us we shall all be slain. And Dona Sol said to
him in her great pain, Cousin, for all that our father hath deserved at
your hands, give us water. Felez Munoz took his hat and filled it with
water and gave it to them. And he comforted them and bade them take
courage, and besought them to bear up. And he placed them upon his
horse, and covered them both with his cloak, and led them through the
oak forest, into the thickest part thereof, and there he made a bed of
leaves and of grass, and laid them on it, and covered them with his
cloak, and he sate down by them and began to weep, for he knew not what
he should do: for he had no food, and if he went to seek it, great
danger was there because they were wounded and bloody, that the wild
beasts and the birds of the mountain would attack them; and on the
other hand, unless he went to his uncle the Cid, to tell him of this
wickedness, none other knew what had been done, and thus there would be
no vengeance taken.

XVI. While Felez Munoz was in this great trouble the Infantes joined
their company, and their spurs were bloody and their hands also from
the wounds which they had given their wives. And when their people saw
them in this plight, and that their wives were not with them, they
weened that some wickedness had been done; and all they who were of
good heart and understanding among them went apart, to the number of an
hundred, with one who was named Pero Sanchez; and he spake unto them,
saying, Friends, these Infantes have done a foul deed upon their wives,
the daughters of our Lord the Cid; and they are our liege Ladies, for
we did homage to them before their father, and accepted them as such;
and the Cid made us knights that we should discharge the duty which we
owe to them. Now then, it behoveth us that we arm ourselves, and demand
of the Infantes what they have done with our ladies, and require them
at their hands. And if they will not deliver them to us, then will we
fight against them even to death; for thus shall we do right, and
otherwise we shall be ill spoken of, and not worthy to live in the
world. This was the counsel which Pero Sanchez gave, and they all held
it good and did accordingly. And the Infantes, when they saw them
coming and heard their demand, were greatly afraid, and they said, Go
to the fountain in the Oak-forest of Corpes, and there ye may find
them; we left them safe and sound, and no harm have we done unto them;
but we would not take them with us. Ill have ye done, replied those
knights, to forsake such wives, and the daughters of such a father, and
ill will ye fare for it! And from henceforward, we renounce all
friendship with ye, and defy ye for the Cid, and for ourselves, and for
all his people. And the Infantes could not reply. And when they saw
that the Infantes did not answer, they said, Get ye gone for traitors
and false caitiffs: there is no way in the world by which ye can escape
from the enemies whom ye have now made! But for all this the Infantes
made no reply, and went their way.

XVII. Pero Sanchez and those other knights rode back to the green lawn
in the Oak-forest, where they had left the dames; and when they came to
the fountain they saw that there was blood round about, but the dames
were not there; and they were greatly troubled, and knew not where to
seek them. And they went about the forest seeking them, calling them
aloud, and making great lamentation for the ill that had befallen, and
also, because they could not find them. Now Felez Munoz and the women
heard their voices, and were in great fear, for they weened that it was
the Infantes and their company, who were returned with intent to kill
them; and in their great fear they remained still, and would fain have
been far from that place. So Pero Sanchez and they who were with him
went about seeking them in vain. Then spake up a knight called Martin
Ferrandez, who was a native of Burgos, saying, Friends, it boots us to
turn back from hence and follow after the Infantes, and do battle with
them, even unto death, because of this wickedness which they have
committed, rather than return to the Cid; for if we do not strive to
take vengeance, we are not worthy to appear before him. And if,
peradventure, we cannot come up with them upon the road, let its go
before the King Don Alfonso, and discover unto him this foul deed, and
tell him the truth thereof, to the intent that he may order justice to
be done for such a thing; for certes, greatly will he be troubled when
he knoweth it, and greatly will he be incensed against them, inasmuch
as he it was who besought the Cid to give them his daughters to wife.
And we will not depart from the King's house, nor take unto ourselves
any other Lord till the Cid shall have obtained justice in this matter.
And all those knights held this counsel to be good, and agreed to do
so. And they took their way and followed after the Infantes as fast as
they could, taking no rest; but the Infantes had ridden away full
speed, and they could not overtake them. And when they saw this they
went their way to King Don Alfonso who was at Palencia, and they came
before him and kissed his hands, and then with sorrowful hearts told
him of the evil which had befallen the Cid, in this dishonour done unto
his daughters by the Infantes of Carrion. And when the King heard it he
was grievously offended, as one who had great part therein; and he said
unto him, It must needs be, that before many days we shall receive
tidings of this from the Cid Campeador, and then upon his complaint we
will enter into the business in such wise, that every one shall have
justice. Then Pero Sanchez and the other knights kissed the King's
hands for what he had said; and they abode in his court, waiting
tidings from the Cid.

XVIII. When Felez Munoz saw that the voices which they heard had
ceased, he went after awhile to a village which was at hand, to seek
food for the dames and for himself; and in this manner he kept them for
seven days. And in that village he found a good man, who was a
husbandman, and who lived a godly life with his wife and with his
daughters; and this good man knew the Cid Ruydiez, for the Cid had
lodged in his house, and he had heard tell of his great feats. And when
Felez Munoz knew this he took the man aside, seeing how good a man he
was, and how well he spake of the Cid, and told him what had befallen
those dames, and how he had hidden them in the wood. And when the good
man heard it he had great ruth for them, but he held himself a happy
man in that he could do them service; and he took two asses and went
with Felez Munoz to the place where they were hidden, and took with him
his two sons, who were young men. And when the dames saw them they
marvelled who they might be, and were ashamed and would have hidden
themselves; but they could not. And the good man bent his knees before
them, weeping, and said, Ladies, I am at the service of the Cid your
father, who hath many times lodged in my house, and I served him the
best I could, and he alway was bountiful toward me. And now, this young
man, who saith his name is Felez Munoz, hath told me the great wrong
and dishonour which your husbands, the Infantes of Carrion, have done
unto you. And when I heard it I was moved to great sorrow, and for the
great desire I have to do service to the Cid and to you, I am come
hither, to carry you, if you will be so pleased, upon these beasts, to
my house; for you must not remain in this wild forest, where the beasts
would devour you. And when you are there, I and my wife and my
daughters will serve you the best we can; and you may then send this
squire to your father, and we will keep you secretly and well till your
father shall send for you; this place is not fit for you, for you would
die of cold and hunger. When the good man had said this, Dona Sol
turned to Dona Elvira and said, Sister, the good man saith well, and it
is better that we should go with him than remain and die here, for so
shall we see the vengeance which I trust in God our father will give
us. So they gave thanks to God, and to that man. And he set them upon
his beasts, and led them to the village, when it was now night; and
they entered his house secretly, so that none knew of their coming save
the good man and his family, whom he charged that they should tell no
man thereof. And there his wife and his daughters ministered uoto them
with pure good will.

XIX. Then these dames wrote a letter to their father the Cid, which was
a letter of credence, that he should believe the tidings which Felez
Munoz would deliver, and they wrote it with the blood from their
wounds. And Felez Munoz went his way toward Valencia; and when he came
to Santesteban he spake with Diego Tellez, who had been of the company
of Alvar Fanez, and told him of what had befallen. He, so soon as he
heard this great villainy, took beasts and seemly raiment, and went for
those dames, and brought them from the house of that good man to
Santesteban, and did them all honour that he could. They of Santesteban
were always gentlemen; and they comforted the daughters of the Cid, and
there they were healed of their hurts. In the mean time Felez Munoz
proceeded on his journey; and it came to pass that he met Alvar Fanez
Minaya, and Pero Bermudez on the way, going to the King with a present
which the Cid had sent him; and the present was this, ... two hundred
horses, from those which he had won in the battle of Quarto from King
Bucar, and an hundred Moorish prisoners, and many good swords, and many
rich saddles. And as Alvar Fanez and Pero Bermudez rode on in talk,
they thought that it was he, and marvelled greatly; and he when he drew
nigh began to tear his hair, and make great lamentation, so that they
were greatly amazed. And they alighted, asking him what it was. And he
related unto them all that had befallen. But when they heard this, who
can tell the lamentation which they made? And they took counsel
together what they should do, and their counsel was this, ... that they
should proceed to the King, and demand justice at his hands in the name
of the Cid, and that Felez Munoz should proceed to Valencia. So he told
them the name of the good man with whom he had left the dames, and the
place where he dwelt, and also how he had spoken with Diego Tellez at
Santesteban, and then they parted.

XX. Alvar Fanez and Pero Bermudez held on their way, and came to the
King, whom they found in Valladolid. And he received them right well,
and asked them for the Cid, and they kissed his hand and said, Sir, the
Cid commends himself to your grace; he hath had a good affair with King
Bucar of Morocco, and hath defeated him, and nine and twenty Kings who
came with him, in the field of Quarto, and great booty did he gain
there in gold and in silver, and in horses and tents and cattle; and he
hath slain many and taken many prisoners. And in acknowledgment of you
as his natural Lord, he sends you two hundred horses, and an hundred
black Moors, and many rich saddles and precious swords, beseeching you
to accept them at his hand, in token of the desire he hath to do
service to God and to you, maintaining the faith of Jesus Christ. And
King Don Alfonso made answer and said, that he took the present of the
Cid with a right good will, as of the truest and most honourable vassal
that ever Lord had: and he gave order to his people to receive it, and
bade Alvar Fanez and Pero Bermudez seat themselves at his feet. After a
while Alvar Fanez rose and said, Sir, when we departed from the Cid we
left him in great honour and prosperity; but on our way we met a squire
who is his nephew, by name Felez Munoz, and he hath told us the evil
and the dishonour which both we and the Cid endure in the villainy
which the Infantes of Carrion have committed upon his daughters. You,
Sir, know how great this villainy hath been, and how nearly it toucheth
you, for the marriage was of your appointment, and I gave them by your
command to the Infantes. Pero Sanchez hath told you that the dames were
dead, as he believed them to be; but we, Sir, know that they are yet
alive, having been grievously hurt and wounded with bridles and spurs,
and stript of their garments, ... in which plight Felez Munoz found
them. Certes such a thing as this cannot please God in heaven, and
ought to offend you who are Lord here in your own realm. Now therefore
we beseech you that you take justice for yourself, and give us and the
Cid ours. And let not the Cid be dishonoured in your time, for blessed
be God, he hath never been dishonoured yet, but hath gone on alway
advancing in honour since King Don Ferrando your father knighted him in
Coimbra. To this the King made answer and said, God knoweth the trouble
which I resent for this dishonour which hath been done to the Cid, and
the more I hear of it the more doth it trouble me, and many reasons are
there why it should; for my own sake, and for the sake of the Cid, and
for the sake of his daughters; but since they are yet alive the evil is
not so great, for as they have been wrongfully put to shame, nothing
meriting such treatment, they may be rightfully avenged, as my Cortes
shall determine. Moreover it is a grief to me that my vassals the
Infantes of Carrion should have erred so badly and with such cruelty;
but since it hath been so I cannot but do justice. I hold it good
therefore to summon them to my Cortes, which I will assemble for this
matter in Toledo, and the time assigned them shall be three months from
this day; and do ye tell the Cid to come there with such of his people
as he shall think good. Glad were Alvar Fanez and Pero Bermudez of this
reply, and they kissed his hand, and dispeeded themselves. And the King
ordered mules to be given them for the dames, with right noble saddles
and trappings of gold and cloth of gold and of wool, with menever and
gris.

XXI. Then Alvar Fanez and Pero Bermudez went their way, and Pero
Sanchez and his company departed with them. They went up Val de Esgueva
to Penafiel, and by Roa and Arrueco, and they entered the Oak-forest of
Corpes, and Pero Sanchez showed the place beside the fountain where the
villainy had been committed; and they made such lamentation there as if
they had seen the dames lie dead before them. Then rode they to the
village where the good man dwelt, and went to his dwelling, and good
guerdon did they give unto him for the service which he had done, so
that he was full well requited. And they took with them the two sons
and the two daughters of the good man, that they might recompense them
for the good deeds of their father; and the dames gave them in
marriage, and made them full rich, and held them even as brothers and
as sisters, because of the service which they had received from them.
When it was known at Santesteban that Minaya was coming for his
kinswomen, the men of that town welcomed him and his company, and they
brought him in payment the _efurcion_, that is to say, the
supper-money, and it was full great. But Minaya would not accept it at
their hands, and he thanked them, and said, Thanks, men of Santesteban,
for what ye have done, and my Cid the Campeador will thank ye, as I do,
and God will give ye your guerdon. Then went they to visit their
kinswomen, and when they saw the dames, who can tell the great
lamentation which was made on both sides? albeit that they rejoiced to
see each other. And Minaya said unto them, By God, cousins, he knoweth
the truth, and your father and mother know it also, ... I misdoubted
this when you went away with those false ones; and it grieved me when
your father said that he had given his consent that ye should go, and
your mother gainsaid it also; but we could not prevail, for he said he
had consented. Howbeit, since ye are alive, of evils let us be thankful
for the least: you have lost one marriage, and may gain a better, and
the day will come when we shall avenge ye. That night they rested at
Santesteban, and on the morrow they set forward and took the road
towards Atienza, and the men of Santesteban escorted them as far as the
river Damor, to do them pleasure. And they past Alcoceba, and went on
to the King's Ford, and there took up there lodging at the Casa de
Berlanga. On the morrow they lodged at Medina Celi, and from thence
they went to Molina, and Abengalvon came out with a right good will to
welcome them, for love of the Cid, and he did them all the honour that
he could. And it was accorded between them that the dames should rest
there some days, because of their weakness, and that they should send
and let the Cid know what had been done.

XXII. Then Pero Bermudez went on to Valencia, and Alvar Fanez and the
rest of his company abode with the dames in Molina. And when Pero
Bermudez arrived he found the Cid Ruydiez just risen with his chivalry
from dinner, and when the Cid saw him he welcomed him right well;
howbeit he could not refrain from weeping; for before this Felez Munoz
had told him all. And he stroked his beard and said, Thanks be to
Christ, the Lord of this world, by this beard which no one hath ever
cut, the Infantes of Carrion shall not triumph in this! And he began to
take comfort, hearing how King Don Alfonso had appointed the Cortes.
And he took Pero Bermudez by the hand and led him to Dona Ximena, who
wept greatly at seeing him, and said, Ah, Pero Bermudez, what tidings
bringest thou of my daughters? And he comforted her and said, Weep not,
Lady, for I left them alive and well at Molina, and Alvar Fanez with
them; by God's blessing you shall have good vengeance for them! Then
the Cid seated himself near his wife, and Pero Bermudez took his seat
before them, and told them all that he had done, and how the King had
summoned them to the Cortes at Toledo. And he said unto the Cid, My
uncle and Lord, I know not what to say, but ill is my luck that I could
not take vengeance before I returned here; and certes, if I could have
found them I would have died, or have compleated it: but they when they
had done this villainy dared not appear before the King, neither in his
Court, and therefore he hath issued this summons to them that they
should come. Manifestly may it be seen that the King well inclineth to
give you justice, if you fail not to demand it. Now then I beseech you
tarry not, but let us to horse and confront them and accuse them, for
this is not a thing to be done leisurely. And the Cid answered and
said, Chafe not thyself, Pero Bermudez, for the man who thinketh by
chafing to expedite his business, leaveth off worse than he began. Be
you certain, that if I die not I shall take vengeance upon those
traitors, and I trust in God not to die till I have taken it. Now
therefore, give me no more anger than I feel in my own heart, for Felez
Munoz hath given me enough. I thank my Lord King Don Alfonso for the
answer which he gave you, and for appointing the Cortes, and in such
guise will I appear there as shall gall them who wish ill to me. God
willing, we will take our departure in good time! Do you now return to
Molina, and bring on my daughters, for I would fain see them; and I
will talk with them that they may tell me the whole truth of this
thing, that I may know the whole when I go to the court of the King to
demand vengeance.

XXIII. Pero Bermudez returned the next day to Molina, where Abengalvon
had done great honour to the dames, and to Alvar Fanez, and all that
were with him. And they departed from Molina, and Abengalvon with them,
for he would not leave them till he had brought them to Valencia to his
Lord the Cid. And when the Cid knew that they were drawing nigh he rode
out two leagues to meet them, and when they saw him they made great
lamentation, they and all his company, not only the Christians but the
Moors also who were in his service. But my Cid embraced his daughters,
and kissed them both, and smiled and said, Ye are come, my children,
and God will heal you! I accepted this marriage for you, but I could do
no other; by God's pleasure ye shall be better mated hereafter. And
when they reached Valencia and went into the Alcazar to their mother
Dona Ximena, who can tell the lamentation which was made by the mother
over her daughters, and the daughters with their mother, and by the
women of their household. Three days did this great lamentation last.
And the Cid thanked Abengalvon, his vassal, for the honour which he had
shown to his children and their company, and promised to protect him
from all who should come against him. And Abengalvon returned to Molina
well pleased.




BOOK IX.


I. My Cid the Campeador made ready to appear at the Cortes in Toledo,
and he left the Bishop Don Hieronymo, and Martin Pelaez the Asturian,
to command in Valencia, and five hundred knights with them, all
hidalgos. And he spake with his daughters, and commanded and besought
them to tell him the whole truth, how this matter had been, and not say
the thing which was false; and they did accordingly, and related unto
him all, even as it had befallen them. And the Cid departed from
Valencia, and with him went Alvar Fanez Minaya with two hundred
knights, and Pero Bermudez with one hundred; and Martin Antolinez with
fifty, and Martin Ferrandez with other fifty, and Felez Ferruz and
Benito Sanchez with fifty each; ... these were five hundred knights.
And there went fifty with Martin Garcia and Martin Salvadorez, and
fifty with Pero Gonzalvez and Martin Munoz, and Diego Sanchez of
Arlanza went with fifty, and Don Nuno, he who colonized Cubiella, and
Alvar Bermudez he who colonized Osma, went with forty, and Gonzalo
Munoz of Orbaneja, and Muno Ravia, and Yvanez Cornejo with sixty, and
Muno Fernandez the Lord of Monteforte, and Gomez Fernandez he who
colonized Pampliego with sixty; and Don Garcia de Roa and Serrazin his
brother, Lord of Aza, with ninety; and Antolin Sanchez of Soria took
with him forty knights who were his children or his kin: ... nine
hundred knights were they in all. And there went with them five hundred
esquires on foot, all hidalgos, beside those who were bred in his
household, and beside other foot-men, who were many in number. All
these went well clad in right good garments, and with good horses, to
serve the Cid both in Cortes and in the war.

II. King Don Alfonso made no delay, but sent out his letters through
Leon and Santiago, to the Portugueze and the Calicians, and they of
Carrion, and the Castillians, that he would hold a Cortes in Toledo at
the end of seven weeks, and that they who did not appear should no
longer be accounted his vassals. At this greatly were the Infantes of
Carrion troubled, for they feared the coming of my Cid the Campeador.
And they took counsel with their kin and prayed the King that he would
hold them excused from that Cortes; and the King made answer, that
nothing but God should excuse them from it, for the Campeador was
coming to demand justice against them, and he, quoth the King, who will
not appear, shall quit my kingdoms. So when they saw that they must
needs appear, they took counsel with the Count Don Garcia, the enemy of
my Cid, who alway wished him ill, and they went with the greatest
company that they could assemble, thinking to dismay my Cid the
Campeador. And they arrived before him.

III. When my Cid drew nigh unto Toledo, he sent Alvar Fanez forward to
kiss the King's hand, and let him wit that he should be there that
night. When the King heard this it rejoiced his heart, and he took
horse and went out with a great company to meet him who was born in
happy hour; and there went with him his sons-in-law, the Count Don
Anrrich, and the Count Don Remond; this one was the father of the good
Emperor. When they came in sight, the Cid dismounted and fell to the
ground, and would have abased himself to honour his Lord, but the King
cried out to him and said, By St. Isidro this must not be to-day!
Mount, Cid, or I shall not be well pleased! I welcome you with heart
and soul; ... and my heart is grieved for your grief. God send that the
court be honoured by you! Amen, said my Cid the Campeador, and he
kissed his hand, and afterwards saluted him. And the Cid said, I thank
God that I see you, Sir; and he humbled himself to Count Don Anrrich,
and Count Don Remond, and the others, and said, God save all our
friends, and chiefly you, Sir! my wife Dona Ximena kisses your hand,
and my daughters also, that this thing which hath befallen us, may be
found displeasing unto you. And the King said, That will it be, unless
God prevent. So they rode toward Toledo. And the King said unto him, I
have ordered you to be lodged in my Palaces of Galiana, that you may be
near me. And the Cid answered, Gramercy, Sir! God grant you long life
and happy, but in your Palaces there is none who should be lodged save
you. When you hold your Cortes let it be in those Palaces of Galiana,
for there is better room there than in the Alcazar. I will not cross
the Tagus to-night, but will pass the night in St. Servans on this
side, and hold a vigil there. To-morrow I will enter the city, and be
in the court before dinner. The King said that it pleased him well, and
he returned into Toledo. And the Cid went into the Church of St.
Servans, and ordered candles to be placed upon the altar, for he would
keep a vigil there; and there he remained with Minaya and the other
good ones, praying to the Lord, and talking in private. The tents of
his company were pitched upon the hills round about. Any one who beheld
them might well have said, that it looked like a great host.

IV. When the King entered the city, he bade his seneschal, Benito
Perez, make ready the Palaces of Galiana for the next day, when the
Cortes should begin; and he fitted the great Palace after this manner.
He placed _estrados_ with carpets upon the ground, and hung the walls
with cloth of gold. And in the highest place he placed the royal chair
in which the King should sit; it was a right noble chair and a rich,
which he had won in Toledo, and which had belonged to the Kings
thereof; and round about it right noble _estrados_ were placed for the
Counts and honourable men who were come to the Cortes. Now the Cid knew
how they were fitting up the Palaces of Galiana, and he called for a
squire, who was a young man, one whom he had brought up and in whom he
had great trust; he was an hidalgo, and hight Ferran Alfonso; and the
Cid bade him take his ivory seat which he had won in Valencia, and
which had belonged to the Kings thereof, and place it in the Palace, in
the best place, near the seat of the King; and that none might hurt or
do dishonour unto it, he gave him a hundred squires, all hidalgos, to
go with him, and ordered them not to leave it till he should come there
the next day. So when they had dined, they made the seat be taken up,
and went with it to the Palaces of Galiana, and placed it near the seat
of the King, as the Cid had commanded; and all that day and night they
remained there guarding the ivory seat, till the Cid should come and
take his place thereon; every one having his sword hung from his neck.
This was a right noble seat, and of subtle work, so that whoso beheld
it would say it was the seat of a good man, and that it became such a
one as the Cid. It was covered with cloth of gold, underneath which was
a cushion.

V. On the morrow, after the King had heard mass, he went into the
Palace of Galiana, where the Cortes was to assemble, and the Infantes
of Carrion and the other Counts and Ricos-omes with him, save the Cid
who was not yet come; and when they who did not love the Cid beheld his
ivory seat, they began to make mock of it. And Count Garcia said to the
King, I beseech your Grace, tell me, for whom that couch is spread
beside your seat: for what dame is it made ready; will she come drest
in the _almexia_ ... or with white _alquinales_ on her head, or after
what fashion will she be apparelled? Sir, a seat like that is fit for
none but your Grace: give order to take it for yourself, or that it be
removed. When Ferran Alfonso, who was there to guard the ivory seat
heard this, he answered and said, Count, you talk full foolishly, and
speak ill of one against whom it behoves you not to talk. He who is to
sit upon this seat is better than you, or than all your lineage; and he
hath ever appeared a man to all his enemies, not like a woman as you
say. If you deny this I will lay hands upon you, and make you
acknowledge it before my Lord the King Don Alfonso, who is here
present. And I am of such a race that you cannot acquit yourself by
saying I am not your peer, and the vantage of half your arms I give
you! At these words was the King greatly troubled, and the Counts also,
and all the honourable men who were there present. And Count Garcia who
was an angry man, wrapt his mantle under his arm, and would have struck
Ferran Alfonso, saying, Let me get at the boy who dares me! And Ferran
Alfonso laid hand upon his sword and came forward to meet him, saying,
that if it were not for the King, he would punish him thereright for
the folly which he had uttered. But the King seeing that these words
went on from bad to worse, put them asunder that farther evil might not
happen, and he said, None of ye have reason to speak thus of the seat
of the Cid; he won it like a good knight and a valiant, as he is. There
is not a King in the world who deserves this seat better than my vassal
the Cid, and the better and more honourable he is, the more am I
honoured through him. This seat he won in Valencia, where it had
belonged to the Kings thereof; and much gold and silver, and many
precious stones hath he won; and many a battle hath he won both against
Christians and Moors: and of all the spoil which he hath won, he hath
alway sent me part, and great presents and full rich, such as never
other vassal sent to his Lord; and this he hath done in acknowledgment
that I am his Lord. Ye who are talking here against him, which of ye
hath ever sent me such gifts as he? If any one be envious, let him
atchieve such feats as he hath done, and I will seat him with myself to
do him honour.

VI. Now the Cid had performed his vigil in the Church of St. Servan,
matins and primes were said, and mass performed; and then he made ready
to go to the Cortes, and with him went Alvar Fanez Minaya, whom he
called his right arm, and Pero Bermudez, and Muno Gustios, and Martin
Antolinez that doughty Burgalese, and Alvar Alvarez, and Alvar
Salvadorez, and Martin Munoz, and Felez Munoz the Cid's nephew, and
Malanda who was a learned man, and Galin Garciez the good one of
Aragon: these and others made ready to go with him, being an hundred of
the best of his company. They wore _velmezes_ under their harness, that
they might be able to bear it, and then their mail, which was as bright
as the sun: over this they had ermine or other skins, laced tight that
the armour might not be seen, and under their cloaks, their swords
which were sweet and sharp. He who was born in happy hour made no
tarriance; he drew on his legs hose of fine cloth, and put on over them
shoes which were richly worked. A shirt of _ranzal_ he wore, which was
as white as the sun; all the fastenings were wrought with gold and
silver: over this a _brial_ of gold tissue; and over this a red skin
with points of gold. My Cid the Campeador alway wore it. On his head he
had a coif of scarlet wrought with gold, which was made that none might
clip the hair of the good Cid. His was a long beard, and he bound it
with a cord. And he bade Alvar Fanez and Pero Bermudez assemble their
companions, and when he saw them he said, If the Infantes of Carrion
should seek a quarrel, where I have a hundred such as these I may be
well without fear! And he said, Let us mount now and go to the Cortes.
We go to make one defiance, and peradventure it may be two or three,
through the folly of those who may stir against us. Ye will be ready to
aid me, saying and doing as I shall call upon ye, always saving the
honour and authority of King Don Alfonso our Lord; see now that none of
ye say or do ought amiss, for it would be unseemly. Then called he for
his horse, and bestrode it, and rode to the Cortes.

VII. My Cid and his company alighted at the gate of the Palaces of
Galiana, and he and his people went in gravely, he in the midst and his
hundred knights round about him. When he who was born in happy hour
entered, the good King Don Alfonso rose up, and the Counts Don Anrrich
and Don Remond did the like, and so did all the others, save the
curly-headed one of Granon, and they who were on the side of the
Infantes of Carrion. All the others received him with great honour. And
he said unto the King, Sir, where do you bid me sit with these my
kinsmen and friends who are come with me? And the King made answer,
Cid, you are such a one, and have past your time so well to this day,
that if you would listen to me and be commanded by me, I should hold it
good that you took your seat with me; for he who hath conquered Kings,
ought to be seated with Kings. But the Cid answered, That, Sir, would
not please God, but I will be at your feet for by the favour of the
King your father Don Ferrando was I made, his creature and the creature
of your brother King Don Sancho am I, and it behoveth not that he who
receiveth bounty should sit with him who dispenseth it. And the King
answered, Since you will not sit with me, sit on your ivory seat, for
you won it like a good man; and from this day I order that none except
King or Prelate sit with you, for you have conquered so many high-born
men, and so many Kings, both Christians and Moors, that for this reason
there is none who is your peer, or ought to be seated with you. Sit
therefore like a King and Lord upon your ivory seat. Then the Cid
kissed the King's hand, and thanked him for what he had said, and for
the honour which he had done him; and he took his seat, and his hundred
knights seated themselves round about him. All who were in the Cortes
sate looking at my Cid and at his long beard which he had bound with a
cord; but the Infantes of Carrion could not look upon him for shame.

VIII. When they were all seated the King gave command that they should
be silent; and when the Cid saw that they were all still, he rose and
spake after this manner. Sir King Don Alfonso, I beseech you of your
mercy that you would hear me, and give command that I should be heard,
and that you would suffer none to interrupt me, for I am not a man of
speech, neither know I how to set forth my words, and if they interrupt
me I shall be worse. Moreover, Sir, give command that none be bold
enough to utter unseemly words, nor be insolent towards me, least we
should come to strife in your presence. Then King Don Alfonso rose and
said, Hear me, as God shall help you! Since I have been King I have
held only two Cortes, one in Burgos, and one in Carrion. This third I
have assembled here in Toledo for the love of the Cid, that he may
demand justice against the Infantes of Carrion for the wrongs which we
all know. The Counts Don Anrrich and Don Remoud shall be Alcaldes in
this cause; and these other Counts who are not on either side, give ye
all good heed, for ye are to take cognizance that the right may be
decreed. And I give order, and forbid any one, to speak without my
command, or to utter aught insolent against the Cid; and I swear by St.
Isidro, that whosoever shall disturb the Cortes shall lose my love and
be banished from the kingdom. I am on the side of him who shall be
found to have the right. Then those Counts who were appointed Alcaldes
were sworn upon the Holy Gospels, that they would judge between the Cid
and the Infantes of Carrion, rightly and truly, according to the law of
Castille and Leon.

IX. When this was done the King bade the Cid make his demand; and the
Cid rose and said, Sir, there is no reason for making long speeches
here, which would detain the Cortes. I demand of the Infantes of
Carrion, before you, two swords which I gave into their keeping; the
one is Colada and the other Tizona. I won them like a man, and gave
them to the keeping of the Infantes that they might honour my daughters
with them, and serve you. When they left my daughters in the Oak-forest
of Corpes they chose to have nothing to do with me, and renounced my
love; let them therefore give me back the swords, seeing that they are
no longer my sons-in-law. Then the King commanded the Alcaldes to judge
upon this demand according as they should find the right; and they took
counsel and judged, that the swords should be restored unto the Cid.
And Count Don Garcia said they would talk concerning it; and the
Infantes of Carrion talked apart with those who were on their side, and
they thought that they were well off; for that the Cid would demand
nothing more of them, but would leave the Cortes when he had recovered
the swords. So they brought the swords Colada and Tizona, and delivered
them to the King. The King drew the swords, and the whole Court shone
with their brightness: their hilts were of solid gold; all the good men
of the Cortes marvelled at them. And the Cid rose and received them,
and kissed the King's hand, and went back to his ivory seat; and he
took the swords in his hand and looked at them; they could not change
them, for the Cid knew them well, and his whole frame rejoiced, and he
smiled from his heart. And he laid them upon his lap and said, Ah, my
swords, Colada and Tizona, truly may I say of you, that you are the
best swords in Spain; and I won you, for I did not get you either by
buying or by barter. I gave ye in keeping to the Infantes of Carrion
that they might do honour to my daughters with ye. But ye were not for
them! they kept ye hungry, and did not feed ye with flesh as ye were
wont to be fed. Well is it for you that ye have escaped that thraldom
and are come again to my hands, and happy man am I to recover you. Then
Alvar Fanez rose and kissed the hand of the Cid, and said, I beseech
you give Colada into my keeping while this Cortes shall last, that I
may defend you therewith: and the Cid gave it him and said. Take it, it
hath changed its master for the better. And Pero Bermudez rose and made
the same demand for the sword Tizona, and the Cid gave it him in like
manner. Then the Cid laid hand upon his beard as he was wont to do, and
the Infantes of Carrion and they who were of their side thought that he
meant to disturb the Cortes, and they were greatly afraid; but he sate
still like a man of good understanding, for he was not one who did
things lightly.

X. Then the Cid rose and said, Thanks be to God and to you, Sir King, I
have recovered my swords Colada and Tizona, I have now another demand
against the Infantes of Carrion, King Don Alfonso, you well know that
it was your pleasure to bid me meet you at Requena, and I went there in
obedience to your command. And you asked of me my daughters in marriage
for the Infantes, and I did not refuse, in that I would not disobey
your command; and you bade me deliver them to my kinsman here Don Alvar
Fanez, and he gave them to the Infantes to be their wives, and the
blessing was given them in the church of St. Mary, according to the law
of Rome. You, Sir, gave them in marriage, not I; and you did it for
good, not for evil; but what they did was after another wise. And
though they are of great blood and honourable, yet would I not have
given my daughters to them, unless in obedience to your command; and
this, Sir, you well know, for so I said unto you. I gave them, when
they took my daughters from Valencia, horses and mules, and cups and
vessels of fine gold, and much wrought silver, and many noble garments,
and other gifts, three thousand marks of silver in all, thinking that I
gave it to my daughters whom I loved. Now, Sir, since they have cast my
daughters off, and hold themselves to have been dishonoured in marrying
them, give command that they restore unto me this which is my own, or
that they show cause why they should not. Then might you have seen the
Infantes of Carrion in great chafing. And Count Don Remond called upon
them to speak; and they said, We gave his swords to the Cid Campeador,
that he might ask nothing more of us, if it please the King. But the
King said that they must answer to the demand. And they asked to
consult together concerning it; and the King bade them take counsel and
make answer incontinently. So they went apart, and with them eleven
Counts and Ricos-omes who were on their side, but no right or reason
could they find for opposing this demand which the Cid had made.
Howbeit Count Don Garcia spake for them and said, Sir, this which the
Cid demands back from them, it is true that he gave it, but they have
expended it in your service; we hold therefore that they are not bound
to make restitution of it, seeing how it hath been expended.
Nevertheless if you hold it to be lawful that they should restore this
money, give order that time be given them to make the payment, and they
will go to Carrion, their inheritance, and there discharge the demand
as you shall decree. When the Count had thus said he sate down. And the
Cid arose and said, Sir, if the Infantes of Carrion have expended aught
in your service, it toucheth not me. You and the Alcaldes whom you have
appointed have heard them admit that I gave them this treasure, and
this excuse which they set up; I pray you let judgment be given whether
they are bound to pay it or not. Then King Don Alfonso answered and
said, If the Infantes of Carrion have expended aught in my service, I
am bound to repay it, for the Cid must not lose what is his own; and he
bade the Alcaldes consult together and judge according to what they
should find right. And the Alcaldes having taken counsel gave judgment,
that seeing the Infantes acknowledged the Cid had given them this
treasure with his daughters, and they had abandoned them, they must
needs make restitution in the Cortes of the King there right: and the
King confirmed this sentence, and the Cid rose and kissed the King's
hand. Greatly were the Infantes of Carrion troubled at this sentence,
and they besought the King that he would obtain time for them from the
Cid, in which to make their payment; and the King besought him to grant
them fifteen days, after this manner, that they should not depart from
the Court till they had made the payment, and that they should plight
homage for the observance of this. And the Cid granted what the King
desired, and they plighted homage accordingly in the hands of the King,
Then made they their account with the King, and it was found that what
they had expended for his service was two hundred marks of silver, and
the King said that he would repay this, so that there remained for them
two thousand and eight hundred to pay. Who can tell the trouble in
which the Infantes were, to pay this treasure to the Cid, they and all
their kindred and friends, for it was full hard for them to accomplish,
And they took up upon trust horses and mules and wrought silver, and
other precious things, and as they could get them, delivered them over
to the Cid. Then might you have seen many a good-going horse brought
there, and many a good mule, and many a good palfrey, and many a good
sword with its mountings. And they sent to Carrion to their father and
mother to help them, for they were in great trouble; and they raised
for them all they could, so that they made up the sum within the time
appointed. And then they thought that the matter was at an end, and
that nothing more would be demanded from them.

XI. After this payment had been made the Cortes assembled again, and
the King and all the honourable men being each in his place, the Cid
rose from his ivory seat, and said, Sir, praise be to God and your
favour, I have recovered my swords, and my treasure; now then I pray
you let this other demand be heard which I have to make against the
Infantes. Full hard it is for me to make it, though I have it rooted in
my heart! I say then, let them make answer before you, and tell why it
was that they besought you to marry them with my daughters, and why
they took them away from me from Valencia, when they had it in heart to
dishonour me, and to strike them, and leave them as they were left, in
the Oak-forest of Corpes? Look, Sir, what dishonour they did them! they
stript them of the garments which they had not given them, as if they
had been bad women, and the children of a bad father. With less than
mortal defiance I shall not let them go!... How had I deserved this,
Infantes, at your hands? I gave you my daughters to take with you from
Valencia; with great honour and great treasures gave I them unto
you;... Dogs and Traitors,... ye took them from Valencia when ye did
not love them, and with your bridles ye smote and with your spurs ye
spurned and wounded them, and ye left them alone in the Oak-forest, to
the wild beasts, and to the birds of the mountain! King Don Alfonso,
they neither remembered God, nor you, nor me, nor their own good
fortune! And here was fulfilled the saying of the wise man, that harder
it is for those who have no understanding to bear with good than with
evil. Praise be to God and to your grace, such a one am I, and such
favour hath God shown me, from the day when I first had horse and arms,
until now, that not only the Infantes of Carrion, but saving yourself,
Sir, there is not a King in Christendom who might not think himself
honoured in marrying with either of my daughters,... how much more then
these traitors!... I beseech you give me justice upon them for the evil
and dishonour which they have done me! And if you and your Cortes will
not right me, through the mercy of God and my own good cause, I will
take it myself, for the offence which they have committed against God
and the faith, and the truth which they promised and vowed to their
wives. I will pull them down from the honour in which they now are;
better men than they have I conquered and made prisoners ere now! and
with your license, Sir, to Carrion will I follow them, even to their
inheritance, and there will I besiege them, and take them by the
throat, and carry them prisoners to Valencia to my daughters, and there
make them do penance for the crime which they have committed, and feed
them with the food which they deserve. If I do not perform this, call
me a flat traitor. When the King heard this he rose up and said, that
it might be seen how he was offended in this thing. Certes, Cid Ruydiez
Campeador, I asked your daughters of you for the Infantes of Carrion,
because, as they well know, they besought me to do so, I never having
thought thereof. It well seemeth now that they were not pleased with
this marriage which I made at their request, and great part of the
dishonour which they have done you, toucheth me. But seeing ye are here
in my presence, it is not fitting that you make your demand in any
other manner than through my Cortes; do you therefore accuse them, and
let them acquit themselves if they can before my Alcaldes, who will
pass sentence according to what is right. And the Cid kissed the King's
hand, and returned to his place upon the ivory seat.

XII. Then the Cid arose and said, God prosper you, Sir, in life, and
honour, and estate, since you have compassion for me and for the
dishonour which my daughters have received. And he turned towards the
Infantes of Carrion, and said, Ferrando Gonzalez and Diego Gonzalez, I
say that ye are false traitors for leaving your wives as ye left them
in the Oak-forest; and here before the King I attaint you as false
traitors, and defy you, and will produce your peers who shall prove it
upon you, and slay you or thrust you out of the lists, or make you
confess it in your throats. And they were silent. And the King said,
that seeing they were there present, they should make answer to what
the Cid had said. Then Ferrando Gonzalez the elder arose and said, Sir,
we are your subjects, of your kingdom of Castille, and of the best
hidalgos therein, sons of the Count Don Gonzalo Gonzalez; and we hold
that men of such station as ourselves were not well married with the
daughters of Ruydiez of Bivar. And for this reason we forsook them,
because they come not of blood fit for our wives, for one lineage is
above another. Touching what he says, that we forsook them, he saith
truly; and we hold that in so doing we did nothing wrong, for they were
not worthy to be our wives, and we are more to be esteemed for having
left them, than we were while they were wedded with us. Now then, Sir,
there is no reason why we should do battle upon this matter with any
one. And Diego Gonzalez his brother arose and said, You know, Sir, what
perfect men we are in our lineage, and it did not befit us to be
married with the daughters of such a one as Ruydiez; and when he had
said this he held his peace and sate down. Then Count Don Garcia rose
and said, Come away, Infantes, and let us leave the Cid sitting like a
bridegroom in his ivory chair:... he lets his beard grow and thinks to
frighten us with it!... The Campeador put up his hand to his beard, and
said, What hast thou to do with my beard, Count? Thanks be to God, it
is long because it hath been kept for my pleasure; never son of woman
hath taken me by it; never son of Moor or of Christian hath plucked it,
as I did yours in your castle of Cabra, Count, when I took your castle
of Cabra, and took you by the beard; there was not a boy of the host
but had his pull at it. What I plucked then is not yet methinks grown
even!... And the Count cried out again, Come away, Infantes, and leave
him! Let him go back to Rio de Ovierna, to his own country, and set up
his mills, and take toll as he used to do!... he is not your peer that
you should strive with him. At this the knights of the Cid looked at
each other with fierce eyes and wrathful countenances; but none of them
dared speak till, the Cid bade them, because of the command which he
had given.

XIII. When the Cid saw that none of his people made answer he turned to
Pero Bermudez and said, Speak, Pero Mudo, what art thou silent for? He
called him Mudo, which is to say, Dumb-ee, because he snaffled and
stuttered when he began to speak; and Pero Bermudez was wroth that he
should be so called before all that assembly. And he said, I tell you
what, Cid, you always call me Dumb-ee in Court, and you know I cannot
help my words; but when anything is to be done, it shall not fail for
me. And in his anger he forgot what the Cid had said to him and to the
others that they should make no broil before the King. And he gathered
up his cloak under his arm and went up to the eleven Counts who were
against the Cid, to Count Garcia, and when he was nigh him he clenched
his fist, and gave him a blow which brought him to the ground. Then was
the whole Cortes in an uproar by reason of that blow, and many swords
were drawn, and on one side the cry was Cabra and Granon, and on the
other side it was Valencia and Bivar; but the strife was in such sort
that the Counts in short time voided the Palace, King Don Alfonso
meantime cried out aloud, forbidding them to fight before him, and
charging them to look to his honour; and the Cid then strove what he
could to quiet his people, saying to the King. Sir, you saw that I
could bear it no longer, being thus maltreated in your presence; if it
had not been before you, well would I have had him punished. Then the
King sent to call those Counts who had been driven out; and they came
again to the Palace, though they fain would not, complaining of the
dishonour which they had received. And the King said unto them that
they should defend themselves with courtesy and reason, and not revile
the Cid, who was not a man to be reviled; and he said that he would
defend as far as he could the rights of both parties. Then they took
their seats on the estrados as before.

XIV. And Pero Bermudez rose and said to Count Garcia, Foul mouth, in
which God hath put no truth, thou hast dared let thy tongue loose to
speak of the Cid's beard. His is a praiseworthy beard, and an
honourable one, and one that is greatly feared, and that never hath
been dishonoured, nor overcome! and if you please you may remember when
he fought against you in Cabra, hundred to hundred, he threw you from
your horse, and took thee by the beard, and made thee and thy knights
prisoners, and carried thee prisoner away across a pack-saddle; and his
knights pulled thy beard for thee, and I who stand here had a good
hand-full of it: how then shall a beard that hath been pulled speak
against one that hath alway been honourable! If you deny this, I will
fight you upon this quarrel before the King our Lord. Then Count Suero
Gonzalez rose in great haste and said, Nephews, go you away and leave
these rascally companions: if they are for fighting, we will give them
their fill of that, if our Lord the King should think good so to
command; that shall not fail for us, though they are not our peers.
Then Don Alvar Fanez Minaya arose and said, Hold thy peace, Count Suero
Gonzalez! you have been to breakfast before you said your prayers, and
your words are more like a drunkard's than one who is in his senses.
Your kinsmen like those of the Cid!... if it were not out of reverence
to my Lord and King, I would teach you never to talk again in this way.
And then the King saw that these words were going on to worse, and
moreover that they were nothing to the business; and he commanded them
to be silent, and said, I will determine this business of the defiance
with the Alcaldes, as shall be found right; and I will not have these
disputes carried on before me, least you should raise another uproar in
my presence.

XV. Then the King rose and called to the Alcaldes, and went apart with
them into a chamber, and the Cid and all the others remained in the
Hall. And when the King and the Alcaldes had taken counsel together
concerning what was right in this matter, they came out from the
chamber, and the King went and seated himself in his chair, and the
Alcaldes each in his place, and they commanded all persons to be silent
and hear the sentence which the King should give. Then the King spake
thus: I have taken counsel with these Counts whom I appointed to be
Alcaldes in this cause between the Cid and the Infantes of Carrion, and
with other honourable and learned men: and this is the sentence which I
give; that both the Infantes and Count Suero Gonzalez their fosterer
and uncle, forasmuch as it is given me to understand that he was the
adviser and abettor in the dishonour which they did unto the daughters
of the Cid, shall do battle with such three of the Cid's people as it
may please him to appoint, and thereby acquit themselves if they can.
When the King had given this sentence, the Cid rose and kissed, his
hand and said, May God have you, Sir, in his holy keeping long and
happy years, seeing you have judged justly, as a righteous King and our
natural Lord. I receive your sentence; and now do I perceive that it is
your pleasure to show favour unto me, and to advance mine honour, and
for this reason I shall ever be at your service. Then Pero Bermudez
rose up and went to the Cid and said, A boon, Sir! I beseech you let me
be one of those who shall do battle on your part, for such a one do I
hold myself to be, and this which they have done is so foul a thing,
that I trust in God to take vengeance for it. And the Cid made answer
that he was well pleased it should be so, and that he should do battle
with Ferrando Gonzalez the eldest; and upon that Pero Bermudez kissed
his hand. Then Martin Antolinez of Burgos rose and besought the Cid
that he might be another, and the Cid granted his desire, and said that
he should do battle with Diego Gonzalez the younger brother. And then
Muno Gustioz of Linquella rose and besought the Cid that he might be
the third, and the Cid granted it, and appointed him to do battle with
Count Suero Gonzalez. And when the Cid had appointed his three
champions, the King gave command that the combat should be performed on
the morrow; but the Infantes were not prepared to fight so soon, and
they besought him of his favour that he would let them go to Carrion,
and that they would come prepared for the battle. And the King would
not allow this time which they requested; howbeit the Counts Don
Anrrich and Don Remond his sons-in-law, and Count Don Nuno, spake with
him, and besought him of his grace that he would allow them three
weeks; and the King at their intreaty granted it with the pleasure of
the Cid.

XVI. Now when all this had been appointed, as ye have heard, and while
they were all in the court, there came into the Palace messengers from
the Kings of Aragon and of Navarre, who brought letters to King Don
Alfonso, and to the Cid Campeador, wherein those Kings sent to ask the
daughters of the Cid in marriage, the one for the Infante Don Sancho of
Aragon, the other for the Infante Garcia Ramirez of Navarre. And when
they came before the King, they bent their knees and gave him the
letters, and delivered their message; the like did they to the Cid.
Much were the King and the Cid also pleased at this news, and the King
said unto him, What say you to this? And the Cid answered, I and my
daughters are at your disposal, do you with us as you shall think good.
And the King said, I hold it good that they wed with these Infantes,
and that from henceforward they be Queens and Ladies; and that for the
dishonour which they have received, they now receive this honour. And
the Cid rose and kissed the hands of the King, and all his knights did
the like. These messengers hight, he of Aragon Ynigo Ximenez, and he of
Navarre Ochoa Perez. And the King gave order that his letters of
consent to these marriages should be given, and the Cid did the like.
And those knights did homage before the King, that in three months from
that day the Infantes of Aragon and of Navarre should come to Valencia,
to the Cid, to be wedded to his daughters. Great joy had the companions
of the Cid that these marriages were appointed, seeing how their honour
was increased; and contrariwise, great was the sorrow of the Infantes
of Carrion and their friends, because it was to their confusion and
great shame. And King Don Alfonso said aloud unto the Cid before them
all, Praised be the name of God, because it hath pleased him that the
dishonour which was done to me and to you and your daughters, should
thus be turned into honour: for they were the wives of the sons of
Counts, and now shall they be the wives of the sons of Kings, and
Queens hereafter. Great was the pleasure of the Cid and his company at
these words of the King, for before they had sorrow, and now it was
turned into joy. And the Infantes went away from the Palace full sadly,
and went to their lodging, and prepared to go to Carrion that they
might make ready for the combat, which was to be in three weeks from
that time.

XVII. Then the Cid said unto the King, Sir, I have appointed those who
are to do battle with the Infantes and their uncle for the enmity and
treason which they committed against me and my daughters; and now, Sir,
as there is nothing more for me to do here, I will leave them in your
hand, knowing that you will not suffer them to receive any displeasure
or wrong soever, and that you will defend their right. And if it please
you I would fain return to Valencia, where I have left my wife and
daughters, and my other companions; for I would not that the Moors
should rise up against me during my absence, thinking peradventure that
I have not sped so well in this matter as I have done, praised be God
and you. And moreover I have to make ready for these marriages which
you have now appointed. And the King bade him go when he pleased, and
good fortune with him, and said that he would protect his knights and
maintain his right in all things. Then the Cid kissed the King's hand
for this which he had said, and commended the knights to his keeping.
And the King called for Count Don Remond his son-in-law, and gave the
knights of the Cid to his charge, and bade them not depart from him;
and then the King rose and returned to the Alcazar.

XVIII. Then the Cid took off his coif of _ranzal,_ which was as white
as the sun, and he loosed his beard, and took it out of the cord with
which it was bound. All they who were there could not be satisfied with
looking at him. And the Counts Don Anrrich and Don Remond came up to
him, and he embraced them, and thanked them and the other good men who
had been Alcaldes in this business, for maintaining his right; and he
promised to do for them in requital whatever they might require; and he
besought them to accept part of his treasures. And they thanked him for
his offer, but said that it was not seemly. Howbeit he sent great
presents to each of them, and some accepted them and some did not. Who
can tell how nobly the Cid distributed his treasure before he departed?
And he forgave the King the two hundred marks which should have been
paid on account of the Infantes. And to the knights who had come from
Aragon and Navarre concerning the marriages, he gave many horses, and
money in gold, and sent them with great honour into their own country.

XIX. On the morrow the Cid went to take leave of the King, and the King
went some way out of the town with him, and all the good men who were
in the court also, to do him honour as he deserved. And when he was
about to dispeed himself of the King they brought him his precious
horse Bavieca, and he turned to the King and said, Sir, I should depart
ill from hence if I took with me so good a horse as my Bavieca, and did
not leave him for you, for such a horse as this is fit for you and for
no other master: and that you may see what he is, I will do before you
what it is long since I have done except in the battles which I have
had with my enemies. Then he mounted his horse, with his ermine
housings, and gave him the spur. Who can tell the goodness of the horse
Bavieca, and of the Cid who rode him? And as the Cid was doing this the
horse brake one of his reins, yet he came and stopt before the King as
easily as if both the reins had been whole. Greatly did the King and
all they who were with him marvel at this, saying that they had never
seen or heard of so good a horse as that. And the Cid besought the King
that he would be pleased to take the horse, but the King answered, God
forbid that I should take him!... rather would I give you a better if I
had one, for he is better bestowed on you than on me or any other, for
upon that horse you have done honour to yourself, and to us, and to all
Christendom, by the good feats which you have atchieved. Let him go as
mine, and I will take him when I please. Then the Cid kissed the King's
hand and dispeeded himself, and the King embraced him and returned to
Toledo.

XX. Now when the Cid had taken leave of the King, and of the other
honourable men and Counts, and Ricos-omes who were with him, Pero
Bermudez and Martin Antolinez and Muno Gustioz went on yet awhile with
him: and he counselled them how to demean themselves so as to clear him
of the shame which had been done him, and to be held for good knights
themselves, and to take vengeance for King Don Alfonso, and for him,
and for themselves, that he might receive good tidings from them in
Valencia. And they took his counsel well, as they afterwards manifested
when there was occasion. But Martin Antolinez made answer, Why do you
say this, Sir? we have undertaken the business and we shall go through
it; and they said unto him, God have you in his guidance. Sir, and be
you sure and certain, that by the mercy and help of God we shall so
demean ourselves as to come to you without shame. But if for our sins
it should betide otherwise, never more shall we appear before you dead
or living,... for slain we may be, but never vanquished. Then he bade
them return to the King, praying to God to have them in his keeping,
and assist them in fulfilling their demand, as he knew that their cause
was right.




BOOK X.


I. Now King Alfonso misdoubted the Infantes of Carrion that they would
not appear at the time appointed, and therefore he said that he would
go to Carrion, and the battle should be fought there. And he took with
him the Counts whom he had appointed Alcaldes, and Pero Bermudez and
Martin Antolinez and Muno Gustioz went with the Count Don Remond, to
whose charge the King had given them. And on the third day after the
Cid departed from Toledo the King set forth for Carrion; but it so
chanced that he fell sick upon the road, and could not arrive within
the three weeks, so that the term was enlarged to five. And when the
King's health was restored he proceeded and reached Carrion, and gave
order that the combat should be performed, and appointed the day, and
named the plain of Carrion for the place thereof. And the Infantes came
there with a great company of all their friends and kindred, for their
kinsmen were many and powerful; and they all came with one accord, that
if before the battle they could find any cause they would kill the
knights of the Cid: nevertheless, though they had determined upon this
they dared not put it in effect, because they stood in fear of the
King.

II. And when the night came of which the morrow was appointed for the
combat, they on one side and on the other kept vigil in the Churches,
each in that Church to which he had the most devotion. Night is past
away, and the dawn is now breaking; and at day-break a great multitude
was assembled in the field, and many Ricos-omes came there for the
pleasure which they would have in seeing this battle, and the King sent
and commanded the champions to make ready. Moreover he made the two
Counts his sons-in-law, Don Anrrich and Don Remond, and the other
Counts and their people, arm themselves and keep the field, that the
kinsmen of the Infantes might not make a tumult there. Who can tell the
great dole and sorrow of Count Gonzalo Gonzalez for his sons the
Infantes of Carrion, because they had to do battle this day! and in the
fullness of his heart he curst the day and the hour in which he was
born, for his heart divined the sorrow which he was to have for his
children. Great was the multitude which was assembled from all Spain to
behold this battle. And there in the field near the lists the champions
of the Cid armed themselves on one side, and the Infantes on the other.
And Count Don Remond armed the knights of the Cid, and instructed them
how to do their devoir, and Count Garci Ordonez helped arm the Infantes
of Carrion and their uncle Suero Gonzalez, and they sent to ask the
King of his favour that he would give command that the swords Colada
and Tizona should not be used in that combat. But the King would not,
and he answered that each must take the best sword and the best arms
that he could, save only that the one should not have more than the
other. Greatly were they troubled at this reply, and greatly did they
fear those good swords, and repent that they had taken them to the
Cortes of Toledo. And from that hour the Infantes and Suero Gonzalez
bewrayed in their countenances that they thought ill of what they had
done, and happy men would they have thought themselves if they had not
committed that great villainy, and he if he had not counselled it; and
gladly would they have given all that they had in Carrion so it could
now have been undone.

III. And the King went to the place where the Infantes were arming, and
said unto them, If ye feared these swords ye should have said so in the
Cortes of Toledo, for that was the place, and not this; ... there is
now nothing to be done but to defend yourselves stoutly, as ye have
need against those with whom ye have to do. Then went he to the knights
of the Cid, whom he found armed; and they kissed his hand and said unto
him, Sir, the Cid hath left us in your hand, and we beseech you see
that no wrong be done us in this place, where the Infantes of Carrion
have their party; and by God's mercy we will do ourselves right upon
them. And the King bade them have no fear for that. Then their horses
were brought, and they crost the saddles, and mounted, with their
shields hanging from the neck; and they took their spears, each of
which had its streamer, and with many good men round about they went to
the lists; and on the other side the Infantes and Count Suero Gonzalez
came up with a great company of their friends and kinsmen and vassals.
And the King said with a loud voice, Hear what I say, Infantes of
Carrion!... this combat I would have had waged in Toledo, but ye said
that ye were not ready to perform it there, and therefore I am come to
this which is your native place, and have brought the knights of the
Cid with me. They are come here under my safeguard. Let not therefore
you nor your kinsmen deceive yourselves, thinking to overpower them by
tumult, or in any other way than by fair combat; for whosoever shall
begin a tumult, I have given my people orders to cut him in pieces upon
the spot, and no enquiry shall be made touching the death of him who
shall so have offended. Full sorrowful were the Infantes of Carrion for
this command which the King had given. And the King appointed twelve
knights who were hidalgos to be true-men and place the combatants in
the lists, and show them the bounds at what point they were to win or
to be vanquished, and to divide the sun between them. And he went with
a wand in his hand, and saw them placed on both sides; then he went out
of the lists, and gave command that the people should fall back, and
not approach within seven spears-length of the lines of the lists.

IV. Now were the six combatants left alone in the lists, and each of
them knew now with whom he had to do battle. And they laced their
helmets, and put shield upon the arm, and laid lance in rest. And the
knights of my Cid advanced against the Infantes of Carrion, and they on
their part against the champions of the Campeador. Each bent down with
his face to the saddle-bow, and gave his horse the spur. And they met
all six with such a shock, that they who looked on expected to see them
all fall dead. Pero Bermudez and Ferrando Gonzalez encountered, and the
shield of Pero Bermudez was pierced, but the spear past through on one
side, and hurt him not, and brake in two places; and he sat firm in his
seat. One blow he received, but he gave another; he drove his lance
through Ferrando's shield, at his breast, so that nothing availed him.
Ferrando's breast-plate was threefold: two plates the spear went clean
through, and drove the third in before it, with the _velmes_ and the
shirt, into the breast, near his heart; ... and the girth and the
poitral of his horse burst, and he and the saddle went together over
the horse's heels, and the spear in him, and all thought him dead.
Howbeit Ferrando Gonzalez rose, and the blood began to run out of his
mouth, and Pero Bermudez drew his sword and went against him; but when
he saw the sword Tizona over him, before he received a blow from it, he
cried out that he confessed himself conquered, and that what Pero
Bermudez had said against him was true. And when Pero Bermudez heard
this he stood still, and the twelve true-men came up and heard his
confession, and pronounced him vanquished. This Ferrando did thinking
to save his life; but the wound which he had got was mortal.

V. Martin Antolinez and Diego Gonzalez brake their lances on each
other, and laid hand upon their swords. Martin Antolinez drew forth
Colada, the brightness of which flashed over the whole field, for it
was a marvellous sword; and in their strife he dealt him a back-handed
blow which sheared off the crown of his helmet, and cut away hood and
coif, and the hair of his head and the skin also: this stroke he dealt
him with the precious Colada. And Diego Gonzalez was sorely dismayed
therewith, and though he had his own sword in his hand he could not for
very fear make use of it, but he turned his horse and fled; and Martin
Antolinez went after him, and dealt him another with the flat part of
the sword, for he mist him with the edge, and the Infante began to cry
out aloud, Great God, help me and save me from that sword! And he rode
away as fast as he could, and Martin Antolinez called out after him,
Get out, Don Traitor! and drove him out of the lists, and remained
conqueror.

VI. Muno Gustioz and Suero Gonzalez dealt each other such strokes with
their spears as it was marvellous to behold. And Suero Gonzalez being a
right hardy knight and a strong, and of great courage, struck the
shield of Muno Gustioz and pierced it through and through; but the
stroke was given aslant, so that it passed on and touched him not. Muno
Gustioz lost his stirrups with that stroke, but he presently recovered
them, and dealt him such a stroke in return that it went clean through
the midst of the shield, and through all his armour, and came out
between his ribs, missing the heart; then laying hand on him he
wrenched him out of the saddle, and threw him down as he drew the spear
out of his body; and the point of the spear and the haft and the
streamer all came out red. Then all the beholders thought that he was
stricken to death. And Muno Gustioz turned to smite again. But when
Gonzalo Ansures his father saw this, he cried out aloud for great ruth
which he had for his son, and said, For God's sake do not strike him
again, for he is vanquished. And Muno Gustioz, like a man of good
understanding, asked the true-men whether he were to be held as
conquered for what his father said, and they said not, unless he
confirmed it with his own mouth. And Muno Gustioz turned again to Suero
Gonzalez where he lay wounded, and lifted his spear against him, and
Suero Gonzalez cried out, Strike me not, for I am vanquished. And the
judges said it was enough, and that the combat was at an end.

VII. Then the King entered the lists, and many good knights and
hidalgos with him, and he called the twelve true-men, and asked them if
the knights of the Cid had aught more to do to prove their accusation;
and they made answer that the knights of the Cid had won the field and
done their devoir, and all the hidalgos who were there present made
answer, that they said true. And King Don Alfonso lifted up his voice
and said, Hear me, all ye who are here present: inasmuch as the knights
of the Cid have conquered, they have won the cause; and the twelve
true-men made answer, that what the King said was the truth, and all
the people said the same. And the King gave command to break up the
lists, and gave sentence that the Infantes of Carrion and their uncle
Suero Gonzalez were notorious traitors, and ordered his seneschal to
take their arms and horses. And from that day forth their lineage never
held up its head, nor was of any worth in Castille; and they and their
uncle fled away, having been thus vanquished and put to shame. And thus
it was that Carrion fell to the King after the days of Gonzalo
Gonzalez, the father of the Infantes. Great was their shame, and the
like or worse betide him who abuseth fair lady, and then leaveth her.

VIII. Then the King went to meat, and he took the knights of the Cid
with him; and great was the multilude which followed after them,
praising the good feat which they had atchieved. And the King gave them
great gifts, and sent them away by night, and with a good guard to
protect them till they should be in safety; and they took their leave
of the King, and travelled by night and day, and came to Valencia. When
the Cid knew that they drew nigh, he went out to meet them, and did
them great honour. Who can tell the great joy which he made over them?
And they told him all even as it had come to pass, and how the King had
declared the Infantes of Carrion and their uncle to be notorious
traitors. Great was the joy of the Cid at these tidings, and he lifted
up his hands to heaven, and blest the name of God because of the
vengeance which he had given him for the great dishonour which he had
received. And he took with him Martin Antolinez and Pero Bermudez and
Muno Gustioz, and went to Dona Ximena and her daughters, and said to
them, Blessed be the name of God, now are you and your daughters
avenged! and he made the knights recount the whole unto them, even as
it had come to pass. Great was the joy of Dona Ximena and her
daughters, and they bent their knees to the ground, and praised the
name of Jesus Christ, because he had given them this vengeance for the
dishonour which they had received; and Dona Elvira and Dona Sol
embraced those knights many times, and would fain have kissed their
hands and their feet. And the Cid said unto Dona Ximena, Now may you
without let marry your daughters with the Infantes of Aragon and
Navarre, and I trust in God that they will be well and honourably
married, better than they were at first. Eight days did the great
rejoicings endure which the Cid made in Valencia, for the vengeance
which God had given him upon the Infantes of Carrion, and their uncle
Suero Gonzalez, the aider and abettor in the villainy which they had
committed.

IX. Now it came to pass after this, that the Great Soldan of Persia,
having heard of the great goodness of the Cid, and of his great feats
in arms, and how he had never been vanquished by mortal man, and how he
had conquered many Kings, Moor and Christian, and had won the noble
city of Valencia, and had defeated King Bucar Lord of Africa and
Morocco, and twenty nine Kings with him, all these things made him
greatly desirous of his love. And holding him to be one of the noble
men of the world, he sent messengers to him with great gifts, which
will be recounted hereafter, and with them he sent one of his kinsmen,
a full honourable man, with letters of great love. When this kinsman
reached the port of Valencia, he sent word to the Cid that he was
arrived there with a message from the Great Soldan of Persia, who had
sent a present by him; and when the Cid knew this he was well pleased.
And in the morning the Cid took horse, and went out with all his
company, all nobly attired, and his knights rode before him with their
lances erect. And when they had gone about a league they met the
messenger of the Soldan coming to Valencia: and when he beheld them in
what order they came, he understood what a noble man the Cid Campeador
was. And when he drew nigh, the Cid stopt his horse Bavieca, and waited
to receive him. And when the messenger came before the Cid and beheld
him, all his flesh began to tremble, and he marvelled greatly that his
flesh should tremble thus; and his voice failed him, so that he could
not bring forth a word. And the Cid said that he was welcome, and went
towards him to embrace him; but the Moor made him, no reply, being
amazed. And when he had somewhat recovered and could speak, he would
have kissed the Cid's hand; but the Cid would not give it him: and he
thought this was done for haughtiness, but they made him understand
that it was to do him honour; then was he greatly rejoiced, and he
said, I humble myself before thee, O Cid, who art the fortunate, the
best Christian, and the most honourable that hath girded on sword or
bestrode horse these thousand years. The Great Soldan of Persia, my
Lord, hearing of thy great fame and renown, and of the great virtue
which is in thee, hath sent me to salute thee and receive thee as his
friend, even as his best friend, the one whom he loveth and prizeth
best. And he hath sent a present by me who am of his lineage, and
beseecheth thee to receive it as from a friend. And the Cid made answer
that he thanked him greatly.

X. Then the Cid bade his people make way that the sumpter beasts which
carried the present might pass, and also the strange animals which the
Soldan had sent, the like whereof were not in that land. And when they
were passed he and his company returned towards the town, and the
messenger with him. And whensoever the messenger spake to the Cid, it
came into his mind how his voice had failed and his flesh trembled when
he beheld him; and he marvelled thereat, and would fain have asked the
Cid why it should be. And when they entered Valencia, great was the
crowd which assembled to see the sumpter beasts, and the strange
animals, for they had never seen such before, and they marvelled at
them. And the Cid gave order that the beasts should be taken care of,
and he went to the Alcazar and took the Moor with him; and when they
came to Dona Ximena the Moor humbled himself before her and her
daughters, and would have kissed her hand, but she would not give it
him. Then he commanded that the camels and other beasts of burthen
should be unloaded in their presence, and he began to open the packages
and display the noble things which were contained therein. And he laid
before them great store of gold and of money, which came in leathern
bags, each having its lock; and wrought silver in dishes and trenchers
and basons, and pots for preparing food; all these of fine silver and
full cunningly wrought, the weight whereof was ten thousand marks. Then
he brought out five cups of gold, in each of which were ten marks of
gold, with many precious stones set therein, and three silver barrels,
which were full of pearls and of precious stones. Moreover he presented
unto him many pieces of cloth of gold, and of silk, of those which are
made in Tartary, and in the land of Calabria. And moreover, a pound of
myrrh and of balsam, in little caskets of gold; this was a precious
thing, for with this ointment they were wont to anoint the bodies of
the Kings when they departed, to the end that they might not corrupt,
neither the earth consume them: and with this was the body of the Cid
embalmed after his death. Moreover he presented unto him a chess board,
which was one of the noble ones in the world; it was of ivory riveted
with gold, and with many precious stones round about it; and the men
were of gold and silver, and the squares also were richly wrought with
stones of many virtues. This was a full rich, and great and noble
present, so that no man could tell the price thereof.

XI. When the Moor had produced all these things before the Cid, he said
unto him, All this, Sir, with the animals which thou hast seen, my Lord
the Soldan of Persia hath sent unto thee, because of the great fame
which he hath heard of thy goodness and loyalty; and, Sir, he
beseecheth thee to accept it for the love of him. And the Cid thanked
him, taking great pleasure therein, and said that he would fain do him
greater honour than he had ever yet done to any one. And then he
embraced him in the name of the Soldan, and said, that if he were a
Christian he would give him the kiss of peace; and he asked whether
among those things there was aught which had belonged to the person of
the Soldan, that if so he might kiss it in his honour, and in token
that if he were there present, he would kiss him on the shoulder,
according to the custom of the Moors, for he knew that his Lord was one
of the noblest men in all Pagandom. When the kinsman of the Soldan
heard this he was greatly rejoiced, because of the great courtesy with
which the Cid had spoken, and he perceived how noble a man he was. And
he said unto him, Sir Cid, if you were present before my Lord the
Soldan, he would do you full great honour, and would give you the head
of his horse to eat, according to the custom of our country; but seeing
that this is not the custom of this country, I give you my living
horse, which is one of the best horses of Syria; and do you give order
that he be taken in honour of my Lord the Soldan, and he will be better
than his head would be boiled. And I kiss your hand, Sir Ruydiez, and
hold myself more honoured and a happier man than ever I have been
heretofore. And the Cid accepted the horse, and gave consent to the
Moor that he should kiss his hand. And then he called for his
Almoxarife, and bade him take with him this kinsman of the Soldan, and
lodge him in the Garden of Villa Nueva, and do him even such honour and
service as he would to himself.

XII. Great was the honour which the Almoxarife of the Cid Ruydiez did
unto the kinsman of the Soldan, and he served him even as he would have
served his Lord the Cid. And when they had disported and taken solace
together, the kinsman of the Soldan asked him concerning the Cid, what
manner of man he was. And the Almoxarife answered that he was the man
in the world who had the bravest heart, and the best knight at arms,
and the man who best maintained his law; and in the word which he hath
promised he never fails; and he is the man in the world who is the best
friend to his friend, and to his enemy he is the mortallest foe among
all Christians; and to the vanquished he is full of mercy and
compassion; and full thoughtful and wise in whatsoever thing he doeth;
and his countenance is such that no man seeth him for the first time
without conceiving great fear. And this, said the Almoxarife, I have
many times witnessed, for when any messengers of the Moors come before
him, they are so abashed that they know not where they are. When the
messenger of the Soldan heard this he called to mind how it had been
with him, and he said unto the Almoxarife, that as they were both of
one law he besought him to keep secret what he should say, and he would
tell him what had befallen him himself. And the Almoxarife said that he
would do as he desired. And with that he began to say, that he
marvelled greatly at what he had heard, for even as he had now told him
that it happened unto other messengers, even so had he himself found it
the first time that he had seen the Cid; for so great was the fear
which he conceived at the sight of his countenance, that for long time
he had no power of speech; and according to his thinking, this could
only proceed from the grace of God towards the Cid, that none of his
enemies might ever behold his face without fear. When the kinsman of
the Soldan had said this, the Almoxarife perceived that he was a wary
man, and one of good understanding; and he began to talk with him, and
asked him whether he would tell him what he should ask, and the
messenger replied that he would. Then the Almoxarife asked of him if he
knew what was the reason which had moved his Lord the Soldan to send so
great a present to the Cid Campeador, and why he desired to have his
love when he was so far away, beyond sea. Now the messenger of the
Soldan conceived that the Almoxarife sought to know the state of the
lands beyond sea, and he feared that this had been asked of him by
command of the Cid; and he made answer, that so great was the renown of
the Cid, and the report which they had heard in the lands beyond sea of
his great feats in arms, that it had moved the Soldan to send him that
present and desire his love. But when the Almoxarife heard this, he
said that he could not believe that this had been the reason, but that
some other intention had moved him. And when the messenger perceived
that the Almoxarife understood him, and that he desired to know the
whole of the matter, he said that he would tell him, but he besought
him to keep it secret. And the Almoxarife promised to do this. Then he
told him that the land beyond sea was in such state that they weened it
would be lost, and that the Christians would win it, so great a Crusade
had gone forth against it from Germany, and from France, and from
Lombardy, and Sicily, and Calabria, and Ireland, and England, which had
won the city of Antioch, and now lay before Jerusalem. And my Lord the
Great Soldan of Persia, hearing of the great nobleness of the Cid, and
thinking that he would pass over also, was moved to send him this
present to gain his love, that if peradventure he should pass there he
might be his friend. And when the Almoxarife of the Cid heard this, he
said that of a truth he believed it.

XIII. While yet that messenger of the Soldan of Persia abode in
Valencia, tidings carne to the Cid that the Infantes of Aragon and
Navarre were coming to celebrate their marriage with his daughters,
according as it had been appointed at the Cortes of Toledo. He of
Navarre hight Don Ramiro, and he was the son of King Don Sancho, him
who was slain at Rueda; and he married with Dona Elvira, the elder: and
the Infante of Aragon who married Dona Sol, the younger, hight Don
Sancho, and was the son of King Don Pedro. This King Don Pedro was he
whom the Cid Ruydiez conquered and made prisoner, as the history hath
related; but calling to mind the great courtesy which the Cid had shown
in releasing him from prison, and how he had ordered all his own to be
restored unto him, and moreover the great worth and the great goodness
of the Cid, and the great feats which he had performed, he held it good
that his son should match with his daughter, to the end that the race
of so good a man might be preserved in Aragon. Howbeit it was not his
fortune to have a son by Dona Sol, for he died before he came to the
throne, and left no issue. When the Cid knew that the Infantes were
coming, he and all his people went out six leagues to meet them, all
gallantly attired both for court and for war; and he ordered his tents
to be pitched in a fair meadow, and there he awaited till they came up.
And the first day the Infante Don Sancho of Aragon carne up, and they
waited for the Infante Don Ramiro; and when they were all met they
proceeded to Valencia. And the Bishop Don Hieronymo came out to meet
them with a procession, full honourably. Great were the rejoicings
which were made in Valencia because of the coming of the Infantes, for
eight days before the marriage began. And the Cid gave order that they
should be lodged in the Garden of Villa Nueva, and supplied with all
things in abundance.

XIV. When eight days were overpast the Bishop Don Hieronymo married the
Infantes of Aragon and Navarre to the daughters of the Cid in this
manner: the Infante Don Ramiro of Navarre to Dona Elvira; and the
Infante Don Sancho of Aragon to Dona Sol. And on the day after they had
been espoused they received the blessing in the great Church of St.
Peter, as is commanded by the law of Jesus Christ, and the Bishop said
mass. Who can tell the great rejoicings which were made at those
marriages, and the great nobleness thereof? Certes there would be much
to tell; for during eight days that they lasted, there was feasting
every day, full honourably and plentifully, where all persons did eat
out of silver; and many bulls were killed every day, and many of those
wild beasts which the Soldan sent; and many sports were devised, and
many garments and saddles and noble trappings were given to the
joculars. And the Moors also exhibited their sports and rejoicings,
after such divers manners, that men knew not which to go to first. So
great was the multitude which was there assembled, that they were
counted at eight thousand hidalgos. And when the marriage was
concluded, the Cid took his sons-in-law and led them by the hand to
Dona Ximena, and showed them all the noble things which the Soldan had
sent him; and they when they beheld such great treasures and such noble
things were greatly astonished, and said that they did not think there
had been a man in Spain so rich as the Cid, nor who possessed such
things. And as they were marvelling from whence such riches could have
come, both of gold and silver, and of precious stones and pearls, the
Cid embraced them and said, My sons, this and all that I have is for
you and for your wives, and I will give unto you the noblest and most
precious things that ever were given with women for their dowry: for I
will give you the half of all that you see here, and the other half I
and Dona Ximena will keep so long as we live, and after our death all
shall be yours; and my days are now well nigh full. Then the Infantes
made answer, that they prayed God to grant him life for many and happy
years yet, and that they thanked him greatly, and held him as their
father; and that they would ever have respect to his honour and be at
his service, holding themselves honoured by the tie that there was
between them. Three months these Infantes abode with the Cid in
Valencia, in great pleasure. And then they dispeeded themselves of the
Cid and of their mother-in-law Dona Ximena, and took each his wife and
returned into their own lands with great riches and honour. And the Cid
gave them great treasures, even as he had promised, and gave them
certain of those strange beasts which the Soldan had sent. And he rode
out with them twelve leagues. And when they took leave of each other
there was not a knight of all those who came with the Infantes to whom
the Cid did not give something, horse, or mule, or garments, or money,
so that all were well pleased; and he gave his daughters his blessing,
and commended them to God, and then he returned to Valencia, and they
went to their own country.

XV. After the Cid had seen his sons-in-law depart, he sent for the
messenger of the Soldan, and gave him many of the rare things of his
country to carry unto his Lord. And he gave him a sword which had the
device of the Soldan wrought in gold, and a coat of mail and sleeve
armour, and a noble gipion which was wrought of knots; and his letters
of reply, which were full of great assurances of friendship. Much was
the messenger of the Soldan pleased with the Cid for the great honour
which he had shown him, and much was he pleased also at seeing how
honourably the marriage of his daughters had been celebrated. So he
departed and went to the port, and embarked on board his ship, and went
to his Lord the Soldan.

XVI. After this the Cid abode in Valencia, and he laboured a full year
in settling all the Castles of the Moors who were subject unto him in
peace, and in settling the Moors of Valencia well with the Christians;
and this he did so that their tribute was well paid from this time till
his death. And all the land from Tortoso to Origuela was under his
command. And from this time he abode in peace in Valencia; and laboured
alway to serve God and to increase the Catholic faith, and to make
amends for the faults he had committed towards God, for he weened that
his days now would be but few. And it came to pass one day, the Cid
having risen from sleep and being in his Alcazar, there came before him
an Alfaqui whom he had made Alcalde of the Moors; his name was
Alfaraxi, and he it was who made the lamentation for Valencia, as is
recorded in this history. This Alfaqui had served the Cid well in his
office of Alcalde over the Moors of Valencia: for he kept them in
peace, and made them pay their tribute well, being a discreet man and
of great prudence, so that for this and for his speech he might have
been taken for a Christian; and for this reason the Cid loved him and
put great trust in him. And when the Cid saw him he asked him what he
would have: and he like a prudent man bent his knees before him, and
began to kiss his hand, and said, Sir Cid Ruydiez, blessed be the name
of Jesus Christ who hath brought you to this state that you are Lord of
Valencia, one of the best and noblest cities in Spain. What I would
have is this. Sir, my forefathers were of this city, and I am a native
hereof; and when I was a little lad the Christians took me captive, and
I learnt their tongue among them, and then my will was to be a
Christian, and to abide there in the land of the Christians; but my
father and mother, being rich persons, released me. And God showed me
such favour, and gave me such understanding and so subtle, that I
learnt all the learning of the Moors, and was one of the most
honourable and best Alfaquis that ever was in Valencia till this time,
and of the richest, as you know, Sir; and you in your bounty made me
Alcalde, and gave me your authority over the Moors, of which
peradventure I was not worthy. And now, Sir, thinking in my heart
concerning the law in which I have lived, I find that I have led a life
of great error, and that all which Mahommed the great deceiver gave to
the Moors for their law, is deceit: and therefore, Sir, I turn me to
the faith of Jesus Christ, and will be a Christian and believe in the
Catholic faith. And I beseech you of your bounty give order that I may
be baptized in the name of the Holy Trinity, and give me what name you
will. And from this time forward I will live the life of a Christian,
and fulfil what is written in the Gospel, and forsake wife and children
and kin, and all that there is in the world, and serve God, and believe
in his faith and holy law, as far as the weakness of my body can bear.
When the Cid Ruydiez heard this he began to smile for very pleasure;
and he rose up and took Alfaraxi with him to Dona Ximena, and said,
Here is our Alcalde, who will be a Christian, and our brother in the
faith of Jesus Christ: I beseech you therefore give order to provide
all things that may be needful. When Dona Ximena heard this she
rejoiced greatly, and gave order that all things should be full nobly
prepared. And on the morrow the Bishop Don Hieronymo baptized him, and
they gave him the name of Gil Diaz: and his godfathers were Don Alvar
Fanez, and Pero Bermudez, and Martin Antolinez of Burgos; and Dona
Ximena, with other honourable dames, were his godmothers. And from that
time forward Gil Diaz was in such favour with the Cid, that he trusted
all his affairs to his hands, and he knew so well how to demean
himself, both towards him and all those of his company, that they all
heartily loved him.




BOOK XI.


I. It is written in the history which Abenalfarax, the nephew of Gil
Diaz, composed in Valencia, that for five years the Cid Ruydiez
remained Lord thereof in peace, and in all that time he sought to do
nothing but to serve God, and to keep the Moors quiet who were under
his dominion; so that Moors and Christians dwelt together in such
accord, that it seemed as if they had alway been united; and they all
loved and served the Cid with such goodwill that it was marvellous. And
when these five years were over tidings were spread far and near, which
reached Valencia, that King Bucar the Miramamolin of Morocco, holding
himself disgraced because the Cid Campeador had conquered him in the
field of Quarto near unto Valencia, where he had slain or made
prisoners all his people, and driven him into the sea, and made spoil
of all the treasures which he had brought with him; ... King Bucar
calling these things to mind, had gone himself and stirred up the whole
Paganism of Barbary, even as far as Montes Claros, to cross the sea
again, and avenge himself if he could; and he had assembled so great a
power that no man could devise their numbers. When the Cid heard these
tidings he was troubled at heart; how beit he dissembled this, so that
no person knew what he was minded to do; and thus the matter remained
for some days. And when he saw that the news came thicker and faster,
and that it was altogether certain that King Bucar was coming over sea
against him, he sent and bade all the Moors of Valencia assemble
together in his presence, and when they were all assembled he said unto
them, Good men of the Aljama, ye well know that from the day wherein I
became Lord of Valencia, ye have alway been protected and defended, and
have past your time well and peaceably in your houses and heritages,
none troubling you nor doing you wrong; neither have I who am your Lord
ever done aught unto you that was against right. And now true tidings
are come to me that King Bucar of Morocco is arrived from beyond sea,
with a mighty power of Moors, and that he is coming against me to take
from me this city which I won with so great labour. Now therefore,
seeing it is so, I hold it good and command that ye quit the town, both
ye and your sons and your women, and go into the suburb of Alcudia and
the other suburbs, to dwell there with the other Moors, till we shall
see the end of this business between me and King Bucar. Then the Moors,
albeit they were loth, obeyed his command; and when they were all gone
out of the city, so that none remained, he held himself safer than he
had done before.

II. Now after the Moors were all gone out of the city, it came to pass
in the middle of the night that the Cid was lying in his bed, devising
how he might withstand this coming of King Bucar, for Abenalfarax saith
that when he was alone in his palace his thoughts were of nothing else.
And when it was midnight there came a great light into the palace, and
a great odour, marvellous sweet. And as he was marvelling what it might
be, there appeared before him a man as white as snow; he was in the
likeness of an old man, with grey hair and crisp, and he carried
certain keys in his hand; and before the Cid could speak to him he
said, Sleepest thou, Rodrigo, or what are thou doing? And the Cid made
answer, What man art thou who askest me? And he said, I am St. Peter,
the Prince of the Apostles, who come unto thee with more urgent tidings
than those for which thou art taking thought concerning King Bucar, and
it is, that thou art to leave this world, and go to that which hath no
end; and this will be in thirty days. But God will show favour unto
thee, so that thy people shall discomfit King Bucar, and thou, being
dead, shalt win this battle for the honour of thy body: this will be
with the help of Santiago, whom God will send to the business: but do
thou strive to make atonement for thy sins, and so thou shall be saved.
All this Jesus Christ vouchsafest thee for the love of me, and for the
reverence which thou hast alway shown to my Church in the Monastery of
Cardena. When the Cid Campeador heard this he had great pleasure at
heart, and he let himself fall out of bed upon the earth, that he might
kiss the feet of the Apostle St. Peter; but the Apostle said, Strive
not to do this, for thou canst not touch me; but be sure that all this
which I have told thee will come to pass.

And when the blessed Apostle had said this he disappeared, and the
palace remained full of a sweeter and more delightful odour than heart
of man can conceive. And the Cid Ruydiez remained greatly comforted by
what St. Peter had said to him, and as certain that all this would come
to pass, as if it were already over.

III. Early on the morrow he sent to call all his honourable men to the
Alcazar; and when they were all assembled before him, he began to say
unto them, weeping the while, Friends and kinsmen and true vassals and
honourable men, many of ye must well remember when King Don Alfonso our
Lord twice banished me from his land, and most of ye for the love which
ye bore me followed me into banishment, and have guarded me ever since.
And God hath shown such mercy to you and to me, that we have won many
battles against Moors and Christians; those which were against
Christians, God knows, were more through their fault than my will, for
they strove to set themselves against the good fortune which God had
given me, and to oppose his service, helping the enemies of the faith.
Moreover we won this city in which we dwell, which is not under the
dominion of any man in the world, save only of my Lord the King Don
Alfonso, and that rather by reason of our natural allegiance than of
anything else. And now I would have ye know the state in which this
body of mine now is; for be ye certain that I am in the latter days of
my life, and that thirty days hence will be my last. Of this I am well
assured; for for these seven nights past I have seen visions. I have
seen my father Diego Laynez, and Diego Rodriguez my son; and every time
they say to me, You have tarried long here, let us go now among the
people who endure for ever. Now notwithstanding man ought not to put
his trust in these things, nor in such visions, I know this by other
means to be certain, for Sir St. Peter hath appeared to me this night,
when I was awake and not sleeping, and he told me that when these
thirty days were over, I should pass away from this world. Now ye know
for certain that King Bucar is coming against us, and they say that
thirty and six Moorish Kings are coming with him; and since he bringeth
so great a power of Moors, and I have to depart so soon, how can ye
defend Valencia! But be ye certain, that by the mercy of God I shall
counsel ye so, that ye shall conquer King Bucar in the field, and win
great praise and honour from him, and Dona Ximena, and ye and all that
ye have, go hence in safety; how ye are to do all this I will tell ye
hereafter, before I depart.

IV. After the Cid had said this he sickened of the malady of which he
died. And the day before his weakness waxed great, he ordered the gates
of the town to be shut, and went to the Church of St. Peter; and there
the Bishop Don Hieronymo being present, and all the clergy who were in
Valencia, and the knights and honourable men and honourable dames, as
many as the Church could hold, the Cid Ruydiez stood up, and made a
full noble preaching, showing that no man whatsoever, however
honourable or fortunate they may be in this world, can escape death; to
which, said he, I am now full near; and since ye know that this body of
mine hath never yet been conquered, nor put to shame, I beseech ye let
not this befall it at the end, for the good fortune of man is only
accomplished at his end. How this is to be done, and what ye all have
to do, I will leave in the hands of the Bishop Don Hieronymo, and Alvar
Fanez, and Pero Bermudez. And when he had said this he placed himself
at the feet of the Bishop, and there before all the people made a
general confession of all his sins, and all the faults which he had
committed against our Lord Jesus Christ. And the Bishop appointed him
his penance, and assoyled him of his sins. Then he arose and took leave
of the people, weeping plenteously, and returned to the Alcazar, and
betook himself to his bed, and never rose from it again; and every day
he waxed weaker and weaker, till seven days only remained of the time
appointed. Then he called for the caskets of gold in which was the
balsam and the myrrh which the Soldan of Persia had sent him; and when
these were put before him he bade them bring him the golden cup, of
which he was wont to drink; and he took of that balsam and of that
myrrh as much as a little spoon-full, and mingled it in the cup with
rose-water, and drank of it; and for the seven days which he lived he
neither ate nor drank aught else than a little of that myrrh and balsam
mingled with water. And every day after he did this, his body and his
countenance appeared fairer and fresher than before, and his voice
clearer, though he waxed weaker and weaker daily, so that he could not
move in his bed.

V. On the twenty-ninth day, being the day before he departed, he called
for Dona Ximena, and for the Bishop Don Hieronymo, and Don Alvar Fanez
Minaya, and Pero Bermudez, and his trusty Gil Diaz; and when they were
all five before him, he began to direct them what they should do after
his death; and he said to them. Ye know that King Bucar will presently
be here to besiege this city, with seven and thirty Kings whom he
bringeth with him, and with a mighty power of Moors. Now therefore the
first thing which ye do after I have departed, wash my body with
rose-water many times and well, as blessed be the name of God it is
washed within and made pure of all uncleanness to receive his holy body
to-morrow, which will be my last day. And when it has been well washed
and made clean, ye shall dry it well, and anoint it with this myrrh and
balsam, from these golden caskets, from head to foot, so that every
part shall be anointed, till none be left. And you my Sister Dona
Ximena, and your women, see that ye utter no cries, neither make any
lamentation for me, that the Moors may not know of my death. And when
the day shall come in which King Bucar arrives, order all the people of
Valencia to go upon the walls, and sound your trumpets and tambours,
and make the greatest rejoicings that ye can. And when ye would set out
for Castille, let all the people know in secret, that they make
themselves ready, and take with them all that they have, so that none
of the Moors in the suburb may know thereof; for certes ye cannot keep
the city, neither abide therein after my death. And see ye that sumpter
beasts be laden with all that there is in Valencia, so that nothing
which can profit may be left. And this I leave especially to your
charge, Gil Diaz. Then saddle ye my horse Bavieca, and arm him well;
and ye shall apparel my body full seemlily, and place me upon the
horse, and fasten and tie me thereon so that it cannot fall: and fasten
my sword Tizona in my hand. And let the Bishop Don Hieronymo go on one
side of me, and my trusty Gil Diaz on the other, and he shall lead my
horse. You, Pero Bermudez, shall bear my banner, as you were wont to
bear it; and you, Alvar Fanez, my cousin, gather your company together,
and put the host in order as you are wont to do. And go ye forth and
fight with King Bucar: for be ye certain and doubt not that ye shall
win this battle; God hath granted me this. And when ye have won the
fight, and the Moors are discomfited, ye may spoil the field at
pleasure. Ye will find great riches. What ye are afterwards to do I
will tell ye to-morrow, when I make my testament.

VI. Early on the morrow the Bishop Don Hieronymo, and Alvar Fanez, and
Pero Bermudez, and Martin Antolinez, came to the Cid. Gil Diaz and Dona
Ximena were alway with him; and the Cid began to make his testament.
And the first thing which he directed, after commending his soul to
God, was, that his body should be buried in the Church of St. Pedro de
Cardena, where it now lies; and he bequeathed unto that Monastery many
good inheritances, so that that place is at this day the richer and
more honourable. Then he left to all his company and household
according to the desert of every one. To all the knights who had served
him since he went out of his own country, he gave great wealth in
abundance. And to the other knights who had not served him so long, to
some a thousand marks of silver, to others two, and some there were to
whom lie bequeathed three, according who they were. Moreover, to the
squires who were hidalgos, to some five hundred, and others there were
who had a thousand and five hundred. And he bade them, when they
arrived at St. Pedro de Cardena, give clothing to four thousand poor,
to each a skirt of _escanforte_ and a mantle. And he bequeathed to Dona
Ximena all that he had in the world, that she might live honourably for
the remainder of her days in the Monastery of St. Pedro de Cardena; and
he commanded Cil Diaz to remain with her and serve her well all the
days of her life. And he left it in charge to the Bishop Don Hieronymo,
and Dona Ximena his wife, and Don Alvar Fanez, and Pero Bermudez, and
Felez Munoz, his nephews, that they should see all this fulfilled. And
he commanded Alvar Fanez and Pero Bermudez, when they had conquered
King Bucar, to proceed forthwith into Castille and fulfil all that he
had enjoined. This was at the hour of sexts. Then the Cid Ruydiez, the
Campeador of Bivar, bade the Bishop Don Hieronymo give him the body of
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and he received it with great
devotion, on his knees, and weeping before them all. Then he sate up in
his bed and called upon God and St. Peter, and began to pray, saying,
Lord Jesus Christ, thine is the power and the kingdom, and thou art
above all Kings and all nations, and all Kings are at thy command, I
beseech thee therefore pardon me my sins, and let my soul enter into
the light which hath no end. And when the Cid Ruydiez had said this,
this noble Baron yielded up his soul, which was pure and without spot,
to God, on that Sunday which is called Quinquagesima, being the twenty
and ninth of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand and ninety and
nine, and in the seventy and third year of his life. After he had thus
made his end they washed his body twice with warm water, and a third
time with rose water, and then they anointed and embalmed it as he had
commanded. And then all the honourable men, and all the clergy who were
in Valencia, assembled and carried it to the Church of St. Mary of the
Virtues, which is near the Alcazar, and there they kept their vigil,
and said prayer and performed masses, as was meet for so honourable a
man.

VII. Three days after the Cid had departed King Bucar came into the
port of Valencia, and landed with all his power, which was so great
that there is not a man in the world who could give account of the
Moors whom he brought. And there came with him thirty and six Kings,
and one Moorish Queen, who was a negress, and she brought with her two
hundred horsewomen, all negresses like herself, all having their hair
shorn save a tuft on the top, and this was in token that they came as
if upon a pilgrimage, and to obtain the remission of their sins; and
they were all armed in coats of mail and with Turkish bows. King Bucar
ordered his tents to be pitched round about Valencia, and Abenalfarax
who wrote this history in Arabic, saith, that there were full fifteen
thousand tents; and he bade that Moorish negress with her archers to
take their station near the city. And on the morrow they began to
attack the city, and they fought against it three days strenuously; and
the Moors received great loss, for they came blindly up to the walls
and were slain there. And the Christians defended themselves right
well, and every time that they went upon the walls, they sounded
trumpets and tambours, and made great rejoicings, as the Cid had
commanded. This continued for eight days or nine, till the companions
of the Cid had made ready every thing for their departure, as he had
commanded. And King Bucar and his people thought that the Cid dared not
come out against them, and they were the more encouraged, and began to
think of making bastilles and engines wherewith to combat the city, for
certes they weened that the Cid Ruydiez dared not come out against
them, seeing that he tarried so long.

VIII. All this while the company of the Cid were preparing all things
to go into Castille, as he had commanded before his death; and his
trusty Gil Diaz did nothing else but labour at this. And the body of
the Cid was prepared after this manner: first it was embalmed and
anointed as the history hath already recounted, and the virtue of the
balsam and myrrh was such that the flesh remained firm and fair, having
its natural colour, and his countenance as it was wont to be, and the
eyes open, and his long beard in order, so that there was not a man who
would have thought him dead if he had seen him and not known it. And on
the second day after he had departed, Gil Diaz placed the body upon a
right noble saddle, and this saddle with the body upon it he put upon a
frame; and he dressed the body in a _gambax_ of fine sendal, next the
skin. And he took two boards and fitted them to the body, one to the
breast and the other to the shoulders; these were so hollowed out and
fitted that they met at the sides and under the arms, and the hind one
came up to the pole, and the other up to the beard; and these boards
were fastened into the saddle, so that the body could not move. All
this was done by the morning of the twelfth day; and all that day the
people of the Cid were busied in making ready their arms, and in
loading beasts with all that they had, so that they left nothing of any
price in the whole city of Valencia, save only the empty houses. When
it was midnight they took the body of the Cid, fastened to the saddle
as it was, and placed it upon his horse Bavieca, and fastened the
saddle well: and the body sate so upright and well that it seemed as if
he was alive. And it had on painted hose of black and white, so
cunningly painted that no man who saw them would have thought but that
they were grieves and cuishes, unless he had laid his hand upon them;
and they put on it a surcoat of green sendal, having his arms blazoned,
thereon, and a helmet of parchment, which was cunningly painted that
every one might have believed it to be iron: and his shield was hung
round his neck, and they placed the sword Tizona in his hand; and they
raised his arm, and fastened it up so subtilly that it was a marvel to
see how upright he held the sword. And the Bishop Don Hieronymo went on
one side of him, and the trusty Gil Diaz on the other, and he led the
horse Bavieca, as the Cid had commanded him. And when all this had been
made ready, they went out from Valencia at midnight, through the gate
of Roseros, which is towards Castille. Pero Bermudez went first with
the banner of the Cid, and with him five hundred knights who guarded
it, all well appointed. And after these came all the baggage. Then came
the body of the Cid with an hundred knights, all chosen men, and behind
them Dona Ximena with all her company, and six hundred knights in the
rear. All these went out so silently, and with such a measured pace,
that it seemed as if there were only a score. And by the time that they
had all gone out it was broad day.

IX. Now Alvar Fanez Minaya had set the host in order, and while the
Bishop Don Hieronymo and Gil Diaz led away the body of the Cid, and
Dona Ximena, and the baggage, he fell upon the Moors. First he attacked
the tents of that Moorish Queen the Negress, who lay nearest to the
city; and this onset was so sudden, that they killed full a hundred and
fifty Moors before they had time to take arms or go to horse. But that
Moorish Negress was so skilful in drawing the Turkish bow, that it was
held for a marvel, and it is said that they called her in Arabic
_Nugueymat Turya_, which is to say, the Star of the Archers. And she
was the first that got on horseback, and with some fifty that were with
her, did some hurt to the company of the Cid; but in fine they slew
her, and her people fled to the camp. And so great was the uproar and
confusion, that few there were who took arms, but instead thereof they
turned their backs and fled toward the sea. And when King Bucar and his
Kings saw this they were astonished. And it seemed to them that there
came against them on the part of the Christians full seventy thousand
knights, all as white as snow: and before them a knight of great
stature upon a white horse with a bloody cross, who bore in one hand a
white banner, and in the other a sword which seemed to be of fire, and
he made a great mortality among the Moors who were flying. And King
Bucar and the other Kings were so greatly dismayed that they never
checked the reins till they had ridden into the sea; and the company of
the Cid rode after them, smiting and slaying and giving them no
respite; and they smote down so many that it was marvellous, for the
Moors did not turn their heads to defend themselves. And when they came
to the sea, so great was the press among them to get to the ships, that
more than ten thousand died in the water. And of the six and thirty
Kings, twenty and two were slain. And King Bucar and they who escaped
with him hoisted sails and went their way, and never more turned their
heads. Then Alvar Fanez and his people, when they had discomfited the
Moors, spoiled the field, and the spoil thereof was so great that they
could not carry it away. And they loaded camels and horses with the
noblest things which they found, and went after the Bishop Don
Hieronymo and Gil Diaz, who, with the body of the Cid, and Dona Ximena,
and the baggage, had gone on till they were clear of the host, and then
waited for those who were gone against the Moors. And so great was the
spoil of that day, that there was no end to it: and they took up gold,
and silver, and other precious things as they rode through the camp, so
that the poorest man among the Christians, horseman or on foot, became
rich with what he won that day. And when they were all met together,
they took the road toward Castille; and they halted that night in a
village which is called Siete Aguas, that is to say, the Seven Waters,
which is nine leagues from Valencia.

X. Abenalfarax, he who wrote this history in Arabic, saith, that the
day when the company of the Cid went out from Valencia, and
discomfited King Bucar and the six and thirty Kings who were with him,
the Moors of Alcudia and of the suburbs thought that he went out alive,
because they saw him on horseback, sword in hand; but when they saw
that he went towards Castille, and that none of his company returned
into the town, they were astonished. And all that day they remained in
such amaze, that they neither dared go into the tents which King
Bucar's host had left, nor enter into the town, thinking that the Cid
did this for some device; and all night they remained in the same
doubt, so that they dared not go out from the suburbs. When it was
morning they looked towards the town, and heard no noise there; and
Abenaltarax then took horse, and taking a man with him, went toward the
town, and found all the gates thereof shut, till he came to that
through which the company of the Cid had gone forth; and he went into
the city and traversed the greater part thereof, and found no man
therein, and he was greatly amazed. Then he went out and called aloud
to the Moors of the suburbs, and told them that the city was deserted
by the Christians; and they were more amazed than before: nevertheless
they did not yet dare either to go out to the camp or to enter into the
town, and in this doubt they remained till it was mid-day. And when
they saw that no person appeared on any side, Abenalfarax returned
again into the town, and there went with him a great company of the
best Moors; and they went into the Alcazar, and looked through all the
halls and chambers, and they found neither man nor living thing; but
they saw written upon a wall in Arabic characters by Gil Diaz, how the
Cid Ruydiez was dead, and that they had carried him away in that manner
to conquer King Bucar, and also to the end that none might oppose their
going. And when the Moors saw this they rejoiced and were exceeding
glad, and they opened the gates of the town, and sent to tell these
tidings to those in the suburbs. And they came with their wives and
children into the town, each to the house which had been his before the
Cid won it. And from that day Valencia remained in the power of the
Moors till it was won by King Don Jayme of Aragon, he who is called the
Conqueror, which was an hundred and seventy years. But though King Don
Jayme won it, it is alway called _Valencia del Cid_. On the morrow they
went into the tents of King Bucar, and found there many arms; but the
tents were deserted, save only that they found certain women who had
hid themselves, and who told them of the defeat of King Bucar. And the
dead were so many that they could scarcely make way among them. And
they went on through this great mortality to the port, and there they
saw no ships, but so many Moors lying dead that tongue of man cannot
tell their numbers; and they began to gather up the spoils of the
field, which were tents, and horses, and camels, and buffaloes, and
flocks, and gold and silver, and garments, and store of provisions, out
of all number, so that they had wherewith to suffice the city of
Valencia for two years, and to sell to their neighbours also; and they
were full rich from that time.

XI. When the company of the Cid departed from the Siete Aguas, they
held their way by short journies to Salvacanete. And the Cid went alway
upon his horse Bavieca, as they had brought him out from Valencia, save
only that he wore no arms, but was clad in right noble garments; and
all who saw him upon the way would have thought that he was alive, if
they had not heard the truth. And whenever they halted they took the
body off, fastened to the saddle as it was, and set it upon that frame
which Gil Diaz had made, and when they went forward again, they placed
it in like manner upon the horse Bavieca. And when they reached
Salvacanete, the Bishop Don Hieronymo, and Dona Ximena, and Alvar
Fanez, and the other honourable men, sent their letters to all the
kinsmen and friends of the Cid Ruydiez, bidding them come and do honour
to his funeral; and they sent letters also to his sons-in-law, the
Infantes of Aragon and Navarre, and to King Don Alfonso. And they moved
on from Salvacanete and came to Osma, and then Alvar Fanez asked of
Dona Ximena if they should not put the body of the Cid into a coffin
covered with purple and with nails of gold; but she would not, for she
said that while his countenance remained so fresh and comely, and his
eyes so fair, his body should never be placed in a coffin, and that her
children should see the face of their father; and they thought that she
said well, so the body was left as it was. And at the end of fifteen
days the Infante of Aragon arrived, with Dona Sol his wife, and they
brought with them an hundred armed knights, all having their shields
reversed hanging from the saddle bow, and all in grey cloaks, with the
hoods rent. And Dona Sol came clad in linsey-woolsey, she and all her
women, for they thought that mourning was to be made for the Cid. But
when they came within half a league of Osma, they saw the banner of the
Cid coming on, and all his company full featly apparelled. And when
they drew nigh they perceived that they were weeping, but they made no
wailing; and when they saw him upon his horse Bavieca, according as ye
have heard, they were greatly amazed. But so great was the sorrow of
the Infante that he and all his company began to lament aloud. And Dona
Sol, when she beheld her father, took off her tire, and threw it upon
the ground and began to tear her hair, which was like threads of gold.
But Dona Ximena held her hand and said, Daughter, you do ill, in that
you break the command of your father, who laid his curse upon all who
should make lamentation for him. Then Dona Sol kissed the hand of the
Cid and of her mother, and put on her tire again, saying, Lady mother,
I have committed no fault in this, forasmuch as I knew not the command
of my father. And then they turned back to Osma, and great was the
multitude whom they found there assembled from all parts to see the
Cid, having heard in what manner he was brought, for they held it to be
a strange thing: and in truth it was, for in ne history do we find that
with the body of a dead man hath there been done a thing so noble and
strange as this. Then they moved on from Osma, and came to Santesteban
de Gormaz. And there after few days the King of Navarre came with the
Queen Dona Elvira his wife; and they brought with them two hundred
knights; howbeit their shields were not reversed, for they had heard
that no mourning was to be made for the Cid. And when they were within
half a league of Santesteban, the company of the Cid went out to meet
them, as they had the Infante of Aragon; and they made no other
lamentation, save that they wept with Dona Elvira; and when she came up
to the body of her father she kissed his hand, and the hand of Dona
Ximena her mother. And greatly did they marvel when they saw the body
of the Cid Ruydiez how fair it was, for he seemed rather alive than
dead. And they moved on from Santesteban, towards San Pedro de Cardena.
Great was the concourse of people to see the Cid Ruydiez coming in that
guise. They came from Rioja, and from all Castille, and from all the
country round about, and when they saw him their wonder was the
greater, and hardly could they be persuaded that he was dead.

XII. At this time King Don Alfonso abode in Toledo, and when the
letters came unto him saying how the Cid Campeador was departed, and
after what manner he had discomfited King Bucar, and how they brought
him in this goodly manner upon his horse Bavieca, he set out from
Toledo, taking long journies till he came to San Pedro de Cardena to do
honour to the Cid at his funeral. The day when he drew nigh the Infante
of Aragon and the King of Navarre went out to meet him, and they took
the body of the Cid with them on horseback, as far as the Monastery of
San Christoval de Ybeas, which is a league from Cardena; and they went,
the King of Navarre on one side of the body, and the Infante of Aragon
on the other. And when King Don Alfonso saw so great a company and in
such goodly array, and the Cid Ruydiez so nobly clad and upon his horse
Bavieca, he was greatly astonished. Then Alvar Fanez and the other good
men kissed his hand in the name of the Cid. And the King beheld his
countenance, and seeing it so fresh and comely, and his eyes so bright
and fair, and so even and open that he seemed alive, he marvelled
greatly. But when they told him that for seven days he had drank of the
myrrh and balsam, and had neither ate nor drank of aught else, and how
he had afterwards been anointed and embalmed, he did not then hold it
for so great a wonder, for he had heard that in the land of Egypt they
were wont to do thus with their Kings. When they had all returned to
the Monastery they took the Cid from off his horse, and set the body
upon the frame, as they were wont to do, and placed it before the
altar. Many were the honours which King Don Alfonso did to the Cid in
masses and vigils, and other holy services, such as are fitting for the
body and soul of one who is departed. Moreover he did great honour to
the King of Navarre, and to the Infante of Aragon, ordering that all
things which were needful should be given to them and their companies.

XIII. On the third day after the coming of King Don Alfonso, they would
have interred the body of the Cid, but when the King heard what Dona
Ximena had said, that while it was so fair and comely it should not be
laid in a coffin, he held that what she said was good. And he sent for
the ivory chair which had been carried to the Cortes of Toledo, and
gave order that it should be placed on the right of the altar of St.
Peter; and he laid a cloth of gold upon it, and upon that placed a
cushion covered with a right noble _tartari_, and he ordered a graven
tabernacle to be made over the chair, richly wrought with azure and
gold, having thereon the blazonry of the Kings of Castille and Leon,
and the King of Navarre, and the Infante of Aragon, and of the Cid
Ruydiez the Campeador. And he himself, and the King of Navarre and the
Infante of Aragon, and the Bishop Don Hieronymo, to do honour to the
Cid, helped to take his body from between the two boards, in which it
had been fastened at Valencia. And when they had taken it out, the body
was so firm that it bent not on either side, and the flesh so firm and
comely, that it seemed as if he were yet alive. And the King thought
that what they purported to do and had thus begun, might full well be
effected. And they clad the body in a full noble _tartari_, and in
cloth of purple, which the Soldan of Persia had sent him, and put him
on hose of the same, and set him in his ivory chair; and in his left
hand they placed his sword Tizona in its scabbard, and the strings of
his mantle in his right. And in this fashion the body of the Cid
remained there ten years and more, till it was taken thence, as the
history will relate anon. And when his garments waxed old, other good
ones were put on.

XIV. King Don Alfonso, and the sons-in-law of the Cid, King Don Ramiro
of Navarre, and the Infante Don Sancho of Aragon, with all their
companies, and all the other honourable men, abode three weeks in St.
Pedro de Cardena, doing honour to the Cid. And the Bishop Don
Hieronymo, and the other Bishops who came with King Don Alfonso, said
every day their masses, and accompanied the body of the Cid there where
it was placed, and sprinkled holy water upon it, and incensed it, as is
the custom to do over a grave. And after three weeks they who were
there assembled began to break up, and depart to their own houses. And
of the company of the Cid, some went with the King of Navarre, and
other some with the Infante of Aragon; but the greater number, and the
most honourable among them, betook themselves to King Don Alfonso,
whose natural subjects they were. And Dona Ximena and her companions
abode in San Pedro de Cardena, and Gil Diaz with her, as the Cid had
commanded in his testament. And the Bishop Don Hieronymo, and Alvar
Fanez Minaya, and Pero Bermudez, remained there also till they had
fulfilled all that the Cid Ruydiez had commanded in his testament to be
done.

XV. Gil Diaz did his best endeavour to fulfil all that his Lord the Cid
Ruydiez had commanded him, and to serve Dona Ximena and her companions
truly and faithfully; and this he did so well, that she was well
pleased with his faithfulness. And Dona Ximena fulfilled all that the
Cid had commanded her; and every day she had masses performed for his
soul, and appointed many vigils, and gave great alms for the soul of
the Cid and of his family. And this was the life which she led, doing
good wherever it was needful for the love of God; and she was alway by
the body of the Cid, save only at meal times and at night, for then
they would not permit her to tarry there, save only when vigils were
kept in honour of him. Moreover Gil Diaz took great delight in tending
the horse Bavieca, so that there were few days in which he did not lead
him to water, and bring him back with his own hand. And from the day in
which the dead body of the Cid was taken off his back, never man was
suffered to bestride that horse, but he was alway led when they took
him to water, and when they brought him back. And Gil Diaz thought it
fitting that the race of that good horse should be continued, and he
bought two mares for him, the goodliest that could be found, and when
they were with foal, he saw that they were well taken care of, and they
brought forth the one a male colt and the other a female; and from
these the race of this good horse was kept up in Castille, so that
there were afterwards many good and precious horses of his race, and
peradventure are at this day. And this good horse lived two years and a
half after the death of his master the Cid, and then he died also,
having lived, according to the history, full forty years. And Gil Diaz
buried him before the gate of the Monastery, in the public place, on
the right hand; and he planted two elms upon the grave, the one at his
head and the other at his feet, and these elms grew and became great
trees, and are yet to be seen before the gate of the Monastery. And Gil
Diaz gave order that when he died they should bury him by that good
horse Bavieca, whom he had loved so well.

XVI. Four years after the Cid had departed that noble lady Dona Ximena
departed also, she who had been the wife of that noble baron the Cid
Ruydiez, the Campeador. At that time Don Garcia Tellez was Abbot of the
Monastery, a right noble monk, and a great hidalgo. And the Abbot and
Gil Diaz sent for the daughters of the Cid and Dona Ximena to come and
honour their mother at her funeral, and to inherit what she had left.
Dona Sol, who was the younger, came first, because Aragon is nearer
than Navarre, and also because she was a widow; for the Infante Don
Sancho, her husband, had departed three years after the death of the
Cid, and had left no child. King Don Ramiro soon arrived with the other
dame, Queen Dona Elvira his wife, and he brought with him a great
company in honour of his wife's mother, and also the Bishop of
Pamplona, to do honour to her funeral; and the Infante Don Garcia
Ramirez, their son, came with them, being a child of four years old.
Moreover there came friends and kinsmen from all parts. And when they
were all assembled they buried the body of Dona Ximena at the feet of
the ivory chair on which the Cid was seated; and the Bishop of Pamplona
said mass, and the Abbot Don Garcia Tellez officiated. And they tarried
there seven days, singing many masses, and doing much good for her
soul's sake. And in that time the Bishop Don Hieronymo arrived, who
abode with King Don Alfonso, and he came to do honour to the body of
Dona Ximena; for so soon as he heard that she was departed, he set off
taking long journies every day. And when the seven days were over, King
Don Ramiro and Queen Dona Elvira his wife, and her sister, Dona Sol,
set apart rents for the soul of Dona Ximena, and they appointed that
Gil Diaz should have them for his life, and that then they should go to
the Monastery for ever: and they ordained certain anniversaries for the
souls of the Cid and of Dona Ximena. After this was done they divided
between them what Dona Ximena had left, which was a great treasure in
gold and in silver, and in costly garments; ... the one half Queen Dona
Elvira took, and Dona Sol the other. And when they had thus divided it,
Dona Sol said that all which she had in the world should be for her
nephew the Infante Don Garcia Ramirez, and with the good will of Queen
Elvira his mother, she adopted him then to be her son, and she took him
with her to Aragon, to the lands which had been given her in dower, and
bred him up till he became a young man; and after the death of his
father he was made King of Navarre, as may be seen in the book of the
Chronicles of the Kings of Spain. And when all these things were done
they departed each to his own home, and Gil Diaz remained, serving and
doing honour to the bodies of his master the Cid and Dona Ximena his
mistress.

XVII. Now Don Garcia Tellez the Abbot, and the trusty Gil Diaz, were
wont every year to make a great festival on the day of the Cid's
departure, and on that anniversary they gave food and cloathing to the
poor, who came from all parts round about. And it came to pass when
they made the seventh anniversary, that a great multitude assembled as
they were wont to do, and many Moors and Jews came to see the strange
manner of the Cid's body. And it was the custom of the Abbot Don Garcia
Tellez, when they made that anniversary, to make a right noble sermon
to the people: and because the multitude which had assembled was so
great that the Church could not hold them, they went out into the open
place before the Monastery, and he preached unto them there. And while
he was preaching there remained a Jew in the Church, who stopt before
the body of the Cid, looking at him to see how nobly he was there
seated, having his countenance so fair and comely, and his long beard
in such goodly order, and his sword Tizona in its scabbard in his left
hand, and the strings of his mantle in his right, even in such manner
as King Don Alfonso had left him, save only that the garments had been
changed, it being now seven years since the body had remained there in
that ivory chair. Now there was not a man in the Church save this Jew,
for all the others were hearing the preachment which the Abbot made.
And when this Jew perceived that he was alone, he began to think within
himself and say. This is the body of that Ruydiez the Cid, whom they
say no man in the world ever took by the beard while he lived ... I
will take him by the beard now, and see what he can do to me. And with
that he put forth his hand to pull the beard of the Cid; ... but before
his hand could reach it, God, who would not suffer this thing to be
done, sent his spirit into the body, and the Cid let the strings of his
mantle go from his right hand, and laid hand on his sword Tizona, and
drew it a full palm's length out of the scabbard. And when the Jew saw
this, he fell upon his back for great fear, and began to cry out so
loudly, that all they who were without the Church heard him, and the
Abbot broke off his preachment and went into the Church to see what it
might be. And when they came they found this Jew lying upon his back
before the ivory chair, like one dead, for he had ceased to cry out,
and had swooned away. And then the Abbot Don Garcia Tellez looked at
the body of the Cid, and saw that his right hand was upon the hilt of
the sword, and that he had drawn it out a full palm's length; and he
was greatly amazed. And he called for holy water, and threw it in the
face of the Jew, and with that the Jew came to himself. Then the Abbot
asked him what all this had been, and he told him the whole truth; and
he knelt down upon his knees before the Abbot, and besought him of his
mercy that he would make a Christian of him, because of this great
miracle which he had seen, and baptize him in the name of Jesus Christ,
for he would live and die in his faith, holding all other to be but
error. And the Abbot baptized him in the name of the Holy Trinity, and
gave him to name Diego Gil. And all who were there present were greatly
amazed, and they made a great outcry and great rejoicings to God for
this miracle, and for the power which he had shown through the body of
the Cid in this manner; for it was plain that what the Jew said was
verily and indeed true, because the posture of the Cid was changed. And
from that day forward Diego Gil remained in the Monastery as longed as
he lived, doing service to the body of the Cid.

XVIII. After that day the body of the Cid remained in the same posture,
for they never took his hand off the sword, nor changed his garments
more, and thus it remained three years longer, till it had been there
ten years in all. And then the nose began to change colour. And when
the Abbot Don Garcia Tellez and Gil Diaz saw this, they weened that it
was no longer fitting for the body to remain in that manner. And three
Bishops from the neighbouring provinces met there, and with many masses
and vigils, and great honour, they interred the body after this manner.
They dug a vault before the altar, beside the grave of Dona Ximena, and
vaulted it over with a high arch, and there they placed the body of the
Cid seated as it was in the ivory chair, and in his garments, and with
the sword in his hand, and they hung up his shield and his banner upon
the walls.

XIX. After the body of the noble Cid Campeador had been thus honourably
interred, Gil Diaz his trusty servant abode still in the Monastery of
St. Pedro de Cardena, doing service to the graves of the Cid and Dona
Ximena, and making their anniversaries, and celebrating masses, and
giving great alms to the poor both in food and clothing, for the good
of their souls; and in this manner he lived while Don Garcia Tellez was
Abbot, and two others after him, and then he died. And his deportment
had alway been such in that Monastery, that all there were his friends,
and lamented greatly at his death, because he had led so devout and
good a life, and served so trustily at the graves of his master and
mistress. And at the time of his death he gave order that they should
lay his body beside the good horse Bavieca whom he had loved so well,
in the grave which he had made there for himself while he was living.
And Diego Gil remained in his place, doing the same service which he
had done, till he departed also. And the history saith that though Gil
Diaz was good, Diego Gil was even better.

XX. Eighty and six years after the death of the Cid Campeador, that is
to say, in the year of the Era 1223, which is the year of the
Incarnation 1185, it came to pass, that there was war between the Kings
of Leon and Navarre on the one part, and the King of Castille on the
other, notwithstanding this King Don Sancho of Navarre was uncle to the
King of Castille, being his mother's brother. And this King Don Sancho
entered into the lands of his nephew King Don Alfonso of Castille, and
advanced as far as Burgos, and with his sword he struck a great stroke
into the elm tree which is before the Church of St. John at Burgos, in
token that he had taken possession of all that land; and he carried
away with him a great booty in flocks and herds and beasts of the
plough, and whatever else he could find, and with all this booty went
his way toward Navarre. Now he had to pass nigh the Monastery of St.
Pedro de Cardena, where the body of the Cid Campeador lay. And at that
time the Abbot of the Monastery, whose name was Don Juan, was a good
man, and a hidalgo, and stricken in years; and he had been a doughty
man in arms in his day. And when he saw this great booty being driven
out of Castille, he was sorely grieved at the sight, and though he was
now an old man, and it was long since he had got on horseback, he went
to horse now, and took ten monks with him, and bade the strongest among
them take down the banner of the Cid from the place where it was hung
up, and he went after King Don Sancho who was carrying away the spoil.
And the King when he saw him coming marvelled what banner this might
be, for in those days there was no banner like unto that borne by any
man in all the kingdoms of Spain; and perceiving how few they were who
came with it, he halted to see what it might be. And the Abbot humbled
himself before him when he came up, and said, King Don Sancho of
Navarre, I am the Abbot of this Monastery of St. Pedro de Cardena,
wherein lies the body of Cid Campeador, your great grandfather; and for
that reason presuming on your bounty and favour, I am come hither with
this banner, which was borne before him in his battles, to beseech you
that you would leave this booty for the honour of this banner and of
the body of the Cid. And when King Don Sancho heard this, he marvelled
at the great courage of the man, that he should thus without fear ask
of him to restore his booty. And he said unto him after awhile, Good
man, I know you not: but for what you have said I will give back the
booty, for which there are many reasons. For I am of the lineage of the
Cid, as you say, and my father King Don Garcia being the son of Dona
Elvira his daughter, this is the first reason; and the second is for
the honour of his body which lies in your Monastery; and the third is
in reverence to this his banner, which never was defeated. And if none
of these were of any avail, yet ought I to restore it were it only for
this, that if he were living there is none who could drive away the
spoils of Castille, he being so near. For the love of God therefore,
and of my forefather the Cid, I give it to him, and to you, who have
known so well how to ask it at my hands. When the Abbot heard this he
was as joyful as he could be, and would have kissed the hand of King
Don Sancho, but the King would not suffer this because he was a priest
of the mass. Then the King ordered the spoil to be driven to the
Monastery, and went himself with it, and saw the banner hung up again
in its place, and abode there three weeks, till all that booty had been
restored to the persons from whom it was taken. And when this was done
he offered to the Monastery two hundred pieces of gold for the soul of
his forefather the Cid, and returned into his kingdom of Navarre, and
did no more evil at that time in the realm of Castille. This good
service the Cid Ruydiez did to Castille after his death.

XXI. Moreover when the Miramamolin brought over from Africa against
King Don Alfonso, the eighth of that name, the mightiest power of the
misbelievers that had ever been brought against Spain since the
destruction of the Kings of the Goths, the Cid Campeador remembered his
country in that great danger. For the night before the battle was
fought at the Navas de Tolosa, in the dead of the night, a mighty sound
was heard in the whole city of Leon, as if it were the tramp of a great
army passing through. And it passed on to the Royal Monastery of St.
Isidro, and there was a great knocking at the gate thereof, and they
called to a priest who was keeping vigils in the Church, and told him,
that the Captains of the army whom he heard were the Cid Ruydiez, and
Count Ferran Gonzalez, and that they came there to call up King Don
Ferrando the Great, who lay buried in that Church, that he might go
with them to deliver Spain. And on the morrow that great battle of the
Navas de Tolosa was fought, wherein sixty thousand of the misbelievers
were slain, which was one of the greatest and noblest battles ever won
over the Moors.

XXII. The body of the Cid remained in the vault wherein it had been
placed as ye have heard, till the year of the Incarnation 1272, when
King Don Alfonso the Wise, for the great reverence which he bore the
memory of the Cid his forefather, ordered a coffin to be made for him,
which was hewn out of two great stones; and in this the body of the Cid
was laid, and they placed it on that side where the Epistle is read;
and before it, in, a wooden coffin, they laid the body of Dona Ximena.
And round about the stone coffin these verses were graven, in the Latin
tongue, being, according as it is said, composed by King Don Alfonso
himself.

  BELLIGER, INVICTOS, FAMOSUS MARTE TRIUMPHIS,
  CLAUDITUR HOC TUMULO MAGNUS DIDACI RODERICUS.

And upon his tomb he ordered these verses to be graven also:

  QUANTUM ROMA POTENS BELLICIS EXTOLLITUR ACTIS,
  VIVAX ARTHURUS FIT GLORIA QUANTUM BRITANNIS,
  NOBILIS E CAROLO QUANTUM GAUDET FRANCIA MAGNO,
  TANTUM IBERIA DURIS CID INVICTOS CLARET.

And upon the walls it was thus written. I who lie here interred am the
Cid Ruydiez, who conquered King Bucar with six and thirty Kings of the
Moors; and of those six and thirty, twenty and two died in the field.
Before Valencia I conquered them, on horseback, after I was dead, being
the seventy and second battle which I won. I am he who won the swords
Colada and Tizona. God be praised, Amen.

XXIII. The body of the Cid remained here till the year of the
Incarnation 1447, when the Abbot Don Pedro del Burgo ordered the old
Church to be pulled down that a new one might be built in its place.
And then as all the sepulchres were removed, that of the Cid was
removed also, and they placed it in front of the Sacristy, upon four
stone lions. And in the year 1540 God put it in the heart of the Abbot
and Prior, Monks and Convent of the Monastery of St. Pedro de Cardena,
for the glory of God, and the honour of St. Peter and St. Paul, and of
the Cid and other good knights who lay buried there, and for the
devotion of the people, to beautify the great Chapel of the said
Monastery with a rich choir and stalls, and new altars, and goodly
steps to lead up to them. And as they were doing this they found that
the tomb of the blessed Cid, if they left it where it was, which was in
front of the door of the Sacristy, before the steps of the altar, it
would neither be seemly for the service of the altar, because it was in
the way thereof, nor for his dignity, by reason that they might stumble
against it; ... moreover it was fallen somewhat to decay, and set badly
upon the stone lions which supported it; and there were other knights
placed above him. Whereupon the Abbot, Prior, Monks, and Convent,
resolved that they would translate his body, and remove the other tombs
to places convenient for them, holding that it was not meet that those
who neither in their exploits nor in holiness had equalled him in life,
should have precedency of him after death. And they were of accord that
the day of this translation should not be made public, knowing how
great the number would be of knights and other persons who would be
desirous of being at this festival, for which cause they doubted least
some misadventure would betide of tumults and deaths, or scandals, such
as are wont to happen on such occasions; they were therefore minded to
do this thing without giving knowledge thereof to any but those who
were in the Monastery, who were of many nations and conditions, and who
were enow to bear testimony when it was done; for there was no lack
there, besides the religious, of knights, squires, hidalgos, labourers,
and folk of the city and the district round about, and Biscayans and
mountaineers, and men of Burgundy and of France.

XXIV. So on Thursday, the eighth day of Epiphany, being the thirteenth
day of January in the year of our Lord 1541, and at the hour of
complines, the Abbot and Convent being assembled, together with
serving-men and artificers who were called for this purpose, they made
that night wooden biers that the tomb might be moved more easily and
reverently, and with less danger. And on the morrow, which was Friday,
the fourteenth day of the said month and year, the Convent having said
primes, and the mass of Our Lady, according to custom, and the Abbot,
Fray Lope de Frias, who was a native of Velorado, having confessed and
said mass, the doors of the Church being open, and the altar richly
drest, and the bells ringing as they are wont to do upon great
festivals, at eight in the morning there assembled in the Church all
the brethren of the Monastery, nineteen in number, the other fifteen
being absent each in his avocation; and there were present with them
Sancho de Ocana, Merino and Chief Justice of the Monastery; Juan de
Rosales, Pedro de Ruseras, and Juan Ruyz, squires of the house; master
Ochoa de Artiaga, a mason, with his men; Andres de Carnica, and Domingo
de Artiago, master Pablo and master Borgonon, stone-cutters, with their
men; and master Juan, a smith, with his; and all the other workmen and
serving-men and traders who were in the house. And the Abbot being clad
in rich vestments, and the ministers and acolites with him, with cross,
candles, and torches burning, went all in procession to Our Lady's
altar, where the sacrament was at that time kept, because of the
repairs which were going on in the great Chapel; and all kneeling on
their knees, and having recited the Pater-noster and the Ave-maria, the
Abbot gave a sign, and the Precentor of the Convent began in plain
descant the antiphony _Salvator Mundi_. And when the whole Convent had
sung this, the Abbot said the verse _Ostende nobis_, and the verse
_Post partum virgo_, and the prayer _Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui es
omnium dubitantium certitudo_, and the prayer _Deus qui salutis
oeternoe_, demanding the grace and favour of the Lord. When this was
done they returned in procession to the great Chapel, before the tomb
of the blessed Cid, and then the choir began the anthem _Mirabilis
Deus_, saying it to the organ. And while this was singing in great
accord, the workmen stood ready with their instruments in hand, to lift
off the upper stone of the coffin, because it was well nigh impossible
to remove the whole together, and also because the Abbot, Prior, and
Convent, had resolved to see that holy body and relicks, by reason of
the devotion which they bore to the blessed Cid, and that they might
bear testimony in what manner he lay in that tomb, wherein he had been
deposited to many years ago, as behoved them for the honour of the Cid
and the authority of the Monastery.

XXV. When the anthem was finished, the Abbot said the verse _Exuliabunt
saneti in gloria_, and the prayer _Deus qui es tuorum gloria servorum_.
And when all had said Amen, the Abbot himself, with a little bar of
iron, began first to move the lid of the stone coffin; and then the
workmen and others easily lifted it off upon the bier, and thus the
tomb was laid open; and there appeared within it a coffin of wood
fastened-down with gilt nails, the hair of the coffin being entirely
gone, and great part of the wood decayed also. Within this coffin was
the holy body, now well nigh consumed, nothing but the bones remaining
entire. On some of the bones the flesh was still remaining, not
discoloured, but with a rosy colour, and the bones, were of the same
rosy colour, and the flesh also which had fallen from them. The body
was wrapt in a sendal wrought after the Moorish fashion, with sword and
spear by its side, as tokens of knighthood. As soon as the coffin was
opened there issued forth a good odour, and comforting fragrance. It
appeared that no part of the body was wanting: but this was not
narrowly examined, by reason of the reverence which they bore it. After
all this had been seen well and leisurely by all those who were
present, the Abbot and his ministers passed a clean sheet under the
coffin, and collecting into it all the bones and holy dust, covered it
with another sheet, and took it out, and laid it upon the high altar,
with candles and torches on each side; and in this manner it remained
there all day, till it was time to deposit it in the tomb. And all this
while the choristers sung to the organ, and the organ responded. And
when the body was laid upon the altar, the Abbot said the verse
_Mirabilis Deus_, and the prayer _Magnifuet te Domine sanctorum tuorum
beaia solemnitas_. And when this was done he went and disrobed himself
of his sacred vestments. And the workmen went and removed the stone
lions, and placed them in the place where they were to be, and the tomb
upon them. And the Convent went to perform divine service, which was
celebrated that day at all the hours with a full choir. And at the hour
accustomed, after this was done, the Abbot and the Convent invited all
who were there present to be their guests, giving a right solemn feast
to all; and the chief persons dined with the Convent in the Refectory.
And that same day in the evening, after vespers, when it was about four
o'clock, the workmen had removed the stone lions, and placed the tomb
upon them, and laid the lid of the tomb hard by, and made all ready to
fasten it down, so soon as the holy body should be laid in it. And at
that time, the bells ringing again, and all being again assembled, the
Abbot having put on again his vestments, which were of white brocade,
and his ministers with him, went to the altar whereon they had laid the
holy body, which had been right nobly guarded and accompanied. And the
singers singing the while, he and his ministers took it and laid it
with great reverence in the tomb, all seeing it when it was laid there,
wrapt up and covered with the sheets. And in the presence of all, the
workmen put on the lid and fastened it down. Then the Abbot began the
_Te Deum laudamus_, and the singers continuing it, they went in
procession to Our Lady's Chapel, where the most holy sacrament then
was, as ye have heard. And the Abbot said the verse _Benedicamus Patrem
et Filium cum Sancto Spiritu_, and the prayer _Deus ad quem digne
laudandum_, and they all returned thanksgiving to the Lord. And the
Abbot and the ministers went into the Sacristy, and took off their
sacred vestments; and then he returned and again invited all who were
there to a collation in the Refectory, which had been prepared by the
servants of the Monastery. And when this was over they separated, each
going with great content to his several occupation, praising God.

XXVI. It was a thing of great consolation that there was not a person
in that Monastery, who did not all that day feel great joy and delight
in his soul. And there befell a thing of which many took notice, and
which ought not to be passed over in silence, and it was this. There
was a great want of rain in the land of Rioja and Bureva, and the
district of Cardena also was in want of water, though not in such great
need, for it was long since any rain had fallen; and it pleased God
that on the aforesaid Thursday, the eve of the translation, at the very
hour when the Abbot and his people began to prepare the bier, and make
all things ready for opening and removing the tomb, a soft and gentle
rain began, such a rain that to those who were out of doors it was
nothing troublesome, and to the country greatly profitable, and
pleasant unto all; and it lasted all that night, and all the day
following, till the holy business of the translation was accomplished,
and then it ceased. Now it was found that this rain had fallen at the
same time and in the same manner, both in the country below Burgos, and
also in Bureva, albeit that it rarely hath happened for rain to fall at
one time in both provinces, because they are wont to have rain with
different winds. It seemeth therefore that this blessed knight, who
while he lived protected and defended that country with his person and
his arms, beholding the service which was done him, and how he was
remembered, favoured it at that time in heaven with his holy
intercession, by sending that thing whereof it had then most need,
which was water from heaven, in order that it might be made manifest
that he never ceased to show favour to those who trusted in him, and to
that Monastery of St. Pedro de Cardena. And an account of this
translation, and of all this which befell, was drawn up by the Abbot
Fray Lope de Frias, and signed by all the brethren of the Monastery,
and all the chief persons there present.

XXVII. Now albeit this translation of the body of the blessed Cid had
been made with such honour and reverence, there were many who murmured
against it; and Don Pedro Fernandez de Velasco, Duke of Frias, who was
then Constable of Castille, and the Municipality of Burgos, sent advice
thereof to the Emperor Charles V. who was at that time in Flanders,
beseeching him to give order that the tomb of the Cid might be
translated back to its former place, and that of Dona Ximena also,
which had been removed into the Cloisters of the Monastery. Hereupon
the Emperor dispatched letters to his Governor, Cardinal Juan, bidding
him see that the petition of the Constable and of the City of Burgos
was fulfilled, and the Cardinal in obedience thereunto dispatched the
provision here following.


The King.

Venerable Abbot, Monks and Convent of St. Pedro de Cardena, know ye
that we have ordered to be given, and do hereby give our edict unto
you, to the following tenor. The Council, Justice, and Regidores,
Knights, Esquires, Artificers and Good Men of the City of Burgos, have
made a memorial to us the King, showing, that we well know the fame,
nobleness, and exploits of the Cid, which are notorious to all, from
whose valour there redoundeth honour to all Spain, and especially to
that city whereof he was a native, and where he had his origin and
birth place; and that one of the principal things which they who pass
through that city, both natives of these kingdoms, and strangers also,
desire to see, is his tomb and the place wherein he and his ancestors
are interred, for his greatness and the antiquity thereof; and that it
is now some thirty or forty days since ye, not having respect to this,
neither bearing in mind that the Cid is our progenitor, nor the
possessions which he left to your house, nor the authority that it is
to the said Monastery that he should there have been interred, have
removed and taken away his tomb from the middle of the great Chapel,
where it had stood for more than four hundred years, and placed it near
a staircase, in a place unseemly, and unlike that where it was placed
heretofore, both in authority and honour. Moreover ye have removed with
him the tomb of Dona Ximena his wife, and placed it in the Cloisters of
the said Monastery, full differently from where it was. The which that
city, as well because it toucheth us as for her honour, doth greatly
resent; and albeit that as soon as it was known the Corregidor and
three of the Regidores thereof went there to prevail with ye that ye
should restore the said bodies to the place where they were wont to be,
ye would not be persuaded; whereof the said city holdeth itself greatly
aggrieved: and moreover it is a thing of bad example for Monasteries
and Religioners, who, seeing how lightly the tomb of so famous a person
hath been removed, may venture to remove and change any monuments and
memorials, whereby great evil would accrue to our kingdoms. And the
said City supplicateth and beseeching us of our grace, that we would be
pleased to give command that ye should restore the bodies of the Cid
and of his wife to the same place and form as heretofore. And the Cid
having been so signal a person, and one from whom the Royal Crown of
Castille hath received such great and notable services, we marvel that
ye should have made this alteration in their tombs, and we command you
if it be so that their bodies or their tombs have been indeed removed,
as soon as ye receive this, to restore them to the same place, and in
the same form and manner as they were before; and in case they have not
yet been removed, that ye do not move nor touch them, neither now nor
at anytime to come. And having first complied with this order, if ye
have any cause or reason for making this removal, ye are to send us an
account thereof, and also how ye have restored the said bodies and
tombs to their former place within forty days, to the end that we may
give order to have this matter inspected, and provide as shall be most
convenient. Done in Madrid, the 8th day of the Month of July, in the
year 1541. Johannes Cardinalis, by command of his Majesty. Governor in
his name.

XXVIII. This provision having been notified unto them, the Abbot and
Monks made answer that they were ready to obey it, and that he would go
and give account to the Lord Governor of what had been done. And the
Abbot went accordingly to Court, and informed the Cardinal Governor of
the translation which had been made; and that the tomb of the Cid had
been removed to a place more decorous, and nearer the High Altar, and
answering the site where King Don Alfonso VI. had commanded him to be
placed in his ivory chair before he was first interred; and where the
vault had been made wherein he had lain many years. And that the reason
why the tomb had been moved was, that the passage from the Sacristy to
the choir and the High Altar might be cleared; and that the reason why
it had not been placed in the middle of the Great Chapel, was, that if
that place were occupied, it seemed due to Queen Dona Sancha, the
foundress of that House, or to King Don Ramira, who had held that place
in the old Church. But notwithstanding all these reasons which the
Abbot alleged, the Cardinal ordered him to obey the King's command.
Hereupon the Abbot returned to the Monastery and determined to place
the tombs of the Cid and of Dona Ximena in the middle of the Great
Chapel, before it should be known in Burgos that the translation was to
take place; and accordingly when those persons who would fain have been
present made enquiry, they were told that the thing was done.

XXIX. Now there have not been wanting over-curious persons who, because
the Monastery of Cardena is the first under the royal patronage, by
reason that it is a foundation of Queen Dona Sancha, who is the first
royal personage that ever founded a Monastery in Spain, and because
King Don Alfonso the Great re-edified it, and Garcia Ferrandez the
Count of Castille restored it, have said, that the Cid hath taken the
place of these patrons. And when King Carlos II. was in this Monastery
in the year 1679, he asked whose the tomb was which occupied the middle
of the Great Chapel; and Fray Joseph del Hoyo, who was at that time
Abbot, made answer, Sir, it is the tomb of Rodrigo Diaz, the Cid
Campeador. Why then, said one of the Grandees, doth the Cid occupy the
best place, seeing that this Monastery is a royal foundation? Upon this
the Abbot made answer, that the Emperor Charles V. had ordered the
Abbot and Monks to place him in that place; and King Carlos II. said,
The Cid was not a King, but he was one who made Kings. And from that
time till the present day the tomb of the Cid hath remained in the same
place, and that of Dona Ximena beside it; and with such veneration and
respect are they preserved, that they are alway covered and adorned
with two cloths, whereof the upper one is of silk, and on great
festivals they are adorned with one still more precious.

XXX. Many are the things which belonged to Ruydiez the Cid Campeador,
which are still preserved with that reverence which is due to the
memory of such a man. First, there are those good swords Colada and
Tizona, which the Cid won with his own hand. Colado is a sword of full
ancient make: it hath only a cross for its hilt, and on one side are
graven the words _Si, Si_ ... that is to say, Yea, Yea: and on the
other, No, No. And this sword is in the Royal Armoury at Madrid. That
good sword Tizona is in length three quarters and a half, some little
more, and three full fingers wide by the hilt, lessening down to the
point; and in the hollow of the sword, by the hilt, is this writing in
Roman letters, _Ave Maria gratia plena, Dominus_, and on the other
side, in the same letters, I am Tizona, which was made in the era 1040,
that is to say, in the year 1002. This good sword is an heir-loom in
the family of the Marquisses of Falces. The Infante Don Ramiro, who was
the Cid's son-in-law, inherited it, and from him it descended to them.
Moreover the two coffers which were given in pledge to the Jews Rachel
and Vidas are kept, the one in the Church of St. Agueda at Burgos,
where it is placed over the principal door, in the inside, and the
other is in the Monastery of St. Pedro de Cardena, where it is hung up
by two chains on the left of the dome; on the right, and opposite to
this coffer, is the banner of the Cid, but the colour thereof cannot
now be known, for length of time and the dampness of the Church have
clean consumed it. In the middle is his shield hanging against the
wall, covered with skin, but now so changed that no blazonry or device
is to be seen. In the Sacristy there are the keys of the coffer, a
great round chest of sattin wood, the setting of the amethyst cup which
he used at table, and one of the caskets which the Soldan of Persia
sent with the myrrh and balsam; this is of silver, and gilt in the
inside, and it is in two parts, the lid closing over the other part;
its fashion is like that of the vessels in which the three Kings of the
East are represented, bringing their offerings to Christ when he was
newly born. On the upper part is graven the image of our Redeemer
holding the world in his hand, and on the other the figure of a serpent
marvellously contorted, per-adventure in token of the victory which
Jesus atchieved over the enemy of the human race. That noble
chess-board, the men whereof were of gold and silver, was also in the
Monastery in the days of King Don Alfonso the Wise, but it hath long
since been lost, no man knoweth how. Moreover there is in this Sacristy
a precious stone of great size, black and sparkling; no lapidary hath
yet known its name. The Convent have had an infant Jesus graven
thereon, with the emblem of the Passion, that it might be worthily
employed. It is thought also that the great cross of crystal which is
set so well and wrought with such great cunning, is made of different
pieces of crystal which belonged to the Cid. But the most precious
relick of the Cid Ruydiez which is preserved and venerated in this
Monastery, is the cross which he wore upon his breast when he went to
battle; it is of plain silver, in four equal parts, and each part
covered with three plates of gold, and in the flat part of each five
sockets set with precious stones of some size; and with other white
ones which are smaller; of these little ones, some are still left,
fastened in with filigrane. In the middle of the cross is a raised
part, after the manner of an artichoke, ending in white and green
enamel; and it is said that in the hollow thereof are certain relicks,
with a piece of the holy wood of the true cross. Verily, that part of
the writing which can still be read implieth this, for thus much may at
this day be discerned.... CRUCIS SALVATOR * * SANCTI PETRI * * PORTO.
Of the four limbs of this cross the upper one is wanting. King Don
Alfonso, the last of that name, asked for it, and had it made into a
cross to wear himself when he went to battle, because of the faith
which he had, that through it he should obtain the victory; of the
lower limb little more is left than that to which the plates of silver
and gold were fastened on. From point to point this cross is little
more than a quarter.

XXXI. There is no doubt that the soul of the blessed Cid resteth and
reigneth with the blessed in Heaven. And men of all nations and at all
times have come from all parts to see and reverence his holy body and
tomb, being led by the odour of his fame, especially knights and
soldiers, who when they have fallen upon their knees to kiss his tomb,
and scraped a little of the stone thereof to bear away with them as a
relick, and commended themselves to him, have felt their hearts
strengthened, and gone away in full trust that they should speed the
better in all battles into which they should enter from that time with
a good cause. By reason of this great devotion, and the great virtues
of my Cid, and the miracles which were wrought by him, King Philip the
Second gave order to his ambassador Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoza, to
deal with the Court of Borne concerning the canonization of this
venerable knight Rodrigo Diaz. Now Don Diego was a person of great
learning, and moreover, one of the descendants of the Cid; and being
greatly desirous that this thing should be effected, he sent to the
Monastery of St. Pedro de Cardena, and had papers and depositions sent
from thence, and made a memorial of the virtues and miracles of the
Campeador, showing cause why this blessed knight should be canonized.
But before the matter could be proceeded in, the loss of Sienna took
place, whereupon he was fain to leave Rome and thus this pious design
could not be brought about. Nevertheless the Cid hath alway been
regarded with great reverence as an especial servant of God: and he is
called the Blessed Cid, and the Venerable Rodrigo Diaz. Certes, his
soul resteth and reigneth with the blessed in Heaven. Amen.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Chronicle Of The Cid, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRONICLE OF THE CID ***

***** This file should be named 8491.txt or 8491.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/4/9/8491/

Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Tiffany Vergon, Marvin A.
Hodges, Charles Franks, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

