The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Quest, by P�o Baroja

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Quest

Author: P�o Baroja

Posting Date: October 18, 2012 [EBook #8496]
Release Date: July, 2005
First Posted: July 16, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE QUEST ***




Produced by Eric Eldred, Cam, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team










THE QUEST

BY P�O BAROJA

TRANSLATED FROM THE SPANISH By ISAAC GOLDBERG




CONTENTS


PART ONE

I Preamble--Somewhat Immoral Notions of a Boarding-House Keeper--A
Balcony is Heard Closing--A Cricket Chirps

II Do�a Casiana's House--A Morning Ceremony--Conspiracy--Wherein is
Discussed The Nutritive Value of Bones--Petra and Her Family--Manuel;
his Arrival in Madrid

III First Impressions of Madrid--The Boarders--Idyll--Sweet and
Delightful Lessons

IV Oh, Love, Love!--What's Don Telmo Doing?--Who is Don
Telmo?--Wherein the Student and Don Telmo Assume Certain Novelesque
Proportions


PART TWO

I "The Regeneration of Footgear" and "The Lion of the Bootmaker's
Art"--The First Sunday--An Escapade--_El Bizco_ and his Gang

II The "Big Yard" or Uncle Rilo's House--Local Enmities

III Roberto Hastings at the Shoemaker's--The Procession of
Beggars--Court of Miracles

IV Life in the Cobbler's Shop--Manuel's Friends

V La Blasa's Tavern

VI Roberto in Quest of a Woman--_El Tabuenca_ and his
Inventions--Don Alonso or the Snake-Man

VII The _Kermesse_ on Pasi�n Street--"The Dude"--A Caf� Chantant

VIII Leandro's Irresolution--In La Blasa's Tavern--The Man with the
Three Cards--The Duel with _Valencia_

IX An Unlikely Tale--Manuel's Sisters--Life's Baffling Problems


PART THREE

I Uncle Patas' Domestic Drama--The Bakery--Karl the Baker--The Society
of the Three

II One of the Many Disagreeable Ways of Dying in Madrid--The
Orphan--_El Cojo_ and his Cave--Night in the Observatory

III Meeting with Roberto--Roberto Narrates the Origin of a Fantastic
Fortune

IV Dolores the Scandalous--_Pastiri's_ Tricks--Tender Savagery--A
Modest Out-of-the-way Robbery

V Gutter Vestals--The Troglodites

VI Se�or Custodio and his Establishment--The Free Life

VII Se�or Custodio's Ideas--_La Justa, el Carnicer�n_ and _El
Conejo_

VIII The Square--A Wedding in La Bombilla--The Asphalt Caldrons




PART ONE




CHAPTER I

  Preamble--Somewhat Immoral Notions of a Boarding-House Keeper--A
    Balcony Is Heard Closing--A Cricket Chirps.


The clock in the corridor had just struck twelve, in a leisurely,
rhythmic, decorous manner. It was the habit of that tall old
narrow-cased clock to accelerate or retard, after its own sweet taste
and whim, the uniform and monotonous series of hours that encircle our
life until it wraps it and leaves it, like an infant in its crib, in
the obscure bosom of time.

Soon after this friendly indication of the old clock, uttered in a
solemn, peaceful voice becoming an aged person, the hour of eleven
rang out in a shrill, grotesque fashion, with juvenile impertinence,
from a petulant little clock of the vicinity, and a few minutes later,
to add to the confusion and the chronometric disorder, the bell of a
neighbouring church gave a single long, sonorous stroke that quivered
for several seconds in the silent atmosphere.

Which of the three clocks was correct? Which of those three devices
for the mensuration of time was the most exact in its indications?

The author cannot say, and he regrets it. He, regrets it, because
Time, according to certain solemn philosophers, is the canvas
background against which we embroider the follies of our existence,
and truly it is little scientific not to be able to indicate at
precisely which moment the canvas of this book begins. But the author
does not know; all he can say is, that at that moment the steeds of
night had for an appreciable time been coursing across the heavens. It
was, then, the hour of mystery; the hour when wicked folk stalk
abroad; the hour in which the poet dreams of immortality, rhyming
_hijos_ with _prolijos_ and _amor_ with _dolor_; the hour in which the
night-walker slinks forth from her lair and the gambler enters his;
the hour of adventures that are sought and never found; the hour,
finally, of the chaste virgin's dreams and of the venerable old man's
rheumatism. And as this romantic hour glided on, the shouts and songs
and quarrels of the street subsided; the lights in the balconies were
extinguished; the shopkeepers and janitors drew in their chairs from
the gutter to surrender themselves to the arms of sleep.

In the chaste, pure dwelling of Do�a Casiana the boarding-house
keeper, idyllic silence had reigned for some time. Only through the
balcony windows, which were wide open, came the distant rumbling of
carriages and the song of a neighbouring cricket who scratched with
disagreeable persistency upon the strident string of his instrument.

At the hour, whatever it was, that was marked by the twelve slow,
raucous snores of the corridor clock, there were in the house only an
old gentleman,--an impenitent early-riser; the proprietress, Do�a
Casiana,--a landlady equally impenitent, to the misfortune of her
boarders, and the servant Petra.

At this moment the landlady was asleep, seated upon the rocking-chair
before the open balcony; Petra, in the kitchen, was likewise asleep,
with her head resting against the window-frame, while the old
early-rising gentleman amused himself by coughing in bed.

Petra had finished scouring and her drowsiness, the heat and fatigue
had doubtless overcome her. She could be made out dimly in the light
of the small lamp that hung by the hearth. She was a thin, scrawny
woman, flat-chested, with lean arms, big red hands and skin of greyish
hue. She slept seated upon a chair with her mouth open; her breathing
was short and laboured.

At the strokes of the corridor clock she suddenly awoke; she shut the
window, through which came a nauseating, stable-like odour from the
milk-dairy on the ground-floor; she folded the clothes and left with a
pile of dishes, depositing them upon the dining-room table; then she
laid away in a closet the table-ware, the tablecloth and the left-over
bread; she took down the lamp and entered the room in the balcony of
which the landlady sat sleeping.

"Se�ora, se�ora!" she called, several times.

"Eh? What is it?" murmured Do�a Casiana drowsily.

"Perhaps you wish something?"

"No, nothing. Oh, yes! Tell the baker tomorrow that I'll pay him the
coming Monday."

"Very well. Good-night."

The servant was leaving the room, when the balconies of the house
across the way lighted up. They opened wide and soon there came the
strains of a tender prelude from a guitar.

"Petra! Petra!" cried Do�a Casiana. "Come here. Eh? Over in that
Isabel's house ... You can tell they have visitors."

The domestic went to the balcony and gazed indifferently at the house
opposite.

"Now that's what pays," the landlady went on. "Not this nasty
boarding-house business."

At this juncture there appeared in one of the balconies of the other
house a woman wrapped in a flowing gown, with a red flower in her
hair. A young man in evening dress, with swallow-tail coat and white
vest, clasped her tightly about the waist.

"That's what pays," repeated the landlady several times.

This notion must have stirred her ill-humour, for she added in an
irritated voice:

"Tomorrow I'll have some plain words with that priest and those
gadabout daughters of Do�a Violante, and all the rest who are behind
in their payments. To think a woman should have to deal with such a
tribe! No! They'll laugh no more at me! ..."

Petra, without offering a reply, said good-night again and left the
room. Do�a Casiana continued to grumble, then ensconced her rotund
person in the rocker and dozed off into a dream about an establishment
of the same type as that across the way; but a model establishment,
with luxuriously appointed salons, whither trooped in a long
procession all the scrofulous youths of the clubs and fraternities,
mystic and mundane, in such numbers that she was compelled to install
a ticket-office at the entrance.

While the landlady lulled her fancy in this sweet vision of a brothel
_de luxe_, Petra entered a dingy little room that was cluttered
with old furniture. She set the light upon a chair, and placed a
greasy box of matches on the top of the container; she read for a
moment out of a filthy, begrimed devotionary printed in large type;
she repeated several prayers with her eyes raised to the ceiling, then
began to undress. The night was stifling; in that hole the heat was
horrible. Petra got into bed, crossed herself, put out the lamp, which
smoked for a long time, stretched herself out and laid her head upon
the pillow. A worm in one of the pieces of furniture made the wood
crack at regular intervals.

Petra slept soundly for a couple of hours, then awoke stifling from
the heat. Somebody had just opened the door and footsteps were heard
in the entry.

"That's Do�a Violante and her daughters," mumbled Petra. "It must be
pretty late."

The three women were probably returning from los Jardines, after
having supped in search of the pesetas necessary to existence. Luck
must have withheld its favour, for they were in bad humour and the two
young women were quarrelling, each blaming the other for having wasted
the night.

There were a number of venomous, ironic phrases, then the dispute
ceased and silence was restored. Petra, thus kept awake, sank into her
own thoughts; again footfalls were heard in the corridor, this time
light and rapid. Then came the rasping of the shutter-bolt of a
balcony that was being opened cautiously.

"One of them has got up," thought Petra. "What can the fuss be now?"

In a few minutes the voice of the landlady was heard shouting
imperiously from her room:

"Irene! ... Irene!"

"Well?"

"Come in from the balcony."

"And why do I got to come in?" replied a harsh voice in rough,
ill-pronounced accents.

"Because you must ... That's why."

"Why, what am I doing in the balcony?"

"That's something you know better than I."

"Well, I don't know."

"Well, I do."

"I was taking the fresh air."

"I guess you're fresh enough."

"You mean you are, se�ora."

"Close the balcony. You imagine that this house is something else."

"I? What have I done?"

"I don't have to tell you. For that sort of thing there's the house
across the way, across the way."

"She means Isabel's," thought Petra.

The balcony was heard to shut suddenly; steps echoed in the entry,
followed by the slamming of a door. For a long time the landlady
continued her grumbling; soon came the murmuring of a conversation
carried on in low tones. Then nothing more was heard save the
persistent shrilling of the neighbouring cricket, who continued to
scrape away at his disagreeable instrument with the determination of a
beginner on the violin.




CHAPTER II

  Do�a Casiana's House--A Morning Ceremony--Conspiracy--Wherein Is
    Discussed the Nutritive Value of Bones--Petra and her
    Family--Manuel; his arrival in Madrid.


... And the cricket, now like an obstinate virtuoso, persisted in his
musical exercises, which were truly somewhat monotonous, until the sky
was brightened by the placid smile of dawn. At the very first rays of
the sun the performer relented, doubtless content with the perfection
of his artistic efforts, and a quail took up his solo, giving the
three regulation strokes. The watchman knocked with his pike at the
stores, one or two bakers passed with their bread, a shop was opened,
then another, then a vestibule; a servant threw some refuse out on the
sidewalk, a newsboy's calling was heard.

The author would be too bold if he tried to demonstrate the
mathematical necessity imposed upon Do�a Casiana's house of being
situated on Mesonero Romanos Street rather than upon Olivo, for,
undoubtedly, with the same reason it might have been placed upon
Desenga�o, Tudescos or any other thoroughfare. But the duties of the
author, his obligation as an impartial and veracious chronicler compel
him to speak the truth, and the truth is that the house was on
Mesonero Romanos Street rather than on Olivo.

At this early hour not a sound could be heard inside; the janitor had
opened the vestibule-entrance and was regarding the street with a
certain melancholy.

The vestibule,--long, dingy, and ill-smelling,--was really a narrow
corridor, at one side of which was the janitor's lodge.

On passing this lodge, if you glanced inside, where it was encumbered
with furniture till no room was left, you could always make out a fat
woman, motionless, very swarthy, in whose arms reposed a pale weakling
of a child, long and thin, like a white earthworm. It seemed that
above the window, instead of "Janitor" the legend should have read:
"The Woman-Cannon and her Child," or some similar sign from the circus
tents.

If any question were addressed to this voluminous female she would
answer in a shrill voice accompanied by a rather disagreeable gesture
of disdain. Leaving the den of this woman-cannon to one side, you
would proceed; at the left of the entrance began the staircase, always
in darkness, with no air except what filtered in through a few high,
grated windows that opened upon a diminutive courtyard with filthy
walls punctured by round ventilators. For a broad, roomy nose endowed
with a keen pituitary membrane, it would have been a curious sport to
discover and investigate the provenience and the species of all the
vile odours comprising that fetid stench, which was an inalienable
characteristic of the establishment.

The author never succeeded in making the acquaintance of the persons
living upon the upper floors. He has a vague notion that there were
two or three landladies, a family who let out rooms to permanent
gentlemen boarders, but nothing else. Wherefore the author does not
climb those heights but pauses upon the first landing.

Here, at least by day, could be made out in the reigning darkness, a
tiny door; at night, on the other hand, by the light of a kerosene
lantern one could glimpse a tin door-plate painted red, upon which was
inscribed in black letters: "Casiana Fern�ndez."

At one side of the door hung a length of blackish rusted chain that
could be reached only by standing on tiptoe and stretching out one's
arm; but as the door was always ajar, the lodgers could come and go
without the need of knocking.

This led to the house. By day, one was plunged into utter obscurity;
the sole thing that indicated a change of place was the smell, not so
much because it was more agreeable than that of the staircase, as
because it was distinct; on the contrary, at night, in the vague light
shed by a cork night-taper afloat in the water and oil of a bowl that
was attached to the wall by a brass ring, there could be seen through
a certain dim nebulosity, the furniture, the pictures and the other
paraphernalia that occupied the reception hall.

Facing the entrance stood a broad, solid table on which reposed an
old-fashioned music-box consisting of several cylinders that bristled
with pins; close beside it, a plaster statue: a begrimed figure
lacking a nose, and difficult to distinguish as some god, half-god or
mortal.

On the wall of the reception room and of the corridor hung some large,
indistinct oil paintings. A person of intelligence would perhaps have
considered them detestable, but the landlady, who imagined that a very
obscure painting must be very good, refreshed herself betimes with the
thought that mayhap these pictures, sold to an Englishman, would, one
day make her independent.

There were several canvases in which the artist had depicted
horrifying biblical scenes: massacres, devastation, revolting plagues;
but all this in such a manner, that, despite the painter's lavish
distribution of blood, wounds and severed heads, these canvases
instead of horrifying, produced an impression of merriment. One of
them represented the daughter of Herodias contemplating the head of
St. John the Baptist. Every figure expressed amiable joviality: the
monarch, with the indumentary of a card-pack king and in the posture
of a card-player, was smiling; his daughter, a florid-face dame, was
smiling; the familiars, encased in their huge helmets, were smiling,
and the very head of St. John the Baptist was smiling from its place
upon a repouss� platter. Doubtless the artist of these paintings, if
he lacked the gift of design and colour, was endowed with that of
joviality.

To the right and left of the house door ran the corridor, from whose
walls hung another exhibit of black canvases, most of them unframed,
in which could be made out absolutely nothing; only in one of them,
after very patient scrutiny, one might guess at a red cock pecking at
the leaves of a green cabbage.

Upon this corridor opened the bedrooms, in which, until very late in
the afternoon, dirty socks and torn slippers were usually seen strewn
upon the floor, while on the unmade beds lay collars and cuffs.

Almost all the boarders in that house got up late, except two
travelling salesmen, a bookkeeper and a priest, who arose early
through love of their occupations, and an old gentleman who did so
through habit or for reasons of hygiene.

The bookkeeper would be off, without breakfast, at eight in the
morning; the priest left _in albis_ to say mass; but the salesmen
had the audacious presumption to eat a bite in the house, and the
landlady resorted to a very simple procedure to send them off without
so much as a sip of water; these two agents began work between
half-past nine and ten; they retired very late, bidding their landlady
wake them at eight-thirty. She would see to it that they were not
aroused until ten. When they awoke and saw the time, they would jump
out of bed, hurriedly dress and dash off like a shot, cursing the
landlady. Then, when the feminine element of the house gave signs of
life, every nook would echo with cries, discordant voices,
conversations shouted from one bedchamber to another, and out of the
rooms, their hands armed with the night-service, would come the
landlady, one of Do�a Violante's daughters, a tall, obese Biscayan
Lady, and another woman whom they called the Baroness.

The landlady invariably wore a corset-cover of yellow flannel, the
Baroness a wrapper mottled with stains from cosmetics and the Biscayan
lady a red waist through whose opening was regularly presented, for
the admiration of those who happened along the corridor, a huge white
udder streaked with coarse blue veins.

After this matutinal ceremony, and not infrequently during the same,
complaints, disputes, gossip and strife would arise, providing
tid-bits for the remaining hours.

On the day following the scrape between the landlady and Irene, when
the latter returned to her room after having fulfilled her mission, a
secret conclave was held by those who remained.

"Don't you know? Didn't you hear anything last night?" asked the
Biscayan.

"No," replied the landlady and the Baroness. "What happened?"

"Irene smuggled a man into the house last night."

"She did?"

"I heard her talking to him myself."

"And he must have opened the street door! The dog!" muttered the
landlady.

"No; the man came from this tenement."

"One of the students from upstairs," offered the Baroness.

"I'll tell a thing or two to the rascally fellow," replied Do�a
Casiana.

"No. Take your time," answered the Biscayan. "We're going to give her
and her gallant a fright. If he comes tonight, while they're talking,
we'll tell the watchman to knock at the house door, and at the same
time we'll all come out of our rooms with lights, as if we were going
to the dining-room, and catch them."

While this plot was being hatched in the corridor, Petra was preparing
breakfast in the obscurity of the kitchen. There was very little to
prepare, for the meal invariably consisted of a fried egg, which never
by any accident was large, and a beefsteak, which, in memories
reverting to the remotest epoch, had not a single time by any
exception been soft.

At noon, the Biscayan, in tones of deep mystery, told Petra about the
conspiracy, but the maid-of-all-work was in no mood for jests that
day. She had just received a letter that filled her with worriment.
Her brother-in-law wrote her that Manuel, the eldest of Petra's
children, was being sent to Madrid. No lucid explanation of the reason
for this decision was given. The letter stated simply that back there
in the village the boy was only wasting his time, and that it would be
better for him to go to Madrid and learn a trade.

This letter had set Petra thinking. After wiping the dishes, she
washed herself in the kneeding-trough; she could not shake the fixed
idea that if her brother-in-law was sending Manuel to her it was
because the boy had been up to some mischief. She would soon find out,
for he was due to arrive that night.

Petra had four children, two boys and two girls; the girls were well
placed; the elder as a maid, with some very wealthy religious ladies,
the younger in a government official's home.

The boys gave her more bother; the younger not so much, since, as they
said, he continued to reveal a steady nature. The elder, however, was
rebellious and intractable.

"He doesn't take after me," thought Petra. "In fact, he's quite like
my husband."

And this disquieted her. Her husband, Manuel Alc�zar, had been an
energetic, powerful man, and, towards his last days, harsh-tempered
and brutal.

He was a locomotive machinist and earned good pay. Petra and he could
not get along together and the couple were always at blows.

Folks and friends alike blamed Alc�zar the machinist for everything,
as if the systematic contrariness of Petra, who seemed to enjoy
nagging the man, were not enough to exasperate any one. Petra had
always been that way,--wilful, behind the mask of humility, and as
obstinate as a mule. As long as she could do as she pleased the rest
mattered little.

While the machinist was alive, the family's economic situation had
been relatively comfortable. Alc�zar and Petra paid sixteen duros per
month for their rooms on Relojo street, and took in boarders: a mail
clerk and other railroad employ�s.

Their domestic existence might have been peaceful and pleasureful were
it not for the daily altercations between husband and wife. They had
both come to feel such a need for quarrelling that the most
insignificant cause would lead to scandalous scenes. It was enough
that he said white for her to cry black; this opposition infuriated
the machinist, who would throw the dishes about, belabour his wife,
and smash all the household furniture. Then Petra, satisfied that she
had sufficient cause for affliction, shut herself in her room to weep
and pray.

What with his alcohol, his fits of temper, and his hard work, the
machinist went about half dazed; on one terribly hot day in August he
fell from the train on to the roadbed and was found dead without a
wound.

Petra, disregarding the advice of her boarders, insisted upon changing
residence, as she disliked that section of the city. This she did,
taking in new lodgers--unreliable, indigent folk who ran up large
bills or never paid at all--and in a short time she found herself
compelled to sell her furniture and abandon her new house.

Then she hired out her daughters as servants, sent her two boys off to
a little town in the province of Soria, where her brother-in-law was
the superintendent of a small railway station, and herself entered as
a domestic in Do�a Casiana's lodging-house. Thus she descended from
mistress to servant, without complaint. It was enough that the idea
had occurred to her; therefore it was best.

She had been there for two years, saving her pay. Her ambition was to
have her sons study in a seminary and graduate as priests. And now
came the return of Manuel, the elder son, to upset her plans. What
could have happened?

She made various conjectures. In the meantime with her deformed hands
she removed the lodgers' dirty laundry. In through the courtyard
window wafted a confusion of songs and disputing voices, alternating
with the screech of the clothes-line pulleys.

In the middle of the afternoon Petra began preparation for dinner. The
mistress ordered every morning a huge quantity of bones for the
sustenance of her boarders. It is very possible that there was, in all
that heap of bones, a Christian one from time to time; certainly,
whether they came from carnivorous animals or from ruminants, there
was rarely on those tibiae, humeri, and femora a tiny scrap of meat.
The ossuary boiled away in the huge pot with beans that had been
tempered with bicarbonate, and with the broth was made the soup,
which, thanks to its quantity of fat, seemed like some turbid
concoction for cleaning glassware or polishing gilt.

After inspecting the state of the ossuary in the stew-pot, Petra made
the soup, and then set about extracting all the scrap meat from the
bones and covering them hypocritically with a tomato sauce. This was
the _pi�ce de r�sistance_ in Do�a Casiana's establishment.

Thanks to this hygienic regimen, none of the boarders fell ill with
obesity, gout or any of those other ailments due to excess of food and
so frequent in the rich.

After preparing the meal and serving it, Petra postponed the
dish-washing, and left the house to meet her son.

Night had not yet fallen. The sky was vaguely red, the air stifling,
heavy with a dense mist of dust and steam. Petra went up Carretas
Street, continued through Atocha, entered the Estaci�n del Mediod�a
and sat down on a bench to wait for Manuel....

Meanwhile, the boy was approaching the city half asleep, half
asphyxiated, in a third-class compartment.

He had taken the train the night before at the railway station where
his uncle was superintendent. On reaching Almaz�n, he had to wait more
than an hour for a mixed train, so he sauntered through the deserted
streets to kill time.

To Manuel, Almaz�n seemed vast, infinitely sad; the town, glimpsed
through the gloom of a dimly starlit night, loomed like a great,
fanastic, dead city. The pale electric lights shone upon its narrow
streets and low houses; the spacious plaza with its arc lights was
deserted; the belfry of a church rose into the heavens.

Manuel strolled down towards the river. From the bridge the town
seemed more fantastic and mysterious than ever; upon a wall might be
made out the galleries of a palace, and several lofty, sombre towers
shot up from amidst the jumbled dwellings of the town; a strip of moon
gleamed close to the horizon, and the river, divided by a few islets
into arms, glittered as if it were mercury.

Manuel left Almaz�nhad to wait a few hours in Alcuneza for the next
train. He was weary, and as there were no benches in the station, he
stretched himself out upon the floor amidst bundles and skins of oil.

At dawn he boarded the other train, and despite the hardness of the
seat, managed to fall asleep.

Manuel had been two years with his relatives; he departed from their
home with more satisfaction than regret.

Life had held no pleasure for him during those two years.

The tiny station presided over by his uncle was near a poor hamlet
surrounded by arid, stony tracts upon which grew neither tree nor
bush. A Siberian temperature reigned in those parts, but the
inclemencies of Nature were nothing to bother a little boy, and gave
Manuel not the slightest concern.

The worst of it all was that neither his uncle nor his uncle's wife
showed any affection for him, rather indifference, and this
indifference prepared the boy to receive their few benefactions with
utter coldness.

It was different with Manuel's brother, to whom the couple gradually
took a liking.

The two youngsters displayed traits almost absolutely opposite; the
elder, Manuel, was of a frivolous, slothful, indolent disposition, and
would neither study nor go to school. He was fond of romping about the
fields and engaging in bold, dangerous escapades. The characteristic
trait of Juan, the younger brother, was a morbid sentimentalism that
would overflow in tears upon the slightest provocation.

Manuel recalled that the school master and town organist, an old
fellow who was half dominie and taught the two brothers Latin, had
always prophesied that Juan would make his mark; Manuel he considered
as an adventure-seeking rover who would come to a bad end.

As Manuel dozed in the third-class compartment, a thousand
recollections thronged his imagination: the events of the night before
at his uncle's mingled in his mind with fleeting impressions of Madrid
already half forgotten. One by one the sensations of distinct epochs
intertwined themselves in his memory, without rhyme or reason and
among them, in the phantasmagoria of near and distant images that
rolled past his inner vision, there stood out clearly those sombre
towers glimpsed by night in Almaz�n by the light of the moon....

When one of his travelling companions announced that they had already
reached Madrid, Manuel was filled with genuine anxiety. A red dusk
flushed the sky, which was streaked with blood like some monster's
eye; the train gradually slackened speed; it glided through squalid
suburbs and past wretched houses; by this time, the electric lights
were gleaming pallidly above the high signal lanterns....

The train rolled on between long lines of coaches, the round-tables
trembled with an iron rumble, and the Estaci�n del Mediod�a,
illuminated by arc lamps, came into view.

The travellers got out; Manuel descended with his little bundle of
clothes in his hand, looked in every direction for a glimpse of his
mother and could not make her out anywhere on the wide platform. For a
moment he was confused, then decided to follow the throng that was
hurrying with bundles and bird-cages toward a gate; he was asked for
his ticket, he stopped to go through his pockets, found it and issued
into the street between two rows of porters who were yelling the names
of hotels.

"Manuel! Where are you going?"

There was his mother. Petra had meant to be severe; but at the sight
of her son she forgot her severity and embraced him effusively.

"But--what happened?" Petra asked at once.

"Nothing."

"Then--why have you come?"

"They asked me whether I wanted to stay there or go to Madrid, and I
said I'd rather go to Madrid."

"Nothing more?"

"Nothing more," replied Manuel simply.

"And Juan? Was he studying?"

"Yes. Much more than I was. Is the house far off, Mother?"

"Yes, Why? Are you hungry?"

"I should say. I haven't had a bite all the way."

They left the Station at the Prado; then they walked up Alcal� street.
A dusty mist quivered in the air; the street-lamp shone opaquely in
the turbid atmosphere.... As soon as they reached the house Petra made
supper for Manuel and prepared a bed for him upon the floor, beside
her own. The youth lay down, but so violent was the contrast between
the hamlet's silence and the racket of footsteps, conversations and
cries that resounded through the house, that, despite his weariness,
Manuel could not sleep.

He heard every lodger come in; it was past midnight when the
disturbance quieted down; suddenly a squabble burst out followed by a
crash of laughter which ended in a triply blasphemous imprecation and
a slap that woke the echoes.

"What can that be, Mother?" asked Manuel from his bed.

"That's Do�a Violante's daughter whom they've caught with her
sweetheart," Petra answered, half from her sleep. Then it occurred to
her that it was imprudent to tell this to her boy, and she added,
gruffly:

"Shut up and go to sleep."

The music-box in the reception-room, set going by the hand of one of
the boarders, commenced to tinkle that sentimental air from _La
Mascotte_,--the duet between Pippo and Bettina:

  _Will you forget me, gentle swain?_

Then all was silent.




CHAPTER III

  First Impressions of Madrid--The Boarders--Idyll--Sweet and
    Delightful Lessons.


Manuel's mother had a relation, her husband's cousin, who was a
cobbler. Petra had decided, some days previously, to give Manuel into
apprenticeship at the shoe-shop; but she still hoped the boy would be
convinced that it was better for him to study something than to learn
a trade, and this hope had deterred her from the resolution to send
the boy to her relative's house.

Persuading the landlady to permit Manuel to remain in the house cost
Petra no little labour, but at last she succeeded. It was agreed that
the boy would run errands and help to serve meals. Then when the
vacation season had passed, he would resume his studies.

On the day following his arrival the youngster assisted his mother at
the table.

All the borders, except the Baroness and her girl, were seated in the
dining-room, presided over by the landlady with her wrinkle-fretted,
parchment-hued face and its thirty-odd moles.

The dining-room, a long, narrow habitation with a window opening on
the courtyard, communicated with two narrow corridors that switched
off at right angles; facing the window stood a dark walnut sideboard
whose shelves were laden with porcelain, glassware and cups and
glasses in a row. The centre table was so large for such a small room
that when the boarders were seated it scarcely left space for passage
at the ends.

The yellow wall-paper, torn in many spots, displayed, at intervals,
grimy circles from the oil of the lodgers' hair; reclining in their
seats they would rest the back of the chairs and their heads against
the wall.

The furniture, the straw chairs, the paintings, the mat full of
holes,--everything in that room was filthy, as if the dust of many
years had settled upon the articles and clung to the sweat of several
generations of lodgers.

By day the dining-room was dark; by night it was lighted by a
flickering kerosene lamp that smudged the ceiling with smoke.

The first time that Manuel, following his mother's instructions,
served at table, the landlady, as usual, presided. At her right sat an
old gentleman of cadaverous aspect,--a very fastidious personage who
conscientiously wiped the glasses and plates with his napkin. By his
side this gentleman had a vial and a dropper, and before eating he
would drop his medicine into the wine. To the left of the landlady
rose the Biscayan, a tall, stout woman of bestial appearance, with a
huge nose, thick lips and flaming cheeks; next to this lady, as flat
as a toad, was Do�a Violante, whom the boarders jestingly called now
Do�a Violent and now Do�a Violated.

Near Do�a Violante were grouped her daughters; then a priest who
prattled incessantly, a journalist whom they called the Superman,--a
very fair youth, exceedingly thin and exceedingly serious,--the
salesmen and the bookkeeper.

Manuel served the soup and all the boarders took it, sipping it with a
disagreeable inhalation. Then, according to his mother's orders, the
youngster remained standing there. Now followed the beans which, if
not for their size then for their hardness might have figured in an
artillery park, and one of the boarders permitted himself some
pleasantry about the edibleness of so petreous a vegetable; a
pleasantry that glided over the impassive countenance of Do�a Casiana
without leaving the slightest trace.

Manuel sat about observing the boarders. It was the day after the
conspiracy; Do�a Violante and her daughters were incommunicative and
in ugly humour. Do�a Violante's inflated face at every moment creased
into a frown, and her restless, turbid eyes betrayed deep
preoccupation. Celia, the elder of the daughters, annoyed by the
priest's jests, began to answer violently, cursing everything human
and divine with a desperate, picturesque, raging hatred, which caused
loud, universal laughter. Irene, the culprit of the previous night's
scandal, a girl of some fifteen or sixteen years with a broad head,
large hands and feet, an as yet incompletely developed body and heavy,
ungainly movements, spoke scarcely a word and kept her gaze fixed upon
her plate.

The meal at an end, the lodgers went off to their various tasks. At
night Manuel served supper without dropping a thing or making a single
mistake, but in five or six days he was forever doing things wrong.

It is impossible to judge how much of an impression was made upon the
boy by the usage and customs of the boarding roost and the species of
birds that inhabited it; but they could not have impressed him much.
Manuel, while he served at table in the days that followed, had to put
up with and endless succession of remarks, jests and practical jokes.

A thousand incidents, comical enough to one who did not have to suffer
them, turned up at every step; now they would discover tobacco in the
soup, now coal, ashes, and shreds of coloured paper in the
water-bottle.

One of the salesmen, who was troubled with his stomach and spent his
days gazing at the reflection of his tongue in the mirror, would jump
up in fury when one of these jokes was perpetrated, and ask the
proprietress to discharge an incompetent booby who committed such
atrocities.

Manuel grew accustomed to these manifestations against his humble
person, and when they scolded him he retorted with the most bare-faced
impudence and indifference.

Soon he learned the life and miracles of every boarder and was ready
to talk back in outrageous fashion if they tried his patience.

Do�a Violante and her daughters,--especially the old lady, showed a
great liking for the boy. The three women had now been living in the
house for several months; they paid little and when they couldn't pay
at all, they didn't. But they were easily satisfied. All three
occupied an inner room that opened onto the courtyard, whence came a
nauseating odour of fermented milk that escaped from the stable of the
ground floor.

The hole in which they lived was not large enough to move about in;
the room assigned to them by the landlady--in proportion to the size
of their rent and the insecurity of the payment--was a dark den
occupied by two narrow iron beds, between which, in the little space
left, was crammed a cot.

Here slept these gallant dames; by day they scoured all Madrid, and
spent their existence making arrangements with money-lenders, pawning
articles and taking them out of pawn.

The two young ladies, Celia and Irene, although they were mother and
daughter, passed for sisters. Do�a Violante, in her better days, had
led the life of a petty courtesan and had succeeded in hoarding up a
tidy bit as provision against the winter of old age, when a former
patron convinced her that he had a remarkable combination for winning
a fortune at the Fronton. Do�a Violante fell into the trap and her
patron left her without a c�ntimo. Then Do�a Violante went back to the
old life, became half blind and reached that lamentable state at which
surely she would have arrived much sooner if, early in her career, she
had developed a talent for living respectably.

The old lady passed most of the day in the confinement of her dark
room, which reeked of stable odors, rice powder and cosmetics; at
night she had to accompany her daughter and her granddaughter on
walks, and to caf�s and theatres, on the hunt and capture of the kid,
as it was put by the travelling salesman who suffered from his
stomach,--a fellow half humorist and half grouch. When they were in
the house Celia and Irene, the daughter and the granddaughter of Do�a
Violante, kept bickering at all hours; perhaps this continuous state
of irritation derived from the close quarters in which they lived;
perhaps so much passing as sisters in the eyes of others had convinced
them that they really were, so that they quarrelled and insulted one
another as such.

The one point on which they agreed was that Do�a Violante was in their
way; the burden of the blind woman frightened away every libidinous
old fellow that came within the range of Irene and Celia.

The landlady, Do�a Casiana, who at the slightest occasion suspected
the abandonment of the blind old woman, admonished the two maternally
to gird themselves with patience; Do�a Violante, after all, was not,
like Calypso, immortal. But they replied that this toiling away at
full speed just to keep the old lady in medicine and syrups wasn't at
all to their taste.

Do�a Casiana shook her head sadly, for her age and circumstances
enabled her to put herself in Do�a Violante's place, and she argued
with this example, asking them to put themselves in the grandmother's
position; but neither was convinced.

Then the landlady advised them to peer into her mirror. She--as she
assured them--had descended from the heights of the Comandancia (her
husband had been a commander of the carbineers) to the wretchedness of
running a boarding-house, yet she was resigned, and her lips curled in
a stoic smile.

Do�a Casiana knew the meaning of resignation and her only solace in
this life was a few volumes of novels in serial form, two or three
feuilletons, and a murky liquid mysteriously concocted by her own
hands out of sugared water and alcohol.

This beverage she poured into a square, wide-mouthed flask, into which
she placed a thick stem of anis. She kept it in the closet of her
bedroom.

Some one who discovered the flask with its black twig of anis compared
it to those bottles in which fetuses and similar nasty objects are
preserved, and since that time, whenever the landlady appeared with
rosy cheeks, a thousand comments--not at all favourable to the
madame's abstinence--ran from lodger to lodger.

"Do�a Casiana's tipsy from her fetus-brandy."

"The good lady drinks too much of that fetus."

"The fetus has gone to her head...."

Manuel took a friendly part in this witty merriment of the boarders.
The boy's faculties of adaptation were indisputably enormous, for
after a week in the landlady's house it was as if he had always lived
there.

His skill at magic was sharpened: whenever he was needed he was not to
be seen and no sooner was anybody's back turned than he was in the
street playing with the boys of the neighbourhood.

As a result of his games and his scrapes he got his clothes so dirty
and torn that the landlady nicknamed him the page Don Rompe-Galas,
recalling a tattered character from a sa�nete that Do�a Casiana,
according to her affirmations, had seen played in her halycon days.

Generally, those who most made use of Manuel's services were the
journalist whom they called the Superman--he sent the boy off with
copy to the printers--and Celia and Irene, who employed him for
bearing notes and requests for money to their friends. Do�a Violante,
whenever she pilfered a few c�ntimos from her daughter would dispatch
Manuel to the store for a package of cigarettes, and give him a cigar
for the errand.

"Smoke it here," she would say. "Nobody'll see you."

Manuel would sit down upon a trunk and the old lady, a cigarette in
her mouth and blowing smoke through her nostrils, would recount
adventures from the days of her glory.

That room of Do�a Violante and her daughters was a haunt of infection;
from the hooks nailed to the wall hung dirty rags, and between the
lack of air and the medley of odours a stench arose strong enough to
fell an ox.

Manuel listened to Do�a Violante's stories with genuine delight. The
old lady was at her best in her commentaries.

"I tell you, my boy," she would say, "you can take my word for it. A
woman with a good pair of breasts and who happens to be a pretty warm
article"--and here the old lady pulled at her cigarette and with an
expressive gesture indicated what she meant by her no less expressive
word--"will always have a trail of men after her."

Do�a Violante used to sing songs from Spanish _zarzuelas_ and
from French operettas, which produced in Manuel a terrible sadness. He
could not say why, but they gave him the impression of a world of
pleasures that was hopelessly beyond his reach. When he heard Do�a
Violante sing the song from _El Juramento_

  _Disdain is a sword with a double edge,
  One slays with love, the other with forgetfulness...._

he had a vision of salons, ladies, amorous intrigues; but even more
than by this he was overwhelmed with sadness by the waltzes from _La
Dina_ and _La Grande Duchesse_.

Do�a Violante's reflexions opened Manuel's eyes; the scenes that
occurred daily in the house, however, worked quite as much as these
toward such a result.

Another good instructor was found in the person of Do�a Casiana's
niece, a trifle older than Manuel,--a thin, weakly chit of such a
malicious nature that she was always hatching plots against somebody.

If any one struck her she didn't shed a tear; she would go down to the
concierge's lodge when the concierge's little boy was left alone,
would grab him and pinch him and kick him, in this manner wreaking
vengeance for the blows she had received.

After eating, almost all of the boarders went off to their affairs;
Celia and Irene, together with the Biscayan, indulged in a grand
frolic by spying upon the women in Isabel's house, who would come out
on the balcony and chat, or signal to the neighbours. At times these
miserable brothel odalisques were not content with speaking; they
would dance and exhibit their calves.

Manuel's mother, as always, would be meditating upon heaven and hell,
giving little heed to the pettiness of this earth, and she could not
shield her son from such edifying spectacles. Petra's educational
system consisted only of giving Manuel an occasional blow and of
making him read prayer-books.

Petra imagined that she could see the traits of the machinist showing
up in the boy, and this troubled her. She wished Manuel to be like
her,--humble toward his superiors, respectful toward the priests...;
but a fine place this was for learning to respect anything!

One morning, after the solemn ceremony had been celebrated in which
all the women of the house issued into the corridor swinging their
night service, there burst from Do�a Violante's room a clamour of
shouts, weeping, stamping and vociferation.

The landlady, the Biscayan and several of the boarders tiptoed into
the corridor to pry. Inside the quarrellers must have realized that
they were being spied upon, for they opened the door and the fray
continued in low tones.

Manuel and the landlady's niece remained in the entry. They could hear
Irene's sobbing and the scolding voices of Celia and Do�a Violante.

At first they could not make out what was being said; but soon the
three women forgot their determination to speak low and their voices
rose in anger.

"Go! Go to the House of Mercy and have them rid you of that swelling!
Wretch!" cried Celia.

"Well, what of it?" retorted Irene. "I'm caught, am I? I know it. What
of it?"

Do�a Violante opened the door to the entry furiously; Manuel and the
landlady's niece scampered off, and the old lady came out in a patched
flannel shift and a weed kerchief tied about her ears, and began to
pace to and fro, dragging her worn-out shoes from end to end of the
corridor.

"The sow! Worse than a sow!" she muttered. "Did any one ever see such
a filthy creature!"

Manuel went off to the parlour, where the landlady and the Biscayan
were chatting in low tones. The landlady's niece, dying with
curiosity, questioned the two women with growing irritation:

"But why are they scolding Irene?"

The landlady and the Biscayan exchanged amicable glances and burst
into laughter.

"Tell me," cried the child insistently, clutching at her aunt's
kerchief. "What of it if she has that bundle? Who gave her that
package?"

The landlady and the Biscayan could no longer restrain their guffaws,
while the little girl stared avidly up at them, trying to make out the
meaning of what she heard.

"Who gave her that package?" repeated the Biscayan between outbursts.
"My dear little girl, we really don't know who gave her that package."

All the boarders repeated the niece's question with enthusiastic
delight, and at every table discussion some wag would be sure to
interrupt suddenly with:

"Now I see that you know who gave her that package." The remark would
be greeted with uproarious merriment.

Then, after a few days had passed, there was rumour of a mysterious
consultation held by Do�a Violante's daughters with the wife of a
barber on Jardines street,--a sort of provider of little angels for
limbo; it was said that Irene returned from the conference in a coach,
very pale, and that she had to be put at once to bed. Certainly the
girl did not leave her room for more than a week and, when she
appeared, she looked like a convalescent and the frowns had
disappeared completely from the face of her mother and her
grandmother.

"She looks like an infanticide," said the priest when he saw her
again, "but she's prettier than ever."

Whether any transgression had been committed, none could say with
surety; soon everything was forgotten; a patron appeared for the girl,
and he was, from all appearances, wealthy. In commemoration of so
happy an event the boarders participated in the treat. After the
supper they drank cognac and brandy, the priest played the guitar,
Irene danced _sevillanas_ with less grace than a bricklayer, as
the landlady said; the Superman sang some _fados_ that he had
learned in Portugal, and the Biscayan, not to be outdone, burst forth
into some _malague�as_ that might just as well have been a
_cante flamenco_ or the Psalms of David.

Only the blond student with the eyes of steel abstained from the
celebration; he was absorbed in his thoughts.

"And you, Roberto," Celia said to him several times,--"don't you sing
or do anything?"

"Not I," he replied coldly.

"You haven't any blood in your veins."

The youth looked at her for a moment, shrugged his shoulders
indifferently and his pale lips traced a smile of disdainful mockery.

Then, as almost always happened in these boarding-house sprees, some
wag turned on the music-box in the corridor and the duet from _La
Mascotte_ together with the waltz from _La Diva_ rose in
confusion upon the air; the Superman and Celia danced a couple of
waltzes and the party wound up with everybody singing a
_habanera_, until they wearied and each owl flew off to his nest.




CHAPTER IV

  Oh, love, love!--What's Don Telmo Doing?--Who is Don
    Telmo?--Wherein the Student and Don Telmo Assume Certain
    Novelesque Proportions.


The Baroness was hardly ever seen in the house, except during the
early hours of the morning and the night. She dined and supped
outside. If the landlady was to be credited, she was an adventuress
whose position varied considerably, for one day she would be moving to
a costly apartment and sporting a carriage, while the next she would
disappear for several months in the germ-ridden hole of some cheap
boarding-house.

The Baroness's daughter, a child of some twelve or fourteen years,
never appeared in the dining-room or in the corridor; her mother
forbade all communication with the lodgers. Her name was Kate. She was
a fair girl, very light-complexioned and exceedingly winsome. Only the
student Roberto spoke to her now and then in English.

The youth was enthusiastic over her.

That summer the Baroness's streak of bad luck must have come to an
end, for she began to make herself some fine clothes and prepared to
move.

For several weeks a modiste and her assistant came daily, with gowns
and hats for the Baroness and Kate.

Manuel, one night, saw the modiste's assistant go by with a huge box
in her hand and was smitten.

He followed her at a distance in great fear lest she see him. As he
stole on behind, he wondered what he could say to such a maiden if he
were to accompany her. It must be something gallant, exquisite; he
even imagined that she was at his side and he racked his brain for
beautiful phrases and delicate compliments, yet nothing but
commonplaces rewarded his search. In the meantime the assistant and
her box were lost in the crowd and he could not catch sight of them
again.

The memory of that maiden was for Manuel as an enchanting music, a
fancy upon which were reared still wilder fancies. Often he made up
tales in which always he figured as the hero and the assistant as the
heroine. While Manuel bemoaned the harshness of fate, Roberto, the
blond student, gave himself up likewise to melancholy, brooding upon
the Baroness's daughter. The student was forced to endure jests
especially from Celia, who, according to certain evil tongues, was
trying to rouse him from his habitual frigidity. But Roberto gave her
no heed.

Some days later the house was agog with curiosity.

As the boarders came in from the street, they greeted each other
jokingly, repeating in the manner of a pass-word: "Who is Don Telmo?
What's Don Telmo doing?"

One day the district police-commissioner came and spoke to Don Telmo,
and some one heard or invented the report that the two men were
discussing the notorious crime on Malasana Street. Upon hearing this
news the expectant inquisitiveness of the boarders waxed great, and
all, half in jest and half in earnest, arranged to keep a watch upon
the mysterious gentleman.

Don Telmo was the name of the cadaverous old fellow who wiped his cups
and spoons with his napkin, and his reserved manner seemed to invite
observation. Taciturn, indifferent, never joining the conversation, a
man of few words who never made any complaints, he attracted attention
by the very fact that he seemed intent upon not attracting it.

His only visible occupation was to wind the seven or eight clocks of
the house and to regulate them when they got out of order,--an event
of common occurrence.

Don Telmo had the features of a very sad man,--one in profound sorrow.
His livid countenance betrayed fathomless dejection. He wore his white
beard and his hair short; his brows fell like brushes over his grey
eyes.

In the house he went around wrapped in a faded coat, with a Greek
bonnet and cloth slippers. When he went out he donned a long frock
coat and a very tall silk hat; only on certain summer days would he
wear a Havana hat of woven straw.

For more than a month Don Telmo was the topic of conversation in the
boarding-house.

In the famous trial of the Malasana Street crime a servant declared
that one afternoon she saw Do�a Celsa's son in an aqueduct of the
Plaza de Oriente, talking with a lame old man. For the guests this man
could be none other than Don Telmo. With this suspicion they set about
spying upon the old man; he, however, had a sharp scent and sniffed
the state of affairs at once; the boarders, seeing how bootless their
attempts were proving, tried to ransack his room; they used a number
of keys until they got the door open and when they had forced an
entrance, discovered nothing more that a closet fastened by a
formidable safety-lock.

The Biscayan and Roberto, the blond student, opposed this campaign of
espionage. The Superman, the priest, the salesmen and the women of the
establishment made up that the Biscayan and the student were allies of
Don Telmo, and, in all probability, accomplices in the Malasana Street
crime.

"Without a doubt," averred the Superman, "Don Telmo killed Do�a Celsa
Nebot; the Biscayan poured oil over the body and set it afire, and
Roberto hid the jewels in the house on Amaniel Street."

"That cold bird!" replied Celia. "What could he do?"

"Nothing, nothing. We must keep on their track," said the curate.

"And get some money out of that old Shylock," added the Superman.

This espionage, carried on half in joke and half in all seriousness,
wound up in debates and disputes, and as a result two groups were
formed in the house; that of the Sensible folk, comprised by the three
criminals and the landlady, and that of the Foolish, in which were
enrolled all the rest.

This limitation of sides forced Roberto and Don Telmo into intimacy,
so that the student changed his place at the table and sat next to the
old man.

One night, after eating, while Manuel was removing the service, the
plates and the cups, Don Telmo and Roberto were engaged in
conversation.

The student was a dogmatic reasoner, dry, rectilinear, never swerving
from his point of view; he spoke but little, but when he did speak, it
was in a sententious manner.

One day, discussing whether or not young men should be ambitious and
look to the future, Roberto asserted that the first was the proper
course.

"Well, that isn't what you're doing," commented the Superman.

"I am absolutely convinced," replied Roberto, "that some day I'm going
to be a millionaire. I am engaged in constructing the machinery that
will bring me a fortune."

The Superman posed as a man of the world who had seen many things;
upon hearing this he permitted himself a scoffing remark concerning
Roberto's ability, and the youth retorted in so violent and aggressive
a manner that the journalist lost his composure and blurted out a
string of apologies.

Afterwards, when Don Telmo and Roberto were left alone at the table,
they continued talking, and from the general theme as to whether young
folk should or should not be ambitious, they passed on to the
student's hopes of some day being a millionaire.

"I'm convinced that I shall be one," said the boy. "In my family there
have been a number of individuals with great luck."

"That's all very well, Roberto," muttered the old man. "But one must
know how to become wealthy."

"Don't imagine that my hope is illusory; I'm going to inherit, and not
a small amount, either; I'm heir to a vast sum ... millions.... The
foundations of my work and the framework are already completed; all I
need now is money."

Don Telmo's countenance was crossed by an expression of disagreeable
surprise.

"Don't worry," replied Roberto, "I'm not going to ask you for it."

"My dear boy, if I had it, I'd give it to you with pleasure, and free
of interest. They think I'm a millionaire."

"No. I tell you I'm not trying to get a c�ntimo from you. All I ask is
a bit of advice."

"Speak, then, speak. I'm all attention," answered the old man, resting
an elbow upon the table.

Manuel, who was taking off the tablecloth, cocked his ears.

At that juncture one of the salesmen entered the dining-room, and
Roberto, who was about to say something, grew silent and looked
impertinently at the intruder. The student was an aristocratic type
with blond hair, thick and combed back, and moustache of glittering
white, like silver; his skin was somewhat tanned by the sun.

"Won't you continue?" asked Don Telmo.

"No," answered the student, staring at the salesman. "For I don't want
anybody to hear what I have to say."

"Come to my room, then," replied Don Telmo. "There we can talk
undisturbed. We'll have coffee up in my room. Manuel!" he ordered.
"Bring us two coffees."

Manuel, who was deeply interested in discovering what the student had
to say, dashed out into the street on his errand. He was more than a
quarter of an hour in returning with the coffee, and supposed that
Roberto by this time had finished his story.

He knocked at Don Telmo's door and was resolved to linger there as
long as possible, that he might catch all he could of the
conversation. He began to dust Don Telmo's lamp-table with a cloth.

"And how did you ascertain that," Don Telmo was asking, "if your
family didn't know it?"

"Quite by accident," answered the student. "A couple of years ago,
about this time of the year, I wished to give a present to a sister,
who is a proteg�e of mine, and who is very fond of playing the piano.
It occurred to me, three days before her birthday, to purchase two
operas, have them bound and send them to her. I wanted to have the
book bound immediately, but at the shops they told me there was no
time; I was walking along with my operas under my arm in the vicinity
of the Plaza de las Descalzas when in the back wall of a convent I
caught sight of a tiny bookbinder's shop,--like a cave with steps
leading down. I asked the man,--a gnarled old fellow,--whether he
would bind the book for me in a couple of days, and he said 'Yes.'
'Very well,' I told him, 'then I'll call within two days.'--'I'll
send it to you; let me have your address.' I gave him my address and
he asked my name. 'Roberto Hasting y N��ez de Letona.'--'Are you a
N��ez de Latona?' he inquired, gazing at me curiously. 'Yes, sir.'--'Do
you come from la Rioja?'--'Yes, and suppose I do?' I retorted,
provoked by all this questioning. And the binder, whose mother was a
N��ez de Latona and came from la Rioja, told me the story I've just
told you. At first I took it all as a joke; then, after some time, I
wrote to my mother, and she wrote back that everything was quite so,
and that she recalled something of the whole matter."

Don Telmo's gaze strayed over toward Manuel.

"What are you doing here?" he snarled. "Get out; I don't want you
going around telling tales...."

"I'm no tattle-tale."

"Very well, then, get a move on."

Manuel went out, and Don Telmo and Roberto continued their
conversation. The boarders showered Manuel with questions, but he
refused to open his mouth. He had decided to join the group of the
Sensible ones.

This friendship between the old man and the student served as an
incitement for the continuation of the espionage. One of the salesmen
learned that Don Telmo drew up contracts of sales on reversion and
made a living by lending money on houses and furniture, and at other
such usurious business.

Some one saw him in the Rastro in an old clothes shop that probably
belonged to him, and invented the tale that he had gold coins
concealed in his room and that he played with them at night upon the
bed.

It was also discovered that Don Telmo frequently paid visits to a very
elegant, good looking young lady, who was, according to some, his
sweetheart, and to others, his niece.

On the following Sunday Manuel overheard a conversation between the
old man and the student. In a dark room there was a transom that
opened into Don Telmo's room, and from this position he played the
eavesdropper.

"So he refuses to furnish any more data?" Don Telmo was asking.

"Absolutely," said the student. "And he assures me that the reason for
the name of Ferm�n de N��ez de Latona not appearing in the parish
register was--forgery; that this was effected by a certain Shaphter,
one of Bandon's agents, and that afterwards the curates took advantage
of it to acquire possession of some chaplaincies. I am certain that
the town where Ferm�n N��ez was born was either Arnedo or Autol."

Don Telmo carefully inspected a large folio document: the genealogy of
Roberto's family.

"What course do you think I ought to pursue?" asked the student.

"You need money; but it's so hard to find that!" muttered the old man.
"Why don't you marry?"

"And what good would that do?"

"I mean some wealthy woman...."

Here Don Telmo lowered his voice to an inaudible pitch and after a few
words they separated.

The espionage of the boarders became so obstructive to the men spied
upon that the Biscayan and Don Telmo served notice on the landlady of
their removal. Do�a Casiana's desolation, when she learned of their
decision, was exceedingly great; several times she had to resort to
the closet and surrender herself to the consolations of the beverage
of her own concoction.

The boarders were so disappointed at the flight of the Biscayan and of
Don Telmo that neither the altercations between Irene and Celia nor
the stories told by the priest Don Jacinto, who stressed the smutty
note, were potent enough to draw them from their silence.

The bookkeeper, a jaundiced fellow with an emaciated face and a beard
like that of a monumental Jew, exceedingly taciturn and timid, had
burst into speech in his excitement over the intrigues invented and
fancied in the life of Don Telmo; now he became from moment to moment
sallower than ever with his hypochondria.

Don Telmo's departure was paid for by the student and Don Manuel. As
far as the student was concerned they dared no more than twit him on
his complicity with the old man and the Biscayan; at Manuel, however,
they all kept screeching and scolding when they weren't kicking him.

One of the salesmen,--the fellow who was troubled with his stomach,
exasperated by the boredom, the heat and his uncertain digestion,
found no other distraction than insulting and berating Manuel while he
served at table, whether or not there were cause.

"Go on, you cheap fool!" he would say. "You're not worth the food you
eat! Clown!"

This refrain, added to others of the same tenor, began to weary
Manuel. One day the salesman heaped the insults and the vilification
upon him more plentifully than ever. They had sent the boy out for two
coffees, and he was slow in returning; on that particular day the
delay was not due to any fault of his, for he had been kept waiting a
long time.

"They ought to put a pack-saddle on you, you ass!" shouted the agent
as Manuel entered.

"You won't be the one to do it!" retorted the boy impudently, as he
placed the cups upon the table.

"I won't? Do you want to see me?"

"Yes, I do."

The salesman got up and kicked Manuel in the shins; the poor boy saw
stars. He gave a cry of pain and then, furious, seized a plate and
sent it flying at the agent's head; the latter ducked and the
projectile crossed the dining-room, crashed through a window pane and
fell into the courtyard, where it smashed with a racket. The salesman
grabbed one of the coffee-pots that was filled with coffee and milk
and hurled it at Manuel with such good aim that it struck the boy in
the face; the youth, blinded with rage and by the coffee and milk,
rushed upon his enemy, cornered him, and took revenge for the insults
and blows with an endless succession of kicks and punches.

"He's killing me! He's killing me!" shrieked the agent in feminine
wails.

"Thief! Clown!" shouted Manuel, employing the street's choicest
repertory of insults.

The Superman and the priest seized Manuel by the arms, leaving him at
the mercy of the salesman, who, beholding the boy thus corralled,
tried to wreak vengeance; but when he was ready to strike, Manuel gave
him such a forceful kick in the stomach that the fellow vomited up his
whole meal.

Everybody took sides against Manuel, except Roberto, who defended him.
The agent retired to his room, summoned the landlady, and told her
that he refused to remain another moment as long as Petra's son was in
the house.

The landlady, whose chief interest was to retain her boarder,
communicated her decision to her servant.

"Now see what you've done. You can't stay here any longer," said Petra
to her son.

"All right. That clown will pay for these," replied the boy, nursing
the welts on his forehead. "I tell you, if I ever meet him I'm going
to smash in his head."

"You take good care not to say a word to him."

At this moment the student happened to enter the dining-room.

"You did well, Manuel," he exclaimed, turning to Petra. "What right
had that blockhead to insult him? In this place every boss has a right
to attack his neighbour if he doesn't do as all the others wish. What
a cowardly gang!"

As he spoke, Roberto blanched with rage; then he grew calm and asked
Petra:

"Where are you going to take Manuel now?"

"To a cobbler's shop that belongs to a relative of mine on Aguila
street."

"Is it in the poorer quarters?"

"Yes."

"I'll come to see you some day."

Before Manuel had gone to bed, Roberto appeared again in the
dining-room.

"Listen," he said to Manuel. "If you know any strange place in the
slums where criminals get together, let me hear. I'll go with you."

"I'll let you know, never you mind."

"Fine. See you again. Good-bye!"

Roberto extended his hand to Manuel, who pressed it with deep
gratitude.




PART TWO




CHAPTER I

  The Regeneration of Footwear and The Lion of The Shoemaker's
    Art--The First Sunday--An Escapade--El Bizco and his Gang.


The inhabitant of Madrid who at times finds himself by accident in the
poor quarters near the Manzanares river, is surprised at the spectacle
of poverty and sordidness, of sadness and neglect presented by the
environs of Madrid with their wretched Rondas, laden with dust in the
summer and in winter wallowing in mire. The capital is a city of
contrasts; it presents brilliant light in close proximity to deep
gloom; refined life, almost European, in the centre; in the suburbs,
African existence, like that of an Arab village. Some years ago, not
many, in the vicinity of the Ronda de Sevilla and of el Campillo de
Gil Im�n, there stood a house of suspicious aspect and of not very
favourable repute, to judge by popular rumour. The observer ...

In this and other paragraphs of the same style I had placed some hope,
for they imparted to my novel a certain phantasmagoric and mysterious
atmosphere; but my friends have convinced me I ought to suppress these
passages, arguing that they would be quite in place in a Parisian
novel, but not in one dealing with Madrid,--not at all. They add,
moreover, that here nobody goes astray, not even if one wishes to.
Neither are there here any observers, nor houses of suspicious aspect,
nor anything else. In resignation, then, I have excised these
paragraphs, through which I hoped some day to be elected to the
Spanish Academy; and so I continue my tale in more pedestrian
language.

It came about, then, that on the day following the row in the
dining-room of the lodging-house, Petra, very early in the morning,
woke Manuel and told him to dress.

The boy recalled the scene of the previous day; he verified it by
raising his hand to his forehead, for the bruises still pained him,
and from his mother's tone he understood that she persisted in her
resolve to take him to the cobbler's.

After Manuel had dressed, mother and son left the house and went into
the bun-shop for a cup of coffee and milk. Then they walked down to
Arenal Street, crossed the Plaza del Oriente, and the Viaduct, thence
through Rosario Street. Continuing along the walls of a barracks they
reached the heights at whose base runs the Ronda de Segovia. From this
eminence there was a view of the yellowish countryside that reached as
far as Jetafe and Villaverde, and the San Isidro cemeteries with their
grey mudwalls and their black cypresses.

From the Ronda de Segovia, which they covered in a short time, they
climbed up Aguila Street, and paused before a house at the corner of
the Campillo de Gil Im�n.

There were two shoe shops opposite one another and both closed.
Manuel's mother, who could not recall which was her relative's place,
inquired at the tavern.

"Se�or Ignacio's over at the big house," answered the tavern-keeper.
"I think the cobbler's come already, but he hasn't opened the shop
yet."

Mother and son had to wait until the shop was opened. The building was
not the tiny, evil-boding one, but it looked as if it had an atrocious
desire to cave in, for here and there it, too, showed cracks, holes
and all manner of disfigurements. It had a lower and upper floor,
large and wide balconies the balustrades of which were gnawed by rust
and the diminutive panes of glass held in place by leaden strips.

On the ground floor of the house, in the part that faced Aguila
Street, there was a livery-stable, a carpenter's shop, a tavern and
the cobbler's shop owned by Petra's relation. This establishment
displayed over the entrance a sign that read:

  _For The Regeneration of Footwear._

The historian of the future will surely find in this sign proof of
how widespread, during several epochs, was a certain notion of
national regeneration, and it will not surprise him that this idea,
which was launched in the aim to reform and regenerate the Constitution
and the Spanish people, came to an end upon the signboard of a shop on
a foresaken corner of the slums, where the only thing done was the
reformation and regeneration of footwear.

We will not deny the influence of this regenerating theory upon the
proprietor of the establishment _For The Regeneration of Footwear;_
but we must point out that this presumptuous legend was put up in token
of his defiance of the cobbler across the way, and we must register
likewise that it had been answered by another, and even more
presumptuous, one.

One fine morning the workmen in the establishment for _The
Regeneration of Footwear_ were dumfounded to find staring them in
the face the sign of the rival shop. It was a beautiful signboard about
two metres long, bearing this inscription:

  _The Lion of the Shoemaker's Art_

This in itself was quite tolerable; the terrible, annihilating thing
about it was the painting that sprawled over the middle of the board.
A handsome yellow lion with the face of a man and with wavy mane,
standing erect; in his front paws he held a boot, apparently of
patent-leather. Beneath this representation was printed the following:
_You may break, but never unstitch it._

This was a crushing motto: A lion (wild beast) trying to unseam the
boot made by the Lion (shoemaker), and powerless before the task! What
a humiliation for the lion! What a triumph for the shoemaker! The
lion, in this case, was _For The Regeneration of Footwear,_
which, as the saying goes, had been compelled to bite the dust.

In addition to Se�or Ignacio's sign there was, in one of the balconies
of the large house, the bust of a woman, made probably of pasteboard,
with lettering beneath: _Perfecta Ruiz: Ladies' Hair Dressing;_
on the side walls of the main entrance there hung several
announcements unworthy of occupying the attention of the
aforementioned historian, in which were offered low-priced rooms with
or without bed, amanuenses and seamstresses. A single card, upon which
were pasted horizontally, vertically and obliquely a number of cut-out
figures, deserved to go down in history for its laconicism. It read:

  _Parisian Styles. Escorihuela, Tailor._

Manuel, who had not taken the trouble to read all these signs, went
into the building by a little door at the side of the livery-stable
entrance, and walked through the corridor to a very filthy courtyard.

When he returned to the street the cobbler's shop had already been
opened. Petra and her boy entered.

"Isn't Se�or Ignacio in?" she asked.

"He'll be here in a second," answered a youngster who was piling up
old shoes in the middle of the shop.

"Tell him that his cousin is here,--Petra."

Se�or Ignacio appeared. He was a man of between forty and fifty, thin
and wizened. Petra and he got into conversation, while the boy and a
little urchin continued to heap up the old shoes. Manuel was looking
on, when the boy said to him:

"Come on, you. Lend a hand!"

Manuel pitched in, and when the three had ended their labours, they
waited for Petra and Se�or Ignacio to finish chatting. Petra was
recounting Manuel's latest exploits to her cousin and the cobbler
listened smilingly. The man bore no signs of gruffness; he was blond
and beardless; upon his upper lip sprouted a few saffron-hued hairs.
His complexion was leathery, wrinkled; the deep furrows of his face,
and his wearied mien, gave him the appearance of a weakling. He spoke
with a certain ironic vagueness.

"You're going to stay here," said Petra to Manuel.

"All right."

"He's an amiable rogue," exclaimed Se�or Ignacio, laughing. "He agrees
right away."

"Yes; he takes everything calmly. But, look--" she added, turning to
her son, "if ever I find out that you carry on as you did yesterday,
you'll hear from me!"

Manuel said good-bye to his mother.

"Were you very long in that town of Soria with my cousin?" Se�or
Ignacio asked.

"Two years."

"And did you work very hard there?"

"I didn't work at all."

"Well, sonny, you can't get out of it here. Come. Sit down and get
busy. These are your cousins," added Se�or Ignacio, indicating the
youth and the little boy.

"They are a pair of warriors, too."

The youth's name was Leandro, and he was well-built; in no respect did
he resemble his father. He had thick lips and a thick nose, an
obstinate, manly expression; the other was a boy of about Manuel's
age, frail, thin, with a rascally look, and called Vidal.

Se�or Ignacio and the three boys sat down around a wooden block formed
of a tree-trunk with a deep groove running through it. The labour
consisted in undoing and taking apart old boots and shoes, which
arrived at the shop from every direction in huge, badly tied bales and
in sacks with paper designations sewed to the burlap. The boot
destined to be drawn and quartered was laid upon the block; there it
received a stroke or more from a knife until the heel was severed;
then, with the nippers the various layers of sole were ripped off;
with the scissors they cut off buttons and laces, and everything was
sorted into its corresponding basket: in one, the heels; in others,
the rubbers, the latchets, the buckles.

So low had _The Regeneration of Footwear_ descended: it justified
its title in a manner quite distinct from that intended by the one who
had bestowed it.

Se�or Ignacio, a master workman, had been compelled through lack of
business to abandon the awl and the shoemaker's stirrup for the
nippers and the knife; creating for destroying; the fashioning of new
boots for the disembowelling of old. The contrast was bitter; but
Se�or Ignacio could find consolation in looking across at his
neighbour, he of the _Lion of The Shoemaker's Art_, who only at
rare intervals would receive an order for some cheap pair of boots.

The first morning of work was infinitely boresome to Manuel; this
protracted inactivity became unbearable. At noon a bulky old woman
entered the shop with their lunch in a basket. This was Se�or
Ignacio's mother.

"And my wife?" the cobbler asked her.

"She's gone washing."

"And Salom� Isn't she coming?"

"No. She got some work in a house for the whole week."

The old lady extracted from the basket a pot, dishes, napkins,
cutlery, and a huge loaf of bread; she laid a cloth upon the floor and
everybody squatted down around it. She poured the soup from the pot
into the plates, into which each one crumbled a bit of bread, and they
began to eat. Then the old woman doled out to each his portion of
boiled meat and vegetables, and, as they ate, the cobbler discoursed
briefly upon the future of Spain and the reasons for national
backwardness,--a topic that appeals to most Spaniards, who consider
themselves regenerators.

Se�or Ignacio was a mild liberal, a man who swelled with enthusiasm
over these words about the national sovereignty, and who spoke openly
of the Glorious Revolution. In matters of religion he advocated
freedom of worship; his ideal would be for Spain to have an equal
number of priests of the Catholic, Protestant, Jewish and every other
denomination, for thus, he asserted, each would choose the dogma that
seemed to him best. But one thing he'd certainly do if he had a say in
the government. He would expel all the monks and nuns, for they're
like the mange: the weaker the sufferer, the more it thrives. To this
argument Leandro, the elder son, added that as far as the monks, nuns
and other small fry were concerned, the best course with them was to
lop off their heads like hogs, and with regard to the priests, whether
Catholic, Protestant or Chinese, nothing would be lost if there were
nary a one.

The old lady, too, joined the conversation, and since to her, as a
huckstress of vegetables, politics was chiefly a question between
marketwomen and the municipal guards, she spoke of a row in which the
amiable ladies of the Cebada market had discharged their garden
produce at the heads of several redcoats who were defending a
trouble-maker of the market. The huckstresses wanted to organize a
union, and then lay down the law and fix prices. Now this didn't at
all appeal to her.

"What the deuce!" she exclaimed. "What right have they to take away a
person's stock if he wants to sell it cheaper? Suppose I take it into
my head to give it all away free."

"Why no, se�ora," differed Leandro. "That's not right."

"And why not?"

"Because it isn't. Because tradesfolk ought to help one another, and
if you, let's suppose, do as you say, you prevent somebody else from
selling, and that's why Socialism was invented,--to favour man's
industry."

"All right, then. Let them give two duros to man's industry and kill
it."

The woman spoke very phlegmatically and sententiously. Her calm manner
harmonized perfectly with her huge person, which was as thick and
rigid as a tree-trunk; her face was fleshy and of stolid features, her
wrinkles deep; pouches of loose flesh sagged beneath her eyes; on her
head she wore a black kerchief, tightly knotted around her temples.

Se�ora Jacoba--that was her name--was a woman who probably felt
neither heat nor cold; summer and winter she spent the dead hours
seated by her vegetable stand at the Puerta de Moros; if she sold a
head of lettuce between sunrise and sunset, it was a great deal.

After eating, some of the shoemaker's family went off to the courtyard
for their siesta, while others remained in the shop.

Vidal, the man's younger son, sprawled out in the patio beside Manuel,
and having inquired into the cause of the bumps that stood out on his
cousin's forehead, asked:

"Have you ever been on this street before?"

"I? No."

"We have great times around here."

"You do, eh?"

"I should say so. Haven't you a girl?"

"I? No."

"Well, there are lots of girls 'round here that would like to have a
fellow."

"Really?"

"Yes, sir! Over where we live there's a very pretty little thing, a
friend of my girl. You can hitch up with her."

"But don't you live in this house?"

"No. We live in Embajadores lane. It's my aunt Salom� and my
grandmother who live here. Over where we are--oh, boy!--the times I've
had!"

"In the town where I come from," said Manuel, not to be dwarfed by his
cousin, "there were mountains higher than twenty of your houses here."

"In Madrid we've got the Monte de Pr�ncipe Pio."

"But it can't be as high as the one in that town."

"It can't? Why, in Madrid everything's the best."

Manuel was not a little put out by the superiority which his cousin
tried to assume by speaking to him about women in the tone of an
experienced man about town who knew them through and through. After
the noonday nap and a game of mus, over which the shoemaker and a few
neighbours managed to get into a wrangle, Se�or Ignacio and his
children went off to their house. Manuel supped at Se�ora Jacoba's,
the vegetable huckstress's, and slept in a beautiful bed that looked
to him far better than the one at the boarding-house.

Once in, he weighed the pros and contras of his new social position,
and in the midst of his calculations as to whether the needle of the
balance inclined to this side or that, he fell asleep.

At first, the monotony of the labour and the steady application
bothered Manuel; but soon he grew accustomed to one thing and another,
so that the days seemed shorter and the work less irksome.

The first Sunday Manuel was fast asleep in Se�ora Jacoba's house when
Vidal came in and waked him. It was after eleven; the marketwoman, as
usual, had departed at dawn for her stall, leaving the boy alone.

"What are you doing there?" asked Vidal. "Why don't you get up?"

"Why? What time is it?"

"Awful late."

Manuel dressed hurriedly and they both left the house. Nearby,
opposite Aguila street, on a little square, they joined a group of
boys who were playing _chito_, and they followed the fortunes of
the game with deep interest.

At noon Vidal said to his cousin:

"Today we're going to eat yonder."

"At your house?"

"Yes. Come on."

Vidal, whose specialty was finding things, discovered close by the
fountain of the Ronda, which is near Aguila Street, an old,
wide-brimmed high hat; the poor thing was hidden in a corner, perhaps
through modesty. He began to kick it along and send it flying through
the air and Manuel joined in the enterprise, so that between the two
they transported the relic, venerable with antiquity, from the Ronda
de Segovia to that of Toledo, thence to the Ronda de Embajadores,
until they abandoned it in the middle of the street, minus top and
brim. Having committed this perversity, Manuel and Vidal debouched
into the Paseo da las Acacias and went into a house whose entrance
consisted of a doorless archway.

The two boys walked through a narrow passage paved with cobblestones
until they reached a courtyard, and then, by one of the numerous
staircases they climbed to the balcony of the first floor, on which
opened a row of doors and windows all painted blue.

"Here's where we live," said Vidal, pointing to one of the doors.

They entered. Se�or Ignacio's home was small; it comprised two
bedrooms, a parlour, the kitchen and a dark room. The first habitation
was the parlour, furnished with a pine bureau, a sofa, several straw
chairs and a green mirror stuck with chromos and photographs and
covered with red netting. The cobbler's family used the parlour as the
dining-room on Sundays, because it was the lightest and the most
spacious of their rooms.

When Manuel and Vidal arrived the family had been waiting for them a
long time. They all sat down to table, and Salom�, the cobbler's
sister-in-law, took charge of serving the meal. She resembled very
closely her sister, the mother of Vidal. Both, of medium height, had
short, saucy noses and black, pretty eyes; despite this physical
similarity, however, their appearance differentiated them sharply.
Vidal's mother,--called Leandra,--untidy, unkempt, loathsome, and
betraying traces of ill humour, seemed much older than Salom�,
although but three or four years separated them. Salom� had a merry,
resolute air.

Yet, consider the irony of fate! Leandra, despite her slovenly ways,
her sour disposition and her addiction to drink, was married to a good
hardworking man, while Salom�, endowed with excellent gifts of
industriousness and sweet temper, had wound up by going to live with
an outcast who made his way by swindling, pilfering and browbeating
and who had given her two children. Her humble or servile spirit,
confronted with this wild, independent nature, made Salom� adore her
man, and she deceived herself into considering him a tremendous,
energetic fellow, though he was in all truth a coward and a tramp. The
bully had seen just how matters stood, and whenever it pleased him he
would stamp into the house and demand the pay that Salom� earned by
sewing at the machine, at five c�ntimos per two yards. Unresistingly
she handed him the product of her sweating toil, and many a time the
ruffian, not content with depriving her of the money, gave her a
beating into the bargain.

Salom�'s two children were not today in Se�or Ignacio's home; on
Sundays, after dressing them very neatly, their mother would send them
to a relative of hers,--the proprietress of a workshop,--where they
spent the afternoon.

At the meal Manuel listened to the conversation without taking part.
They were discussing one of the girls of the neighbourhood who had run
off with a wealthy horse-dealer, a married man with a family.

"She did wisely," declared Leandra, draining a glass of wine.

"If she didn't know he was married...."

"What's the difference?" retorted Leandra with an air of unconcern.

"Plenty. How would you like a woman to carry off your husband?" Salom�
asked her sister.

"Psch!"

"Yes, nowadays, we know," interrupted Se�or Ignacio's mother. "Of two
women there isn't one that's respectable."

"A great ways any one'll go by being respectable," snarled Leandra.
"Poverty and hunger.... If a woman weren't to get married, then she
might make a change and even acquire money."

"I don't see how," asserted Salom�.

"How? Even if she had to go into the business."

Se�or Ignacio, disgusted, turned his head away from his wife, and his
elder son, Leandro, eyed his mother grimly, severely.

"Bah, that's all talk," argued Salom�, who wished to thresh the matter
out impersonally. "You'd hardly like it just the same if folks were to
insult you wherever you went."

"Me? Much I care what folks say to me!" replied the cobbler's wife.
"Stuff and nonsense! If they call me a loose woman, and if I'm not,
why, you see: a floral wreath. And if I am,--it's all the same in the
end."

Se�or Ignacio, offended, shifted the conversation to the crime on
Pa�uelas Street; a jealous organ-grinder had slain his sweetheart for
a harsh word and the hearers were excited over the case, each offering
his opinion. The meal over, Se�or Ignacio, Leandro, Vidal and Manuel
went out to the gallery to have a nap while the women remained inside
gossiping.

All the neighbours had brought their sleeping-mats out, and in their
undershirts, half naked, some seated, others stretched out, they were
dozing on the galleries.

"Hey, you," said Vidal to Manuel. "Let's be off."

"Where?"

"To the Pirates. We meet today. They must be waiting for us already."

"What do you mean,--pirates?"

"Bizco and the others."

"And why do they call 'em that?"

"Because they're like the old time pirates."

Manuel and Vidal stepped into the patio and leaving the house, walked
off down Embajadores lane.

"They call us the Pirates," explained Vidal, "from a certain battle of
stones we had. Some of the kids from the Paseo de las Acacias had got
some sticks and formed a company with a Spanish flag at the head; then
I, Bizco, and three or four others, began to throw stones at them and
made them retreat. The Corretor, a fellow who lives in our house, and
who saw us chasing after them, said to us: 'Say, are you pirates or
what? For, if you're pirates you ought to fly the black flag. Well,
next day I swiped a dark apron from my father and I tied it to a stick
and we got after the kids with the Spanish flag and came near making
them surrender it. That's why they call us the Pirates."

The two cousins came to a tiny, squalid district.

"This is the Casa del Cabrero," said Vidal. "And here are our chums."

So it proved; the entire pirate gang was here encamped. Manuel now
made the acquaintance of El Bizco, a cross-eyed species of chimpanzee,
square-shaped, husky, long-armed, with misshapen legs and huge red
hands.

"This is my cousin," added Vidal, introducing Manuel to the gang; and
then, to make him seem interesting, he told how Manuel had come to the
house with two immense lumps that he had received in a Homeric
struggle with a man.

Bizco stared closely at Manuel, and seeing that Manuel, on his side,
was observing him calmly, averted his gaze. Bizco's face possessed the
interest of a queer animal or of a pathological specimen. His narrow
forehead, his flat nose, his thick lips, his freckled skin and his
red, wiry hair lent him the appearance of a huge, red baboon.

As soon as Vidal had arrived, the gang mobilized and all the
ragamuffins went foraging through la Casa del Cabrero.

This was the name given to a group of low tenement hovels that bounded
a long, narrow patio. At this hot hour the men and women, stretched
out half naked on the ground, were sleeping in the shade as in a
trance. Some women, in shifts, huddled into a circle of four or five,
were smoking the same cigar, each taking a puff and passing it along
from hand to hand.

A swarm of naked brats infested the place; they were the colour of the
soil, most of them black, some fair, with blue eyes. As if already
they felt the degradation of their poverty, these urchins neither
shouted nor frolicked about the yard.

A few lasses of ten to fourteen were chatting in a group. Bizco, Vidal
and the rest of the gang gave chase to them around the patio. The
girls, half naked, dashed off, shrieking and shouting insults.

Bizco boasted that he had violated some of the girls.

"They're all _puchereras_ like the ones on Ceres Street," said
one of the Pirates.

"So they make pots, do they?" inquired Manuel.

"Yes. Fine pots, all right!"

"Then why do you call them _puchereras_?"

"Becau--" added the urchin, and he made a coarse gesture.

"Because they're a sly bunch," stammered Bizco. "You're awful simple."

Manuel contemplated Bizco scornfully, and asked his cousin:

"Do you mean to say that those little girls...?"

"They and their mothers," answered Vidal philosophically. "Almost all
of 'em that live here."

The Pirates left the Casa del Cabrero, descended an embarkment after
passing a high, black fence, and at the middle of Casa Blanca turned
into the Paseo de Yeser�as.

They approached the morgue, a white structure near the river, situated
at the foot of the Dehesa del Canal. They circled around it, trying to
catch a glimpse of some corpse, but the windows were closed.

They continued along the banks of the Manzanares, amidst the twisted
pines of la Dehesa. The river ran very thin, consisting of a few
threads of murky water and pools above the mud.

At the end of the Dehesa de la Arganzuela, opposite a large, spacious
lot surrounded by a fence made of flattened oil cans nailed to posts,
the gang paused to inspect the place, whose wide area was taken up
with watering-carts, mechanical sweepers, ditch pumps, heaps of brooms
and other tools and appurtenances of municipal cleanliness.

In one corner of the lot arose a white edifice that, judging from its
two towers and the vacant belfries, had formerly been a church or a
convent.

The gang went nosing about the place and passed under an arch bearing
the inscription: "Stallion Stables." Behind the structure that looked
like a convent they came upon some shanties furnished with filthy,
grimy mats: African huts built upon a framework of rough sticks and
cane.

Bizco went into one of these hovels and returned with a piece of cod
in his hand.

Manuel was overcome by a horrible fear.

"I'm going," he said to Vidal.

"What do you mean!..." exclaimed one of the gang ironically. "Much
nerve you've got!"

All at once another of the urchins cried:

"Skip. Somebody's coming!"

The pirates started on a run down the Paseo del Canal.

Madrid, with its yellowish dwellings veiled in a cloud of dust, came
into view. The high window-panes were aglow with the reflection of the
setting sun. From the Paseo del Canal, crossing a stubble patch, they
reached the Plaza de las Pe�uelas, then, after going up another street
they climbed the Paseo de las Acacias.

They entered the Corral�n. Manuel and Vidal, after having arranged to
meet the gang on the following Sunday, climbed the stairway to Se�or
Ignacio's house and as they drew near to the cobbler's door they heard
cries.

"Father's giving the old lady a beating," murmured Vidal. "There
won't be much to eat today. I'm going off to sleep."

"And how do I get to the other house?" asked Manuel.

"All you have to do is walk along the Ronda until you reach the Aguila
street stairway. You can't miss it."

Manuel followed the directions. It was fearfully hot; the air was
thick with dust. A few men were playing cards in tavern doorways, and
in others they were dancing in embrace to the strains of a
barrel-organ.

When Manuel reached the Aguila Street stairway it was getting dark. He
sat down to rest a while in the Campillo de Gil Im�n. From this
elevated point could be seen the yellowish country, growing darker and
darker with approaching night, and the chimneys and housetops sharply
outlined against the horizon. The sky, blue and green above, was
flushed with red nearer the earth; it darkened and assumed sinister
hues,--coppery reds, purplish reds.

Above the mudwalls jutted the turrets and the cypresses of San Isidro
cemetery; a round cupola stood out clearly in the atmosphere; at its
top rose an angel with wings outspread, as if about to take flight
against the flaming, blood-red background of evening.

Above the embanked clouds of the twilight shone a pale star in a green
border, and on the horizon, animated by the last breath of day, could
be discerned the hazy silhouettes of distant mountains.




CHAPTER II

  The "Big Yard," or Uncle Rilo's House--Local Enmities.


When Salom� finished her sewing and went off to Aguila Street to
sleep, Manuel definitively settled in the home of Uncle Rilo, of
Embajadores lane. Some called this La Corrala, others, El Corral�n,
still others, La Piltra, and it boasted so many other names that it
seemed as if the neighbours spent hours and hours thinking up new
designations for it.

The Corral�n (Big yard)--this was the best known name of Uncle Rilo's
lair,--fronted the Paseo de las Acacias, but it was not in the direct
line of this thoroughfare, as it set somewhat back. The fa�ade of this
tenement, low, narrow, kalso-mined, indicated neither the depth nor
the size of the building; the front revealed a few ill-shaped windows
and holes unevenly arranged, while a doorless archway gave access to a
narrow passage paved with cobblestones; this, soon widening, formed a
patio surrounded by high, gloomy walls.

From the sides of the narrow entrance passage rose brick stairways
leading to open galleries that ran along the three stories of the
house and returned to the patio. At intervals, in the back of these
galleries, opened rows of doors painted blue with a black number on
the lintel of each.

Between the lime and the bricks of the walls stuck out, like exposed
bones, jamb-posts and crossbeams, surrounded by lean bass ropes. The
gallery columns, as well as the lintels and the beams that supported
them, must formerly have been painted green, but as the result of the
constant action of sun and rain only a stray patch of the original
colour remained.

The courtyard was always filthy; in one corner lay a heap of useless
scraps covered by a sheet of zinc; one could make out grimy cloths,
decayed planks, debris, bricks, tiles, baskets: an infernal jumble.
Every afternoon some of the women would do their washing in the patio,
and when they finished their work they would empty their tubs on to
the ground, and the big pools, on drying, would leave white stains and
indigo rills of bluing. The neighbours also had the habit of throwing
their rubbish anywhere at all, and when it rained--since the mouth of
the drain would always become clogged--an unbearable, pestilential
odour would rise from the black, stagnant stream that inundated the
patio, and on its surface floated cabbage leaves and greasy papers.

Each neighbour could leave his tools and things in the section of the
gallery that bounded his dwelling; from the looks of this area one
might deduce the grade of poverty or relative comfort of each
family,--its predilections and its tastes.

This space usually revealed an attempt at cleanliness and a curious
aspect; here the wall was whitewashed, there hung a cage,--a few
flowers in earthenware pots; elsewhere a certain utilitarian instinct
found vent in the strings of garlic put out to dry or clusters of
grape suspended; beyond, a carpenter's bench and a tool-chest gave
evidence of the industrious fellow who worked during his free hours.

In general, however, one could see only dirty wash hung out on the
balustrades, curtains made of mats, quilts mended with patches of
ill-assorted colors, begrimed rags stretched over broomsticks or
suspended from ropes tied from one post to the other, that they might
get a trifle more light and air.

Every section of the gallery was a manifestation of a life apart
within this communism of hunger; this edifice contained every grade
and shade of poverty: from the heroic, garbed in clean, decent
tatters, to the most nauseating and repulsive.

In the majority of the rooms and holes of La Corrala one was struck
immediately by the resigned, indolent indigence combined with organic
and moral impoverishment.

In the space belonging to the cobbler's family, at the tip of a very
long pole attached to one of the pillars, waved a pair of
patch-covered trousers comically balancing itself.

Off from the large courtyard of El Corral�n branched a causeway heaped
with ordure, leading to a smaller courtyard that in winter was
converted into a fetid swamp.

A lantern, surrounded with a wire netting to prevent the children from
breaking it with stones, hung from one of the black walls.

In the inner courtyard the rooms were much cheaper than those of the
large patio; most of them brought twenty-three reales, but there were
some for two or three pesetas per month: dismal dens with no
ventilation at all, built in the spaces under stairways and under the
roof.

In some moister climate La Corrala would have been a nest of
contagion: the wind and sun of Madrid, however,--that sun which brings
blisters to the skin,--saw to the disinfection of that pesthole.

As if to make sure that terror and tragedy should haunt the edifice,
one saw, on entering,--either at the main door or in the corridor,--a
drunken, delirious hag who begged alms and spat insults at everybody.
They called her Death. She must have been very old, or at least
appeared so. Her gaze was wandering, her look diffident, her face
purulent with scabs; one of her lower eyelids, drawn in as the result
of some ailment, exposed the bloody, turbid inside of her eyeball.
Death would stalk about in her tatters, in house slippers, with a
tin-box and an old basket into which she gathered her findings.
Through certain superstitious considerations none dared to throw her
into the street.

On his very first night in La Corrala Manuel verified, not without a
certain astonishment, the truth of what Vidal had told him. That
youngster, and almost all the gamins of his age, had sweethearts among
the little girls of the tenement, and it was not a rare occurrence, as
he passed by some nook, to come upon a couple that jumped up and ran
away.

The little children amused themselves playing bull-fight, and among
the most-applauded feats was that of Don Tancredo. One tot would get
down on all fours, and another, not very heavy, would mount him and
fold his arms, thrust back his chest and place a three-cornered hat of
paper upon his erect, haughty head.

He who was playing the bull would approach, roar loudly, sniff Don
Tancredo and pass by without throwing him over; a couple of times he
would repeat this, and then dash off. Whereupon Don Tancredo would
dismount from his living pedestal to receive the plaudits of the
public. There were wily, waggish bulls who took it into their heads to
pull both statue and pedestal to the ground, and this would be
received amidst shouts and huzzahs of the spectators.

In the meantime the girls would be playing in a ring, the women would
shout from gallery to gallery and the men would chat in their
shirtsleeves; some fellow, squatting on the floor, would scrape away
monotonously at the strings of a guitar.

La Muerte, the old beggar, would also cheer the evening gatherings
with her long discourse.

La Corrala was a seething, feverish world in little, as busy as an
anthill. There people toiled, idled, guzzled, ate and died of hunger;
there furniture was made, antiques were counterfeited, old
embroideries were fashioned, buns cooked, broken porcelain mended,
robberies planned and women's favours traded.

La Corrala was a microcosm; it was said that if all the denizens were
placed in line they would reach from Embajadores lane to the Plaza del
Progreso; it harboured men who were everything and yet nothing: half
scholars, half smiths, half carpenters, half masons, half business
men, half thieves.

In general, everybody who lived here was disoriented, dwelling in that
unending abjection produced by everlasting, irremediable poverty; many
sloughed their occupations as a reptile its skin; others had none;
some carpenters' or masons' helpers, because of their lack of
initiative, understanding and skill, could never graduate from their
apprenticeship. There were also gypsies, mule and dog clippers, nor
was there a dearth of porters, itinerant barbers and mountebanks.
Almost all of them, if opportunity offered, stole what they could;
they all presented the same pauperized, emaciated look. And all
harboured a constant rage that vented itself in furious imprecations
and blasphemies.

They lived as if sunk in the shades of a deep slumber, unable to form
any clear notion of their lives, without aspirations, aims, projects
or anything.

There were some whom a couple of glasses of wine made drunk for half a
week; others seemed already besotted, without having had a sip, and
their countenances constantly mirrored the most absolute debasement,
whence they escaped only in a fleeting moment of anger or indignation.

Money was to them, more often than not, a misfortune. Possessing an
instinctive understanding of their weakness and their frail wills,
they would resort to the tavern in quest of courage; there they would
cast off all restraint, shout, argue, forget the sorrows of the
moment, feel generous, and when, after having bragged to the top of
their bent they believed themselves ready for anything, they
discovered that they hadn't a c�ntimo and that the illusory strength
imbibed with the alcohol was evaporating.

The women of the house, as a rule, worked harder than the men, and
were almost always disputing. For thirty years past they had all
shared the same character and represented almost the same type: foul,
unkempt, termagacious, they--shrieked and grew desperate upon the
slightest provocation.

From time to time, like a gentle sunbeam amidst the gloom, the souls
of these stultified, bestial men,--of these women embittered by harsh
lives that held neither solace nor illusion,--would be penetrated by a
romantic, disinterested feeling of tenderness that made them live like
human beings for a while; but when the gust of sentimentalism had
blown over, they would return to their moral inertia, as resigned and
passive as ever. The permanent neighbours of La Corrala were situated
in the floors surrounding the large courtyard. In the other courtyard
the majority were transients, and spent, at most, a couple of weeks in
the house. Then, as the saying was among them, they spread wing.

One day a mender would appear with his huge bag, his brace and his
pliers, shouting through the streets in a husky voice: "Jars and tubs
to mend ... pans, dishes and plates!" After a short stay he would be
off; the following week arrived a dealer in cloth bargains, crying at
the top of his lungs his silk handkerchiefs at ten and fifteen
c�ntimos; another day came an itinerant hawker, his cases laden with
pins, combs and brooches, or some purchaser of gold and silver braid.
Certain seasons of the year brought a contingent of special types;
spring announced itself through the appearance of mule dealers,
tinkers, gypsies and bohemians; in autumn swarmed bands of rustics
with cheese from La Mancha and pots of honey, while winter brought the
walnut and chestnut vendors.

Of the permanent tenants in the first courtyard, those who were
intimate with Se�or Ignacio included: a proof-corrector, nick-named El
Corretor; a certain Rebolledo, both barber and inventor, and four
blind men, who were known by the sobriquets El Calabazas, El Sapistas,
El Erigido and El Cuco and dwelt in harmony with their respective
wives playing the latest tangos, _tientos_ and _zarzuela_
ditties on the streets.

The proof-reader had a numerous family: his wife, his mother-in-law, a
daughter of twenty and a litter of tots; the pay he earned correcting
proof at a newspaper office was not enough for his needs and he used
to suffer dire straits. He was in the habit of wearing a threadbare
macfarland,--frayed at the edges,--a large, dirty handkerchief tied
around his throat, and a soft, yellow, grimy slouch hat.

His daughter, Milagros by name, a slender lass as sleek as a bird, had
relations with Leandro, Manual's cousin.

The sweethearts had plenty of love quarrels, now because of her
flirtations, now because of the evil life he led.

They could not get along, for Milagros was a bit haughty and a
climber, considering herself a social superior fallen upon evil days,
while Leandro, on the other hand, was abrupt and irascible.

The cobbler's other neighbour, Se�or Zurro, a quaint, picturesque
type, had nothing to do with Se�or Ignacio and felt for the
proof-reader a most cordial hatred. El Zurro went about forever
concealed behind a pair of blue spectacles, wearing a fur cap and
ample cassock.

"His name is Zurro (fox)," the proof-reader would say, "but he's a fox
in his actions as well; one of those country foxes that are masters of
malice and trickery."

According to popular rumour, El Zurro knew what he was about; he had a
place at the lower end of the Rastro, a dark, pestilent hovel
cluttered with odds and ends, second-hand coats, remnants of old
cloth, tapestries, parts of chasubles, and in addition, empty bottles,
flasks full of brandy and cognac, seltzer water siphons, shattered
clocks, rusty muskets, keys, pistols, buttons, medals and other
frippery.

Despite the fact that surely no more than a couple of persons entered
Se�or Zurro's shop throughout the livelong day and spent no more than
a couple of reales, the second-hand dealer thrived.

He lived with his daughter Encarna, a coarse specimen of some
twenty-five years, exceedingly vulgar and the personification of
insolence, who went walking with her father on Sundays, bedecked with
jewelry. Encarna's bosom was consumed with the fires of passion for
Leandro; but that ingrate, enamoured of Milagros, was unscathed by the
soul-flames of the second-hand dealer's daughter.

Wherefore Encarna mortally hated Milagros and the members of her
family; every hour of the day she branded them as vulgarians,
starvelings, and insulted them with such scoffing sobriquets as
Mendrugo, "Beggar's Crumb," which was applied by her to the
proof-reader, and "The Madwoman of the Vatican," which meant his
daughter.

It was not at all rare for such hatreds, between persons forced almost
into living in common, to grow to violent rancour and malevolence;
thus, the members of one and the other family never looked at each
other without exchanging curses and wishes for the most disastrous
misfortunes.




CHAPTER III

  Roberto Hastings at the Shoemaker's--Procession of Beggars--Court
    of Miracles.


One morning toward the end of September Roberto appeared in the
doorway of _The Regeneration of Footwear_, and thrusting his head
into the shop exclaimed:

"Hello, Manuel!"

"Hello, Don Roberto!"

"Working, eh?"

Manuel shrugged his shoulders, indicating that the job was not exactly
to his taste.

Roberto hesitated for a moment, but at last made up his mind and
entered the shop.

"Have a seat," invited Se�or Ignacio, offering him a chair.

"Are you Manuel's uncle?"

"At your service."

Roberto sat down, offered a cigar to Se�or Ignacio and another to
Leandro, and the three began to smoke.

"I know your nephew," said Roberto to the proprietor, "for I live in
the house where Petra works."

"You do?"

"And I wish you'd let him off today for a couple of hours."

"All right, se�or. All afternoon, if you wish."

"Fine. Then I'll call for him after lunch."

"Very well."

Roberto watched them work for a while, then suddenly jumped up and
left.

Manuel could not understand what Roberto wanted, and in the afternoon
waited for him with genuine impatience. Roberto carne, and the pair
turned out of Aguila Street down toward the Ronda de Segovia.

"Do you know where La Doctrina is?" Roberto asked Manuel.

"What Doctrina?"

"A place where herds of beggars meet every Friday."

"I don't know."

"Do you know where the San Isidro highway is?"

"Yes."

"Good. For that's where we're going. That's where La Doctrina is."

Manuel and Roberto walked down the Paseo de los Pontones and continued
in the direction of Toledo Bridge. The student was silent and Manuel
did not care to ask any questions.

It was a dry, dusty day. The stifling south wind whirled puffs of heat
and sand; a stray bolt of lightning illuminated the clouds; from the
distance came the rumble of thunder; the landscape lay yellow under a
blanket of dust.

Over the Toledo Bridge trudged a procession of beggars, both men and
women, each dirtier and more tattered than the next. Out of las
Cambroneras and las Injurias streamed recruits for this ragged army;
they came, too, from the Paseo Imperial and from Ocho Hilos, and by
this time forming solid ranks, they trooped on to the Toledo Bridge
and tramped up the San Isidro highway until they reached a red
edifice, before which they came to a halt.

"This must be La Doctrina," said Roberto to Manuel, pointing to a
building that had a patio with a statue of Christ in the centre.

The two friends drew near to the gate. This was a beggars' conclave, a
Court of Miracles assembly. The women took up almost the entire
courtyard; at one end, near a chapel, the men were huddled together;
one could see nothing but swollen, stupid faces, inflamed nostrils,
and twisted mouths; old women as fat and clumsy as melancholy whales;
little wizened, cadaverous hags with sunken mouths and noses like the
beak of a bird of prey; shamefaced female mendicants, their wrinkled
chins bristling with hair, their gaze half ironical and half shy;
young women, thin and emaciated, slatternly and filthy; and all, young
and old alike, clad in threadbare garments that had been mended,
patched and turned inside out until there wasn't a square inch that
had been left untouched. The green, olive-coloured cloaks and the drab
city garb jostled against the red and yellow short skirts of the
countrywomen.

Roberto sauntered about, peering eagerly info the courtyard. Manuel
trailed after him indifferently.

A large number of the beggars was blind; there were cripples, minus
hand or foot, some hieratic, taciturn, solemn, others restless. Brown
long-sleeved loose coats mingled with frayed sack-coats and begrimed
smocks. Some of the men in tatters carried, slung over their
shoulders, black sacks and game-bags; others huge cudgels in their
hands; one burly negro, his face tattooed with deep
stripes,--doubtless a slave in former days,--leaned against the wall in
dignified indifference, clothed in rags; barefoot urchins and mangy
dogs scampered about amongst the men and women; the swarming,
agitated, palpitating throng of beggars seethed like an anthill.

"Let's go," said Roberto. "Neither of the women I'm looking for is
here.... Did you notice," he added, "how few human faces there are
among men! All you can read in the features of these wretches is
mistrust, abjection, malice, just as among the rich you find only
solemnity, gravity, pedantry. It's curious, isn't it? All cats have
the face of cats; all oxen look like oxen; while the majority of human
beings haven't a human semblance."

Roberto and Manuel left the patio. They sat down opposite La Doctrina,
on the other side of the road, amid some sandy clearings.

"These doings of mine," began Roberto, "may strike you as queer. But
they won't seem so strange when I tell you that I'm looking for two
women here; one of them a poor beggar who can make me rich; the other,
a rich lady, who perhaps would make me poor."

Manuel stared at Roberto in amazement. He had always harboured a
certain suspicion that there was something wrong with the student's
head.

"No. Don't imagine this is silly talk. I'm on the trail of a
fortune,--a huge fortune. If you help me, I'll remember you."

"Sure. What do you want me to do?"

"I'll tell you when the right moment comes."

Manuel could not conceal an ironic smile.

"You don't believe it," muttered Roberto.

"That doesn't matter. When you'll see, you'll believe."


"Naturally."

"If I should happen to need you, promise you'll help me."

"I'll help you as far as I am able," replied Manuel, with feigned
earnestness.

Several ragamuffins sprawled themselves out on the clearing near
Manuel and Roberto, and the student did not care to go on with his
tale.

"They've already begun to split up into divisions," said one of the
loafers who wore a coachman's hat, pointing with a stick to the women
inside the courtyard of La Doctrina.

And so it was; groups were clustering about the trees of the patio, on
each of which was hung a poster with a picture and a number in the
middle.

"There go the marchionesses," added he of the coachman's hat,
indicating several women garbed in black who had just appeared in the
courtyard.

The white faces stood out amidst the mourning clothes.

"They're all marchionesses," said one.

"Well, they're not all beauties," retorted Manuel, joining the
conversation. "What have they come here for?"

"They're the ones who teach religion," answered the fellow with the
hat. "From time to time they hand out sheets and underwear to the
women and the men. Now they're going to call the roll."

A bell began to clang; the gate closed; groups were formed, and a lady
entered the midst of each.

"Do you see that one there?" asked Roberto. "She's Don Telmo's niece."

"That blonde?"

"Yes. Wait for me here."

Roberto walked down the road toward the gate.

The reading of the religious lesson began; from the patio came the
slow, monotonous drone of prayer.

Manuel lay back on the ground. Yonder, flat beneath the grey horizon,
loomed Madrid out of the mist of the dust-laden atmosphere. The wide
bed of the Manzanares river, ochre-hued, seemed furrowed here and
there by a thread of dark water. The ridges of the Guadarrama range
rose hazily into the murky air.

Roberto passed by the patio. The humming of the praying mendicants
continued. An old lady, her head swathed in a red kerchief and her
shoulders covered with a black cloak that was fading to green, sat
down in the clearing.

"What's the matter, old lady? Wouldn't they open the gate for you?"
shouted the fellow with the coachman's hat.

"No.... The foul old witches!"

"Don't you care. They're not giving away anything today. The
distribution takes place this coming Friday. They'll give you at least
a sheet," added he of the hat mischievously.

"If they don't give me anything more than a sheet," shrilled the hag,
twisting her blobber-lip, "I'll tell them to keep it for themselves.
The foxy creatures! ..."

"Oh, they've found you out, granny!" exclaimed one of the loafers
lying on the ground. "You're a greedy one, you are."

The bystanders applauded these words, which came from a
_zarzuela_, and the chap in the coachman's hat continued
explaining to Manuel the workings of La Doctrina.

"There are some men and women who enrol in two and even three
divisions so as to get all the charity they can," he went on. "Why,
we--my father and I--once enrolled in four divisions under four
different names.... And what a rumpus was raised! What a row we had
with the marchionesses!"

"And what did you want with all those sheets," Manuel asked him.

"Why! Sell 'em, of course. They re sold here at the very gate at two
_chul�s_ apiece."

"I'm going to buy one," said a coachman from a nearby hackstand,
approaching the group. "I'll give it a coating of linseed oil, then
varnish it and make me a cowled waterproof."

"But the marchionesses,--don't they see that these people sell their
gifts right away?"

"Much they see!"

To these idlers the whole business was nothing more than a pious
recreation of the religious ladies, of whom they spoke with
patronizing irony.

The reading of the religious lesson did not last quite an hour.

A bell rang; the gate was swung open; the various groups dissolved and
merged; everybody arose and the women began to walk off, balancing
their chairs upon their heads, shouting, shoving one another
violently; two or three huckstresses peddled their wares as the
tattered crowd issued through the gate in a jam, shrieking as if in
escape from some imminent danger. A few old women ran clumsily down
the road; others huddled into a corner to urinate, and all of them
were howling at the top of their lungs, overcome by the necessity of
insulting the women of La Doctrina, as if instinctively they divined
the uselessness of a sham charity that remedied nothing. One heard
only protests and manifestation of scorn.

"Damn it all! These women of God...."

"And they want a body to have faith in 'em."

"The old drunkards."

"Let them have faith, and the mother that bore 'em."

"Let 'em give blood-pudding to everybody."

After the women came the men,--blind, maimed, crippled,--in leisurely
fashion, and conversing solemnly.

"Huh! They don't want me to marry!" grumbled a blind fellow,
sarcastically, turning to a cripple.

"And what do you say," asked the latter.

"I? What the deuce! Let them get married if they have any one to marry
'em. They came here and bore us stiff with their prayers and sermons.
What we need isn't sermons, but hard cash and plenty of it."

"That's what, man ... the dough,--that's what we want."

"And all the rest is nothing but ... chatter and chin music....
Anybody can give advice. When it comes to bread, though, not a sign of
it."

"So say I!"

The ladies came out, prayer-books in hand; the old beggar-women set
off in pursuit and harassed them with entreaties.

Manuel looked everywhere for the student; at last he caught sight of
him with Don Telmo's niece. The blonde turned around to look at him,
and then stepped into a coach. Roberto saluted her and the coach
rolled off.

Manuel and Roberto returned by the San Isidro highway.

The sky was still overcast; the air dry; the procession of beggars was
advancing in the direction of Madrid. Before they reached the Toledo
Bridge, at the intersection of the San Isidro highway and the
Extremadura cartroad, Roberto and Manuel entered a very large tavern.
Roberto ordered a bottle of beer.

"Do you live in the same house where the shoe shop is?" asked Roberto.

"No. I live over in the Paseo de las Acacias, in a house called El
Corral�n."

"Good. I'll come to visit you there, and you already understand that
whenever you happen to go to any place where poor folk or criminals
gather, you're to let me know."

"I'll let you know. I was watching that blonde eye you. She's pretty."

"Yes."

"And she has a swell coach."

"I should say so."

"Well? Are you going to marry her?"

"What do I know? We'll see. Come, we can't stay here," said Roberto,
stepping up to the counter to pay.

In the tavern a large number of beggars, seated at the tables, were
gulping down slices of cod and scraps of meat; a piquant odour of
fried bird-tripe and oil came from the kitchen.

They left. The wind still blew in eddies of sand; dry leaves and stray
bits of newspaper danced madly through the air; the high houses near
the Segovia Bridge, their narrow windows and galleries hung with
tatters, seemed greyer and more sordid than ever when glimpsed through
an atmosphere murky with dust.

Suddenly Roberto halted, and placing his hand upon Manuel's shoulder
said:

"Listen to what I say, for it is the truth. If you ever want to
accomplish anything in life, place no belief in the word 'impossible.'
There's nothing impossible to an energetic will. If you try to shoot
an arrow, aim very high,--as high as you can; the higher you aim, the
farther you'll go."

Manuel stared at Roberto with a puzzled look, and shrugged his
shoulders.




CHAPTER IV

  Life In the Cobbler's Shop--Manuel's Friends.


The months of September and October were very hot; it was impossible
to breathe in the shoe shop.

Every morning Manuel and Vidal, on their way to the shoemaker's, would
talk of a thousand different things and exchange impressions; money,
women, plans for the future formed everlasting themes of their chats.
To both it seemed a great sacrifice, something in the nature of a
crowning misfortune in their bad luck, to have to spend day after day
cooped up in a corner ripping off outworn soles.

The languorous afternoons invited to slumber. After lunch especially,
Manuel would be overcome by stupor and deep depression. Through the
doorway of the shop could be seen the fields of San Isidro bathed in
light; in the Campillo de Gil Im�n the wash hung out to dry gleamed in
the sun.

There came a medley of crowing cocks, far-off shouts of vendors, the
shrieking of locomotive whistles muffled by the distance. The dry,
burning, atmosphere vibrated. A few women of the neighbourhood came
out to comb their hair in the open, and the mattress-makers beat their
wool in the shade of the Campillo, while the hens scampered about and
scratched the soil.

Later, as evening fell, the air and the earth changed to a dusty grey.
In the distance, cutting the horizon, waved the outline of the arid
field,--a simple line, formed by the gentle undulation of the
hillocks,--a line like that of the landscapes drawn by children, with
isolated houses and smoking chimneys. Here and there a lone patch of
green grove splotched against the yellow field, which lay parched by
the sun beneath a pallid sky, whitish and murky in the hot vapours
rising from the earth. Not a cry, not the slightest sound rent the
air.

At dusk the mist grew transparent and the horizon receded until, far
in the distance, loomed the vague silhouettes of mountains not to be
glimpsed by day, against the red background of the twilight.

When they left off working in the shop it was usually night. Se�or
Ignacio, Leandro, Manuel and Vidal would turn down the road toward
home.

The gas lights shone at intervals in the dusty air; lines of carts
rumbled slowly by, and across the road, in little groups, tramped the
workmen from the neighbouring factories.

And always, coming and going, the conversation between Manuel and
Vidal would turn upon the same topics: women and money.

Neither had a romantic notion, or anything like it, of women. To
Manuel, a woman was a magnificent animal with firm flesh and swelling
breast.

Vidal did not share this sexual enthusiasm; he experienced, with all
women, a confused feeling of scorn, curiosity and preoccupation.

As far as concerned money, they were both agreed that it was the
choicest, most admirable of all things; they spoke of money--especially
Vidal--with a fierce enthusiasm. To him, the thought that
there might be anything--good or evil--that could not be obtained with
hard cash, was the climax of absurdity. Manuel would like to have
money to travel all over the world and see cities and more cities and
sail in vessels. Vidal's dream was to live a life of ease in Madrid.

After two or three months in the Corral�n, Manuel had become so
accustomed to the work and the life there that he wondered how he
could do anything else. Those wretched quarters no longer produced
upon him the impression of dark, sinister sadness that they cause in
one unaccustomed to live in them; on the contrary, they seemed to him
filled with attractions. He knew almost everybody in the district.
Vidal and he would escape from the house on any pretext at all, and on
Sundays they would meet Bizco at the Casa del Cabrero and go off into
the environs: to Las Injurias, Las Cambroneras, the restaurants of
Alarc�n, the Campamento, and the inns on the Andaluc�a road, where
they would consort with thieves and rogues and play with them at
_can�_ and _rayuela_.

Manuel did not care for Bizco's company; Bizco sought only to hobnob
with thieves. He was forever taking Manuel and Vidal to haunts
frequented by bandits and low types, but since Vidal seemed to think
it all right, Manuel never objected.

Vidal was the link between Manuel and Bizco, Bizco hated Manuel, who
in turn, not only felt enmity and repugnance for Bizco, but showed
this repulsion plainly. Bizco was a brute,--an animal deserving of
extermination. As lascivious as a monkey, he had violated several of
the little girls of the Casa del Cabrero, beating them into
submission; he used to rob his father, a poverty-stricken cane-weaver,
so that he might have money enough to visit some low brothel of Las
Penuelas or on Chopa Street, where he found rouged dowagers with
cigarette-stubs in their lips, who looked like princesses to him. His
narrow skull, his powerful jaw, his blubber-lip, his stupid glance,
lent him a look of repellant brutality and animality.

A primitive man, he kept his dagger--bought in El Rastro--sharp,
guarding it as a sacred object. If he ever happened across a cat or
dog, he would enjoy torturing it to death with oft-repeated stabs. His
speech was obscene, abounding in barbarities and blasphemies.

Whether anybody induced Bizco to tattoo his arms, or the idea was
original with him, cannot be said; probably the tattooing he had seen
on one of the bandits that he ran after had suggested a similar
adornment for himself. Vidal imitated him, and for a time the pair
gave themselves up enthusiastically to self-tattooing. They pricked
their skins with a pin until a little blood came, then moistened the
wounds with ink.

Bizco painted crosses, stars and names upon his chest; Vidal, who
didn't like to prick himself, stippled his own name on one arm and his
sweetheart's on the other; Manuel didn't care to inscribe anything
upon his person, first because he was afraid of blood, and then
because the idea had been Bizco's.

Each harboured a mute hostility against the other.

Manuel, always with a chip on his shoulder, was disposed to show his
enemy challenge; Bizco, doubtless, noticed this scornful hatred in
Manuel's eyes, and this confused him.

To Manuel, a man's superiority consisted in his talent, and, above
all, in his cunning; to Bizco, courage and strength constituted the
sole enviable qualities; the greatest merit of all was to be a real
brute, as he would declare with enthusiasm.

Because of the great esteem in which he held craft and cunning, Manuel
felt deep admiration for the Rebolledos, father and son, who also
lived in the Corral�n. The father, a dwarfed hunchback, a barber by
trade, used to shave his customers in the sunlight of the open, near
the Rastro. This dwarf had a very intelligent face, with deep eyes; he
wore moustache and side-whiskers, and long, bluish, unwashed hair. He
dressed always in mourning; in winter and summer alike he went around
in an overcoat, and, by some unsolved mystery of chemistry his
overcoat kept turning green while his trousers, which were also black,
kept quite as plainly turning red.

Every morning Rebolledo would leave the Corral�n carrying a little
bench and a wooden wall-bracket, from which hung a brass basin and a
poster. Reaching a certain spot along the Americas fence he would
attach the bracket and put up, beside it, a humorous sign the point of
which, probably, he was the only one to see. It ran thus:

      MODERNIST TONSORIAL PARLOUR
           Antiseptic Barber
  Walk in Gents. Shaving by Rebolledo.
              Money Lent

The Rebolledos were very skilful; they made toys of wire and of
pasteboard, which they afterward sold to the street-vendors; their
home, a dingy little room of the front patio, had been converted into
a workshop, and they had there a vise, a carpenter's bench and an
array of broken gew-gaws that were apparently of no further use.

The neighbours of the Corral�n had a saying that indicated their
conception of Rebolledo's acute genius.

"That dwarf," they said, "has a regular Noah's ark in his head."

The father had made for his own use a set of false teeth. He had taken
a bone napkin-ring, cut it into two unequal parts, and, by filing it
on either side, had fitted the larger to his mouth. Then with a tiny
saw he made the teeth, and to simulate the gums he covered a part of
the former napkin-ring with sealing-wax. Rebolledo could remove and
insert the false set with remarkable ease, and he could eat with them
perfectly, provided, as he said, there was anything to eat.

Perico, the son of the dwarf, promised even to outstrip his father in
cleverness. Between the hunger that he often suffered, and the
persistent tertian fevers, he was very thin and his complexion was
citreous. He was not, like his father, deformed, but slender,
delicate, with sparkling eyes and rapid, jerky motions. He looked, as
the saying is, like a rat under a bowl.

One of the proofs of his inventive genius was a mechanical snuffler
that he had made of a shoe-polish tin.

Perico cherished a particular enthusiasm for white walls, and wherever
he discovered one he would sketch, with a piece of coal, processions
of men, women and horses, houses puffing smoke, soldiers, vessels at
sea, weaklings engaging in struggle with burly giants, and other
equally diverting scenes.

Perico's masterpiece was the Don Tancredo triptych, done in coal on
the walls of the narrow entrance lane to La Corrala. This work
overwhelmed the neighbours with admiration and astonishment.

The first part of the triptych showed the valiant hypnotizer of bulls
on his way to the bull-ring, in the midst of a great troop of
horsemen; the legend read: "Don Tancredo on his _weigh_ to the
bulls." The second part represented the "king of bravery" in his
three-cornered hat, with his arms folded defiantly before the wild
beast; underneath, the rubric "Don Tancredo upon his pedestal." Under
the third part one read: "The bull takes to flight." The depiction of
this final scene was noteworthy; the bull was seen fleeing as one
possessed of the devil amidst the toreros, whose noses were visible in
profile while their mouths and both eyes were drawn in front view.

Despite his triumphs, Perico Rebolledo did not grow vain, nor did he
consider himself superior to the men of his generation; his greatest
pleasure was to sit down at his father's side in the patio of La
Corrala, amidst the works of old clocks, bunches of keys and other
grimy, damaged articles, and ponder over the possible utilization of
an eye-glass crystal, for example, or a truss, or the rubber bulb of a
syringe, or some similar broken, out-of-order contrivance.

Father and son spent their lives dreaming of mechanical contraptions;
they considered nothing useless; the key that could open no door, the
old-style coffee-pot, as queer as some laboratory instrument, the oil
lamp with machine attachment,--all these articles were treasured up,
taken apart and put to some use. Rebolledo, father and son, wasted
more ingenuity in living wretchedly than is employed by a couple of
dozen comic authors, journalists and state ministers dwelling in
luxury.

Among the friends of Perico Rebolledo were the Aristas, who became
intimate with Manuel.

The Aristas, two brothers, sons of an ironing-woman, were apprentices
in a foundry of the near-by Ronda. The younger passed his days in a
continuous capering, indulging in death-defying leaps, climbing trees,
walking on his hands and performing acrobatic stunts from all the door
transoms.

The elder brother, a long-legged stutterer whom they called Arist�n in
jest, was the most funereal fellow on the planet; he suffered from
acute necromania; anything connected with coffins, corpses, wakes and
candles roused his enthusiasm. He would like to have been a
gravedigger, the priest of a religious confraternity, a cemetery
warden; but his great dream,--what most enchanted him,--was a funeral;
he would imagine, as a wonderful ideal, the conversations that the
proprietor of a funeral establishment must have with the father or the
inconsolable widow as he offered wreaths of immortelles, or as he went
to take the measure of a corpse or strolled amidst the coffins. What a
splendid existence, this manufacturing of last resting-places for men,
women and children, and afterward accompanying them to the
burial-ground. For Arist�n, details relating to death were the most
important matter in life.

Through that irony of fate which almost always exchanges the proper
labels of things and persons, Arist�n was a supernumerary in one of
the vaudeville theatres, through the influence of his father, who was
a scene-shifter, and the job disgusted him, for in such a playhouse
nobody ever died upon the stage, nobody ever came out in mourning and
there was no weeping. And while Arist�n kept thinking of nothing but
funereal scenes, his brother dreamed of circuses, trapezes and
acrobats, hoping that some day fate would send him the means to
cultivate his gymnastic talents.




CHAPTER V

  La Blasa's Tavern.


The frequent quarrels between Leandro and his sweetheart, the
Corrector's daughter, very often gave the neighbours of the Corrala
food for gossip. Leandro was an ill-tempered, quarrelsome sort; his
brutal instincts were quickly awakened; despite his habit of going
every Saturday night to the taverns and restaurants, ready for a
rumpus with the bullies and the ruffians, he had thus far managed to
steer clear of any disagreeable accident. His sweetheart was somewhat
pleased with this display of valour; her mother, however, regarded it
with genuine indignation, and was forever advising her daughter to
dismiss her Leandro for good.

The girl would dismiss her lover; but afterwards, when he returned in
humility, ready to accede to any conditions, she relented.

This confidence in her power turned the girl despotic, whimsical,
voluble; she would amuse herself by rousing Leandro's jealousy; she
had arrived at a particular state, a blend of affection and hatred, in
which the affection remained within and the hatred outside, revealing
itself in a ferocious cruelty, in the satisfaction of mortifying her
lover constantly.

"What you ought to do some fine day," Se�or Ignacio would say to
Leandro, incensed by the cruel coquetry of the maiden, "is to get her
into a corner and take all you want.... And then give her a beating
and leave her soft as mush. The next day she'd be following you around
like a dog."

Leandro, as brave as any bully, was as meek as a charity-pupil in the
presence of his sweetheart. At times he recalled his father's counsel,
but he would never have summoned the courage to carry it through.

One Saturday afternoon, after a bitter dispute with Milagros, Leandro
invited Manuel to make the rounds that night together with him.

"Where'll we go?" asked Manuel.

"To the Naranjeros caf�, or to the Engrima restaurant."

"Wherever you please."

"We'll make the rounds of those dives and then we'll wind up at La
Blasa's tavern."

"Do the hard guys go there?"

"I should say. As tough as you make 'em."

"Then I'll let Roberto know,--that fellow who came for me to take him
to la Doctrina."

"All right."

After work Manuel went off to the boardingrhouse and took counsel with
Roberto.

"Be at the San Mill�n caf� about nine in the evening," said Roberto,
"I'll be there with a cousin of mine."

"Are you going to take her there?" Manuel asked in astonishment.

"Yes. She's a queer one, a painter."

"And is this painter good-looking?" asked Leandro.

"I can't say. I don't know her."

"Damn my sweet---- ... ! I'd give anything to have this woman come
along, man."

"Me, too."

They both went to the San Mill�n caf�, sat down and waited
impatiently. At the hour indicated Roberto appeared in company of his
cousin whom he called Fanny. She was a woman between thirty and forty,
very slender, with a sallow complexion,--a distinguished, masculine
type; there was about her something of the graceless beauty of a
racehorse; her nose was curved, her jaw big, her cheeks sunken and her
eyes grey and cold. She wore a jacket of dark green taffeta, a black
skirt and a small hat.

Leandro and Manuel greeted her with exceeding timidity and
awkwardness; they shook hands with Roberto and conversed.

"My cousin," said Roberto, "would like to see something of slum life
hereabouts."

"Whenever you wish," answered Leandro. "But I warn you beforehand that
there are some pretty tough specimens in this vicinity."

"Oh, I'm prepared," said the lady, with a slight foreign accent,
showing a revolver of small calibre.

Roberto paid, despite Leandro's protests, and they left the caf�.
Coming out on the Plaza del Rastro, they walked down the Ribera de
Curtidores as far as the Ronda de Toledo.

"If the lady wishes to see the house we live in, this is the one,"
said Leandro.

They went into the Corral�n; a crowd of gamins and old women, amazed
to see such a strange woman there at such an hour, surrounded them,
showering Manuel and Leandro with questions. Leandro was eager for
Milagros to learn that he had been there with a woman, so he
accompanied Fanny through the place, pointing out all the holes of the
wretched dwelling.

"Poverty's the only thing you can see here," said Leandro.

"Yes, yes indeed," answered the woman.

"Now if you wish, we'll go to La Blasa's tavern."

They left the Corral�n for Embajadores lane and walked along the black
fence of a laundry. It was a dark night and a drizzle had begun to
fall. They stumbled along the surrounding path.

"Look-out," said Leandro. "There's a wire here."

He stepped upon the wire to hold it down. They all crossed the path
and passed a group of white houses, coming to Las Injurias.

They approached a low cottage with a dark socle; a door with clouded
broken panes stuffed with bundles of paper, through which shone a
pallid light, gave entrance to the dwelling. In the opaque
transparency of the glass appeared from time to time the shadow of a
person.

Leandro opened the door and they all went in. A stuffy, smoky wave of
atmosphere struck them in the face. A kerosene lamp, hanging from the
ceiling and covered with a white shade, provided light for the tiny,
low-roofed tavern.

As the four entered, the customers greeted them with an expression of
stupefaction; for a while the habitu�es whispered among themselves,
then some, resumed their playing as others looked on.

Fanny, Roberto, Leandro and Manuel took seats to the right of the
door.

"What'll you have?" asked the woman at the counter.

"Four fifteen-c�ntimo glasses of wine."

The woman brought the glasses in a filthy tray, and set them upon the
table. Leandro pulled out sixty c�ntimos.

"They're ten apiece," corrected the woman in ill-humoured tones.

"How's that?"

"Because this is outside the limits."

"All right; take whatever it comes to."

The woman left twenty c�ntimos on the table and returned to the
counter. She was broad, large-breasted, with a head that set deep in
between her shoulders and a neck composed of some five or six
layers of fat; from time to time she would serve a drink, always getting
the price in advance; she spoke very little, with evident displeasure
and with an invariable gesture of ill-humour.

This human hippopotamus had at her right a tin tank with a spigot, for
brandy, and at her left a flask of strong wine and a chipped jar
covered with a black funnel, into which she poured whatever was left
in the glasses by her customers.

Roberto's cousin fished out a phial of smelling salts, hid it in her
clamped hand and took a sniff from time to time.

Opposite the place where Roberto, Fanny, Leandro and Manuel were
seated, a crowd of some twenty men were packed around a table playing
cane.

Near them, huddled on the floor next the stove, reclining against the
wall, could be seen a number of ugly, scraggly-haired hags, dressed in
corsages and ragged skirts that were tied around their waists by
ropes.

"Who are those women?" asked the painter.

"They're old tramps," explained Leandro. "The kind that go to the
Botanical Garden and the clearings outside the city."

Two or three of the unfortunates held in their arms children belonging
to other women who had come there to spend the night; some were dozing
with their cigarettes sticking from the corner of their mouths. Amid
the old women were a few little girls of thirteen or fourteen,
monstrously deformed, with bleary eyes; one of them had her nose
completely eaten away, with nothing but a hole like a wound left in
its place; another was hydro-cephalous, with so thin a neck that it
seemed the slightest movement would snap it and send her head rolling
from her shoulders.

"Have you seen the large jars they have here?" Leandro asked Manuel.
"Come on and take a look."

The two rose and approached the group of gamblers. One of these
interrupted his game.

"Please make way?" Leandro said to him, with marked impertinence.

The man drew in his chair sourly. There was nothing remarkable about
the jars; they were large, embedded in the wall, painted with
red-lead; each of them bore a sign denoting the class of wine inside,
and had a spigot.

"What's so wonderful about this, I'd like to know?" asked Manuel.

Leandro smiled; they returned as they had come, disturbing the player
once more and resuming their seats at the table.

Roberto and Fanny conversed in English.

"That fellow we made get up," said Leandro, "is the bully of this
place."

"What's his name?" asked Fanny.

"El Valencia."

The man they were speaking about, hearing his sobriquet mentioned,
turned around and eyed Leandro; for a moment their glances crossed
defiantly; Valencia turned his eyes away and continued playing. He was
a strong man, about forty, with high cheek bones, reddish skin and a
disagreeably sarcastic expression. Every once in a while he would cast
a severe look at the group formed by Fanny, Roberto and the other two.

"And that Valencia,--who is he?" asked the lady in a low voice.

"He's a mat maker by trade," answered Leandro, raising his voice. "A
tramp that wheedles money out of low-lives; before he used to belong
to the _pote_,--the kind that visit houses on Sundays, knock, and
when they see nobody's home, stick their jimmy into the lock and
zip!... But he hasn't the courage even for this, 'cause his liver is
whiter than paper."

"It would be curious to investigate," said Roberto, "just how far
poverty has served as centre of gravity for the degradation of these
men."

"And how about that white-bearded old fellow at his side?" asked
Fanny.

"He's one of those apostles that cure with water. They say he's a wise
old fellow.... He has a cross on his tongue. But I believe he painted
it there himself."

"And that other woman there?"

"That's La Paloma, Valencia's mistress."

"Prostitute?" asked the lady.

"For at least forty years," answered Leandro with a laugh.

They all looked closely at Paloma; she had a huge, soft face, with
pouches of violet skin, and a timid look as of a humble beast; she
represented at least forty years of prostitution and all its
concomitant ills; forty years of nights spent in the open, lurking
about barracks, sleeping in suburban shanties and the most repulsive
lodgings.

Among the women there was also a gypsy who, from time to time, would
get up and walk across the tavern with a saucy strut.

Leandro ordered some glasses of whiskey; but it was so bad that nobody
could drink it.

"Hey, you," called Leandro to the gipsy, offering her the glass. "Want
a drink?"

"No."

The gypsy placed her hands upon the table,--a pair of stubby, wrinkled
hands incrusted with dirt.

"Who are these gumps?" she asked Leandro.

"Friends of mine. Will you drink or not?" and he offered her the glass
again.

"No."

Then in a shrill voice, he shouted:

"Apostle, will you have a drink?"

The Apostle rose from his place amongst the gamblers. He was dead
drunk and could hardly move; his eyes were viscous, like those of an
angered animal; he staggered over to Leandro and took the glass, which
trembled in his grasp; he brought it to his lips and gulped it down.

"Want more?" asked the gypsy.

"Sure, sure," he drooled.

Then he began to babble, showing the stumps of his yellow teeth, but
nobody could understand a word; he drained the other glasses, rested
his forehead against his hand and slowly made his way to a corner,
into which he squatted, and then stretched himself out on the floor.

"Do you want me to tell your fortune, princess?" asked the gipsy of
Fanny, seizing her hand.

"No," replied the lady drily.

"Won't you give me a few coins for the _churumbeles_?"

"No."

"Wicked woman! Why won't you give me a few coins for the
_churumbeles_?"

"What does _churumbeles_ mean?" asked the lady.

"Her children," answered Leandro, laughing.

"Have you children?" Fanny asked the gipsy.

"Yes."

"How many?"

"Two. Here they are."

And the gipsy fetched a blond little fellow and a girl of about five
or six.

The lady petted the little boy; then she took a duro from her purse
and gave it to the gipsy.

The gipsy, parting her lips in amazement and bursting forth into
profuse flattery, exhibited the duro to everybody in the place.

"We'd better be going," advised Leandro. "To pull one of those big
coins out in a dive like this is dangerous."

The four left the tavern.

"Would you like to make the rounds of this quarter?" asked Leandro.

"Yes. Let's," said the lady.

Together they wound in and out of the narrow lanes of Las Injurias.

"Watch out, the drain runs in the middle of the street," cautioned
Manuel.

The rain kept falling; the quartet of slummers entered narrow patios
where their feet sank into the pestiferous slime. Along the entire
extension of the ravine black with mud, shone but a single oil lamp,
attached to the side of some half crumbled wall.

"Shall we go back?" asked Roberto.

"Yes," answered the lady.

They set out for Embajadores lane and walked up the Paseo de las
Acacias. The rain came down harder; here and there a faint light shone
in the distance; against the intense darkness of the sky loomed the
vague silhouette of a high chimney....

Leandro and Manuel accompanied Fanny and Roberto as far as the Plaza
del Rastro, and there they parted, exchanging handshakes.

"What a woman!" exclaimed Leandro.

"Nice, eh?" asked Manuel.

"You bet. I'd give anything to have a try at her."




CHAPTER VI

  Roberto In Quest of a Woman--El Tabuenca and his Inventions--Don
    Alonso or the Snake-Man.


A few months later Roberto appeared in the Corrala at the hour when
Manuel and the shoe-shop employ�s were returning from their day's
work.

"Do you know Se�or Zurro?" Roberto asked Manuel.

"Yes. He lives here on this side."

"I know that. I'd like to have a talk with him.

"Then knock at his door. He must be in."

"Come along with me."

Manuel knocked and Encarna opened; they went inside. Se�or Zurro was
in his room, reading a newspaper by the light of a large candle; the
place was a regular storehouse, cluttered with old secretaries,
dilapidated chests, mantlepieces, clocks and sundry other items. It
was close enough to stifle a person; it was impossible to breathe or
to take a step without stumbling against something.

"Are you Se�or Zurro?" asked Roberto.

"Yes."

"I have come at the suggestion of Don Telmo."

"Don Telmo!" repeated the old man, rising and offering the student a
chair. "Have a seat. How is the good gentleman?"

"Very well."

"He's an excellent friend of mine," continued Zurro. "I should say so.
Well, young man, let me know what you wish. It's enough for me that
you come from Don Telmo; that assures you my best services."

"I should like to learn the whereabouts of a certain girl acrobat who
lived about five or six years ago in a lodging-house of this vicinity,
or in Cuco's hostelry."

"And do you know this girl's name?"

"Yes."

"And you say that she used to live in Cuco's hostelry?"

"Yes, sir."

"I know somebody who lives there," murmured the second-hand dealer.

"Yes, that's so," said Encarna.

"That man with the monkeys. Didn't he live there?" asked Se�or Zurro.

"No; he lived in la Quinta de Goya," answered his daughter.

"Well, then.... Just wait a moment, young man. Wait a moment."

"Isn't it Tabuenca that lives there, father?" interrupted Encarna.

"That's the fellow. That's it. El Tabuenca. You go and see him. And
tell him," added Se�or Zurro, turning to Roberto, "that I sent you.
He's a grouchy old fellow, as testy as they make 'em."

Roberto took leave of the second-hand man and his daughter, and in
company of Manuel walked out to the gallery of the house.

"And where's this Cuco's hostelry?" he asked.

"Over there near Las Yeser�as," answered Manuel.

"Come along with me, then; we'll have supper together," suggested
Roberto.

"All right."

They both went on to the hostelry, which was situated upon a
thoroughfare that was deserted at this hour. It was a large building,
with an entrance-vestibule in country style and a patio crowded with
carts. They questioned a boy. El Tabuenca had just come, he told them.
They walked into the vestibule, which was illuminated by a lantern.
There was a man inside.

"Does anybody live here by the name of Tabuenca?" asked Roberto.

"Yes. What is it?" asked the man.

"I'd like to have a talk with him."

"Well, talk away, then, for I'm Tabuenca."

As the speaker turned, the light of the oil lantern hanging upon the
wall struck him full in the face; Roberto and Manuel stared at him in
amazement. He was a yellow, shrivelled specimen; he had an absurd
nose, as if it had been wrenched from its roots and replaced by a
round little ball of meat. It seemed that he looked at the same time
with his eyes and with the two little nasal orifices. He was
clean-shaven, dressed pretty decently, and wore a round woollen cap
with a green visor.

He listened grumpily to what Roberto had to say; then he lighted a
cigar and flung the match far away. Doubtless because of the exiguity
of his organ, he found it necessary to stop the windows of his nose
with his fingers in order to smoke.

Roberto thought at first that the man had not understood his question,
and he repeated it twice. Tabuenca gave no heed; but all at once,
seized with the utmost indignation, he snatched the cigar furiously
from his mouth and began to blaspheme in a whining, gull-like voice,
shrieking that he couldn't make out why folks pestered him with
matters that didn't concern him a particle.

"Don't shout so," said Roberto, provoked by this rumpus. "They'll
imagine that we've come here to assassinate you, at the very least."

"I shout because I please to."

"All right, man; shout away to your heart's content."

"Don't you talk to me like that or I'll push in your face," yelled
Tabuenca.

"_You'll_ push in _my_ face?" retorted Roberto, laughing;
then, turning to Manuel, he added, "These noseless fellows get on my
nerves and I'm going to let this flat-nose have it."

Tabuenca, his mind made up, withdrew and returned in a short while
with a rapier-cane, which he unsheathed; Roberto looked in every
direction for something with which he might defend himself, and found
a carter's stick; Tabuenca aimed a thrust at Roberto, who parried it
with the stick; then another thrust, and Roberto, as again he parried
it, smashed the lantern at the entrance, leaving the scene in
darkness. Roberto began to strike out right and left and he must have
landed once upon some delicate part of Tabuenca's anatomy, for the man
began to shout in horrible tones:

"Assassins! Murder!"

At this, several persons came running into the zagu�n, among them a
stout mule-driver with an oil-lamp in his hand.

"What's the trouble?" he asked.

"These murderers are after my life," bellowed Tabuenca.

"Not a bit of it," replied Roberto in a calm voice. "The fact is, we
came here to ask this fellow a civil question, and without any reason
at all he began to yell and insult me."

"I'll smash your face for you!" interjected Tabuenca.

"Well suppose you try it, and don't stand there talking all day about
it!" Roberto taunted,

"Rascal! Coward!"

"It's you who are the coward. You've got as little guts as you have
nose."

Tabuenca spat out a series of insults and blasphemies, and turning
around, left the place.

"And who's going to pay me for this broken lantern?" asked the
mule-driver.

"How much is it worth?" asked Roberto.

"Three pesetas."

"Here they are."

"That Tabuenca is a loud-mouthed imbecile," said the mule-driver as he
took the money. "And what was it you gentlemen wished?"

"I wanted to ask about a woman that lived here some years ago; she was
an acrobat."

"Perhaps Don Alonso, Titiri, would know. If you'll be so kind, tell me
where you're going, and I'll have Titiri look you up."

"All right. You tell him that we'll be waiting for him at the San
Mill�n caf� at nine o'clock," said Roberto.

"And how are we going to recognize this fellow?" asked Manuel.

"That's so," said Roberto. "How are we going to know him?"

"Easy. He goes around nights through the caf�s with one of those
apparatuses that sings songs."

"You mean a phonograph?"

"That's it."

At this juncture an old woman appeared in the entrance, shouting:

"Who was the dirty son of a bitch that broke the lantern?"

"Shut up, shut up," answered the mule-driver. "It's all paid for."

"Come along!" said Manuel to Roberto.

They left the inn and strode off at a fast clip. They entered the San
Mill�n caf�. Roberto ordered supper. Manuel knew Tabuenca from having
seen him in the street, and as they ate he explained to Roberto just
what sort of fellow he was.

Tabuenca made his living through a number of inventions that he
himself constructed. When he saw that the public was tiring of one
thing, he would put another on the market, and so he managed to get
along. One of these contraptions was a wafer-mold wheel that revolved
around a circle of nails among which numbers were inscribed and
colours painted. This wheel the owner carried about in a pasteboard
box with two covers, which were divided into tiny squares with numbers
and colours corresponding to those placed around the nails, and here
the bets were laid. Tabuenca would carry the closed box in one hand
and a field table in the other. He would set up his outfit at some
street corner, give the wheel a turn and begin to mutter in his
whining voice;

"'Round goes the wheel. Place your bets, gentlemen.... Place your
bets. Number or colour ... number or colour.... Place your bets."

When enough bets were placed,--and this happened fairly
often,--Tabuenca would set the wheel spinning, at the same time
repeating his slogan: "'Round goes the wheel!" The marble would bounce
amidst the nails and even before it came to a stop the operator knew
the winning number and colour, crying: "Red seven...." or "the blue
five," and always he guessed right.

As Manuel spoke on, Roberto became pensive.

"Do you see?" he said, all at once, "these delays are what provoke a
fellow. You have a capital of will in bank-notes, gold-pieces, in
large denominations, and you need energy in c�ntimos, in small change.
It's the same with the intelligence; that's why so many intelligent
and energetic men of ambition do not succeed. They lack fractions, and
in general they also lack the talent to conceal their efforts. To be
able to be stupid on some occasions would probably be more useful than
the ability to be discreet on just as many other occasions."

Manuel, who did not understand the reason for this shower of words,
stared open-mouthed at Roberto, who sank again into his meditations.

For a long time both remained silent, when there came into the caf� a
tall, thin man with greyish hair and grey moustache.

"Can that be Titiri, Don Alonso?" asked Roberto.

"Maybe."

The gaunt fellow went from table to table, exhibiting a box and
announcing: "Here's a novelty. Here's somethin' new."

He was about to leave when Roberto called him.

"Do you live at Cuco's hostelry?" he asked.

"Yes, sir."

"Are you Don Alonso?"

"At your service."

"Well, we've been waiting for you. Take a seat; you'll have coffee
with us."

The man took a seat. His appearance was decidedly comical,--a blend of
humility, bragodoccio and sad arrogance. He gazed at the place that
Roberto had just abandoned, in which remained a scrap of roast meat.

"Pardon me," he said to Roberto. "You're not intending to finish that
scrap? No? Then.... with your permission--" and he took the plate, the
knife and the fork.

"I'll order another beefsteak for you," said Roberto.

"No, no. It's one of my whims. I imagine that this meat must be good.
Would you kindly let me have a slice of bread?" he added, turning to
Manuel. "Thanks, young man. Many thanks."

The man bolted the meat and bread in a trice.

"What? Is there a little wine left?" he asked, smiling.

"Yes," replied Manuel, emptying the bottle into the man's glass.

"All right," answered the man in ill-pronounced English as he gulped
it down. "Gentlemen! At your service. I believe you wished to ask me
something."

"Yes."

"At your service, then. My name is Alonso de Guzm�n Calder�n y T�llez.
This same fellow that's talking to you now has been director of a
circus in America; I've travelled through all the countries and sailed
over every sea in the world; at present I'm adrift in a violent
tempest; at night I go from caf� to caf� with this phonograph, and the
next morning I carry around one of these betting apparatuses that
consists of an _Infiel_[1] Tower with a spiral. Underneath the
tower there's a space with a spring that shoots a little bone ball up
the spiral, and then the bone falls upon a board perforated with holes
and painted in different colours. That is my livelihood. I! Director
of an equestrian circus! This is what I've descended to; an assistant
to Tabuenca. What things come to pass in this world!"

[Footnote 1: i.e. Faithless. A pun on Eiffel.]

"I should like to ask you," interrupted Roberto, "if during your
residence in Cuco's hostelry you ever made the acquaintance of a
certain Rosita Buenavida, a circus acrobat."

"Rosita Buenavida! You say that her name was Rosita Buenavida?... No,
I don't recall.... I did have a Rosita in my company; but her name
wasn't Buenavida (i. e., Goodlife); she'd have been better named
Evil-life and evil habits, too."

"Perhaps she changed her name," said Roberto impatiently. "What age
was the Rosita that you knew?"

"Well, I'll tell you; I was in Paris in '68; had a contract with the
Empress Circus. At that time I was a contortionist and they called me
the Snake-Man; then I became an equilibrist and adopted the name of
Don Alonso. Alonso is my name. After four months of that P�rez and
I--P�rez was the greatest gymnast in the world--went to America, and
two or three years later we met Rosita, who must have been about
twenty-five or thirty at that time."

"So that the Rosita you're talking about should be sixty-odd years old
today," computed Roberto. "The one I'm looking for can't be more than
thirty at most."

"Then she's not the one. Caramba, how sorry I am!" murmured Don
Alonso, seizing the glass of coffee and milk and raising it to his
lips as if he feared it were going to be wrested from him. "And what a
sweet little girl she was! She had eyes as green as a cat's. Oh, she
was a pretty chit, a peach."

Roberto had sunk into meditation; Don Alonso continued his chatter,
turning to Manuel:

"There's no life like a circus artist's," he exclaimed. "I don't know
what your profession is, and I don't want to disparage it; but if
you're looking for art.... Ah, Paris, the Empress Circus,--I'll never
forget them! Of course, P�rez and I had luck; we created a furore
there, and I needn't mention what that means. Oh, that was the
life.... Nights, after our performance, we'd get a note: 'Will be
waiting for you at such and such a caf�.' We'd go there and find one
of your high-life women, a whimsical creature who'd invite a fellow to
supper... and to all the rest. But other gymnasts came to the Empress
Circus; the novelty of our act wore off, and the impresario, a Yankee
who owned several companies, asked P�rez and me if we wanted to go to
Cuba. 'Right ahead,' said I. 'All right.'"

"Have you been in Cuba?" asked Roberto, roused from his abstraction.

"I've been in so many places!" replied the Snake-Man. "We embarked at
Havre," continued Don Alonso, "on a vessel called the Navarre, and we
were in Havana for about eight months; while we were performing there
we struck it big, P�rez and I, and won twenty thousand gold pesos in
the lottery."

"Twenty thousand duros!" exclaimed Manuel.

"Right-o! The next week we had lost it all, and P�rez and I were left
without a centavo. A few days we lived on guava-fruit and yam, until
we fell in with some gymnasts on the Havana wharf who were down on
their uppers. We joined them. They weren't at all bad performers;
among them were acrobats, clowns, pantominists, bar artists, and a
French ecuy�re; we formed a company and made a tour through the island
towns; and some magnificent tour that was. How they did welcome us and
treat us in that country! 'Come right in, friend, and have a glass.'
'Many thanks.' 'The gentleman mustn't displease me; let's have a drink
in that cantine, eh? ...' And the drink flowed to your heart's
content. As I was the only one in the troupe that knew how to
figure--for I've had an education," interposed Don Alonso, "and my
father was a soldier--they named me director. In one of the towns I
reinforced the company with a ballerina and a strong man. The dancer's
name was Rosita Monta��s; she's the one I thought of when you
mentioned the Rosita you were looking for. This Monta��s was Spanish
and had married the strong man, an Italian whose real name was
Napoleon Pitti. The couple had with them as secretary a
Galician,--very intelligent chap, but as an artist, detestable. And
between Rosita and him they deceived Hercules. This wasn't very hard,
for Napoleon was one of the ugliest men I've ever laid eyes on. As for
strength, there was never his match; he had a back as solid as a front
wall; his ears were flattened from blows got in prize-fighting; he was
a barbarian for fair, and you know what they say: 'Tell a man by his
talk and a bullock by his horn.' And believe me, this little Galician
chap led Hercules by the horn, all right. The cursed smarty fooled me,
too, though not as he did Hercules, for I've always been a bachelor,
thank the Lord, partly through fear and partly through design. Nor
have I ever lacked women," added Don Alonso, boastfully.

"What was I saying, now? Oh, yes. I didn't know any English; the
damned lingo isn't very hard, but I simply couldn't get it into my
head. So I needed an interpreter, and I appointed the Galician as
secretary of the company and ticket-seller. We had been together for
almost a year when we reached an English island near Jamaica. The
governor of the island, the queerest Englishman there ever was, with a
pair of side-whiskers that looked like flames leaping from his cheeks,
summoned me as soon as we landed. As there was no site for our
performances, he made alterations in the municipal school, which was a
regular palace; he ordered all the partitions removed and the ring and
tiers of seats installed. Only the negroes of the town went to that
school, and what need had those creatures of learning to read and
write?

"We stayed there a month, and despite the fact that we had rent free
and that we played to full houses every afternoon, and that we had
practically no expenses, we didn't make any profit. 'How can it be?' I
kept asking myself.--A mystery."

"And what was the reason?" asked Manuel.

"I'm coming to that. First I must explain that the governor with the
flaming side-whiskers had fallen in love with Rosita, and without
beating around the bush he had taken her off to his palace. Poor
Hercules roared and crushed the dishes with his fingers, drowning his
grief and his rage by committing all sorts of barbarities.

"The governor, a generous sort, invited the Galician and me to his
residence, and there, in a garden of cedars and palms, we would draw
up the program of the performances, and amuse ourselves at
target-practice while we smoked the finest tobacco and drank glass after
glass of rum. We paid court to Rosita and she'd laugh like a madwoman,
and dance the tango, the _cachucha_ and the _vito_, and she'd fail the
Englishman an awful number of times. One day the governor, who treated
me as a friend, said to me: 'That secretary of yours is robbing you.'
'I think he is,' I answered. 'Tonight you'll have the proof.'

"We finished the performance; I went off home, had supper and was
about to go to bed when a little negro servant comes in and tells me
to follow him; all right; I follow; we both leave; we draw near the
circus house, and in a nearby saloon I see the governor and the town
chief of police. It was a very beautiful moonlit night, and there was
no light in the saloon; we wait and wait, and soon a figure appears,
and steals in through a window of the schoolhouse. '_Forwer_'
whispered the governor. That means Forward," interpreted Don Alonso.

"The three of us followed and entered noiselessly through the same
window; on tiptoe we reached the entrance to the former school, which
served as the circus vestibule and contained the ticket-office. We see
the secretary with a lantern in his hand going through the money-box.
'Surrender in the name of the authorities!' shouted the governor, and
with the revolver that he held in his hand he fired a shot into the
air. The secretary was paralyzed at the sight of us; then the governor
aimed the gun at the fellow's chest and fired again point blank; and
the man wavered, turned convulsively in the air and fell dead.

"The governor was jealous and the truth is that Rosita was in love
with the secretary. I never in my life saw grief as great as that
woman's when she found her lover dead. She wept and dragged along
after him, uttering wails that simply tore your soul in two. Napoleon,
too, wept.

"We buried the secretary and four or five days later the chief of
police of the island informed us that the school could no longer serve
as a circus and that we'd have to clear out. We obeyed the order, for
there was no way out of it, and for another couple of years we
wandered from town to town through Central America, Yucatan, Mexico,
until we struck Tampico, where the company disbanded. As there was no
outlook for us there, P�rez and I took a vessel for New Orleans."

"Beautiful town, eh?" said Roberto.

"Beautiful. Have you been there?"

"Yes."

"Man, how happy I am to hear it!"

"What a river, eh?"

"An ocean! Well, to continue my story. The first time we performed in
that city, gentlemen, what a success! The circus was higher than a
church; I said to the carpenter; 'Place our trapeze as high as
possible,' and after giving him these orders I went off for a bite.

"During our absence the impresario happened along and asked: 'Are
those Spanish gymnasts going to perform at such a height?' 'That's
what they said,' answered the carpenter. 'Let them know, then, that I
don't want to be responsible for such barbarity.'

"P�rez and I were in the hotel, when we received a message calling us
to the circus at once."

"'What can it be?' my companion asked me. 'You'll see,' I told him.
'They're going to demand that we lower the trapeze.'

"And so it was. P�rez and I go to the circus and we see the
impresario. That was what he requested.

"'Nothing doing,' I told him. 'Not even if the President of the
Republic of the United States himself comes here, together with his
esteemed mother. I won't lower the trapeze an inch.' 'Then you'll be
compelled to.' 'We'll see.' The impresario summoned a policeman; I
showed the fellow my contract, and he sided with me; he told me that
my companion and I had a perfect right to break our necks...."

"What a country!" murmured Roberto, ironically.

"You're right," agreed Don Alonso in all seriousness. "What a country.
That's what you call progress!

"That night, in the circus, before we went on, P�rez and I listened to
the comments of the public. 'What? Are these Spaniards going to
perform at such an altitude?' the people were asking each other.
'They'll kill themselves.' And we listened calmly, all the time
smiling.

"We were about to enter the ring, when along comes a fellow with
sailor's chinwhiskers wearing a flat-brimmed high hat and a carrick,
and in a twanging voice he tells us that we're in danger of having a
terrible accident performing 'way up there, and that, if we wish, we
can take out life insurance. All we'd have to do is to sign a few
papers that he had in his hand. Lord! I nearly died. I felt like
choking the fellow.

"Trembling and screwing up our courage, P�rez and I entered the ring.
We had to put on a little rouge. We wore a blue costume decorated with
silver stars,--a reference to the United States flag; we saluted and
then, up the rope.

"At first I thought that I was going to slip; my head was going
'round, my ears were humming; but with the first applause I forgot
everything, and P�rez and I performed the most difficult feats with
most admirable precision. The public applauded wildly. What days those
were!"

And the old gymnast smiled; then he made a bitter grimace; his eyes
grew moist; he blinked so as to dry a tear that at last escaped and
coursed down his earth-coloured cheek.

"I'm an old fool; but I can't help it," Don Alonso murmured in
explanation of his weakness.

"And did you stay in New Orleans?" asked Roberto.

"P�rez and I signed a contract there," replied Don Alonso, "with a big
circus syndicate of New York that had about twenty or thirty companies
touring all America. All of us gymnasts, ballet-dancers, ecuy�res,
acrobats, pantominists, clowns, contortionists, and strong men
travelled in a special train.... The majority were Italians and
Frenchmen."

"Were there good-looking women, eh?" asked Manuel.

"Uf! ... Like this ..." replied Don Alonso, bringing his fingers all
together. "Women with such muscles! ... There was no other life
anything like it," he added, reverting to his melancholy theme. "You
had all the money and women and clothes you wanted.... And above all,
glory, applause...."

And the gymnast went into a trance of enthusiasm, staring rigidly at a
fixed point.

Roberto and Manuel gazed at him in curiosity.

"And Rosita,--didn't you ever see her again?" asked Roberto.

"No. They told me that she had got a divorce from Napoleon so that she
could marry again, in Boston, some millionaire from the West. Ah,
women.... Who can trust them? ... But gentlemen, it's already eleven.
Pardon me; I'll have to be going. Thanks ever so much!" murmured Don
Alonso, seizing Roberto and Manuel by the hands and pressing them
effusively. "We'll meet again, won't we?"

"Oh, yes, we'll see each other," replied Roberto.

Don Alonso picked up his phonograph and wound in and out among the
tables, repeating his phrase: "Novelty! Something new!" Then, after
having saluted Roberto and Manuel once more, he disappeared.

"Nothing. I can't discover a thing," grumbled Roberto. "Good-bye. See
you again."

Manuel was left alone, and musing upon Don Alonso's tales and upon the
mystery surrounding Roberto, he returned to the Corral�n and went to
bed.




CHAPTER VII

  The Kermesse on Pasi�n Street--"The Dude"--A Caf� Chantant.


Leandro eagerly awaited the kermesse that was to take place on Pasi�n
street. In former years he had accompanied Milagros to the nocturnal
fair of San Antonio and to those of the Prado; he had danced with her,
treated her to buns, presented her with a pot of sweet basil; but this
summer the proof-reader's family seemed very much determined upon
keeping Milagros away from Leandro. He had learned that his sweetheart
and her mother were thinking of going to the kermesse, so he procured
a pair of tickets and told Manuel that they two would attend.

So it happened. They went, on a terribly hot August night; a dense,
turbid vapour filled all the streets in the vicinity of the Rastro,
which were decorated and illuminated with Venetian lanterns.

The festival was celebrated upon a large vacant lot on Pasi�n street.
Leandro and Manuel entered as the band from the Orphan Asylum was
playing a _habanera_. The lot, aglare with arc-lights, was
bedecked with ribbons, gauze and artificial flowers that radiated from
a pole in the centre to the boundaries of the enclosure. Before the
entrance door there was a tiny wooden booth adorned with red and
yellow percale and a number of Spanish flags; this was the raffle
stand.

Leandro and Manuel took a seat in a corner and waited. The
proof-reader and his family did not arrive until after ten; Milagros
looked very pretty that night; she had on a light costume with blue
figuring, a kerchief of black crape and white slippers. She wore her
gown somewhat decollet�, as far as the smooth, round beginnings of her
throat.

At this moment the band from the Orphan Asylum blared forth the
schottisch called _Los Cocineros_ (The Cooks). Leandro, stirred
by the strains, invited Milagros out for a dance, but the maiden made
a slight gesture of annoyance.

"You might soil my new costume," she murmured, and put her kerchief
around her waist.

"If you dance with another fellow he'll soil it, too," replied Leandro
in all humility.

Milagros did not heed his words; she danced with her skirt gathered in
one hand, answering him in peevish monosyllables.

The schottisch over, Leandro invited the family to refreshments. To
the right of the entrance there were two decorated staircases, which
led to another lot about six or seven metres above the grounds where
the dance was being held. On one of the stairways, which were both
aglow with Spanish flags, was a signpost reading "Refreshments:
Entrance" upon the other, "Refreshments: Exit."

They all went upstairs. The refreshment-parlour was a spacious place,
with trees and illumination of electric globes that hung from thick
cables. Seated at the tables was a motley crowd, speaking at the top
of their voices, clapping their hands and laughing.

They had to wait a long while before a waiter brought them their beer;
Milagros ordered an ice, and as there were none, she would have
nothing.

She sat there thus, without opening her mouth, considering herself
grievously offended, until she met two girls from her shop and joined
them, whereupon her displeasure vanished in a trice. Leandro, at the
first opportunity, left the proof-reader and, rejoining Manuel, set
off in quest of his sweetheart. In the lot next to the entrance, where
the dancing was going on, couples resting between numbers strolled
around in leisurely fashion. Milagros and her two friends, arms
linked, came by in jovial mood, followed closely by three men. One of
them was a rough-looking youth, tall, with fair moustache; the other a
stupid fellow, of ordinary appearance, with dyed moustache,
shirt-front and fingers sparkling with diamonds; the third was a knave
with, cheek-whiskers, half gipsy and half cattle-dealer, with every
ear mark of the most dangerous mountebank.

Leandro, noticing the manoeuvres of the masculine trio, thrust himself
in between the maidens and their gallants, and turning to the men
impertinently asked:

"What's up?"

The trio pretended not to understand and lagged behind.

"Who are they?" asked Manuel.

"One of them's Lechuguino (the dude)," answered Leandro in a loud
voice, so that his sweetheart should hear. "He's at least fifty, and
he comes around here trying to play the dashing young blade; that runt
with the dyed moustache is Pepe el Federal (the Federalist), and the
other is Eusebio el Carnicero (the Butcher), a fellow who owns quite a
number of questionable horses."

Leandro's blustering outburst appealed to one of the maidens, who
turned to look at the youth and smiled at him; but Milagros was not in
the least affected, and looking back, she repeatedly sought the group
of three men with her glance.

At this juncture there appeared the fellow whom Leandro had designated
with the sobriquet of Lechuguino, in company of the proof-reader and
his wife. The three girls approached them, and Lechuguino invited
Milagros to dance. Leandro glanced in anguish at his sweetheart; she,
however, whirled off heedlessly. The band was playing the _pas
double _from the _Drummer of the Grenadiers_. Lechuguino was
an expert dancer; he swept his partner along as if she were a feather
and as he spoke, brought his lips so close to hers that it seemed as
if he were kissing her.

Leandro was at an utter loss and suffered agonies; he could not make
up his mind to leave. The dance came to an end and Lechuguino
accompanied Milagros to the place where her mother was sitting.


"Come. Let's be going!" said Leandro to Manuel. "If we don't, I'm sure
to do something rash."

They escaped from the fair and entered a caf� chantant on Encomienda
Street. It was deserted. Two girls were dancing on a platform; one
dressed like a _maja_, the other, like a _man�lo_.

Leandro, absorbed in his thoughts, said nothing; Manuel was very
sleepy.

"Let's get out of here," muttered Leandro after a short while. "This
is too gloomy."

They walked to the Plaza del Progreso, Leandro with head bowed, as
pensive as ever, and Manuel so sleepy that he could hardly stand.

"Over at the Marina caf�," suggested Leandro, "there must be a high
old time."

"It would be better to go home," answered Manuel.

Leandro, without listening to his companion, walked to the Puerta del
Sol, and the two very silently turned into Montera Street and around
the corner of Jardines. It was past one. As the pair walked on,
prostitutes in their gay attire accosted them from the doorways in
which they lurked, but looking into Leandro's grim countenance and
Manuel's poverty-stricken features the girls let them walk on,
following them with a gibe at their seriousness.

Midway up the narrow, gloomy street shone a red lamp, which
illuminated the squalid front of the Marina caf�.

Leandro shoved the door open and they went inside. At one end the
platform, with four or five mirrors, glittered dazzlingly; the floor
was so tightly jammed with rows of tables thrust against either wall
that only a narrow passage was left in the middle.

Leandro and Manuel found a seat. Manuel rested his forehead against
his palm and was soon asleep; Leandro beckoned to one of the two
singers, who were gaily dressed and were conversing with some fat
women, and the two singers sat down at his table.

"What'll you have?" asked Leandro.

"Canary-seed for me," answered one of them,--a slender, nervous type
with small eyes that were ringed with cosmetics.

"And what's your name?"

"Mine? Mar�a la Chivato,"

"And that girl's?"

"La Tarugo."

Tarugo, who was a buxom, gipsy-like Malague�a, sat down beside
Leandro, and they started a conversation in hushed tones.

The waiter approached.

"Let's have four whiskies," ordered Chivato. "For this chap is going
to drink, too," she added, turning to Manuel and seizing his arm.
"Hey, you there, lad!"

"Eh!" exclaimed the boy, waking up without a notion of his
whereabouts. "What do you want?"

Chivato burst into laughter.

"Wake up, man, you'll lose your express! Did you come in this
afternoon on the mixed train?"

"I came on the ..." and Manuel let loose a stream of obscenity.

Then, in very ugly humour, he began to stare in every direction,
making all manner of efforts not to fall asleep.

At a table set aside a man who looked like a horse-dealer was
discussing the _flamenco_ song and dance with a cross-eyed fellow
bearing every appearance of an assassin.

"There's no more artists," the horse-dealer was saying. "Once upon a
time folks came here to see Pinto, Canito, the Feos, the
Macarronas.... Now what? Now, nothing. Pullets in vinegar."

"That's what," agreed the cross-eyed assassin, very seriously.

"That's the musician," said Chivato, pointing to the latter.

The two singers did not remain very long at the table with Leandro and
Manuel. The cross-eyed fellow was already on the platform; he began to
tune the guitar, and six women sat down around him in a row, beginning
to clap hands in time to the music; Tarugo rose from her seat and
started a side dance, and was soon wiggling her hips convulsively; the
singer commenced to gargarize softly; at intervals he would be silent
and then nothing would be heard save the snapping of Tarugo's fingers
and the clatter of her heels, which played the counterpoint.

After the Malaga singer had finished, a gipsy youth with a chocolate
complexion got up and executed a tango and a negro dance; he twisted
himself in and out, thrust his abdomen forward and his arms back. He
wound up with effeminate undulations of his hips and a most
complicated intertwining of arms and legs.

"That's what you call art!" commended! the horse-dealer.

"See here, I'm going," grumbled Manuel.

"Wait a minute; we'll have another drink."

"No. I'm going."

"All right; let's come. Too bad!"

At that moment a corpulent singer with a powerful neck, and the
cross-eyed guitarist with the assassin's face, came forward to the
public, and while the one strummed the guitar, suddenly muting the
strings by placing his hands over them, the other, his face flushed,
the veins of his neck standing out tensely, and his eyes bulging from
their sockets, poured forth a guttural wail that was doubtless of most
difficult execution, for it reddened him to the very forehead.




CHAPTER VIII

  Leandro's Irresolution--In Blasa's Tavern--The Man With The Three
    Cards--The Duel With Valencia.


Some nights Manuel would hear Leandro tossing about in his bed and
heaving sighs as deep as a bull's roar.

"Things are going rotten with him," thought Manuel.

The break between Milagros and Leandro was definitive. Lechuguino, on
the other hand, was gaining ground: he had won over the girl's mother,
would treat the proof-reader and wait for Milagros where she worked,
accompanying her home.

One day, toward dusk, Manuel saw the pair near the foot of Embajadores
Street; Lechuguino minced along with his cloak thrown back across his
shoulder; she was huddled in her mantle; he was talking to her and she
was laughing.

"What's Leandro going to do when he finds out?" Manuel asked himself.
"No, I'm not going to tell him. Some witch of the neighbourhood will
see to it that he learns soon enough."

And thus it came about; before a month had passed, everybody in the
house knew that Milagros and Lechuguino were keeping company, that he
had given up the gay life in the dives of the city and was considering
the continuation of his father's business,--the sale of construction
material; he was going to settle down and lead the life of a
respectable member of the community.

While Leandro would be away working in the shoeshop, Lechuguino would
visit the proof-reader's family; he now saw Milagros with the full
consent of her parents.

Leandro was, or pretended to be, the only person unaware of Milagros'
new beau. Some mornings as the boy passed Se�or Zurro's apartment on
the way down to the patio, he would encounter Encarna, who, catching
sight of him, would ask maliciously after Milagros, or else sing him a
tango which began:

  _Of all the crazy deeds a man commits in his life,
     The craziest is taking to himself a wife.
       (De las grandes locuras que el hombre hace,
        No comete ninguna como casarse.)_

Whereupon she would specify the madness and entering into details,
would add at the top of her voice:

  _He's off to his office bright and early,
     While some neighbourhood swell stays at home with his girlie.
       (Y por la ma�ana el va a la oficina,
        y ella queda en casa con algun vecino que es persona
                fina.)_

Leandro's bitterness corroded the very depths of his soul, and however
much he tried to dominate his instincts, he could not succeed in
calming himself. One Saturday night, as they were walking homewards
along the Ronda, Leandro drew near to Manuel.

"Do you know whether Milagros talks to Lechuguino?"

"I?"

"Haven't you heard that they were going to get married?"

"Yes; so folks say."

"What would you do in my case?"

"I ... I'd find out."

"And suppose it proved to be true?"

Manuel was silent. They walked along without a word. Soon Leandro
carne to an abrupt stop and placed his hand upon Manuel's shoulder.

"Do you believe," he asked, "that if a woman deceives a man, he has
the right to kill her?"

"I don't believe he has," answered Manuel, staring into Leandro's
eyes.

"Well, if a man has the guts he does it whether he has a right to or
not.

"But, the deuce! Has Milagros deceived you? Were you married to her?
You've had a quarrel; that's all."

"I'll wind up by doing something desperate. Take my word for it,"
muttered Leandro.

Neither spoke. They entered La Corrala, climbed up the stairways and
walked into Leandro's house. They brought out supper, but Leandro
didn't eat; he drank three glasses of water in succession and went out
to the gallery.

Manuel was about to leave after supper, when he heard Leandro call him
several times.

"What do you want?"

"Come on, let's be going."

Manuel ran out to the balcony; Milagros and her mother, from their
door, were heaping insults upon Leandro.

"Outcast! Blackguard!" the proof-reader's wife was shouting. "If her
father were here you wouldn't talk like that."

"I would, too, even if her grandfather were here," exclaimed Leandro,
with a savage laugh. "Come on, let's be off," he added, turning to
Manuel. "I'm sick and tired of these whores."

They left the gallery and were soon out of El Corral�n.

"What was the matter?'" asked Manuel.

"Nothing. It's all over now," answered Leandro. "I went in and said to
her, nice enough, 'Listen Milagros, is it true that you're going to
marry Lechuguino?' 'Yes, it is true. Is it any business of yours?' she
says. 'Yes, it is,' I said to her. 'You know that I like you. Is it
because he's richer than me?' 'Even if he were poorer than a
church-mouse I'd marry him.' 'Bah!' 'You don't believe me?' 'All
right.' Finally I got sore and I told her for all I cared she might
marry a dog, and that she was a cheap street-walker.... It's all over
now. Well, so much the better. Now we know just where we stand. Where
shall we go? To Las Injurias again?"

"What for?"

"To see if that Valencia continues to put on airs when I'm around."

They crossed the wired-off surrounding path. Leandro, taking long
strides, was very soon in Las Injurias. Manuel could hardly keep up
with him.

They entered Blasa's tavern; the same men as on the previous night
were playing can� near the stove. Of the women, only La Paloma and La
Muerte were in. The latter, dead drunk, was asleep on the table. The
light fell full upon her face which was swollen with erisypelas and
covered with scabs; saliva drooled through the thick lips of her
half-opened mouth; her tow-like hair,--grey, filthy, matted,--stuck
out in tufts beneath the faded, greenish kerchief that was soiled with
scurf; despite the shouts and the disputes of the gamblers she did not
so much as blink; only from time to time she would give a prolonged
snore, which, at the start was sibilant, but ended in a rasping snort.
At her side Paloma, huddled on the floor near Valencia, held a tot of
three or four in her arms,--a pale, delicate creature who blinked
incessantly,--to whom she was giving whisky from a glass.

A gaunt, weak fellow wearing a small cap with a gilded number and a
blue smock, passed moodily up and down before the counter; his arms
hung beside his body as if they did not belong to him, and his legs
were bent. Whenever it occurred to him, he took a sip from his glass;
he wiped his lips with the back of his hand and would resume his
languid pacing to and fro. He was the brother of the woman who owned
the tavern.

Leandro and Manuel took a seat at the same table where the gamblers
were playing. Leandro ordered wine, emptied a deep glass at a single
gulp and heaved a few sighs.

"Christ!" muttered Leandro half under his breath. "Never let yourself
go wild over a woman. The best of them is as poisonous as a toad."

Then he seemed to calm down. He gazed at the drawings scratched on the
top of the table: there were hearts pierced by arrows, the names of
women; he drew a knife from his pocket and began to cut letters into
the wood.

When he wearied of this he invited one of the gamblers to drink with
him.

"Thanks, friend," replied the gambler. "I'm playing."

"All right, leave the game. If you don't want to, nobody'll force you.
Doesn't anybody want to drink with me? My treat."

"I'll have one," said a tall, bent fellow with a sickly air, who was
called El Pastiri. He arose and came over to Leandro.

Leandro ordered more wine and amused himself by laughing loudly when
any one lost and in betting against Valencia.

Pastiri took advantage of the opportunity to empty one glass after the
other. He was a sot, a croney of Tabuenca's and likewise dedicated
himself to the deception of the unwary with ball-and-number tricks.
Manuel knew him from having seen him often on la Ribera de Curtidores.
He used to ply his trade in the suburbs, playing at three cards. He
would place three cards upon a little table; one of these he would
show, then slowly he would change the position of the other two,
without touching the card he had shown; he would then place a little
stick across the three cards and wager that nobody could pick out the
one he had let them see. And so well was the game prepared that the
card was never picked.

Pastiri had another trick on the same order, worked with three men
from a game of checkers; underneath one of the men he would place a
tiny ball of paper or a crumb of bread and then bet that nobody could
tell under which of the three ball or crumb was to be found. If, by
accident, any one chanced upon the right man, Pastiri would conceal
the crumb in his finger-nail as he turned the man up.

That night Pastiri was saturated with alcohol and had lost all power
of speech.

Manuel, who had drunk a little too much, was beginning to feel sick
and considered how he might manage to make his escape; but by the time
he had made up his mind the tavern-keeper's brother was already
locking the door.

Before he had quite done so there came in, through the space that was
still left open, an under-grown fellow, shaved, dressed in black, with
a visored woollen cap, curly hair and the repellant appearance of a
hermaphrodite. He greeted Leandro affectionately. He was a lacemaker
from Uncle Rilo's house, of dubious repute and called Besugito
(sea-bream) because his face suggested a fish; by way of more cruel
sobriquet they had christened him the "Barrack hack."

The lacemaker took a sip from a glass, standing, and began to talk in
a thick voice; yet it was a feminine voice, unctuous, disagreeable,
and he emphasized his words with mimicked wonder, fright, and other
mannerisms.

Nobody was bothered by his loquacity. Some fine day when they least
expected, he informed them, the entire district of Las Injurias was
going to be buried beneath the ruins of the Gas House.

"As far as I'm concerned," he went on, "this entire hollow ought to be
filled in with earth. Of course, I'd feel sorry, for I have some good
friends in this section."

"Ay! Pass!" said one of the gamblers.

"Yes, I'd be sorry," continued Besuguito, heedless of the
interruption. "But the truth is that it would be a small loss, for, as
Angelillo, the district watchman says, nobody lives here except
outcasts, pickpockets and prostitutes."

"Shut up, you 'fairy!' You barrack hack!" shouted the proprietress.
"This district is as good as yours."

"You're right, there," replied Besuguito, "for you ought to see the
Portillo de Embajadores and las Pe�uelas. I tell you. Why, the
watchman can't get them to shut their doors at night. He closes them
and the neighbours open them again. Because they're almost all
denizens of the underworld. And they do give me such frights...."

An uproar greeted the frights of Besuguito, who continued unabashed
his meaningless, repetitious chatter, which was adorned with all
manner of notions and involutions. Manuel rested an arm upon the
table, and with his cheek upon it, he fell asleep.

"Hey you! Why aren't you drinking, Pastiri?" asked Leandro. "Do you
mean to offend me? Me?"

"No, friend, I simply can't get any more down," answered the
card-sharper in his insolent voice, raising his open hand to his
throat. Then, in a voice that seemed to come from a broken organ, he
shouted:

"Paloma!"

"Who's calling that woman?" demanded Valencia immediately, glaring at
the group of gamblers.

"I," answered El Pastiri. "I want Paloma over here."

"Ah!... You? Well, there's nothing doing," declared Valencia.

"I said I want Paloma over here," repeated Pastiri, without looking at
the bully.

The latter pretended not to have heard. The card-sharper, provoked by
this discourtesy, got up and, slapping Valencia's sleeve with the back
of his hand, he repeated his words, dwelling upon every syllable:

"I said that I wanted Paloma, and that these friends of mine want to
talk with the lady."

"And I tell you that there's nothing doing," answered the other.

"Those gentlemen want to talk with her."

"All right.... Then let them ask my permission."

Pastiri thrust his face into the bully's, and looking him straight in
the eye, croaked:

"Do you realize, Valencia, that you're getting altogether too damned
high and mighty?"

"You don't say!" sneered Valencia, calmly continuing his game.

"Do you know that I'm going to let you have a couple with my fist?"

"You don't say!"

Pastiri drew back with drunken awkwardness and began to hunt in the
inside pocket of his coat for his knife, amidst the derisive laughter
of the bystanders. Then all at once, with a sudden resolve, Leandro
jumped to his feet, his face as red as flame; he seized Valencia by
the lapel of his coat, gave him a rude tug and sent him smashing
against the wall.

The gamblers rushed into the fray; the table was overturned and there
was a pandemonium of cries and curses. Manuel awoke with a frightened
start. He found himself in the midst of an awful row; most of the
gamblers, with the tavern-owner's brother at their head, wanted to
throw Leandro out, but the raging youth, backed against the counter,
was kicking off anybody that approached him.

"Leave us alone!" shouted Valencia, his lips slavering as he tried to
work himself free of the men who were holding him.

"Yes, leave them alone," said one of the gamblers.

"I'll kill the first guy that touches me," warned El Valencia,
displaying a long knife with black blades.

"That's the stuff," commented Leandro mockingly. "Let's see who are
the red-blooded men."

"Ol�!" shouted Pastiri enthusiastically, in his husky voice.

Leandro drew from the inside pocket of his sack-coat a long, narrow
knife; the onlookers retreated to the walls so as to leave plenty of
room for the duellists. Paloma began to bawl:

"You'll get killed! You'll get killed, I'm telling you!"

"Take that woman away," yelled Valencia in a tragic voice: "Ea!" he
added, cleaving the air with his knife. "Now let's see who are the men
with guts!"

The two rivals advanced to the centre of the tavern, glaring furiously
at each other. The spectators were enthralled by mingled interest and
horror.

Valencia was the first to attack; he bent forward as if to seek out
where to strike his opponent; he crouched, aimed at the groin and
lunged forward upon Leandro; but seeing that Leandro awaited him
calmly without retreating, he rapidly recoiled. Then he resumed his
false attacks, trying to surprise his adversary with these feints,
threatening his stomach yet all the while aiming to stab him in the
face; but before the rigid arm of Leandro, who seemed to be sparing
every motion until he should strike a sure blow, the bully grew
disconcerted and once again drew back. Then Leandro advanced. The
youth came on with such sangfroid that he struck terror into his
opponent's heart; his face bespoke his determination to transfix
Valencia. An oppressive silence weighed upon the tavern; only the
sounds of Paloma's convulsive sobs were heard from the adjoining room.

Valencia, divining Leandro's resolve, grew so pale that his face
turned a sickly blue, his eyes distended and his teeth began to
chatter. At Leandro's first lunge he retreated, but remained on guard;
then his fear overcame him and abandoning all thought of attack he
took to flight, knocking over the chairs. Leandro, blind, smiling
cruelly, gave implacable pursuit.

It was a sad, painful sight; all the partizans of the bully began to
eye him with scorn.

"Now, you yellow-liver, you show the white feather!" shouted Pastiri.
"You're flitting about like a grasshopper. Off with you, my boy!
You're in for it! If you don't get out right away you'll be feeling a
palm's length of steel in your ribs!"

One of Leandro's thrusts ripped the bully's jacket.

The thug, now possessed of the wildest panic, dashed behind the
counter; his popping eyes reflected mad terror.

Leandro, insolently scornful, stood rigidly in the middle of the
tavern; pulling the springs of his knife, he closed it. A murmur of
admiration arose from the spectators.

Valencia uttered a cry of pain, as if he had been wounded; his honour,
his repute as a bold man, had suffered a downfall. Desperately he made
his way to the door of the back room, and looked at the panting
proprietress. She must have understood him, for she passed him a key
and Valencia sneaked out. But soon the door of the back room opened
and the bully stood there anew; brandishing his long knife by the
point he threw it furiously at Leandro's face. The weapon whizzed
through the air like a terrible arrow and pierced the wall, where it
stuck, quivering.

At once Leandro sprang up, but Valencia had disappeared. Then, having
recovered from the surprise, the youth calmly dislodged the knife,
closed it and handed it to the tavern-keeper.

"When a fellow don't know how to use these things," he said,
petulantly, "he ought to keep away from them. Tell that gentleman so
when you next see him."

The proprietress answered with a grunt, and Leandro sat down to
receive general congratulations upon his courage and his coolness;
everybody wanted to treat him.

"This Valencia was beginning to make too much trouble, anyway," said
one of them. "Did as he pleased every night and he got away with it
because it was Valencia; but he was getting too darned fresh."

"That's what," replied another of the players, a grim old jailbird who
had escaped from the Ceuta penitentiary and who looked just like a
fox. "When a guy has the nerve, he rakes in all the dough," and he
made a gesture of scooping up all the coins on the table in his
fingers--"and he skips."

"But this Valencia is a coward," said Pastiri in his thick voice. "A
big mouth with a bark worse than his bite and not worth a slap."

"He was on his guard right away. In case of accident!" replied
Besuguito in his queer voice, imitating the posture of one who is
about to attack with a knife.

"I tell you," exclaimed El Pastiri, "he's a booby, and he's scared so
stiff he can't stand."

"Yes, but he answered every thrust, just the same," added the
lace-maker.

"Yah! Did you see him?"

"Certainly."

"Bah, you must be soused to the gills!"

"You only wish you were as sober as I. Bah!"

"What? You're so full you can't talk!"

"Go on; shut up. You're so drunk you can't stand; I tell you, if you
run afoul of this guy"--and Besuguito pointed to Leandro--"you're in
for a bad time."

"Hell, no!"

"That's my opinion, anyhow."

"You don't have any opinion here, or anything like it," exclaimed
Leandro. "You're going to clear out and shut up. Valencia's liver is
whiter than paper; it's as Pastiri says. Brave enough when it comes to
exploiting boobs like you and the other tramps and low lives,... but
when he bucks up against a chap that's all there, hey? Bah! He's a
white-livered wretch, that's what."

"True," assented all.

"And maybe we won't let him hear a few things," said the escaped
convict, "if he has the nerve to return here for his share of the
winnings."

"I should say!" exclaimed Pastiri.

"Very well, gentlemen, it's my treat now," said Leandro, "for I've got
the money and I happen to feel like it." He fished out a couple of
coins from his pocket and slapped them down on the table. "Lady, let's
have something to drink."

"Right away."

"Manuel! Manuel!" shouted Leandro several times. "Where in thunder has
that kid disappeared?"

Manuel, following the example of the bully, had made his escape by the
back door.




CHAPTER IX

  An Unlikely Tale--Manuel's Sisters--Life's Baffling Problems.


It was already the beginning of autumn; Leandro, on the advice of
Se�or Ignacio, was living with his aunt on Aguila street; Milagros
continued keeping company with Lechuguino. Manuel gave up going with
Vidal and Bizco on their skirmishes and joined the company of
Rebolledo and the two Aristas.

The elder, Arist�n, entertained him and frightened him out of his wits
with lugubrious tales of cemeteries and ghosts; the little Aristas
continued his gymnastic exercises; he had constructed a springboard by
placing a plank upon a heap of sand and there he practised his
death-defying leaps.

One day Alonso, Tabuenca's aid, appeared in the Corral�n accompanied
by a woman and a little girl.

The woman seemed old and weary; the tot was long and thin and pale.
Don Alonso found them a place in a dingy corner of the small patio.

They brought with them a small bundle of clothes, a dirty poodle with
a very intelligent look, and a monkey tied to a chain; in a short
while they had to sell the monkey to some gipsies that lived in the
Quinta de Goya.

Don Alonso called Manuel and said to him:

"Run off and hunt up Don Roberto, and tell him that there's a woman
here named Rosa, and that she is or has been a circus acrobat; she
must be the one he's looking for."

At once Manuel went off to the house; Roberto had left the place and
Manuel did not know his whereabouts.

Don Alonso carne frequently to the Corral�n and conversed with the
mother and the girl. On the window-sill of their tiny home the mother
and the daughter had a little box with a sprig of mint planted in it;
although they watered it every morning, it scarcely grew, for there
was no sun. One day the woman and child disappeared together with
their pretty poodle; they left nothing in their quarters except a
worn-out, broken tambourine.

Don Alonso got into the habit of visiting the Corral�n; he would
exchange a few words with Rebolledo, he of the modernist barber-shop
who chattered away, and would witness the gymnastic prowess of
Aristas. One afternoon the boy's mother asked the former Snake-Man
whether the child showed any real aptitude.

Don Alonso grew serious and subjected the boy's performance to a
searching examination, so that he could form an estimate of the
youngster's abilities and give him a little useful advice.

It was really curious to see the former circus-player give his orders;
he went through them with august seriousness.

"One, two, three.... Hop-la!... Once more, now. At position. The knees
near the head ... nails down ... One, two ... one, two.... Hop-la!"

Don Alonso was not at all displeased with little Aristas' showing, but
he emphasized the unavoidable necessity of continual hard practise.

"Whoever wants something has to pay the price, my little fellow," he
said. "And the profession of gymnast isn't within everybody's reach."

To the mother he confided that her son might some day be a fine circus
artist.

Then Don Alonso, finding himself before a numerous public, would begin
to talk volubly of the United States, of Mexico, and the South
American republics.

"Why don't you tell us stories of the countries you've been to?" asked
Perico Rebolledo.

"No, not now; I have to go out with the _Infiel_ Tower."

"Ah! Go on, tell us," they would all implore.

Don Alonso pretended to be importuned by the request; but when he got
going, he spun one yarn after the other in such numbers that they
almost had to beg him to stop.

"And didn't you ever see in those countries men who had been killed by
lions?" asked Arist�n.

"No."

"Then there aren't any lions?"

"Lions in cages ... yes, a lot."

"But I mean at liberty, in the fields."

"In the fields? No."

Don Alonso seemed rather provoked to make these confessions.

"No other wild beasts, either?"

"There are no longer any wild beasts in the civilized countries," said
the barber.

"Why, see here, there certainly are wild beasts over there," and Don
Alonso, wrinkling his features into a jesting grimace, winked slily at
Rebolledo. "Once a terrible thing happened to me; we were sailing by
an island when we heard cannon shots. It was the garrison firing off a
salvo."

"But what are you laughing at?" asked Arist�n.

"Nervousness.... Well, as I was saying, I went up to the captain of
the ship and asked his permission to let me land on the island. 'Very
well,' he said to me, 'take the Golondrina, if you wish,'--Golondrina
was the name of the canoe; 'but you must be back within a couple of
hours.'

"I set off in my boat and hala! hala! ... I reached the island, which
was thickly planted with plane-trees and cocoanut-trees, and I
disembarked on the beach into which the Golondrina had thrust its
prow."

Here Don Alonso's features were convulsed with the impossibility of
restraining his laughter; he shot a glance at the barber, accompanied
by a confidential wink.

"I land," he continued, "then I start running, and soon, paf! ... in
the face; a huge mosquito, and then, paf! ... another mosquito, until
I was surrounded by a swarm of the animals, each one as large as a
bat. With a scarred face I begin to run for the beach so as to escape
in my canoe, when I catch sight of a lobster right next to the
Golondrina; but what a lobster I He must have been as big as a bear;
he was black, and shiny, and went chug, chug, chug, like an
automobile. No sooner did the creature set eyes on me than he began to
rush upon me with loud outcries; I ran for a cocoanut tree, and one,
two, three, I shinnied right up the trunk to the top. The lobster
approaches the tree, stops meditatively, and decides to shinny up
after me,--which he did."

"An awful situation," commented the barber.

"Just imagine," replied Don Alonso, blinking. "I only had a little
stick in my hands, and I defended myself against the lobster by
hitting him in the knuckles; but he, roaring with rage, and eyes
shining, continued climbing. I couldn't get any farther, and I was
thinking of coming down; but as I made a movement, biff!... The son of
a sea-cook grabs me with one of his many legs by the coat and remains
there hanging from me. The cussed critter was as heavy as lead; he was
already reaching up after me with another claw when I remembered that
I had in my vest pocket a toothpick that I had bought in Chicago, and
that it had a knife attachment; I opened this, and in a moment slashed
off the tail of my coat, and cataplun! ... down from a height of at
least forty metres the lobster fell to the ground. I can't understand
how he wasn't killed. There he began to cry and howl, and go round and
round the cocoanut tree in which I was, glaring at me with his
terrible eyes. Whereupon I--for being a gymnast had to come in handy
to a fellow,--began to leap from one cocoanut tree to the next and
from one plane-tree to the other, while the lobster kept following me,
howling away with the tail of my coat in his teeth.

"Reaching near the beach I find that the tide has gone out and that
the Golondrina is more than fifty metres above the waves. 'I'll wait,'
I said to myself. But at this moment I see, thrusting its head out
from the tree-top that I was then on, a serpent; I seize a branch,
swing up and back for a while so that I can land as far as possible
from the lobster, when the damned branch breaks on me and I lose my
support."

"And what did you do then?" asked the barber.

"I took two somersaults in the air at a hazard."

"That was a useful precaution."

"Certainly I thought I was lost. On the contrary, I was saved."

"But how?" asked El Arist�n.

"Very simple. For as I fell, with the branch in my hand, I landed
plump on the lobster, and as I came down with such a high velocity, I
pierced him right through with the branch and left him nailed to the
beach. The animal roared like a bull; I jumped into the Golondrina and
made my escape. But my vessel had sailed away. I began to row, but
there wasn't a sail in sight. 'I'm lost,' says I to myself. But thanks
to the lobster, I was rescued...."

"The lobster?" asked everybody in amazement.

"Yes sirree; a steamboat that was on its course many miles off, on
hearing the lobster's wails thought that this might be the signal of
some shipwrecked crew; it drew near the island, picked me up, and in a
few days I was back with my company."

As he finished his tale Don Alonso made a most expressive grimace, and
left with his _Infiel_ Tower for the street. Aristas, Rebolledo
and Manuel applauded the old circus man's stories, and the apprentice
gymnast felt more determined than ever to continue practicing upon the
trapeze and the springboard, so that some day he might behold those
distant lands of which Don Alonso spoke.

A few weeks later there occurred one of the events that left upon
Manuel the deepest impression of his entire career. It was Sunday; the
boy went to his mother's place, and helped her, as usual, to wash the
dishes. Then came Petra's daughters, and they spent the whole
afternoon quarrelling over a skirt or a petticoat that the younger had
bought with the elder sister's money.

Manuel, bored by the chatter, invented some excuse and left the house.

The rain was coming down in bucketfuls; Manuel reached the Puerta del
Sol, entered the caf� de Levante and sat down near the window. The
people outside, dressed in their Sunday clothes, scampered by to
places of refuge in the wide doorways of the big square; the coaches
rumbled hurriedly on amidst the downpour; umbrellas came and went and
their black tops, glistening with rain, collided and intertwined like
a shoal of tortoises. Presently it cleared up and Manuel left the
caf�; it was still too early to return to the house; he crossed the
Plaza de Oriente and stopped on the Viaduct, watching from that point
the people strolling along Segovia street.

In the sky, which was becoming serene, floated a few dark clouds with
silver linings, resembling mountains capped with snow; blown by the
wind, they scurried along with outspread wings; the bright sun
illumined the fields with its golden rays; resplendent in the clouds,
it reddened them like live coals; a few cloudlets scudded through
space, white flakes of foam. The hillocks and dales of the Madrilenian
suburbs were not yet mottled with green grass; the trees of the Campo
del Moro stood out reddish, skeleton-like, amidst the foliage of the
evergreens; dark rolls of vapour rose along the ground, soon to be
swept away by the wind. As the clouds passed by overhead, the plain
changed hue; successively it graded from purple into leaden-grey,
yellow, copper; the Extremadura cart-road, with the rows of grey,
dirty houses on each side, traced a broken line. This severe,
melancholy landscape of the Madrilenian suburbs, with their bleak,
cold gloominess, penetrated into Manuel's soul.

He left the Viaduct balcony, sauntered through several narrow lanes,
until he reached Toledo Street, walked down the Ronda and turned in
toward his house. He was getting near the Paseo de las Acacias when he
overheard two old women talking about a crime that had just been
committed at the corner of Amparo Street.

"And just as they were about to catch him, he killed himself," one of
them was saying.

Out of curiosity Manuel hastened his step, and approached a group that
was discussing the event at the entrance to the Corral�n.

"Where did this fellow come from that killed himself?" asked Manuel of
Aristas.

"Why! It was Leandro!"

"Leandro!"

"Yes, Leandro, who killed Milagros and then killed himself."

"But ... is this really so?"

"Yes, man. Just a moment ago,"

"Here? In the house?"

"On this very spot."

Manuel, quaking with fear, ran up the stairs to the gallery. The floor
was still stained with the pool of blood. Se�or Zurro, the only
witness to the drama, was telling the story to a group of neighbours.

"I was here, reading the paper," said the old-clothes man, "and
Milagros and her mother were talking to Lechuguino. The engaged couple
were enjoying themselves, when up comes Leandro to the gallery; he was
about to open the door to his rooms when, before he went in, he
suddenly turned to Milagros. 'Is that your sweetheart?' he said to
her. It seemed to me that he was as pale as a corpse. 'Yes,' she
answered. 'All right. Then I've come here to end things once and for
all,' he shouted. 'Which of the two do you prefer, him or me?' 'Him,'
shrieks Milagros. 'Then it's all up,' cried Leandro in a hoarse voice.
'I'm going to kill you.' After that I can't recall anything clearly;
it was all as swift as a thunderbolt; when I ran over to them, the
girl was gushing blood from her mouth; the proof-reader's wife was
screaming and Leandro was chasing Lechuguino with his knife opened."

"I saw him leave the house," added an old woman. "He was waving his
blood-stained knife in the air; my husband tried to stop him; but he
backed like a bull, lunged for him and came near killing him."

"And where are my uncle and aunt?" asked Manuel.

"Over at the Emergency Hospital. They followed the stretcher."

Manuel went down into the patio.

"Where are you going?" asked Arist�n.

"To the Emergency Hospital."

"I'll go along with you."

The two boys were joined by a machine shop apprentice who lived in the
Corrala.

"I saw him kill himself," said the apprentice. "We were all running
after him, hollering, 'Catch him! Stop him!' when two guards appeared
on Amparo Street, drew their swords and blocked his way. Then Leandro
bounded back, made his way through the people and landed here again;
he was going to escape through the Paseo de las Acacias when he
stumbled against La Muerte, who began to call him names. Leandro
stopped, looked in every direction; nobody dared to get near him; his
eyes were blazing. Suddenly he jabbed the knife into his left side I
don't know how many times. When one of the guards seized him by the
arm he collapsed like an empty sack."

The commentary of Arist�n and the apprentice proved endless; the boys
arrived at the Emergency Hospital and were told that the corpses,
those of Milagros and Leandro, had been taken to the Morgue. The three
gamins walked down to the Canal, to the little house near the river's
edge, which Manuel and the urchins of his gang had so often visited,
trying to peep into the windows. A knot of people had gathered about
the door.

"Let's have a look," said Arist�n.

There was a window, wide open, and they peered in. Stretched upon a
marble slab lay Leandro; his face was the color of wax, and his
features bore an expression of proud defiance. At his side Se�ora
Leandro stood wailing and vociferating; Se�or Ignacio, with his son's
hand clasped in his own, was weeping silently. At another table a
group surrounded Milagros' corpse. The man in charge of the morgue
ordered them all out. As the proofreader and Se�or Ignacio met at the
entrance they exchanged looks and then averted their glance; the two
mothers, on the other hand, glared at each other in terrible hatred.

Se�or Ignacio arranged that they should not sleep at the Corral�n but
in Aguila Street. In that place, at the home of Se�ora Jacoba, there
was a horrible confusion of weeping and cursing. The three women
blamed Milagros for everything; she was a common strumpet, an evil
woman, a selfish, wretched ingrate.

One of the neighbours of the Corrala indicated a strange detail: when
the public doctor came to examine Milagros and remove her corset so
that he might determine the wound, he found a tiny medallion
containing a portrait of Leandro.

"Whose picture is this?" he is reported to have asked.

"The fellow who killed her," they answered. This was exceedingly
strange, and it fascinated Manuel; many a time he had thought that
Milagros really loved Leandro; this fairly confirmed his conjectures.

During all that night Se�or Ignacio, seated on a chair, wept without
cease; Vidal was scared through and through, as was Manuel. The
presence of death, seen so near, had terrorized the two boys.

And while inside the house everybody was crying, in the streets the
little girls were dancing around in a ring. And this contrast of
anguish and serenity, of grief and calm, imparted to Manuel a confused
sense of life. It must, he thought, be something exceedingly sad, and
something weirdly inscrutable.




PART THREE




CHAPTER I

  Uncle Patas' Domestic Drama--The Bakery--Karl the Baker--The
    Society of the Three.


The death of his son made such a deep impression upon Se�or Ignacio
that he fell ill. He gave up working in the shop and as he showed no
improvement after two or three weeks, Leandra said to Manuel:

"See here: better be off to your mother's place, for I can't keep you
here."

Manuel returned to the lodging-house and Petra, through the
intercession of the landlady, procured her son a job as errand-boy at
a bread and vegetable stand situated upon the Plaza del Carmen.

Manuel was here more oppressed than at Se�or Ignacio's. Uncle Patas,
the proprietor, a heavy, burly Galician, instructed the youth in his
duties.

He was to get up at daybreak, open the store, untie the bundles of
greens that were brought by a boy from the Plaza de la Cebada and
receive the bread that was left by the delivery-men. Then he was to
sweep the place and wait for Uncle Patas, his wife or sister-in-law to
awake. As soon as one of these came in Manuel would leave his place
behind the counter and, balancing a little basket upon his head, would
start off on his route delivering bread to the customers of the
vicinity. This going and returning would take all the morning. In the
afternoon the work was harder: Manuel would have to stand quietly
behind the counter in utter boredom, under the surveillance of the
proprietor's wife and his sister-in-law.

Accustomed to his daily strolls through the Rondas, Manuel was
rendered desperate by this immobility.

Uncle Patas' store, a tiny, ill-smelling hole, was papered in yellow
with green borders; the paper was coming off from sheer old age. A
wooden counter, a few dirty shelves, an oil lamp hanging from the
ceiling and two benches comprised the fixtures.

The back room, which was reached by a door at the rear, was a
compartment with no more light than could filter in through a transom
that opened upon the vestibule. This was the dining-room and led to
the kitchen, which in turn gave access to a narrow, very filthy patio
with a fountain. At the other side of the patio were the bedrooms of
Uncle Patas, his wife and his sister-in-law.

Manuel's sleeping quarters were a straw-bed and a couple of old cloaks
behind the counter. Here, especially at night, it reeked of rotten
cabbage: but what bothered Manuel even more was the getting up at
dawn, when the watchman struck two or three blows with his pike upon
the door of the store.

They sold something in the shop,--enough to live on and no more. In
this hovel Uncle Patas had saved up a fortune c�ntimo by c�ntimo.

Uncle Patas' history was really interesting. Manuel had learned it
from the gossip of the men who delivered the bread and from the boys
in the other stores.

Uncle Patas had come to Madrid from a hamlet of Lugo, at the age of
fifteen, in search of a living. Within twenty years, by dint of
unbelievable economies, he had hoarded up from his wages in a bakery
some three or four thousand pesetas, and with this capital he
established a little grocery. His wife stood behind the counter while
he continued to work in the bakery and hoard his earnings. When his
son grew up he assigned to the boy the running of a tavern and then of
a pawnbroker-shop. It was during this prosperous epoch that Uncle
Patas' wife died, and the man, now a widower, wishing to taste the
sweets of life, which had thus far proved so fruitless, married again
despite his fifty-odd years; the bride, a lass that came from his own
province, was only twenty and her sole object in marrying was to
change from servant to mistress. All of Uncle Patas' friends tried to
convince him that it was a monstrosity for a man of his years to wed,
and such a young girl at that; but he persisted in his notions and
married.

Within two months after the marriage the son had come to an
understanding with his step-mother, and shortly after this the elderly
husband made the discovery. One day he played the spy and saw his son
and his wife leave an assignation house in Santa Margarita Street.
Perhaps the man intended to take harsh steps, to speak a few
unvarnished words to the couple; but as he was soft and peaceful by
nature, and did not wish to disturb his business, he let the time go
by and grew little by little accustomed to his position. Somewhat
later, Uncle Patas' wife brought from her town a sister of hers, and
when she arrived, between the wife and the son she was forced upon the
old man, who concluded by taking up with his sister-in-law. Since that
time the four had lived in unbroken harmony. They understood one
another most admirably.

Manuel was not in the least astonished by this state of affairs; he
was cured of fear, for at La Corrala there was more than one
matrimonial combination of the sort. What did make him indignant was
the stinginess of Uncle Patas and his people.

All the scrupulousness which Uncle Patas' wife did not feel in other
matters she reserved, no doubt, for the accounts. Herself accustomed
to pilfer, she knew to the least detail every trick of the servants,
and not a c�ntimo escaped her; she always thought she was being
robbed. Such was her spirit of economy that at home they ate stale
bread, thus confirming the popular saying, "in the house of the smith,
a wooden knife."

The sister-in-law, an uncouth peasant with a stubby nose, carroty
cheeks, abundant breasts and hips, could give lessons in avarice to
her sister, while in the matter of immodesty and undignified
comportment she outdistanced her. She would go about the store with
her bosom exposed and there wasn't a delivery-man who missed a chance
to pinch her.

"What a fatty you are! Oh!" they would all exclaim.

And it was as if all this frequently fingered fat didn't belong to
her, for she raised no protest. Should any one, however, try to get
the best of her on the price of a roll, she would turn into a wild
beast.

On Sunday afternoons Uncle Patas, his wife and his sister-in-law were
in the habit of playing _mus_ on a little table in the middle of
the road; they never dared to leave the store alone.

After Manuel had been here for three months, Petra carne to see Uncle
Patas and asked him to give her boy a regular wage. Uncle Patas burst
into laughter; the request struck him as the very height of absurdity
and he answered No, that it was impossible, that the boy didn't even
earn the bread he ate.

Then Petra sought out another place for Manuel and brought him to a
bakery on Horno de la Mata Street where he was to learn the trade.

As the beginning of his apprenticeship he was assigned to the furnace
as assistant to the man who removed the loaves from the oven. The work
was beyond his strength. He had to get up at eleven in the night and
commence by scraping the iron pans in which the smaller loaves were
baked; after they were cleaned he would go over them with a brush
dipped in melted butter; this accomplished he would help his superior
remove the live coals from the oven with an iron instrument; then,
while the baker baked the bread he would lift very heavy boards laden
with rolls and carry them to the kneading-trough at the mouth of the
furnace; when the baker placed the rolls inside Manuel would take the
board back to the kneading-trough. As the bread came out of the oven
he would moisten it with a brush dipped in water so as to make the
crust shiny. At eleven in the morning the work was over, and during
the intervals of idleness Manuel and the workmen would sleep.

This life was horribly hard.

The bakery occupied a dark cellar, as gloomy as it was dirty. It was
below the level of the street and had two windows the panes of which
were so covered with dust and spiders' webs that only a murky,
yellowish light filtered through. They worked at all hours by gas.

The bakery was entered by a door that opened upon an ample patio, in
which was a shed of pierced zinc; this protected from the rain, or
tried to protect, at least, the loads of furze branch and the piles of
wood that were heaped up there.

From this patio a low door gave access to a long, but narrow and damp,
corridor that was everywhere black; only at the extreme end there was
a square of light that entered through a high window with a few
cracked, filthy panes,--a gloomy illumination.

When the eyes grew accustomed to the surrounding gloom they could make
out on the wall some delivery-baskets, bakers' peels, smocks, caps and
shoes hanging from nails, and on the ceiling thick, silvery cobwebs
covered with dust.

Half way along the corridor were a couple of doors opposite each
other; one led to the furnace, the other to the kneading room.

The furnace room was spacious, and the walls filmed with soot, so that
the place was as black as a camera obscura; a gas-jet burned in that
cavern, illuminating almost nothing. Before the mouth of the furnace,
against an iron shed, were placed the shovels; above, on the ceiling,
could be made out some large pipes that crossed each other.

The kneading room, less dark than the furnace room, was even more
somber. A pallid light shone in through the two windows that looked
into the patio, their panes encrusted with flour dust. There were
always some ten or twelve men in shirt-sleeves, brandishing their arms
desperately over the troughs, and in the back of the room a she-mule
slowly turned the kneading machine.

Life in the bakery was disagreeable and hard; the work was enervating
and the pay small: seven reales per day. Manuel, unaccustomed to the
heat of the furnace, turned dizzy; besides, when he moistened the
loaves fresh from the oven he would burn his fingers and it disgusted
him to see his hands begrimed with grease and soot.

He was also unlucky enough to have his bed placed in the kneaders'
room, beside that of an old workman of the shop who suffered from
chronic catarrh, as a result of having breathed so much flour into his
lungs; this fellow kept hawking away at all hours.

From sheer disgust Manuel found it impossible to sleep here, so he
went to the furnace kitchen and threw himself down upon the floor. He
was forever weary; but despite this, he worked automatically.

Then nobody paid any attention to him; the other bakers, a gang of
pretty rough Galicians, treated him as if he were a mule; none of them
even took the trouble to learn his name, and some addressed him, "Hey,
you, Choto!" while others cried "Hello, Barriga!" When they spoke of
him they referred to him as "the ragamuffin from Madrid" or simply,
"ragamuffin." He answered to whatever names and sobriquets they gave
him.

At first the most hateful of all these men, to Manuel, was the head
baker, who ordered him about in a despotic manner and grew angry if
things weren't done in a trice. This baker was a German named Karl
Schneider who had come to Spain as a vagrant, in evasion of military
service. He was about twenty-four or twenty-five, with limpid eyes,
and hair and moustache that were so fair as almost to be white.

A timid, phlegmatic fellow, he was frightened by everything and found
all things difficult. His strong impressions were manifested neither
in his motions nor his words, but in a sudden flush, which coloured
his cheeks and his forehead, and which would soon disappear and leave
an intense pallor.

Karl expressed himself very well in Spanish, but in a rare manner; he
knew a string of proverbs and phrases which he entangled inextricably;
this lent a quaint character to his conversation.

Manuel soon discovered that the German, despite his abruptness, was a
fine fellow, very innocent, very sentimental and of paradisiacal
simplicity.

After a month's work in the bakery Manuel had come to consider Karl as
his only friend; they treated each other as boon companions and
addressed each other in familiar terms; and if the baker often helped
his assistant in any task that required strength, he would in his
turn, on occasion, ask the boy's opinion and consult him regarding
sentimental complications and punctilios, which fascinated the German
and which Manuel settled with his natural perspicacity and the
instincts of a wandering child who has been convinced that all life's
motives are egotistical and base. This equality between master and
apprentice disappeared the moment Karl took up his position at the
mouth of the furnace. At such times Manuel had to obey the German
without cavil or delay.

Karl's one vice was drunkenness; he was forever thirsty; whenever he
slaked this thirst with wine and beer everything went well; he led a
methodical life and would spend his free hours on the Pinza, de
Oriente or in the Moncloa, reading the two volumes that comprised his
library: one, _Lost Illusions_, by Balzac and the other, a
collection of German poems.

These two books, constantly read, commented upon and annotated by him,
filled his head with fancies and dreams. Between the bitter,
despairing, yet fundamentally romantic ratiocinations of Balzac, and
the idealities of Goethe and Heine, the poor baker dwelt in the most
unreal of worlds. Often Karl would explain to Manuel the conflicts
between the persons of his favourite novel, and would ask how he would
act under similar circumstances. Manuel would usually hit upon so
logical, so natural, so little romantic a solution that the German
would stand perplexed and fascinated before the boy's clearness of
judgment; but soon, considering the selfsame theme anew, he would see
that such a solution would prove valueless to his sublimated
personages, for the very conflict of the novel would never have come
about amidst folk of common thoughts.

There came stretches of ten or twelve days when the German needed more
powerful stimulants than wine and literature, and he would get drunk
on whisky, drinking down half a flask as if it were so much water.

According to what he told Manuel, he was overwhelmed by an avalanche
of sadness; everything looked black and repulsive to his eyes, he felt
feverish and the one remedy for this melancholy was alcohol.

When he entered the tavern his heart was heavy and his head dull with
a surfeit of ugly notions, but as he drank he felt his heart grow
lighter and his breath come easier, while his head began to dance with
merry thoughts. When he left the tavern, however hard he tried, it was
impossible for him to preserve his dignity; laughter would flicker
upon his lips. Then songs of his native land would throng to his
memory and he would sing them aloud, beating time to them as he walked
on. As long as he went through the central thoroughfares he would walk
straight; no sooner did he reach the back streets, the deserted
avenues, than he would abandon himself to the pleasure of stumbling
along and staggering, with a bump here and a thump there. During these
moods everything seemed great and beautiful and superb to the German;
the sentimentalism of his race would overflow and he would begin to
recite verses and weep, and of whatever acquaintances he met on the
street he would beg forgiveness for his imaginary offence, asking
anxiously whether he still continued to enjoy their estimation and
offering his friendship.

However drunk he might be, he never forgot his duty and when the hour
for starting the night's baking arrived he would stagger off to the
bakery; the moment he took up his position before the mouth of the
furnace his intoxication evaporated and he set to work as soberly as
ever, himself laughing at his extravagances.

The German possessed remarkable organic powers and unheard-of
resistance; Manuel had to sleep during all his free time, and even at
that never rose from his bed completely rested. For the two months
that he spent in the bakery Manuel lived like an automaton. Work at
the furnace had so shifted about his hours of sleep that the days
seemed to him nights and the nights, days.

One day Manuel fell ill and all the strength that had been sustaining
him abandoned him suddenly; he gave up his job, took his two-week's
pay and without knowing how, fairly dragging himself thither, made his
way to the lodging-house.

Petra, finding him in this condition, made him go to bed, and Manuel
lay for nearly two weeks in the delirium of a very high fever. On
getting out it seemed that he had grown; he was much emaciated, and
felt in his whole body a great lassitude and languor and such a keen
sensitivity that any word the least mite too harsh would affect him to
the point of tears.

When he was able to go out into the street again, he bought, at
Petra's suggestion, a gold-plated brooch which he presented to Do�a
Casiana; she was so pleased with the gift that she told her servant
the boy might remain in the house until he was completely recovered.

Those days were among the most pleasant that Manuel ever spent in his
whole life; the one thing that bothered him was hunger.

The weather was superb and in the mornings Manuel would go strolling
along the Retiro. The journalist whom they called Superman employed
Manuel in copying his notes and articles, and as compensation, no
doubt, let him take novels by Paul de Kock and Pigault-Lebrun, some of
them highly spiced, as for example _Nuns and Corsairs_ and
_That Rascal Gustave_.

The love theories of these two writers convinced Manuel so well that
he tried to put them into practise with the landlady's niece. During
the previous two years she had developed so fully that she was already
a woman.

One night, during the early hour after supper, either through the
influence of the spring season or in obedience to the theories of the
author of _Nuns and Corsairs_, Manuel persuaded the landlady's
girl of the advantages of a very private consultation, and a neighbour
saw the two of them depart together upstairs and enter the garret.

As they were about to shut themselves in, the neighbour surprised them
and brought them, deeply contrite, into the presence of Do�a Casiana.
The thrashing that the landlady administered to her niece deprived the
girl of all desire for new adventures and the aunt of any strength to
administer another to Manuel.

"Out into the street with you!" she bawled at him, seizing him by the
arm and sinking her nails into his flesh. "And make sure that I never
see you here again, for I'll brain you!"

Manuel, stricken with shame and confusion, wished nothing better at
that moment than a chance to escape, and he dashed into the street as
fast as he could get there, like a beaten cur. The night was cool and
inviting. As he didn't have a c�ntimo, he soon wearied of sauntering
about; he called at the bakery, asked for Karl the baker, they opened
the place to him and he stretched himself out on one of the beds. At
dawn he was awakened by the voice of one of the bakers, who was
shouting:

"Hey, you! Loafer! Clear out!"

Manuel got up and went out into the street. He strolled along toward
the Viaduct, to his favourite spot, to survey the landscape and
Segovia street.

It was a glorious spring morning. In the grove near the Campo del Moro
some soldiers were drilling to the sound of bugle and drums; from a
stone chimney on the Ronda de Segovia puffs of dark smoke issued forth
to stain the clear, diaphanous sky; in the laundries on the banks of
the Manzanares the clothes hung out to dry shone with a white
refulgence.


Manuel slowly crossed the Viaduct, reached Las Vistillas and watched
some rag-dealers sorting out their materials after emptying the
contents of their sacks upon the ground. He sat down for a while in
the sun. With his eyes narrowed to a slit he could make out the arches
of the Almudena church just above a wall; beyond rose the Royal
Palace, a glittering white, the sandy clearings of the Principe P�o
with its long red barracks, and the row of houses on the Paseo de
Rosales, their panes aglow with the sunlight.

Toward the Casa de Campo several brown, bare knolls stood out, topped
by two or three pines that looked as if they had been cut out and
pasted upon the blue atmosphere.

From Las Vistillas Manuel walked down to the Ronda de Segovia. As he
sauntered along Aguila Street he noticed that Se�or Ignacio's place
was still closed. Manuel went into the house and asked in the patio
for Salom�.

"She must be at work in the house," they told him.

He climbed up the stairway and knocked at the door; from within came
the hum of a sewing-machine.

Salom� opened the door and Manuel entered. The seamstress was as
pretty as ever, and, as ever, working. Her two boys had not yet
entered colegio. Salom� told Manuel that Se�or Ignacio had been in
hospital and that he was now looking around for some money with which
to pay off his debts and continue his business. Leandra at that moment
was down by the river, Se�or Jacoba at her post, and Vidal loafing
around with no desire to work. He simply couldn't be kept away from
the company of a certain cross-eyed wretch who was worse than disease
itself, and had become a tramp. The two of them were always seen with
bad women in the stands and lunch-rooms of the Andaluc�a road.

Manuel told her of his experiences as a baker and how he had fallen
ill; what he did not relate however, was the tale of his dismissal
from the house where his mother was employed.

"That's no kind of job for you. You ought to learn some trade that
requires less strength," was Salom�'s advice.

Manuel spent the whole morning chatting with the seamstress; she
invited him to a bite and he accepted with pleasure.

In the afternoon Manuel left Salom�'s house with the thought that if
he were a few years older and had a decent, paying position, he would
marry her, even if he found himself compelled to get the tough who
went with her out of the way with a knife.

Once again upon the Ronda, the first thought that came to Manuel was
that he ought not to go to the Toledo Bridge, nor be in any greater
hurry to reach the Andaluc�a road, for it was very easy to happen upon
Vidal or Bizco there. He pondered the thought deeply, and yet, despite
this, he took the direction of the bridge, glanced into the sands, and
failing to find his friends there continued along the Canal, crossed
the Manzanares by one of the laundry bridges and came out on Andaluc�a
road. In a lunch-room that sheltered a few tables beneath its roof
were Vidal and Bizco in company of a group of idlers playing can�.

"Hey, you, Vidal!" shouted Manuel.

"The deuce! Is it you?" exclaimed his cousin.

"As you see...."

"And what are you doing?"

"Nothing. And you?"

"Whatever comes our way."

Manuel watched them play can�. After they had finished a hand, Vidal
said:

"What do you say to a walk?"

"Come on."

"Are you coming, Bizco?"

"Yes."

The three set out along the Andaluc�a road.

Vidal and Bizco led a thieves' existence, stealing here a horse
blanket, there the electric bulbs of a staircase or telephone wires;
whatever turned up. They did not venture to operate in the heart of
Madrid as they were not yet, in their opinion, sufficiently expert.

Only a few days before, told Vidal, they had, between them, robbed a
fellow of a she-goat, on the banks of the Manzanares near the Toledo
bridge. Vidal had entertained the chap at the game of tossing coins
while Bizco had seized the goat and pulled her up the slope of the
pines to Las Yeser�as, afterward taking her to Las Injurias. Then
Vidal, indicating the opposite direction to their dupe, had shouted:
"Run, run, there goes your goat." And as the youth trotted off in the
direction indicated, Vidal escaped to Las Injurias, joining Bizco and
his sweetheart. They were still dining on the goat's meat.

"That's what you ought to do," suggested Vidal. "Come with us. This is
the life of a lord! Why, listen here. The other day Juan el Burra and
El Arenero came upon a dead hog on the road to Las Yeser�as. A
swineherd was on his way with a herd of them to the slaughter-house,
when they found out that the animal had died; the fellow left it
there, and Juan el Burra and El Arenero dragged it to their house,
quartered it, and we friends of his have been eating hog for more than
a week. I tell you, it's a lord's life!"

According to what Vidal said, all the thieves knew each other, even to
the most distant sections of the city. Their life was outside the pale
of society and an admirable one, indeed; today they were to meet at
the Four Roads, in three or four days at the Vallecas Bridge or at La
Guindelara; they helped each other.

Their radius of activities was a zone bounded by the extreme of the
Casa del Campo, where the inn of Agapito and the Alcorc�n restaurants
were, as far as Los Carabancheles; from here, the banks of the
Abronigal, La Elipa, El Este, Las Ventas and La Concepti�n as far as
La Prosperidad; then Tetu�n as far as the Puerta de Hierro. In summer
they slept in yards and sheds of the suburbs.

The thieves of the city's centre were a better-dressed, more
aristocratic lot; each of these had his woman, whose earnings he
managed and who took good care of him. The outcasts of the heart of
the city were a distinct class with other gradations.

There were times when Bizco and Vidal had gone through intense want,
existing upon cats and rats and seeking shelter in the caves upon San
Blas hill, of Madrid Moderno, and in the Eastern Cemetery. But by this
time the pair knew their business.

"And work? Nothing?" asked Manuel.

"Work! ... Let the cat work," scoffed Vidal.

They didn't work, stuttered Bizco; who was going to get fresh with him
while he had his trusty steel in his hand?

Into the brain of this wild beast there had not penetrated, even
vaguely, any idea of rights or duties. No duties, no rights or
anything at all. To him, might was right; the world was a hunting
wood. Only humble wretches could obey the law of labour. That's what
he said: Let fools work, if they hadn't the nerve to live like men.

As the three thus conversed a man and a woman with a child in her arms
passed by. They looked dejected, like famished, persecuted folk, their
glance timid and awed.

"There's the workers for you," exclaimed Vidal. "That's how they are."

"The devil take them," muttered Bizco.

"Where are they bound for?" asked Manuel, eyeing them sympathetically.

"To the tile-works," answered Vidal. "To sell saffron, as we say
around here."

"And why do they say that?"

"Because saffron is so dear...."

The three came to a halt and lay down upon the sod. For more than an
hour they remained there, discussing women and ways and means of
procuring money.

"Got any money about you?" asked Vidal of Manuel and Bizco.

"Two reales," replied the latter.

"Well, then, invite us to something," suggested Vidal. "Let's have a
bottle."

Bizco assented, grumblingly, so they arose and took their way toward
Madrid. A procession of whitish mules filed past them; a young,
swarthy gipsy, with a long stick under his arm, mounted upon the last
mule of the procession, kept shouting at every step: "Coron�, coron�!"

"So long, swell!" shouted Vidal to him.

"God be with all good folk," answered the gipsy in a hoarse voice.
They reached a road tavern beside a ragpicker's hut, stopped, and
Vidal ordered the bottle of wine.

"What's this factory?" asked Manuel, pointing to a structure at the
left of the Andaluc�a road on the way back to Madrid.

"They make money out of blood," answered Vidal solemnly.

Manuel stared at him in fright.

"Yes. They make glue out of the blood that's left over in the
slaughter-house," added his cousin, laughing.

Vidal poured the wine into the glasses and the three gulped it down.

Yonder, above the avenue of trees on the Canal, could be made out
Madrid, with its long, level cluster of houses. The windows, lit up by
the flush of the setting sun, glowed like live coals; in the
foreground, just below San Francisco el Grande, bulked the red tanks
of the gas factory with their high steel beams, amidst the obscure
rubbish-heaps; from the centre of the city rose tiny towers and low
chimneys which belched forth black puffs of smoke that seemed to rest
motionless in the tranquil atmosphere. At one side, upon a hill,
towered the Observatory, whose windows sparkled with the sun; at the
other, the Guadarama range, blue with crests of white, was outlined
against the clear, transparent heavens furrowed by red clouds.

"Bah," added Vidal, after a moment's silence, turning to Manuel.
"You've got to come with us; we'll make a gang."

"That's the talk," stammered Bizco.

"All right. I'll see," responded Manuel unwillingly.

"What do you mean, you'll see? The gang's already formed. We'll call
it the gang of The Three."

"Fine!" shouted Bizco.

"And we'll help each other?" inquired Manuel.

"Of course we will," assured his cousin. "And if any one of us should
prove a traitor...."

"If any one proves a traitor," interrupted Bizco, "his guts'll be
ripped out." And to lend force to his declaration he drew out his dirk
and plunged it viciously into the table.

At nightfall the three returned by the road to the Toledo bridge and
separated at that point, after arranging to meet on the morrow.

Manuel wondered just what he was committed to by the promise made to
be a member of The Three. The life led by Bizco and Vidal frightened
him. He must resolve to turn over a new leaf; but what was he to do?
That was what puzzled him.

For some time Manuel did not dare to put in an appearance at the
lodging-house; he would meet his mother in the street and he slept in
the entry of the house where one of his sisters was employed. Later it
came to pass that the landlady's niece was found in the bedroom of a
neighbouring student, and this served to rehabilitate Manuel somewhat
in the boarding-house.




CHAPTER II

  One of the Many Disagreeable Ways of Dying in Madrid--The
    Orphan--El Cojo and His Cave--Night in the Observatory.


One day Manuel was not a little surprised to learn that his mother had
not been able to get up and that she was ill. For some time she had
been coughing up blood, but had considered this of no importance.

Manuel presented himself humbly at the house and the landlady, instead
of greeting him with recriminations, asked him in to see his mother.
The only thing Petra complained of was a terrible bruised feeling all
over the body and a pain in her back.

For days and days she had gone on thus, now better, now worse, until
she began to run a high fever and was compelled to call in the doctor.
The landlady said that they'd have to take the sick woman to the
hospital; but as she was a kind-hearted soul she did not insist.

Petra had already confessed several times to the priest of the house.
Manuel's sisters came from time to time, but neither brought the money
necessary to the purchase of the medicines and the food that were
prescribed by the doctor.

One Sunday, toward night, Petra took a turn for the worse; during the
afternoon she had been conversing spiritedly with her daughters; but
this animation had subsided until she was overwhelmed by a mortal
collapse.

That Sunday night Do�a Casiana's lodgers had an unusually succulent
supper, and after the supper several ronquillas for dessert, watered
by the purest concoction of the Prussian distilleries.

The spree was still in progress at ten o'clock. Petra said to Manuel:

"Call Don Jacinto and tell him that I'm worse."

Manuel went to the dining-room. He could barely make out the congested
faces through the thick tobacco smoke that filled the atmosphere. As
Manuel entered, one of the merrymakers said:

"A little less noise; there's somebody sick."

Manuel delivered the message to the priest.

"Your mother's scared, that's all. I'll come a little later," replied
Don Jacinto.

Manuel returned to the room.

"Isn't he coming?" asked the sick woman.

"He'll be here right away. He says you're only scared."

"Yes. A fine scare," she murmured sadly. "Stay here."

Manuel sat down upon a trunk; he was so sleepy, he could hardly see.

He was just dozing off when his mother called to him.

"Listen," she said. "Go into the room and fetch the picture of the
Virgin of Sorrows."

Manuel took down the picture,--a cheap cromograph,--and brought it to
the bedroom.

"Place it at the foot of the bed so that I can see it."

The boy did as he was requested and returned to his seat. From the
dining-room came a din of songs, hand-clapping and castanets.

Suddenly Manuel, who was half asleep, heard a loud, rasping sound
issue from his mother's chest, and at the same time he noticed that
her face had become paler than ever and was twitching strangely.

"What's the matter?"

The sufferer made no reply. Then Manuel ran to notify the priest
again. Grumblingly he left the dining-room, looked at the sick woman
and said to the boy:

"Your mother's dying. Stay here, and I'll be back at once with the
extreme unction."

The priest ordered the merrymakers in the dining-room to cease their
racket and the whole house became silent.

Nothing could be heard now save cautious footfalls, the opening and
closing of doors, followed by the stertorous breathing of the dying
woman and the tick-tock of the corridor clock.

The priest arrived with another who wore a stole and administered all
the rites of the extreme unction. After the vicar and the sacristan
had gone, Manuel looked at his mother and saw her livid features, her
drooping jaw. She was dead.

The youngster was left alone in the room, which was dimly lighted by
the oil lamp; there he sat on the trunk, trembling with cold and fear.

He spent the whole night thus; from time to time the landlady would
enter in her underclothes and ask Manuel something or offer some bit
of advice which, for the most part, he did not understand.

That night Manuel thought and suffered as perhaps he never thought and
suffered at any other time; he meditated upon the usefulness of life
and upon death with a perspicacity that he had never possessed.
However hard he might try, he could not stem the flood of thoughts
that merged one with the other.

At four in the morning the whole house was in silence, when there was
heard the rattle of a latchkey in the stairway door, followed by
footsteps in the corridor and then the querulous tinkling of the
music-box upon the vestibule-table, playing the Mandolinata.

Manuel awoke with a start, as from a dream; he could not make out
where the music was coming from; he even imagined that he had lost his
head. The little organ, after several hitches and asthmatic sobs,
abandoned the Mandolinata and began to roll off in double time the
duet between Bettina and Pippo from _La Mascotte_:

  _Will you forget me, gentle swain,
  Dressed in this lordly finery?_

Manuel left the bedroom and asked, through the darkness:

"Who is it?"

At the same moment voices were heard from every room. The music-box
cut short the duet from _La Mascotte_ and launched spiritedly
into the strains of Garibaldi's hymn. Suddenly the music stopped and a
hoarse voice shouted:

"Paco! Paco!"

The landlady got up and asked who was making all that racket; one of
the men who had just entered the house explained in a whisky-soaked
voice that they were students who boarded on the third floor, and had
just come from the ball in search of Paco, one of the salesmen. The
landlady told them that some one had died in the house and one of the
drunkards, who was a student of medicine, said he would like to view
the corpse. He was persuaded to change his mind and everybody went
back to his place. The next day Manuel's sisters were notified and
Petra was buried....

On the day after the interment Manuel left the boarding-house and said
farewell to Do�a Casiana.

"What are you going to do?" she asked.

"I don't know. I'll see."

"I can't keep you here, but I don't want you to starve. Come here from
time to time."

After walking about town all the morning, Manuel found himself at noon
on the Ronda de Toledo, leaning against the wall of Las Americas, at a
loss to know what to do with himself. To one side, likewise seated
upon the turf, was a loathsome, terribly ugly, flat-nosed gamin, with
a clouded eye, bare feet, and a tattered jacket through whose rents
could be glimpsed his dark skin, which had been tanned by the sun and
wind. Hanging from his neck was a canister into which he threw the
cigarette ends that he gathered.

"Where do you live?" Manuel asked him.

"I haven't any father or mother," answered the urchin, evasively.

"What's your name?"

"The Orphan."

"And why do they call you that?"

"Why! Because I'm a foundling."

"And didn't you ever have a home?"

"No."

"And where do you sleep?"

"Well, in the summer I sleep in the caves, or in yards, and in winter,
in the asphalt caldrons."

"And when they're not doing any asphalting?"

"In some shelter or other."

"All right, then. But what do you eat?"

"Whatever I'm given."

"And do you manage to do well?"

Either the foundling did not understand the question or it appeared
quite silly to him, for he merely shrugged his shoulders. Manuel
continued his curious interrogatory.

"Aren't your feet cold?"

"No."

"And don't you do anything?"

"Psch! ... whatever turns up. I pick up stubs, I sell sand, and when I
can't earn anything I go to the Mar�a Cristina barracks."

"What for?"

"What for? For a meal, of course."

"And where's this barracks?"

"Near the Atocha station. Why? Would you like to go there, too?"

"Yes, I would."

"Well, let's come along then, or we'll miss mess time."

The two got up and started on their journey. The Orphan begged at the
stores on the road and was given two slices of bread and a small coin.

"Will you have some, _ninchi?_" he asked, offering Manuel one of
the slices.

"Hand it over."

By the Ronda de Atocha they reached the Estaci�n de Mediod�a.

"Do you know the time?" asked the Orphan.

"Yes. It's eleven."

"Well then, it's too early to go to the barracks."

Opposite the station a lady, from the seat of a coach, was making a
speech proclaiming the wonders of a salve for wounds and a specific
for curing the toothache.

The Orphan, biting away at his slice of bread, interrupted the speech
of the lady in the coach, shouting ironically:

"Give me a slice to take away my toothache!"

"And another one to me!" added Manuel.

The husband of the speechmaker, an old fellow wearing a very long
raglan and standing amidst the crowd of spectators listening with the
greatest respect to what his better half was saying, grew indignant
and speaking but half Spanish, cried:

"If I catch you your teeth'll ache for fair."

"This gentleman came from Archipipi," interrupted the Orphan.

The old codger tried to catch one of the urchins. Manuel and the
Orphan ran off, dodging the man in the raglan and planting themselves
opposite him.

"Impudent rascals," shouted the gentleman. "I'll give you a hiding and
maybe your teeth won't really ache by the time I'm through with you."

"But they hurt already," chorused the ragamuffins.

The old fellow, exasperated beyond endurance, gave frantic chase to
the urchins; a group of idlers and news-vendors jostled against him as
if by accident, and the pursuer, perspiring freely and wiping his face
with his handkerchief, went off in search of an officer.

"Fakir, froggie, beggar!" shouted the Orphan derisively at him.

Then, laughing at their prank, they returned to the barracks and took
place at the end of a line composed of poverty-stricken folk and
tramps who were waiting for a meal. An old woman who had already eaten
lent them a tin in which to place their food.

They ate and then, in company of other tattered youngsters climbed the
sandy slopes of San Blas hill to get a view from that spot of the
soldiers on Atocha avenue.

Manuel stretched out lazily in the sun, filled with the joy of finding
himself absolutely free of worriment, of gazing upon the azure sky
which extended into the infinite. Such blissful comfort induced in him
a deep sleep.

When he awoke it was already mid-afternoon and the wind was chasing
dark clouds across the heavens. Manuel sat up; there was a knot of
gamins close by, but the Orphan was nowhere to be seen.

A dense black cloud came up and blotted out the sun; shortly afterward
it began to rain.

"Shall we go to Cojo's cave?" asked one of the boys.

"Come on."

The entire band of ragamuffins broke into a run in the direction of
the Retiro, with Manuel hard after them. The thick raindrops fell in
slanting, steel-hued lines; a stray sunbeam glittered from the sky
through the dark violet clouds which were so long that they looked
like huge, motionless fishes.

Ahead of the ragamuffins, at an appreciable distance, ran two women
and two men.

"They're Rubia and Chata with a couple of hayseeds," said one of the
gamins.

"They're running to the cave," added another.

The boys reached the top of the hill; before the entrance to the cave,
which was nothing but a hole dug out of the sand, sat a one-legged man
smoking a pipe.

"We're going in," announced one of the urchins to Cojo.

"You can't," he replied.

"And why not?"

"Because you can't."

"Man! Let's get in until the rain stops."

"Impossible."

"Why? Are Rubia and Chata inside?"

"What do you care if they are?"

"Shall we give those hayseeds a scare?" asked one of the ragamuffins,
whose ears were covered by long black locks.

"Just try it and see," growled Cojo, seizing a rock.

"Come on to the Observatory," said another. "We won't get wet there."

The gang turned back, hurdled a wall that stood in their path and took
refuge in the portico of the Observatory on the Atocha side. The wind
was blowing from the Guadarrama range so that they were in the lee.

For the afternoon and part of the evening the rain came pouring down;
they passed the time chatting about women, thefts and crimes. Two or
three of these youngsters had a home to go to, but they didn't care to
go. One, who was called El Marian�, related a number of notable tricks
and swindles; others, who displayed prodigious skill and ingenuity,
roused the gathering to enthusiasm. After this theme had been
exhausted, a few suggested a game of can�, and the idler with the long
black locks, whom they called El Canco, sang in a low feminine voice
several _flamenco_ songs.

At night, as it grew cold, they lay down quite close to each other
upon the ground and continued their conversations. Manuel was repelled
by the malevolent spirit of the gang; one of them told a story about
an aged fellow of eighty, "old Rainbow," who used to sleep furtively
in the Manzanares laundry in a hole formed by four mats; one night
when an icy cold wind was blowing they opened two of his mats and the
next day he was found frozen to death; El Marian� recounted how he had
been with a cousin of his, a cavalry sergeant, in a public house and
how the sergeant mounted upon a naked woman's back and gashed her
thighs with his spurs.

"The fact is," concluded El Marian�, "there's nothing like making
women suffer if you want to keep 'em satisfied."

Manuel listened in astonishment to this counsel; his mind reverted to
that seamstress who came to the landlady's house, and then to Salom�,
and it occurred to him that he would not care to have made them love
him by inflicting pain. He fell asleep with these notions whirling in
his head.

When he awoke he felt the cold penetrating to his very marrow. Day was
breaking and the rain had ceased; the sky, still dim, was strewn with
greyish clouds. Above a hedge of shrubs shone a star in the middle of
the horizon's pale band, and against this opaline glow stood out the
intertwined branches of the trees, which were still without leaves.

The whistles of the locomotives could be heard from the nearby
station; toward Carabanchel the lantern lights were paling in the dark
fields, which could be glimpsed by the vague luminosity of nascent
day.

Madrid, level, whitish, bathed in mist, rose out of the night with its
many roofs, which cut the sky in a straight line; its turrets, its
lofty factory chimneys; and amidst the silence of the dawn, the city
and the landscape suggested the unreality and the motionlessness of a
painting.

The sky became clearer, growing gradually blue. Now the new white
houses stood out more sharply; the high partition-walls, pierced
symmetrically by tiny windows; the roofs, the corners, the
balustrades, the red towers of recent construction, the army of
chimneys, all enveloped in the cold, sad, damp, atmosphere of morning,
beneath a low zinc-hued sky.

Beyond the city proper, afar, rolled the Madrilenian plain in gentle
undulations, toward the mists of dawn; the Manzanares meandered along,
as narrow as a band of silver; it sought the Los Angeles hill,
crossing barren fields and humble districts, finally to curve and lose
itself in the grey horizon. Towering above Madrid the Guadarrama
loomed like a lofty blue rampart, its summits capped with snow.

In the midst of this silence a church bell began its merry pealing,
but the chimes were lost in the somnolent city.

Manuel felt very cold and commenced pacing back and forth, rubbing his
shoulders and his legs. Absorbed in this operation, he did not see a
man in a boina, with a lantern in his hand, who approached him and
asked:

"What are you doing here?"

Without replying, Manuel broke into a run down the hill; shortly
afterward the rest of the gang came scurrying down, awaked by the
kicks of the man in the boina.

As they reached the Velasco Museum, El Marian� said:

"Let's see if we can't play a dirty trick on that damned Cojo."

"Yes. Come on."

By a side path they climbed back to the spot where they had been on
the previous afternoon. From the caves of San Blas hill came a few
ragamuffins crawling out on all fours; frightened by the sound of
voices and thinking, doubtless, that the police had come to make a
raid, they set off on a mad run, naked, with their ragged clothing
under their arms.

They made their way to Cojo's cave; El Marian� proposed that as a
punishment for his not having let them go in the day before, they
should pile a heap of grass before the entrance to the cave and set
fire to the place.

"No, man, that's monstrous," objected El Canco. "The fellow hires out
his cave to Rubia and Chata, who hang around here and have customers
in the barracks. He has to respect his agreements with them."

"Well, we'll have to give him a lesson," retorted El Marian�. "You'll
see." Whereupon he crawled into the cave and reappeared soon with El
Cojo's wooden leg in one hand and a stewpot in the other.

"Cojo! Cojo!" he shouted.

At these cries the cripple stuck his head out of the entrance to the
cave, dragging himself along on his hands, bellowing blasphemies in
fury.

"Cojo! Cojo!" yelled El Marian� again, as if inciting a dog. "There
goes your leg! And your dinner's following after!" As he spoke, he
seized the wooden leg and the pot and sent them rolling down the
slope.

Then they all broke into a run for the Ronda de Vallecas. Above the
heights and valleys of the Pac�fico district the huge red disk of the
sun rose from the earth and ascended slowly and majestically behind a
cluster of grimy huts.




CHAPTER III

  Meeting with Roberto--Roberto Narrates the Origin of a Fantastic
    Fortune.


Manuel was compelled to return to the bakery in quest of work, and
there, thanks to Karl's intercession with the proprietor, the boy
spent a while as a substitute for a delivery-man.

Manuel understood that this was hardly a suitable thing for him as a
regular position, and that it would get him nowhere; but he was at a
loss what to do, what road to take.

When he was left without a job, he managed to exist as long as he had
enough to pay for a chop-house meal. There came a day when he was
stranded without a c�ntimo and he resorted to the Mar�a Cristina
barracks.

For two or three days he had been taking up his position among the
beggars of the breadline, when once he caught sight of Roberto
entering the barracks. He did not go over to him, as he feared to lose
his place, but after eating he waited until Roberto came out.

"Don Roberto!" hailed Manuel.

The student turned deathly pale; at sight of Manuel he regained his
composure.

"What are you doing here?" he asked.

"You can see for yourself. I come here to eat. I can't find work."

"Ah! You come here to eat?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, I come for the same reason," murmured Roberto, laughing.

"You?"

"Yes. I have been cheated out of my rightful fortune."

"And what are you doing now?"

"I'm working on a newspaper, waiting until there's a vacancy. At the
barracks I made friends with a sculptor who comes here for his meals,
too, and we both live in a garret. I laugh at such things, for I am
convinced that some day I'm going to be wealthy, and when I am, I'll
recall these hard times with pleasure."

"He's beginning to rave already," thought Manuel.

"Then you don't believe that I'm going to be a rich man some day?"

"Certainly. Of course I do!"

"Where are you going?" asked Roberto.

"Nowhere in particular."

"Let's take a stroll."

"Come on."

They walked down to Alfonso XII Street and went into the Retiro; when
they had gone as far as the end of the carriage drive they sat down on
a bench.

"We'll drive along here in a carriage when I become a millionaire,"
said Roberto.

"You mean you.... As for me...." replied Manuel.

"You, too. Do you imagine that I'm going to let you stand in the
barrack's bread line when I have my millions?"

"He's truly a bit off his base," thought Manuel, "but he has a kind
heart." Then he added. "Have your affairs been making much progress?"

"No, not much. The question is still pretty well tangled. But it will
be straightened out, mark my word."

"Do you know that that circus chap with the phonograph showed up one
day with a woman named Rosa?" said Manuel. "I went hunting for you to
see whether she was the one you were talking about."

"No. The one I was looking for is dead."

"Then your case is all cleared up?"

"Yes. But I need money. Don Telmo was ready to lend me ten thousand
duros on condition that I'd give him half of the fortune as soon as I
entered into possession of it, if I won. But I refused."

"How foolish."

"What's more, he wants me to marry his niece."

"And you didn't want to?"

"No."

"But she's pretty."

"Yes. But she's not to my taste."

"What? Are you still thinking of the Baroness's daughter?"

"How could I forget her! I've seen her. She is exquisite."

"Yes. She's certainly good-looking."

"Only good-looking! Don't blaspheme. The moment I saw her, my mind was
made up. It's sink or swim for me."

"You run the risk of being left with nothing."

"I know that. I don't care. All or nothing. The Hastings have always
been men of will and resolution. And I'm inspired by the example of
one of my relatives. It's an invigorating case of pertinacity. You'll
see."

"My uncle, the brother of my grandfather, was employed in a London
business house and learned, through a sailor, that a chest filled with
silver had been dug up on one of the islands in the Pacific; it was
supposed that it came from a vessel that had left Peru for the
Philippines. My uncle succeeded in finding out the exact spot where
the ship had been wrecked, and at once he gave up his position and
went off to the Philippines. He chartered a brig, reached the spot
indicated,--a reef of the Magellan archipelago,--they sounded at
several points and after hard work dredged up only a few shattered
chests that contained not a trace of anything. When their food supply
gave out they were forced to return, and my uncle reached Manila
without a farthing. He got a position in a business house. After a
year of this a fellow from the United States proposed that they should
go out together in quest of the treasure, and my uncle accepted, on
the condition that they'd share the profits equally. On this second
voyage they brought up two huge, very heavy chests, one filled with
silver ingots, the other with Mexican gold pieces. The Yankee and my
uncle divided the money and each one's share amounted to more than one
hundred thousand duros. But my uncle, who was an obstinate fellow,
returned to the site of the shipwreck and this time he must have
located the treasure, for he came back to England with a colossal
fortune. Today the Hastings, who still live in England, are
millionaires. Do you remember that Fanny who came to the tavern in Las
Injurias with us?"

"Yes."

"Well, she's one of the wealthy Hastings of England."

"Then why didn't you ask them for some money?" queried Manuel.

"No, never. Not even if I were dying of hunger, and this despite the
fact that they've often offered to help me. Before coming to Madrid I
sailed almost around the world in a yacht belonging to Fanny's
brother."

"And this fortune that you expect to own, is it also on some island?"
asked Manuel.

"It seems to me that you're of the kind that have no faith," answered
Roberto. "Before the crowing of the cock you would deny me three
times."

"No. I know nothing of your affairs; but if you should ever need me,
I'll be ready to serve you, and gladly."

"But you doubt my destiny, and are wrong to do so. You imagine that
I'm a bit daft."

"No, no, sir."

"Bah! You think that this fortune that I'm to inherit is all a hoax."

"I don't know."

"Well, it isn't. The fortune exists. Do you remember I was once
talking with Don Telmo, in your presence, about a conversation I had
with a certain book-binder in his house?"

"Yes, sir. I remember."

"Well, that conversation furnished me with the clew to all the
investigations I afterward conducted; I won't tell you how I went
about collecting data and more data, little by little, for that would
bore you. I'll put the thing for you in a nutshell."

As he finished his sentence Roberto arose from the bench upon which
they were seated and said to Manuel:

"Let's be going; that fellow yonder is hanging around trying to hear
what we're talking about."

Manuel got up, surer than ever that Roberto was crazy on that point;
they walked by El Angel Ca�do, reached the Meteorological Observatory
and from there left for the hills that lie opposite the Pac�fico and
the Do�a Carlota districts.

"We can talk here," murmured Roberto. "If any one comes along, let me
know."

"Don't worry on that score," assured Manuel.

"Well, as I was telling you, that conversation provided the foundation
of a fortune that will soon be mine; but see how clumsy a fellow can
be and how ill things look when they're too near. Until a full year
after I had had that conversation I made no attempt to start my case.
The first efforts I made about two years ago. The idea came to me on
one Carnival day. I was giving lessons in English and studying at the
University; of the little money I earned I had to send some to my
mother and the rest went toward my upkeep and my tuition fees. This
Carnival day,--a Tuesday, I remember,--I had no more than three
pesetas to my name; I had been working so hard and so steadily,
without a moment's let-up, that I said to myself: 'Yes, sir. Today I'm
going to do something foolish. I'm going to disguise myself. And
surely enough, on San Marcos Street I hired a domino and a mask for
three pesetas, and I went out on to the street with not a c�ntimo in
my pocket. I began to walk down toward La Castellana and as I reached
the Cibeles fountain I stopped and asked myself in astonishment: 'Why
did I have to spend the little money I had on me for a disguise, when
I know nobody anyway?'

"I was about to return and get rid of my disguise, but there were so
many people in the crowd that I had to float with the tide. I don't
know whether you've ever noticed how lonesome one feels on these
Carnival days amidst the throngs of people. This solitude in the crowd
is far more intense than solitude in a forest. It brought to my mind
the thousand absurdities one commits; the sterility of my own life.
'I'm going to waste my life in some grubbing profession,' I said to
myself. 'I'll wind up by becoming a teacher, a sort of English
instructress. No; never that. I must seek an opportunity and the means
to emancipate myself from this petty existence, or else plunge into
tragic life.' It also occurred to me that it was very possible that
the opportunity had come to me without my knowing how to take
advantage of it, and at once I recalled my conversation with that
book-binder. I decided to go into the matter until I saw it more
clearly. Without any hope, you'll understand, but simply as an
exercise of the will. 'I need more will-power,' I said to myself,
'with which to conquer the details that come up every moment rather
than to perform some great sacrifice or be capable of an instant of
abnegation. Sublime moments, heroic acts, are rather the deeds of an
exalted intelligence than of the will; I have always felt it in me to
perform some great deed such as taking a trench or defending a
barricade or going to the North Pole; but, would I be capable of
finishing a daily stint, composed of petty provocations and dull
routine? Yes,' said I to myself, and with this resolution I mingled
with the masked merrymakers and returned to Madrid while the rest were
at the height of their fun."

"And have you been working ever since?"

"Ever since, and with rapid persistency. The book-binder didn't care
to give me any details, so I installed myself in the Casa de
Can�nigos, asked for the Libro de Turnos and there from day to day I'd
look over list after list until I found the date of the lawsuit; from
there I went to Las Salesas, located the archive and I spent an entire
month in a garret opening dockets until I found the documents. Then I
had to get baptismal certificates, seek recommendations from a bishop,
run hither and thither, intrigue, scurry to this place and that, until
the question began to clear up, and with all my documents properly
arranged I presented my claim at London. During these two years I laid
the foundations for the tower to the top of which I'll climb yet."

"And are you sure that the foundations are solid?"

"Certainly. They're all facts. Here they are," and Roberto drew from
his pocket a folded paper. "This is the genealogical tree of my
family. This red circle is Don Ferm�n N��ez de Latona, priest of
Labraz, who goes to Venezuela at the end of the seventeenth century,
and returns to Spain during the Trafalgar epoch. On his journey home
an English vessel captures the Spanish ship on which the priest is
sailing and takes him and the other passengers prisoner, transporting
them to England. Don Ferm�n reclaims his fortune of the English
government, it is returned to him and he deposits it in the Bank of
England, and sails back to Spain during the War of Independence. As
money was none too safe in Spain at that time, Don Ferm�n leaves his
fortune in the Bank of England, and on one occasion, desiring to
withdraw a large sum for the purchase of certain estates, he goes to
England with a cousin's niece;--the cousin was his only relation and
was named Juan Antonio. This niece--" and Roberto pointed to a circle
upon the sheet, "marries an Irish gentleman, Bandon, and dies after
three years. The priest Don Ferm�n decides to return to Spain and
orders his fortune to be remitted to the San Fernando Bank, but before
the money is transferred Don Ferm�n dies. Bandon, the Irishman,
presents a will in which the priest names his niece as sole heir, and
proves, moreover, that he had a son by his wife, who died directly
after baptism. Don Ferm�n's cousin, Juan Antonio, of Labraz, brings
suit against Bandon, and the suit lasts for nearly twenty years. Juan
Antonio dies and the Irishman is thus enabled to collect part of the
inheritance.

"Juan Antonio's other daughter marries a cousin of hers, a merchant of
Haro, and has three children, two boys and a girl. The girl enters a
nunnery, one of the boys dies in the Carlist war and the other goes
into business and leaves for America.

"This fellow, Juan Manuel N�nez makes a regular fortune and marries a
native and has two daughters: Augusta and Margarita. Augusta, the
younger, marries my father, Ricardo Hasting, who was a madcap and ran
away from his home; Margarita weds a soldier, colonel Buenavida. They
all come to Spain with plenty of money; my father plunges into
disastrous business schemes, and after he has been utterly ruined he
learns, I don't know how, that the fortune of the priest N��ez de
Latona is at the disposition of the heirs. He goes to England, enters
his claim; they demand his documents, he brings forth the baptismal
records of his wife's ancestors and it is found that the priest Don
Fermin's birth registration is missing. Soon my father gives up
writing and years and years go by; at the end of more than ten we
receive a letter telling us that he has died in Australia.

"Margarita, my mother's sister, is left a widow with a daughter,
marries a second time, and her husband turns out a rascal of the worst
brand who leaves her without a c�ntimo. Rosa, the daughter of the
first marriage, unable to put up with her step-father, elopes with an
actor and nothing more is heard of her.

"If," added Roberto, "you have followed my explanations, you will have
seen that the only remaining relatives of Don Ferm�n N��ez de Latona
are my sisters and I, because Margarita's daughter Rosa N��ez has
died.

"Now, the point is to prove this relationship, and this relationship
is proved, for I have the baptismal documents that show our descent in
a direct line from Juan Antonio, Ferm�n's brother. But why doesn't
Ferm�n N��ez de Latona's name appear in the parish register of Labraz?
That's what's been bothering me, and I've settled it. That Irishman
Bandon, when his rival Juan Antonio died, sent to Spain an agent named
Shaphter, who caused the disappearance of Don Ferm�n's baptismal
certificate. How? I don't know as yet. In the meantime, I'm continuing
the claim in London, just to keep the case in the courts, and the
Hastings are the ones who are pushing the suit."

"And how much does this fortune amount to?" asked Manuel.

"Reckoning principal and interest, to a million pounds sterling."

"And is that much?"

"Without allowing for exchange, about one hundred million reales;
allowing for exchange, a hundred and thirty."

Manuel burst out laughing.

"And all for you alone?"

"For me and my sisters. You can just imagine, when I collect that sum,
what these cheap carriages and such things will mean to me. Nothing at
all."

"And now, in the meantime, you haven't a peseta."

"Such is life. You've got to wait. It can't be helped. Now, when
nobody believes me, I enjoy the recognition of my own strength more
than I'll enjoy my subsequent triumph. I have reared a whole mountain;
a dense mist prevents people from seeing it; tomorrow the clouds will
scatter and the mountain will stand forth with snow-crowned crests."

Manuel thought it silly to be talking of all this opulence when
neither of them had enough to buy a meal. Pretending important
matters, he took leave of Roberto.




CHAPTER IV,

  Dolores the Scandalous--Pastiri's Tricks--Tender Savagery--A
    Modest Out-of-the-way Robbery.


After a week spent in sleeping in the open Manuel decided one day to
rejoin Vidal and Bizco and to take up their evil ways.

He inquired after his friends in the taverns on the Andaluc�a
cart-road, at La Llorosa, Las Injurias, and a chum of El Bizco, who
was named El Chingui, told him that El Bizco was staying at Las
Cambroneras, at the home of a well-known thieving strumpet called
Dolores the Scandalous.

Manuel went off to Las Cambroneras, asked for Dolores and was shown a
door in a patio inhabited by gipsies.

Manuel knocked, but Dolores refused to open the door; finally, after
hearing the boy's explanations, she allowed him to come in.

Dolores' home consisted of a room about three metres square; in the
rear could be made out a bed where El Bizco was sleeping in his
clothes, beside a sort of vaulted niche with a chimney and a tiny
fireplace. The furnishings of the room consisted of a table, a trunk,
a white shelf containing plates and earthenware pots, and a pine
wall-bracket that supported an oil-lamp.

Dolores was a woman of about fifty; she wore black clothes, a red
kerchief knotted around her forehead like a bandage and another of
some indistinct colour over her head.

Manuel called to El Bizco and, when the cross-eyed fellow awoke, asked
after Vidal.

"He'll be here right away," said El Bizco, and then, turning upon the
old lady, he growled: "Hey, you, fetch my boots."

Dolores was slow in executing his orders, whereupon El Bizco, wishing
to show off his domination over the woman, struck her.

The woman did not even mumble; Manuel looked coldly at El Bizco, in
disgust; the other averted his gaze.

"Want a bite?" asked El Bizco of Manuel when he had got out of bed.

"If you have anything good...."

Dolores drew from the fire a pan filled with meat and potatoes.

"You take good care of yourselves," murmured Manuel, whom hunger had
made profoundly cynical.

"They trust us at the butcher's," said Dolores, to explain the
abundance of meat.

"If you and I didn't work hard hereabouts," interjected El Bizco,
"much we'd be eating."

The woman smiled modestly. They finished their lunch and Dolores
produced a bottle of wine.

"This woman," declared El Bizco, "just as you behold her there, beats
them all. Show him what we have in the corner."

"Not now, man."

"And why not?"

"Suppose some one should come?"

"I'll bolt the door."

"All right."

El Bizco bolted the door. Dolores pushed the table to the middle of
the room, went over to the wall, pulled away a scrap of kalsomined
canvas about a yard square, and revealed a gap crammed with ribbons,
cords, lace edging and other objects of passementerie.

"How's that?" said El Bizco. "And it's all of her own collecting."

"You must have quite a bit of money there."

"Yes. It's worth quite a bit," agreed Dolores. Then she let the strip
of canvas fall into place against the excavation in the wall, fastened
it and drew up the bed before it. El Bizco unbolted the door. In a few
moments there was a knock.

"That must be Vidal," said El Bizco, adding in a low voice, as he
turned to Manuel, "See here, not a word to him."

Vidal strutted in with his carefree air, expressed his pleasure at
Manuel's coming, and the three left for the street.

"Are you going to be around here?" asked the old woman.

"Yes."

"Don't come late, then, eh?" added Dolores, addressing Bizco.

The cross-eyed bully did not deign to make any reply.

The three chums went to the square that faces Toledo bridge; near by,
at a stand owned by Garatusa, a penitentiary graduate who ran a
"fence" for thieves and didn't lose any money at it, they had a drink
and then, walking along Ocho Hilos Avenue they came to the Ronda de
Toledo.

The vicinity of El Rastro was thronged with Sunday crowds.

Along the wall of Las Grandiosas Am�ricas, in the space between the
Slaughter-house and the Veterninary School, a long row of itinerant
hawkers had set up their stands.

Some, garbed like beggars, stood dozing motionless against the wall,
indifferently contemplating their wares: old pictures, new
chromographs, books; useless, damaged, filthy articles which they felt
sure none of the public would purchase. Others were gesticulating and
arguing with their customers; several repulsive, grimy old women with
huge straw hats on their heads, dirty hands, arms akimbo and
indecencies quivering upon their lips, were chattering away like
magpies.

The gipsy women in their motley garments were combing their little
brunettes and their black-skinned, large-eyed _churumbeles_ in
the sun; a knot of vagrants was carrying on a serious discussion;
mendicants wrapped in rags, maimed, crippled, were shouting, singing,
wailing, and the Sunday throng, in search of bargains, scurried back
and forth, stopping now and then to question, to pry, while folks
passed by with faces congested by the heat of the sun,--a spring sun
that blinded one with the chalky reflection of the dusty soil,
glittering and sparkling with a thousand glints in the broken mirrors
and the metal utensils displayed in heaps upon the ground. To add to
this deafening roar of cries and shouts, two organs pierced the air
with the merry wheeze of their blending, interweaving tones.

Manuel, El Bizco and Vidal strolled to the head of El Rastro and
turned down again. At the door of Las Am�ricas they met Pastiri
sniffing around the place.

Catching sight of Manuel and the other two, the fellow of the three
cards approached and said:

"Shall we have some wine?"

"Sure."

They entered one of the taverns of the Ronda. Pastiri was alone that
day, as his companion had gone off to the Escorial; since he had no
one to act as his confederate in the game he hadn't made a c�ntimo.
Now, if they would consent to act as bait to induce the inquisitive
onlookers to play, he'd give them a share of the profits.

"Ask him how much?" said El Bizco to Vidal.

"Don't be an idiot."

Pastiri explained the matter for El Bizco's benefit; the confederates
were to place bets and then proclaim in a loud voice that they had
won. Then he'd see to making the spectators eager to play.

"All right. We know what to do," said Vidal.

"You agree to the scheme?"

"Yes, man."

Pastiri gave them three pesetas apiece and the four left the tavern,
crossed the Ronda and made their way in the crowds of El Rastro.

Every once in a while Pastiri would stop, thinking he had caught sight
of a prospective dupe; El Bizco or Manuel would place a bet; but the
fellow who looked like an easy victim would smile as he saw them lay
the snare or else pass on indifferently, quite accustomed to this type
of trickery.

Soon Pastiri noticed a group of rustics with their broad hats and
short trousers.

"_Aluspiar_, here come a few birds and we may work them for
something," he said, and he planted himself and his card table
directly in the path of the country-folk and began his game.

El Bizco bet two pesetas and won; Manuel followed suit with the same
results.

"This fellow is a cinch," said Vidal in a loud voice, turning to the
group of hayseeds. "Have you seen all the money he's losing? That
soldier there just won six duros."

Hearing this, one of the rustics drew near, and seeing that Manuel and
El Bizco were winning, he wagered a peseta and won. The fellow's
companions advised him to retire with his winnings; but his greed got
the best of him and he returned to bet two pesetas, losing them.

Then Vidal bet a duro.

"Here's a five-peseta piece," he declared, ringing the coin upon the
ground, He picked out the right card and won.

Pastiri made a gesture of anoyance.

The rustic wagered another duro and lost; he glanced anxiously at his
fellow countrymen, extracted another duro and lost that, too.

At this moment a guard happened along and the group broke up; noting
Pastiri's movement of flight, the hayseed tried to seize him, grabbing
at his coat, but the trickster gave a rude tug and escaped in the
crowd.

Manuel, Vidal and El Bizco made their way across the Plaza del Rastro
to Embajadores Street.

El Bizco had four pesetas, Manuel six and Vidal fourteen.

"And what are we going to return to that guy?" asked El Bizco.

"Return? Nothing," answered Vidal.

"Why, that would be robbing him of his whole year's profits," objected
Manuel.

"What of it? Deuce take him," retorted Vidal. "We came darn near
getting caught ourselves, with nothing for our trouble."

It was lunch hour and they wondered where to go; Vidal settled it,
saying that as long as they were on Embajadores Street, the Society of
the Three, in plenary session, might as well continue on the way down
till they got to La Manigua restaurant.

The suggestion was accepted and the associates spent that Sunday
afternoon in royal fashion; Vidal was splendid, spending Pastiri's
money right and left, inviting several girls to their table and
dancing all the _chulo_ steps.

To Manuel this beginning of his free life seemed not at all bad. At
night the three comrades, somewhat the worse for wine, ambled up
Embajadores Street, turning into the surrounding road.

"Where am I going to sleep?" asked Manuel.

"Come over to my house," answered Vidal.

When they came in sight of Casa Blanca, El Bizco left them.

"Thank the Lord that tramp has gone," muttered Vidal.

"Have you had a scrap with him?"

"He's a beastly fellow. He lives with La Escandalosa, who's an old fox
in truth, sixty years at the very least, and spends everything she
robs with her lovers. But she feeds him and he ought to have some
consideration for her. Nothing doing, though; he's always kicking her
and punching her and pricking her with his dirk, and one time he even
heated an iron and wanted to burn her. If he takes her money, well and
good; but what's the sense of his burning her?"

They reached Casa Blanca, a squalid section consisting of a single
street; Vidal opened a door with his key; he lighted a match and the
pair climbed up to a tiny room with a mattress placed on the bricks.

"You'll have to sleep on the floor," said Vidal. "This bed belongs to
my girl."

"All right."

"Take this for your head," and he threw him a woman's rolled-up skirt.

Manuel pillowed his head against the skirt and fell asleep. He awoke
at dawn. He opened his eyes and sat down upon the floor without a
thought as to where he might be. Through a tiny window came a pale
glow. Vidal, stretched out on the mattress, was snoring; beside him
slept a girl, breathing with her mouth wide open; long streaks of
rouge stained her cheeks.

Manuel felt nauseated by the excess of the previous day's drink; he
was deeply dejected. He gave serious thought to his life-problems.

"I'm not made for this," he told himself. "I'm neither a savage like
Bizco nor a brazen, carefree lout like Vidal. What am I going to do,
then?"

A thousand things occurred to him, for the most part impossible of
attainment; he imagined all manner of involved projects. Within him,
vaguely, his maternal inheritance, with its respect for all
established custom, struggled against his anti-social, vagrant
instincts that were fed by his mode of living.

"Vidal and Bizco," he said to himself, "are luckier chaps than myself.
They don't hesitate; they have no scruples. They've got a start on
their careers...."

In the end, he considered, they would come to the gallows or to the
penitentiary; but in the meantime the one experienced no suffering
because he was too beastly to know what it meant, and the other
because he was too lazy, and both of them let themselves float
tranquilly with the stream.

Despite his scruples and his remorse, Manuel spent the summer under
the protection of El Bizco and Vidal, living in Casa Blanca with his
cousin and his cousin's mistress, a girl who sold newspapers and
practised thievery at the same time.

The Society of the Three carried on its operations in the suburbs and
Las Ventas, La Prosperidad and the Do�a Carlota section, the Vallecas
bridge and the Four Roads; and if the existence of this society never
came to be suspected and never figured in the annals of crime, it is
because its misdemeanours were limited to modest burglaries of the
sort facilitated by the carelessness of property owners.

The three associates were not content to operate in the suburbs of
Madrid; they extended the radius of their activities to the nearby
towns and to all places in general where crowds came together.

The market and the small squares were test localities, for the booty
might be of a larger quantity but on the other hand the police were
especially vigilant.

In general, they exploited the laundries more than any other place.

Vidal, like the clever fellow he was, managed to Convince El Bizco
that he was the most gifted of the three for the work. The cross-eyed
thug, out of sheer vanity, always undertook the most difficult part of
the task, seizing the booty, while Vidal and Manuel kept a sharp
lookout.

Vidal would say to Manuel, at the very moment of the robbery, when El
Bizco already had the stolen sheet or chemise under his coat:

"If anyone happens along, don't say a word; nothing. Let them arrest
him; we'll shut up tight as clams, absolutely motionless; if they ask
anything, we know nothing. Right-o?"

"Agreed."

Sheets, chemises, cloaks and all the other articles they robbed they
would sell at the second-hand shop on La Ribera de Curtidores, which
Don Telmo used to visit. The owner, employ� or whatever he was of the
shop, would purchase everything the thieves brought, at a very low
price.

This "fence," which profited by the oversight of some base officer
(for the police lists did not bother with these things), was presided
over by a fellow called Uncle P�rquique. He spent his whole life
passing to and fro in front of his establishment. To deceive the
municipal guard he sold shoe-laces and bargains that came from the
old-clothes shop he conducted.

In the spring this fellow would don a cook's white cap and cry out his
tarts with a word that he scarcely pronounced and which he liked to
alter constantly. Sometimes the word seemed to be P�rquique!
P�rquique! but at once it would change sound and be transformed into
P�rqueque or P�rquique, and these phonetic modifications were extended
to infinity.

The origin of this word P�rquique, which cannot be found in the
dictionary, was as follows: The cream tarts sold by the man in the
white cap brought five c�ntimos apiece and he would cry "_A perra
chica! A perra Chica!_ Only five pesetas apiece! A five-peseta
piece!" As a result of his lazy enunciation he suppressed the first A
and converted the other two into E, thus transforming his cry into
"_Perre chique! Perre chique!_" Later, _Perre chique_ turned
into _P�rquique._

The "fence" guard, a jolly soul, was a specialist in crying wares; he
shaded his cries most artistically; he would go from the highest notes
to the lowest or vice versa. He would begin, for example, on a very
high note, shouting:

"Look here! A real! Only one real! Ladies' and gents' hosiery at a
real a pair! Look-a-here now! A real a pair!" Then, lowering his
register, he would continue, gravely: "A nice Bayonne waistcoat. A
splendid bargain!" And as a finale, he would add in a basso profundo:
"Only twenty pesetas!"

Uncle P�rquique knew the Society of the Three, and he would favour El
Bizco and Vidal with his advice.

Safer and more profitable than dealing with the stolen-goods
purchasers of the second-hand shop was the plan followed by Dolores la
Escandalosa, who sold the ribbons and the lace that she pilfered to
itinerant hawkers who paid very well. But the members of the Society
of the Three were eager to get their dividends quickly.

The sale completed, the three would repair to a tavern at the end of
Embajadores avenue, corner of Las Delicias, which they called the
Handkerchief Corner.

The associates were especially careful not to rob twice in the same
place and never to appear together in those vicinities where
unfavourable surveillance was suspected.

Some days, which did not come often, when theft brought no plunder,
the three companions were compelled to work in the Campillo del Mundo
Nuevo, scattering heaps of wood and gathering it together with rakes
after it had been properly aired and dried.

Another of the Society's means of subsistence was cat-hunting. El
Bizco, who was endowed with no talent (his head, as Vidal said, was a
salted melon) had a really great gift for catching cats. All he needed
was a sack and a stick and he did famously. Every living cat in sight
was soon in his game-bag.

The members made no distinction between slender or consumptive cats,
or pregnant tabbies. Every puss that came along was devoured with the
same ravenous appetite. They would sell the skins in El Rastro; when
there were no ready funds, the innkeeper of the Handkerchief Corner
would let them have wine and bread on tick, and the Society would
indulge in a Sardanapalesque banquet....

One afternoon in August Vidal, who had dined in Las Ventas the
previous day with his girl, proposed to his comrades a scheme to rob
an abandoned house on the East Road.

The project was discussed in all seriousness, and on the afternoon of
the following day the three went out to look the territory over.

It was Sunday, there was a bull-fight; omnibuses and street cars,
packed with people, rolled along Alcal� Street beside open hacks
occupied by harlots in Manila mantles and men of knavish mien.

Outside the bull-ring the throng was denser than ever; from the street
cars came pouring streams of people who ran for the entrance; the
ticket-speculators rushed upon them with a shout; amidst the black
multitude shone the white helmets of the mounted guards. From the
inside of the ring came a muffled roar like the tide.

Vidal, El Bizco and Manuel, chagrined that they could not go in,
continued on their way, passed Las Ventas and took the road to
Vic�lvaro. The south wind, warm and sultry, laid a white sheet of dust
over the fields; along the road from different directions drove black
and white hearses, for adults and children respectively, followed by
gigs containing mourners.

Vidal indicated the house: it stood back from the road and seemed
abandoned. It was fronted by a garden with its gate; behind extended
an orchard planted with leafless saplings, with a water-mill. The
orchard-wall was low and could be scaled with relative facility; no
danger threatened; there were neither prying neighbours nor dogs; the
nearest house, a marbler's workshop, was more than three hundred
metres distant.

From the neighbourhood of the house could be made out the East
cemetery, girded by arid yellow fields and barren hillocks; in the
opposite direction rose the Bull Ring with its bright banner and the
outlying houses of Madrid. The dusty road to the burial-ground ran
between ravines and green slopes, among abandoned tile-kilns and
excavations that showed the reddish ochre bowels of the earth.

After a minute examination of the house and its surroundings, the
three returned to Las Ventas. At night they felt like going back to
Madrid, but Vidal suggested that they had better remain where they
were, so that they could commit the robbery at dawn of the next day.
This was decided upon and they lay down in a tile-kiln, in the
passageway formed by two walls of heaped-up bricks.

A cold wind blew violently throughout the night. Manuel was the first
to awake and he roused the other two. They left the passageway formed
by the walls of bricks. It was still night; from time to time a
segment of the moon peered through the dark clouds; now it hid, now it
seemed to rest upon the bosom of one of those dense clouds which it
silvered so delicately.

In the distance, above Madrid a bright glow began to appear,
irradiated by the lights of the city; a few tombstones in the cemetery
cast a pallid shimmer.

Dawn was already tinting the heavens with its melancholy flush when
the three robbers approached the house.

Manuel's heart was pounding with agitation.

"Ah, by the way," said Vidal. "If by any accident we should be
surprised, we mustn't run; we've got to stick right in the house."

El Bizco burst into laughter; Manuel, who knew that his cousin wasn't
talking just for the sake of hearing his voice, asked:

"Why?"

"Because if they catch us in the house it's only a balked attempt at
robbery, and the punishment isn't severe; on the other hand, if they
catch us in flight, that would be a successful robbery and the penalty
would be great. So I was told yesterday."

"Well, I'll escape if I can."

"Do as you please."

They scaled the wall; Vidal remained astride of it, leaning forward
and watching for signs of any one. Manuel and El Bizco, making their
way astraddle along the wall, approached the house and, entrusting
their feet to the roof of a shed, jumped down to a terrace with a
bower slightly higher than the orchard.

The rear door and the balconies of the ground floor led to this
gallery; but both the door and the balconies were so well fastened
that it was impossible to open them.

"Can't you make it?" whispered Vidal from his perch.

"No."

"Here, take my knife." And Vidal threw it dawn to the gallery.

Manuel tried to pry the balconies open with the knife but met with no
success; El Bizco attempted to force the door with his shoulder and it
yielded enough to leave a chink, whereupon Manuel introduced the blade
of the knife and worked the catch of the lock back until he could open
the door. El Bizco and Manuel then went in.

The lower floor of the house consisted of a vestibule, which formed
the bottom of a staircase leading to a corridor, and two rooms whose
balconies overlooked the orchard.

The first thing that came to Manuel's head was to open the lock of the
door that led to the road.

"Now," said El Bizco to him, after admiring this prudent precaution,
"let's see what there is in the place."

They set about calmly and deliberately to take an inventory of the
house; there wasn't three ochavos' worth of material in the entire
establishment. They were forcing the dining-room closet when of a
sudden they heard the bark of a dog close by and they ran in fright to
the gallery.

"What's the matter?" they asked Vidal.

"A damned dog's begun to bark and he'll certainly attract somebody's
attention."

"Throw a stone at him."

"Where'll I get it?"

"Scare him."

"He'll bark all the more."

"Jump down here, or they'll surely see you."

Vidal jumped down into the orchard. The dog, who must have been a
moral animal and a defender of private property, continued his loud
barking.

"But the deuce!" growled Vidal at his friends. "Haven't you finished
yet?"

"There's nothing!"

The three returned to the rooms trembling; they seized a napkin and
stuffed into it whatever they laid hands upon: a copper clock, a white
metal candlestick, a broken electric bell, a mercury barometer, a
magnet and a toy cannon.

Vidal climbed up the wall with the bundle.

"Here he is," he whispered in fright.

"Who?"

"The dog."

"I'll go down first," mumbled Manuel, and placing the knife between
his teeth he let himself drop. The dog, instead of setting upon him,
withdrew a short distance, but he continued his barking.

Vidal did not dare to jump down with the bundle in his hands; so he
threw it carefully upon some bushes; as it fell, only the barometer
broke; the rest was already broken. El Bizco and Vidal then jumped
down and the three associates set out on a cross-country run, pursued
by the canine defender of private property, who barked at their heels.

"What damned fools we are!" exclaimed Vidal, stopping. "If a guard
should see us running like this he'd certainly arrest us."

"And if we pass the city gate they'll recognize what we're carrying in
this bundle and we'll be stopped," added Manuel.

The Society halted to deliberate and choose a course of action. The
booty was left at the foot of a wall. They lay down on the ground.

"A great many rag-dealers and dustmen pass this way," said Vidal, "on
the road to La Elipa. Let's offer this to the first one that comes
along."

"For three duros," corrected El Bizco.

"Why, of course."

They waited a while and soon a ragpicker hove into view, bearing an
empty sack and headed for Madrid. Vidal called him over and offered to
sell their bundle.

"What'll you give us for these things?"

The ragdealer looked over the contents of the bundle, made a second
inventory, and then in a jesting tone, with a rough voice, asked:

"Where did you steal this?"

The three associates chorused their protestation, but the ragpicker
paid no heed.

"I can't give you more than three pesetas for the whole business."

"No," answered Vidal. "Rather than accept that we'll take the bundle
with us."

"All right. The first guard I meet I'll inform against you and tell
him that you're carrying stolen goods on your person."

"Come across with the three pesetas," said Vidal. "Take the bundle."

Vidal took the money and the ragdealer, laughing, took the package.

"The first guard we see we'll tell that you've got stolen goods in
your sack," shouted Vidal to the ragdealer. The man with the sack got
angry and gave chase to the trio.

"Hey there! Come back! Come back!" he bellowed.

"What do you want?"

"Give me my three pesetas and take your bundle."

"Nix. Give us a duro and we won't say a word."

"Like hell."

"Give us only two pesetas more."

"Here's one, you rascal."

Vidal seized the coin that the ragdealer threw at him, and, as none
was sure of himself, they made off hurriedly. When they reached
Dolores' house in Las Cambroneras, they were bathed in perspiration,
exhausted.

They ordered a flask of wine from the tavern, "A rotten bungle we made
of it, hang it all," grumbled Vidal.

After the wine was paid for there remained ten reales; this they
divided among the three, receiving eighty c�ntimos apiece. Vidal
summed up the day's work with the remark that this committing
robberies in out-of-the-way spots was all disadvantages and no
advantages, for besides exposing oneself to the danger of being sent
to the penitentiary almost for life and getting a beating and being
chewed up by a moral dog, a fellow ran the risk of being wretchedly
fooled.




CHAPTER V

  Gutter Vestals--The Troglodytes.


"No use. We've got to get rid of that beastly Bizco. Every time I see
him hate him more and he disgusts me more."

"Why?"

"Because he's a brute. Let him go off to his old fox, Dolores. You and
I can go to the theatre every night."

"How?"

"With the claque. We don't have to pay. All we have to do is applaud
when we get the signal."

This condition seemed to Manuel so easy to fulfil that he asked his
cousin:

"But listen. How is it, then, that everybody doesn't go to the theatre
like that?"

"Because they don't all know the head of the claque as I do."

And as a matter of fact they went to the Apollo. For the first few
days all Manuel could do was think of the plays and the actresses.
Vidal, with his superior manner in all things, learned the songs right
away; Manuel secretly envied him.

Between the acts the members of the claque would adjourn to a tavern
on Barquillo Street, varying this occasionally with a visit to another
place on the Plaza, del Rey. This latter resort was the rendezvous of
the claquers that worked in Price's Circus.

Almost all the legion of applauders were youngsters; a few of them
worked in shops here and there; for the most part they were loafers
and organgrinders who wound up by becoming supernumeraries, chorus men
or ticket-speculators.

There were among them effeminate, clean-shaven types with a woman's
face and a shrill voice.

At the entrance to the theatre Vidal and Manuel made the acquaintance
of a group of girls, from thirteen to eighteen years of age, who
wandered about Alcal� Street approaching well-to-do pillars of the
middle class; they pretended to be news-vendors and always had a copy
of the _Heraldo_ with them.

Vidal cultivated the intimacy of the girls; they were almost all
homely, but this did not interfere with his plans, which consisted of
extending the radius of his activities and his knowledge.

"We must leave the suburbs and work our way toward the centre," said
Vidal.

Vidal wished Manuel to help him, but Manuel had no gift for it. Vidal
came to be the cadet for four girls who lived together in Cuatro
Caminos and were named, respectively, La Mella, La Goya, La Rabanitos
and Engracia; they had come to form, together with Vidal, El Bizco and
Manuel another Society, though this one was anonymous.

The poor girls needed protection; they were pursued more than the
other loose women by the police because they paid no graft to the
inspectors. They would be forever fleeing from the guards and agents,
who, whenever there was a round-up, would take them to the station and
thence to the Convento de las Trinitarias.

The thought of being immured in the convent struck genuine terror into
their hearts.

"To think of never seeing the street," they moaned, as if this were a
most horrible punishment.

And the abandonment at night in the unprotected thoroughfares, which
inspired horror in others; the cold, the rain, the snow,--were to them
liberty and life.

They all spoke in a rough manner; their grammar and word-forms were
incorrect; language in them leaped backwards into a curious atavic
regression.

They spiced their talk with a long string of theatrical lines and
"gags."

The four led a terrible life; they spent the morning and the afternoon
in bed sleeping and didn't go to sleep again till dawn.

"We're like cats," La Mell� would say. "We hunt at night and sleep by
day."

La Mell�, La Goya, La Rabanitos and Engracia would go at night to the
centre of Madrid, accompanied by a white-bearded beggar with a smiling
face and a striped cap.

The old man came to beg alms; he was a neighbour of the girls and they
called him Uncle Tarrillo, bantering him upon his frequent sprees. He
was utterly daft and loved to talk upon the corruption of popular
manners.

La Mell� said that Uncle Tarrillo had tried, one night after they had
returned alone from the Jardinillos del Deposito de Agua, to violate
her and that he had made her laugh so much that it was impossible.

The mendicant would wax indignant at the tale and would pursue the
indiscreet maid with all the ardour of an old faun.

Of the four girls the ugliest was La Mell�; with her big, deformed
head, her black eyes, her wide mouth and broken teeth, her dumpy
figure, she looked like the lady-jester of some ancient princess. She
had been on the point of becoming a chorus-girl; she was balked,
however, for despite her good voice and excellent ear for music, she
could not pronounce the words clearly because of her missing teeth.

La Mell� was always in high spirits, singing and laughing at all hours
of the day and night. She carried in her apron-pocket a tiny
powder-puff with a mirror on the inside of the cover; she would stop
at every other step to gaze at herself by the light of a
street-lantern and powder her face.

She was affectionate and kind-hearted. Her excessive ugliness made
Manuel gag. The lass was eager to win him but Vidal advised his cousin
not to take up with her; La Goya suited him better, for she made more
money.

La Mell� was not at all to Manuel's taste, despite her affectionate
caresses; but La Goya was compromised with El Soldadito, a man with a
position, as she said, for when he went to work he turned the crank of
an handorgan.

This organ-grinder took all the receipts of La Goya, who, as the
prettiest of the quartet, enjoyed the most numerous patronage; El
Soldadito watched her and when she went off with anybody, followed,
waiting for her to come out of the house of assignation so that he
could collect her earnings.

Vidal, of the four, condescended to choose La Rabanitos and Engracia
as the objects of his protection; the two girls were forever disputing
over him. La Rabanitos looked like a pocket-edition of a woman; a
white little face with blue streaks about her nose and her mouth; a
rachetic, wizened body; thin lips and large eyes of schlerotic blue;
she dressed like an old woman, with her sombre little cloak and her
black dress; such was La Rabanitos. She was bothered with frequent
hemorrhages; she spoke with all the mannerisms of a granny, making
queer twists and turns, and she spent all her spare change on dry salt
tunny fish, caramels and other dainties.

Engracia, Vidal's other favourite, was the typical brothel inmate: her
face was white with rice powder; her dark, flashing eyes had an
expression of purely animal melancholy; as she spoke she showed her
blue teeth, which contrasted with the whiteness of her powdered
countenance. She leaped from joy to dejection without transition. She
could not smile. Her face was as soon darkened by stupidity as it was
illuminated by a ribald merriment, insulting and cynical.

Engracia had little to say and when she spoke it was to utter
something particularly bestial and filthy, of involved cynicism and
pornography. Her imagination was of monstrous fertility.

A macabrous sculptor might have hit upon a work of genius by cutting
the thoughts of this girl into the stone representing some infernal
Dance of Death.

Engracia could not read. She wore loud waists, blue and pink; a white
kerchief on her head and a coloured apron; she trotted along with a
swaying movement, so that the coins in her purse kept jingling. She
had been eight years in this brothel life, and was only sixteen in
all. She was sorry to have grown up, for she said that she had earned
far more as a little girl.

The friendship of Manuel and Vidal with these girls lasted a couple of
months; Manuel could not make up his mind to take up with La Mella;
she was too repulsive; Vidal widened the horizons of his activity,
tippled with a gang of _chulos_ and devoted himself to the
conquest of a flower-girl who sold carnations.

Engracia and La Rabanitos conceived a violent hatred for the lass.

"That strumpet?" La Rabanitos would say. "Why, she's already as
disreputable as us...."

One night Vidal did not put in his usual appearance at Casa Blanca,
and two or three days later he showed up at the Puerta del Sol with a
tall, buxom woman garbed in grey.

"Who's that?" asked Manuel of his cousin.

"Her name's Violeta; I've taken up with her."

"And the other one, at Casa Blanca?"

Vidal shrugged his shoulders.

"You can have her if you wish," he said.

Vidal's former sweetheart likewise disappeared from Casa Blanca and,
after he had been unable to collect the two weeks' rent, the
administrator put Manuel out into the street and sold the furnishings:
a few empty bottles, a stew-pot and a bed.

For several days Manuel slept upon the benches of the Plaza de Oriente
and on the chairs of La Castellana and Recoletos. It was getting
toward the end of summer and he could still sleep in the open. A few
c�ntimos that he earned by carrying valises from the stations helped
him to exist, though badly, until October.

There were days when the only thing he ate was the cabbage stalks that
he picked up in the marketplaces; other days, on the contrary, he
treated himself to seventy-eight c�ntimo banquets in the chop-houses.

October came around and Manuel began to feel cold at night; his eldest
sister gave him a frayed overcoat and a muffler; but despite these,
whenever he could find no roof to shelter him he almost froze to death
in the street.

One night in the early part of November Manuel stumbled against El
Bizco at the entrance to a caf� on La Cabecera del Rastro; the
cross-eyed ragamuffin was bent over, almost naked, his arms crossed
against his chest, barefoot; he presented a painful picture of poverty
and cold.

Dolores La Escandalosa had left him for another.

"Where can we go to sleep?" Manuel asked him.

"Let's try the caves of La Monta�a," answered El Bizco.

"But can we get in there?"

"Yes, if there aren't too many."

"Come on, then."

The two crossed through the Puerta de Moros and Mancebos Street to the
Viaduct; they traversed the Plaza de Oriente, following along Bailen
and Ferraz Streets, and, as they reached the Monta�a del Pr�ncipe P�o,
ascended a narrow path bordered by recently planted pines.

El Bizco and Manuel went along in the dark from one side to the other,
exploring the hollows of the mountain, until a ray of light issuing
from a crevice in the earth betrayed one of the caves.

They approached the hole; from within came the interrupted hum of
hoarse voices.

By the flickering light of a candle which was held in position on the
ground by two rocks, more than a dozen outcasts, some seated and some
on their knees, formed a knot of card-players. In the corners might be
discerned the hazy outlines of men stretched out on the sand.

A fetid vapour was exhaled by the cave.

The flame flickered, illuminating now a corner of the den, now the
pale face of one of the players, and as the light blinked, the shadows
of the men grew long or short on the sandy walls. From time to time
was heard a curse or a blasphemy.

Manuel thought that he had beheld something like this before in one of
his feverish nightmares.

"I'm not going in," he said to El Bizco.

"Why?" asked his companion.

"I'd rather freeze."

"As you please, then. I know one of these fellows. He's El
Interprete."

"And who is this Interprete?"

"The captain of all the mountain vagabonds."

Despite these assurances Manuel hesitated.

"Who's there?" came a voice from inside.

"I," answered El Bizco.

Manuel dashed off at full speed. Near the cave stood a group of two or
three huts, with a yard in the middle, surrounded by a rough stone
wall.

This, according to the ironic name given to it by the ragamuffins, was
the Crystal Palace, the nest of some low-flying turtledoves who
frequented the Monta�a barracks and who, at night, were joined by
friendly hawks and gerfalcons.

The entrance to the yard was closed by a double-panelled door.

Manuel examined it to see if it yielded, but it was strong, and was
armoured with tins that were stretched out and nailed down upon mats.

He thought that nobody could be there and tried to climb the wall; he
scaled the low rubble inclosure and as he advanced, got caught in a
wire; a stone fell noisily from the wall, a dog began to bark
furiously, and a curse echoed from inside.

Manuel, convinced that the nest was not empty, took to flight. He
sought shelter in a doorway that was somewhat protected from the rain
and huddled down to sleep.

It was still night when he awoke shivering with the cold, trembling
from head to foot. He started to run so as to warm himself; he reached
the Paseo de Rosales and strode up and down several times.

It seemed that the night would never end.

The rain ceased; the sun came out in the morning; Manuel took refuge
in a hollow on the slope of the embankment. The sun began to warm him
most deliciously. Manuel dreamed of a very white, exceedingly
beautiful woman with golden tresses. Frozen almost to death, he drew
near the lady, and she wrapped him in her golden strands and he
nestled tenderly, ever so tenderly in her lap....




CHAPTER VI

  Se�or Custodio and His Establishment--The Free Life.


... And he was in the midst of the most ravishing dreams when a harsh
voice recalled him to the bitter, impure realities of existence.

"What are you doing there, loafer?" some one was asking him.

"I!" mumbled Manuel, opening his eyes and staring at his questioner.
"I'm not doing anything."

"Yes, I can see that. I can see that."

Manuel got up; before him he beheld an old man with greyish hair and
gloomy mien, with a sack across his shoulder and a hook in his hand.
The fellow wore a fur cap, a sort of yellowish overcoat and a reddish
muffler rolled around his neck.

"Have you a home?" asked the man.

"No, sir."

"And you sleep in the open?"

"Well, as I haven't any home...."

The ragpicker began to rake over the ground, fished up some objects
and various papers, shoved them into the sack and turning his gaze
again upon Manuel, added:

"You'd be better off if you went to work."

"If I had work, I'd work; but I haven't, so ..."--and Manuel, wearied
of these useless words, huddled into his corner to continue his
slumbers.

"See here," said the ragdealer, "you come along with me. I need a boy
... I'll feed you."

Manuel looked at the man without replying.

"Well, do you want to or not? Hurry up and decide."

Manuel lazily arose. The rag man, sack slung across his shoulder,
climbed the slope of the embankment until he reached Rosales Street,
where he had a cart drawn by two donkeys. The man told them to move on
and they ambled down toward the Paseo de la Florida, thence through
Virgen del Puerto Avenue to the Ronda de Segovia. The cart, with its
license plate and number, was a tumbledown affair, held together by
strips of brass, and was laden with two or three sacks, buckets and
baskets.

The ragman, Se�or Custodio,--that was what he gave as his
name,--looked like a good-natured soul.

From time to time he would bend over, pick up something from the
street and throw it into the cart.

Underneath the cart, attached to it by a chain, jogged along in
leisurely fashion a dog with yellowish locks, long and lustrous,--an
amiable creature who appeared to Manuel as good a canine as his master
was a human being.

       *       *       *       *       *

Between the Segovia and Toledo bridges, not far from the head of
Imperial Avenue, there opens a dark depression with a cluster of two
or three squalid, wretched huts. It is a quadrangular ditch, blackened
by smoke and coal dust, hemmed in by crumbling walls and heaps of
rubbish.

As he reached the edge of this depression, the rag-dealer stopped and
pointed out to Manuel a hovel standing next to a broken-down
merry-go-round and some swings, saying:

"That's my house; take the cart down there and unload it. Can you do
that?"

"Yes, I think so."

"Are you hungry?"

"Yes, sir."

"Very well. Then tell my wife to give you a bite."

Manuel accompanied the cart into the hollow over an embankment of
rubbish. The ragdealer's house was the largest in the vicinity and had
a yard as well as an adjoining shed.

Manuel stopped before the door of the hut; an old woman came out to
meet him.

"What do you want, kid?" she asked. "Who sent you here?"

"Se�or Custodio. He told me to ask you where to put the stuff that's
in the cart."

The woman pointed out the shed.

"He told me also," added the boy, "to say that you should give me
something to eat."

"I know you, you foxy creature," mumbled the old woman. And after
grumbling for a long time and waiting for Manuel to dump out the
contents of the cart, she gave him a slice of bread and a piece of
cheese.

The woman unharnessed the two mules and released the dog, who began to
bark and play with contentment; he snapped playfully at the mules, one
black and the other a silvery grey, who turned their eyes upon him and
showed their teeth; desperately he gave chase to a white cat with a
tail that bristled like a feather-duster, then approached Manuel, who,
seated in the sun, was nibbling at his bit of cheese and his slice of
bread, waiting for something. They both had lunch.

Manuel walked around the dwelling and looked it over. One of its
narrow sides was composed of two bathing-houses.

These two bathing-houses were not joined, but left between them a
space filled in by a rusty iron door such as is used to fasten shops.

The two longer walls of the ragdealer's hovel were formed of stakes
paid with pitch, and the wall opposite to that built of the
bathing-houses was constructed of thick, irregular rocks and curved
outward with a swelling like that of a church presbytery. Within, this
curve corresponded to a hollow in the manner of a wide vaulted niche
occupied by the hearth.

The house, despite its tiny size, had no uniform system of roofing; in
some spots tiles were substituted by strips of tin with heavy rocks
holding them in place and the interstices chinked with straw; in
others, the slate was mortared together with mud; in still others,
sheets of zinc provided protection.

The construction of the house betrayed each phase of its growth. As
the shell of the tortoise augments with the development of the
reptile, so did the rag-dealer's hovel little by little increase. At
first it must have been a place for only one person, something like a
shepherd's hut; then it widened, grew longer, divided into rooms,
afterwards adding its annexes, its shed and its yard.

Before the door to the dwelling, on a flat stretch of tamped earth,
stood a carrousel surrounded by a low, octagonal impalement; the
stakes, decayed by the action of moisture and heat, still showed a
vestige of their original blue paint.

Those poor merry-go-round steeds, painted red, offered to the gaze of
the indifferent spectator the most comical, and at the same time the
most pathetic sight. One of the coursers was of indeterminate hue; the
other must have forgotten his paws in his mad race; one of them, in a
most elegantly uncomfortable pose, symbolized humble sadness and
honest, refined modesty.

At the side of the merry-go-round rose a frame formed of two tripods
upon which rested a beam, whose hooks served as the support of swings.

The black ditch harboured three other hovels, all three constructed of
tins, rubbish, planks, ruins and other similar building materials. One
of the shacks, owing either to old age or deficient architecture,
threatened to collapse, and the owner, no doubt, had sought to prevent
its fall by sinking a row of stakes along one of the walls, against
which it leaned like a lame man upon his crutch; another house
flaunted like a flagstaff a long stick on its roof with a pot stuck on
the top....

After eating Manuel informed the old woman that Se�or Custodio had
told him he might remain there.

"Tell me whether there's anything else for me to do," he concluded.

"All right. Stay here. Take care of the fire. If the pot boils, let
it; if it doesn't, throw a bit of coal into the flames. Reverte!
Reverte!" shouted the woman to the dog. "Let him remain here."

She went off and Manuel was left alone with the dog. The stew boiled
merrily. Manuel, followed by Reverte, made an inspection tour of the
house. It was divided into three compartments: a tiny kitchen and a
large room into which the light entered through two high, small
windows.

In this room or store-room, on all sides, from the walls and from the
ceiling, hung old wares of various hue, white clothes, red boinas and
Catalonian caps, strips of crape cloaks. On the shelves and on the
floor, separated according to class and size, were flasks, bottles,
jars, canisters, a veritable army of glass and porcelain pots; the
ranks were broken by those huge, green, dropsical pharmacy bottles,
and several heavy-paunched demi-johns; then came half-gallon bottles,
tall and dark; straw-covered vases; this was followed by the section
devoted to medicinal waters, the most varied and numerous of all, for
it included Seltzer-water siphons, oxygenized-water siphons, bottles
of gaseous water, Vichy, Mondariz, Carabana; after this came the small
fry, the perfume phials, the pots, the cold-cream jars, the cosmetic
receptacles.

In addition to this department of bottles there were others:
canned-goods tins and pans ranged on shelves; buttons and keys kept in
chests; remnants, ribbons and laces rolled around spools or cardboard.

All this struck Manuel as quite pleasant. Everything was in its proper
place, relatively spick and span; the hand of a methodical, neat
person was in evidence.

In the kitchen, which was kalsomined, shone the few scullery utensils.
On the hearth, above the white ashes, an earthenware stew-pot was
boiling away with a gentle purring.

From outside there scarcely came the distant noises of the city, which
filtered in like a pale sound; it was as quiet as in a remote hamlet;
now and then a dog would bark, some cart would creak as it bumped
along the road, then silence would be restored and in the kitchen
nothing would be heard save the _glu glu_ of the pot, like a
soft, confidential murmur....

Manuel cast a look of satisfaction through the chink of the door to
the dark ditch outside. In the corral the hens were scratching the
earth; a hog was rooting about, running in fright from one side to the
other, grunting and quivering with nervous tremours; Reverte was
yawning, blinking gravely, and one of the donkeys was wallowing
delightedly amidst broken pots, decayed baskets and heaps of refuse,
while the other, as if scandalized by such unrefined comportment,
contemplated him with the utmost surprise.

All this black earth filled Manuel with an impression of ugliness, yet
at the same time with a sense of tranquillity and shelter; it seemed a
proper setting for him. This soil formed the daily deposits of the
dumping-place; this earth, whose sole products were old sardine-cans,
oyster shells, broken combs and shattered pots; this earth, black and
barren, composed of the detritus of civilization, of bits of lime and
mortar and factory refuse, of all that the city had cast off as
useless, seemed to Manuel a place made especially for him, for he
himself was a bit of the flotsam and jetsam likewise cast adrift by
the life of the city.

Manuel had seen no other fields than the sad, rocky meadows of Soria
and the still sadder ones of the Madrilenian suburbs. He did not
suspect that in spots uncultivated by man there were green meadows,
leafy woods, beds of flowers; he thought that trees and flowers were
born only in the gardens of the rich....

Manuel's first days in Se�or Custodio's house seemed too burdened; but
as there is plenty of free roaming in the ragdealer's life, he soon
grew accustomed to it.

Se�or Custodio arose when it was still night, woke Manuel, and they
both harnessed the two donkeys to the cart and took the direction to
Madrid, on their daily hunt for the old boot and the discarded tatter.
Sometimes they went by way of Melanc�licos Avenue; others, by the
Rondas or through Segovia Street.

Winter was coming on; at the hour when they sallied forth Madrid was
in complete darkness. The ragdealer had his fixed itinerary and his
schedule of call stations. When he went by way of the Rondas and drove
up Toledo Street, which was his most frequent route, he would halt at
the Plaza de la Cebada and the Puerta de Moros, fill his hamper with
vegetables and continue toward the heart of the city.

On other days he travelled through Melanc�licos Avenue to the Virgen
del Puerto, from here to La Florida, then to Rosales Street, where he
rummaged in the rubbish deposited by the tip-carts, continuing to the
Plaza de San Marcial and arriving at the Plaza de los Mostenses.

On the way Se�or Custodio let nothing escape his eye; he would examine
it and keep it if it were worth the trouble. The leaves of vegetables
went into the hampers; rags, paper and bones went into the sacks; the
half-burned coke and coal found a place in a bucket and dung was
thrown into the back of the cart.

Manuel and the ragdealer returned early in the morning; they unloaded
the cart on the flat earth before the door, and husband, wife and the
boy would separate and classify the day's collection. The rag-dealer
and his wife were amazingly skilful and quick at this work.

On rainy days the assorting was done in the shed. During such weather
the depression became a dismal, repellant swamp, and in order to cross
it one had to sink into the mud, in places half way up to the knee.
Everything would drip water; the hog in the yard would wallow in mire;
the hens would appear with their wings all black and the dog scampered
about coated with mud to the ears.

After the sorting of the collection, Se�or Custodio and Manuel, each
with a basket, would wait for the dump-carts to arrive, and as the
refuse was tipped out, they would set about sorting it on the very
dumping-grounds: pasteboard, rags, glass and bones.

In the afternoon Se�or Custodio would go to certain stables in the
Arg�elles district to clean out the manure and take it to the orchards
on the Manzanares.

Between one thing and another Se�or Custodio made enough to live in a
certain comfort; he had a firm grasp upon his business and as he was
under no compulsion to sell his wares promptly, he would wait for the
most opportune occasion so that he could sell with advantage.

The paper that he thus stored up was purchased by the pasteboard
factories; they gave him from thirty or forty c�ntimos per arroba. The
manufacturers required the paper to be perfectly dry, and Se�or
Custodio dried it in the sun. As they tried at times to get the best
of him in weight, he used to place in each sack two or three full
arrobas, weighed with a steelyard; on the cloth of the sack he would
inscribe a number in ink, indicating the amount of arrobas it
contained, and these sacks he held in a sort of cellar or ship's hold
that he had dug into the ground of the shed.

When there was a great quantity of paper he sold it to a pasteboard
factory on Acacias Avenue. Se�or Custodio's journey was not in vain,
for in addition to selling the goods at a fancy price, he would, on
the way back, drive his cart in the direction of a pitch factory of
the vicinity, and there he picked up from the ground a very fine coal
that burned excellently and gave as much heat as slag.

He sold the bottles to wine houses, to liquor and beer distilleries;
the medicine flasks he disposed of to pharmacists; the bones went to
the refineries and the rags to the paper factories.

The bread leavings, vegetable leaves and fruit cores were reserved for
the feed of the pigs and hens, and what was of no use at all was cast
into the rotting-place, converted into manure and sold to the orchards
near the river.

On the first Sunday that Manuel spent there, Se�or Custodio and his
wife took the afternoon off. For many a day they had never gone out
together because they were afraid to leave the house alone; this day
they dressed up in their best and went on a visit to their daughter,
who worked as a modiste in a relative's shop.

Manuel was glad to be left by himself with Reverte, contemplating the
house, the yard, the ditch; he turned the carrousel round and it
creaked ill-humouredly; he climbed up the swing frame, looked down at
the hens, teased the pig a little and then ran up and down with the
dog chasing after him barking merrily in feigned fury.

This dark depression attracted Manuel somehow or other, with its
rubbish heaps, its gloomy hovels, its comical, dismantled
merry-go-round, its swings, and its ground that held so many
surprises, for a rough, ordinary pot burgeoned from its depths as
easily as a lady's elegant perfume phial; the rubber bulb of a prosaic
syringe grew side by side with the satin, scented sheet of a love
letter.

This rough, humble life, sustained by the detritus of a refined,
vicious existence; this almost savage career in the suburbs of a
metropolis, filled Manuel with enthusiasm. It seemed to him that all
the stuff cast aside in scorn by the capital,--the ordure and broken
tubs, the old flower-pots and toothless combs, buttons and sardine
tins,--all the rubbish thrown aside and spurned by the city, was
dignified and purified by contact with the soil.

Manuel thought that if in time he should become the owner of a little
house like Se�or Custodio's, and of a cart and donkeys, and hens and a
dog, and find in addition a woman to love him, he would be one of the
almost happy men in this world.




CHAPTER VII

  Se�or Custodio's Ideas--La Justa, El Carnicer�n, and El Conejo.


Se�or Custodio was an intelligent fellow of natural gifts, very
observant and quick to take advantage of a situation. He could
neither read nor write, yet made notes and kept accounts; with
crosses and scratches of his own invention he devised a substitute
for writing, at least for the purposes of his own business.

Se�or Custodio was exceedingly eager for knowledge, and if it
weren't that the notion struck him as ridiculous, he would have set
about learning how to read and write. In the afternoon, work done,
he would ask Manuel to read the newspapers and the illustrated
reviews that he picked up on the streets, and the ragdealer and his
wife listened with the utmost attention.

Se�or Custodio had, too, several volumes of novels in serial form
that had been left behind by his daughter, and Manuel began to read
them aloud.

The comment of the ragdealer, who took this fiction for historic
truth, was always perspicacious and just, revelatory of an instinct
for reasoning and common sense. The man's realistic criticism was
not always to Manuel's taste, and at times the boy would make bold
to defend a romantic, immoral thesis. Se�or Custodio, however, would
at once cut him short, refusing to let him continue.

For professional reasons the ragdealer was much preoccupied with
thought of the manure that went to waste in Madrid. He would say to
Manuel:

"Can you imagine how much money all the refuse that comes from
Madrid is worth?"

"No."

"Then figure it out. At seventy c�ntimos per arroba, the millions of
arrobas that it must amount to in a year.... Spread this over the
suburbs and have the waters of the Manzanares and the Lozoya
irrigating all these lands, and you'd see a world of gardens and
orchards everywhere."

Another of the fellow's fixed ideas was that of reclaiming used
material. It seemed to him that lime and sand could be extracted
from mortar refuse, live plaster from old, dead plaster, and he
imagined that this reclamation would yield a huge sum of money.

Se�or Custodio, who had been born near the very depression in which
his house was situated, felt for his particular district, and for
Madrid in general, a deep enthusiasm; the Manzanares, to him, was as
considerable a river as the Amazon.

Se�or Custodio had two children, of whom Manuel knew only Juan, a
tall, swarthy sport who was married to the daughter of a laundry
proprietress in La Bombilla. The ragdealer's daughter, Justa by
name, was a modiste in a shop.

During the first few weeks neither of the children came to their
parents' home. Juan lived in the laundry and Justa with a relative
of hers who owned a workshop.

Manuel, who spent many hours in conversation with Se�or Custodio,
noted very soon that the rag-dealer, though fully aware of his very
humble condition, was a man of extraordinary pride and that as
regarded honour and virtue he had the ideas of a mediaeval nobleman.

One Sunday, after he had been living there a month Manuel had
finished his meal and was standing at the door when he saw a girl
with her skirts gathered come running down the slope of the
dumping-ground. As she approached and he got a close look at her,
Manuel went red and then blanched. It was the lass that had come two
or three times to the lodging-house to fit the Baroness's dresses;
but she had since then grown to womanhood.

She drew near, raising her skirt and her starched petticoats,
careful not to soil her patent-leather slippers.

"What can she be coming here for?" Manuel asked himself.

"Is father in?" she inquired.

Se�or Custodio came out and embraced her. She was the ragdealer's
daughter of whom Manuel was forever hearing and whom, without
knowing just why, he had imagined as a very thin, emaciated,
disagreeable creature.

Justa walked into the kitchen and after looking over the chairs, to
see whether there was anything on them that might soil her clothes,
she sat down upon one of them. She began to pour forth a flood of
unceasing chatter and roared at her own jokes.

Manuel listened without a word; to tell the truth she wasn't quite
so good-looking as he had imagined, but she didn't please him any
the less for that. She might be about eighteen, was brunette, rather
short, with very dark, flashing eyes, a tilted, pert nose, a sensual
mouth and thick lips. She was, too, a bit full behind and in the
breasts and the hips; she was neat, fresh, with a very high top-knot
and a pair of brand-new, polished slippers.

As Justa gabbled on, to the ecstasy of her parents, there came into
the kitchen a hump-backed fellow from one of the neighbouring
hovels; he was called El Conejo (the rabbit) and his face really
showed a great resemblance to the amiable rodent whose name he bore.

El Conejo was a member of Se�or Custodio's fraternity and knew Justa
since she had been a child; Manuel used to see him every day, but
never paid any attention to him.

The Rabbit walked into Se�or Custodio's and began to talk nonsense,
laughing in violent outbursts, but in so mechanical a manner that it
provoked his hearers, for it seemed that behind this continuous
laughter lay a very deep bitterness. Justa touched his hump, for, as
is known, this brings good luck, whereupon El Conejo exploded with
merriment.

"Have you been lugged up again before the chief?" she asked.

"Oh, yes. Often ... hee-hee ..."

"What for?"

"Because the other day I started to shout in the street: 'Bargains!
Who'll buy Sagasta's umbrella, Kruger's hat, the Pope's urinal, a
syringe lost by a nun while she was talking with the sacristan! ..."

El Conejo trumpeted this at the top of his lungs and Justa held her
sides with laughter.

"And don't you sing mass any more the way you used to?"

"Oh, sure."

"Let's hear it, then."

The humpback had taken for his scandalous parody, the Preface of the
Mass, and for the sacred words he substituted others with which he
announced his business. He began to bellow:

"Who will sell me any ... slippers ... pants ... hempen sandals ...
old shoes ... secondhand clothes ... syringes ... urinals and even
chemises."

The hunchback's cries made Justa laugh nervously. El Conejo, after
repeating the Preface several times took up the melody of the
rogations and sang some strains in a high soprano, others in a basso
profundo:

"The high silk-hat" ... and instead of saying _Lib�ranos
domine_, he went on: "I'll buy for spot cash.... Your old vest
... will fetch a five-peseta piece...."

Then he had to stop to let Justa laugh.

She was not slow in perceiving that she had attracted Manuel, and
despite the fact that he seemed no great conquest to her, she became
serious, egged him on and glanced at him furtively with looks that
sent the boy's blood pounding faster.

After the ragdealer's daughter had left, Manuel felt as if he had
been abandoned to darkness. He thought that he could live for two or
three weeks on her incendiary glances alone.

The next day, when Manuel met El Conejo he listened to the nonsense
that the hunchback spoke, with his eternal harping on the Bishop of
Madrid-Alcal�, and then tried to shift the conversation toward the
topic of Se�or Custodio and his family.

"Justa's a pretty girl, isn't she?"

"Psch ... yes," and El Conejo looked at Manuel with the reserved
mien of a person concealing a mystery.

"You've known her since she was a kid, haven't you?"

"Yes. But I've known plenty of other girls, too."

"Has she a sweetheart?"

"She must have. Every woman has a sweetheart unless she's mighty
ugly."

"And who is Justa's fellow?"

"Anyone; I shouldn't be surprised if it were the Bishop of
Madrid-Alcal�."

El Conejo was a very intelligent looking person; he had a long face,
a curved nose, a broad forehead, tiny, sparkling eyes and a reddish
beard that tapered to a point, like a goat's.

A peculiar tic, a convulsive twitch of the nose, would agitate his
face from time to time, and it was this that completed his
resemblance to a rabbit. His merriment was just as likely to find
issue in a nervous, metallic, sonorous outburst as in a muffled,
clownish guffaw. He would stare at people from top to bottom and
from bottom to top in a manner all the more insolent for its jesting
character, and to add to the mockery he would detain his gaze upon
his interlocutor's buttons, and his eyes would dance from the cravat
to the trousers and from the boots to the hat. He took special care
to dress in the most ridiculous fashion and he liked to adorn his
cap with bright cock feathers, strut about in riding boots and
commit similar follies.

He was fond, too, of confusing folks with his lies, and so firmly
did he state the tales of his own invention that it was hard to tell
whether he was fooling or speaking in all seriousness.

"Haven't you heard what happened this afternoon to the Bishop of
Madrid-Alcal� over at Las Cambroneras?" he would say to some
acquaintance.

"Why, no."

"Sure. He was on a visit bringing alms to Garibaldi and Garibaldi
gave the Bishop a cup of chocolate. The Bishop sat down, took a sip,
when zip! ... Nobody knows just what happened; he dropped dead."

"Why, man! ..."

"It's the Republicans that are behind it all," affirmed El Conejo in
his most serious manner, and he would be off to another place to
spread the news or perpetrate another hoax. He would join a group.

"Have you heard what happened to Weyler?"

"No. What was it?"

"Oh, nothing. On his return from camp some flies attacked his face
and ate up a whole ear. He went across Segovia bridge bleeding
terribly."

This was how the buffoon managed to enjoy himself.

Mornings he would sling his sack over his shoulder and proceed to
the centre of Madrid where he shouted his business through the
thoroughfares, mingling his cries with the names of political
leaders and famous men,--a habit that had won him more than once the
honour of appearing before the police-chief's desk.

El Conejo was as perverse and malevolent as a demon; any maiden in
the vicinity that was going around with a secret bundle might well
tremble lest he surprise her. He knew everything, he scented it out;
apparently, however, he took no mean advantage of his discoveries.
He was content to scare folks out of their wits.

"El Conejo must know," was the regular response when anything was
suspected.

"I don't know a thing; I've seen nothing," he would answer,
laughing. "I don't know anything." And that was all anybody could
get out of him.

As Manuel got to know El Conejo better he felt for him, if not
esteem, at least a certain respect because of his intelligence.

This ragman jester was so cunning that often he deceived his
colleagues of El Rastro, who were far from being a set of fools.

Almost every morning the ragdealers would forgather at the head of
El Rastro, to exchange impressions and used articles. El Conejo
would learn beforehand just what was needed by the stand merchants,
and he would buy the articles of the rag men, selling them in turn
to the merchants; between this bartering and selling he always came
out the gainer....

During the Sundays that followed, Justa amused herself by working
upon Manuel's feelings. The girl was absolutely free in her talk and
had a thorough, finished knowledge of all the Madrilenian phrases
and wiles.

At first Manuel acted very respectfully; but seeing that she took no
offence he grew gradually more daring and ventured so far as to
steal embraces. Justa easily freed herself and would laugh at sight
of the fellow's serious countenance and his glance ablaze with
desire.

With the licentious manner that characterized her, Justa would carry
on scabrous conversations, telling Manuel what men said to her on
the street and the proposals that they whispered into her ears; she
spoke with especial delight of shopmates who had lost their virginal
bloom in La Bombilla or Las Ventas with some Don Juan of the counter
who spent his days twirling his mustache before the mirror of a
perfumery or silk shop.

Justa's words were always freighted with a double meaning and were,
at times, burning allusions. Her mischievous manner, her flaunting,
unbridled coquetry, scattered about her an atmosphere of lust.

Manuel felt a painful eagerness to possess her, mingled with a great
sadness and even hatred, when he saw that Justa was making sport of
him. Many a time when he saw her come Manuel vowed to himself not to
speak a word to her, not to look at her or say anything; then she
would hunt him out and tease him by beckoning to him and touching
his foot.

Justa's temper was disconcertingly uneven. Sometimes when Manuel
clasped her about the waist and sat her down on his knees, she would
let him squeeze her and kiss her all he pleased; at others, however,
simply because he had drawn near and taken her by the hand, she
would give him such a hard slap that his senses whirled.

"And come back for more," she would add, seemingly indignant.

Manuel would feel like crying with anger and rage, and would have to
contain himself lest he blurt out, with childish logic: "Why did you
let me kiss you the other afternoon?" But at once he saw how
ridiculous such a question would seem.

Justa got to feel a certain liking for Manuel, but it was a
sisterly, a friendly affection; he never appealed to her seriously
as a sweetheart or a suitor.

This flirtation, which to Justa was a mere sham of love, constituted
for Manuel a painful awakening from puberty. He had dizzy attacks of
passionate desire which left him mortally weak and crushed. Then he
would stride along hurriedly with the irregular gait of one
suffering from locomotor ataxia; many a time, crossing the pine
grove of the Canal, he was seized with an impulse to jump into the
river and drown himself. The filthy black water, however, hardly
invited to immersion.

It was during these libidinous spells that dark, sinister thoughts
assailed him,--the notion of how useless his life was, the certainty
of an adverse fate,--and as he considered the vagabond, abandoned
existence that awaited him, his soul walked with bitterness and sobs
rose in his throat....

One winter Sunday Justa, who had got into the habit of visiting her
parents on every holiday, did not appear. Manuel wondered whether
the inclement weather might be the cause and he spent the whole week
restless and nervous, counting the days that would intervene before
their next meeting.

On the following Sunday Manuel went to the corner of the Paseo de
los Pontones to wait for the girl to come along; as he espied her at
a distance his heart gave a jump. She was accompanied by a young
dandy, half bull-fighter and half gentleman, wearing a Cordovan hat
and a blue cloak covered with embroidery. At the end of the avenue
Justa took leave of her escort.

The next Sunday Justa carne to her parents' home with a girl friend
and the young man of the embroidered cloak; she introduced the young
man to Se�or Custodio. Afterward she said that he was the son of a
butcher from La Corredera Alta, and to her mother Justa confessed
bashfully that the gentleman had asked permission to pay her
attentions. This phrase pay attentions, which is spoken by the
haughtiest princess and the humblest janitress with equally
lingering pleasure, enchanted the ragdealer's wife, particularly as
the gentleman in question came of a wealthy family.

In Se�or Custodio's home the butcher's son was considered as the
paragon of all perfections and beauties; Manuel alone protested and
El Carnicerin (the little butcher),--as he had named him derisively
from the very first moment,--was the object of his murderous
glances.

When Manuel understood that Justa considered the butcher's son as an
ideal suitor, his sufferings were cruel. It was no longer melancholy
that moved his soul, which was now agitated by the most raging
despair.

The fellow had too many advantages over him: he was tall, graceful,
slender, flaunted a fair, budding moustache, was well-dressed, his
fingers covered with rings, an expert dancer and skilful player on
the guitar; he almost had a right to be as, content with himself as
he was.

"How can that woman fail to see," thought Manuel, "that the fellow
loves only himself? While I...."

On Sundays there used to be dancing on a lawn near the Ronda de
Segovia, and Se�or Custodio, with his wife, Justa and her
sweetheart, would go there. They would leave Manuel behind to watch
the house, but at times he would run off to see the dance.

When he caught sight of Justa dancing with El Carnicerin he was
overwhelmed with a desire to drown them both.

The suitor, moreover, was a terrible show-off; he would affect a
feminine grace as he danced, and it seemed as if he were applauding
and complimenting himself. He kept so finically true to the rhythm
of the dance that a spontaneous motion might ruin everything. He
wouldn't have officiated at mass with greater ceremony.

As was natural, such a complete knowledge of the science of dancing,
united to his consciousness of superiority, endowed El Carnicer�n
with admirable self-possession. It was he who was permitting himself
indolently to be won by Justa, who was frantically fond of him. As
they danced she threw herself upon him, her eyes sparkled and her
nostrils dilated; it seemed as if she wished to dominate him,
swallow him, devour him. She did not take her eyes off him, and if
she saw him with another woman her face at once turned colour.

One afternoon El Carnicer�n was speaking to a friend. Manuel drew
near so as to overhear the conversation.

"Is that the girl?" his friend inquired.

"She's the one."

"Boy, maybe she isn't daffy over you."

And El Carnicer�n, with a conceited smile, added:

"I've turned her head, all right."

Manuel could have torn out the fop's heart at that moment.

His disappointment in love made him think of leaving Se�or
Custodio's house.

One day he met, near the Segovia bridge, El Bizco and another
ragamuffin that was with him.

They were both in tatters; El Bizco looked grimmer and more brutish
than ever. He wore an old jacket through the rents of which peered
his dark skin; according to what they said, they were both on their
way to the intersection of Aravaca road and the Extremadura
cart-road, to a spot they called the Confessionary. They expected to
meet El Cura and El Hospiciano there and rob a house.

"What do you say? Will you join us?" asked El Bizco sarcastically.

"No, I won't."

"Where are you now?"

"In a house ... working."

"There's a brave fool for you! Come on, join us."

"No. I can't.... Listen, how about Vidal? Didn't you ever see him
again?"

El Bizco's face turned grimmer than ever.

"I'll get even with that scoundrel. He won't escape before I carve a
nice scar on his face.... But are you coming along with us or not?"

"No."

Se�or Custodio's ideas had worked a strong influence upon Manuel;
but since, despite this, his adventurous instincts persisted, he
thought of going off to America, or becoming a sailor, or something
of that sort.




CHAPTER VIII

  The Square--A Wedding in La Bombilla--The Asphalt Caldrons.


The betrothal of El Carnicer�n and Justa was formally arranged, Se�or
Custodio and his wife bathed in rose water, and only Manuel believed
that in the end the wedding would never take place.

El Carnicer�n was all together too haughty and too much of a fine
fellow to marry the daughter of a ragdealer; Manuel imagined that now
the butcher's son would try to take advantage of his opportunity. But
for the present nothing authorized such malevolent suppositions.

El Carnicer�n was generosity itself and showed delicate attentions to
his sweetheart's parents.

One summer day he invited the whole family and Manuel to a bull fight.
Justa dressed up very fetchingly in her best to make a worthy
companion to her lover. Se�or Custodio took out his finest apparel:
the new fedora, new although it was more than thirty years old; his
coat of doubled cloth, excellent for the boreal regions, and a cane
with a horn handle, bought in El Rastro; the ragdealer's wife wore a
flowered kerchief, while Manuel made a most ridiculous appearance in a
hat that was taken from the shop and protruded about a palm's length
before his eyes, a winter suit that suffocated him and a pair of tight
shoes.

Behind Justa and El Carnicer�n, Se�or Custodio, his wife and Manuel
attracted everybody's attention and left a wake of laughter.

Justa turned back to look at them and could not help smiling. Manuel
walked along in a rage, stifling, his hat pressing tightly against his
forehead and his feet aching.

They got into a street car at Toledo Street and rode to the Puerta del
Sol; there they boarded art omnibus, which took them to the bull ring.

They entered and, guided by El Carnicer�n, sat themselves down in
their respective places. The spectacle had begun and the amphitheatre
was packed. Tier upon tier was crammed with a black mass of humanity.

Manuel glared into the arena; they were about to kill the bull near
the stone wall that bounded the ring, at a short distance from where
they were. The poor beast, half dead already, was dragging himself
slowly along, followed by three or four toreros and the matador, who,
curved forward, with his red flag in one hand and his sword in the
other, came behind. The matador was scared out of his wits; he stood
before the bull, considered carefully just where he was to strike him,
and at the beast's slightest movement he prepared to escape. Then, if
the bull remained quiet a while, he struck him once, again, and the
animal lowered his head; with his tongue hanging out, dripping blood,
he gazed out of the sad eyes of a dying creature. After much effort
the matador gave him the final stroke and killed him.

The crowd applauded and the band blared forth. The whole business
struck Manuel as pretty disagreeable, but he waited eagerly. The mules
came out and dragged off the dead bull.

Soon the music ceased and another bull appeared. The picadores
remained close to the walls while the toreros ventured a bit nearer to
the beast and waved their red flags, at once rushing back.

This was hardly anything like the picture Manuel had conjured up for
himself, or like what he had seen in the coloured illustrations of
_La Lidia_. He had always imagined that the toreros, in the sheer
skill of their art, would play around with the bull, and there wasn't
any of this; they entrusted their salvation to their legs, just like
the rest of the world.

After the inciting tactics of the toreros, two _monosabios_ began
to beat a picador's horse with several sticks, until they got him to
advance as far as the middle of the arena. Manuel had a close view of
the horse; he was a large, white, bony creature with the saddest look
on his face. The _>monosabios_ goaded him on toward the bull.
Soon the beast drew near, the picador pricked him with the point of
his lance, the bull lowered his head for the attack and threw the
horse into the air. The rider fell to the ground and was picked up in
a trice; the horse tried to raise himself, with his intestines
sprawling on the sand in a pool of blood; he trampled on them with his
hoofs, his legs wavered and he fell convulsively to the ground.

Manuel arose deathly pale.

A _monosabio_ approached the horse, who was still quivering; the
animal raised his head as if to ask help, whereupon the man stabbed
him to death with a poniard.

"I'm going. This is too nasty for anything," said Manuel to Se�or
Custodio. But it was no easy matter to leave the ring at that moment.

"The boy," said the ragdealer to his wife, "doesn't like it."

Justa, who had learned what was the matter, burst into laughter.

Manuel waited for the bull to be put to death; he kept his eyes fixed
downward; the mules came out again, and as they dragged off the
horse's body the intestines were left on the ground until a monosabio
came along and dragged them off with a rake.

"Look at that tripe!" cried Justa, laughing.

Manuel, without a word, and unmindful of the eyes that were turned his
way, left the tier. He went down to a series of long galleries, ranged
with vile-smelling urinals, and tried unsuccessfully to locate the
exit.

He was filled with rage against the whole world, against the others
and against himself. The spectacle seemed to him a most repugnant,
cowardly atrocity.

He had imagined bull-fighting to be something utterly distinct from
what he had just witnessed; he had thought that always it would
display the mastery of man over beast, and that the sword-thrusts
would flash like lightning; that every moment of the struggle would
bring forth something interesting and suggestive; and instead of a
spectacle such as he had visioned, instead of a gory apotheosis of
valour and strength, he beheld a petty, filthy thing, a medley of
cowardice and intestines, a celebration in which one saw nothing but
the torero's fear and the cowardly cruelty of the public taking
pleasure in the throb of that fear.

"'This," thought Manuel, "could please only folks like El Carnicerin,
effeminate loafers and indecent women."

Reaching home Manuel ragingly threw down his hat, pulled off his shoes
and got out of the suit in which he had so ridiculously gone to the
bull fight....

Manuel's indignation elicited plenty of comment from Se�or Custodio
and his wife, and he himself was somewhat intimidated by it; he
understood that the spectacle hadn't been to his taste; what struck
him as strange was that it should rouse so much anger, such rage in
him.

Summer went by; Justa began to make preparations for her wedding, and
in the meantime Manuel thought of leaving Se�or Custodio's house and
getting out of Madrid altogether. Whither? He didn't know; the farther
away, the better, he thought.

In November one of Justa's shopmates got married, in La Bombilla,
Se�or Custodio and his wife found it impossible to attend, so that
Manuel accompanied Justa.

The bride lived in the Ronda de Toledo, and her house was the
meeting-place for all the guests.

At the door a large omnibus was waiting; it could hold any number of
persons.

All the guests piled in; Justa and Manuel found a place on the top and
waited a while. The bride and bridegroom appeared amidst a throng of
gamins who were shouting at the top of their lungs; the groom looked
like a dry goods clerk; she, emaciated and ugly, looked like a monkey;
the best man and the bridesmaids followed after, and in this group a
fat old lady, flat-nosed, cross-eyed, white-haired, with a red rose in
her hair and a guitar in her hand, advanced with a _flamenco_
air.

"Hurrah for the bride and groom! Hurrah for the best man and the
maid-of-honour!" shouted the cross-eyed fright; there was a chorus of
unenthusiastic responses and the coach departed amidst a hubbub and a
shouting. On the way everybody shrieked and sang.

Manuel did not dare to rejoice at his failure to see El Carnicer�n in
the crowd; he felt positive that the fellow would show up at Los
Viveros.

It was a beautiful, humid morning; the trees, copper-hued, were losing
their yellow leaves in the gentle gusts; white clouds furrowed the
pale sky, the road glittered with the moisture; afar in the fields
burned heaps of dead leaves and thick curls of smoke rolled along
close to the soil.

The coach halted before one of the inns of Los Viveros; everybody
rolled out of the omnibus and the shouts and clamouring were heard
anew. El Carnicer�n was not there, but he soon appeared and sat down
at table right beside Justa.

The day seemed hateful to Manuel; there were moments in which he felt
like crying. He spent the whole afternoon despairing in a corner,
watching Justa dance with her sweetheart in time to the tunes of a
barrel-organ.

At night Manuel went over to Justa and with comic gravity, said to her
abruptly:

"Come along, you--" and seeing that she paid no attention to him, he
added, "Listen, Justa, let's be going home."

"Get away. Leave me in peace!" she retorted rudely.

"Your father told you to be back home by night. Come along, now."

"See here, my child," interposed El Carnicer�n with calm deliberation.
"Who gave you a taper to bear at this funeral?"

"I was entrusted to...."

"All right. Shut up. Understand?"

"I don't feel like it."

"Well, I'll make you with a good ear-warming."

"You make me? ... Why, you're nothing but a low-down lout, a thief--"
and Manuel was advancing against El Carnicer�n, when one of the
fellow's friends gave him a punch in the head that stunned him. The
boy made another attempt to rush upon the butcher's son; two or three
guests pushed him out of the way and shoved him out on to the road at
the door of the inn.

"Starveling! ... Loafer!" shouted Manuel.

"You're one yourself," cried one of Justa's friends tauntingly after
him. "Rabble! Guttersnipe!"

Manuel, filled with shame and thirsting for vengeance, still half
dazed by the blow, thrust his cap down over his face and stamped along
the road weeping with rage. Soon after he left he heard somebody
running toward him from behind.

"Manuel, Manolillo," said Justa to him in an affectionate, jesting
voice. "What's the matter?"

Manuel breathed heavily and a long sigh of grief escaped him.

"What's the matter? Come, let's return. We'll go together."

"No, no; go away from me."

He was at a loss; without another word he set off on a run toward
Madrid.

The wild flight dried his tears and rekindled his fury. He meant not
to return to Se�or Custodio's even if he died of hunger.

His rage rose in waves up his throat; he felt a blind madness, hazy
notions of attacking, of destroying everything, of razing the world to
the ground and disemboweling every living creature.

Mentally he promised El Carnicer�n that if ever he met him alone, he
would sink his claws into his neck and strangle him; he would split
the fellow's head in two as they do to hogs, and would hang him up
head downwards with a stick between his ribs and another in his
intestines, and moreover, he'd place a tin box at his mouth into which
his cursed pig's blood could drip.

Then he generalized his hatred and considered that society itself was
against him, intent only upon plaguing him and denying him everything.

Very well, then; he would go against society, he would join El Bizco
and assassinate right and left, and when, wearied of committing so
many crimes, he would be led to the scaffold, he would look scornfully
down from the platform upon the people below and die with a supreme
gesture of hatred and disdain.

While all these thoughts of wholesale extermination thronged in his
brain, night was falling. Manuel walked up to the Plaza de Oriente and
followed thence along Arenal Street.

A strip of the Puerta del Sol was being asphalted; ten or twelve
furnaces ranged in a row were belching thick acrid smoke through their
chimneys. The white illumination of the arc-lights had not yet been
turned on; the silhouettes of a number of men who were stirring with
long shovels the mass of asphalt in the caldrons danced diabolically
up and down before the flaming mouths of the furnaces.

Manuel approached one of the caldrons when suddenly he heard his name
called. It was El Bizco; he was seated upon some paving blocks.

"What are you doing here?" Manuel asked him.

"We've been thrown out of the caves," answered El Bizco, "and it's
cold. What about you? Have you left the house?"

"Yes."

"Have a seat."

Manuel sat down and rested his back against a keg of asphalt.

Lights began to sparkle in the balconies of the residences and in the
shop windows; the street cars arrived gently, as if they were vessels
floating in, with their yellow, green and red lanterns; their bells
rang and they traced graceful circles around the Puerta del Sol.
Carriages, horses, carts came rattling by; the itinerant hawkers cried
their wares from their sidewalk stands; there was a deafening din....
At the end of one street, against the coppery splendour of the dusk
stood out the tapering outlines of a belfry.

"And don't you ever see Vidal?" asked Manuel.

"No. See here, Have you got any money?" blurted El Bizco.

"Twenty or thirty c�ntimos at most."

"Fine."

Manuel bought a loaf of bread, which he gave to El Bizco, and the two
drank a glass of brandy in a tavern. Then they went wandering about
the streets and, at about eleven, returned to the Puerta del Sol.

Around the asphalt caldrons had gathered knots of men and tattered
gamins; some were sleeping with their heads bent against the furnace
as if they were about to attack it in bull fashion. The ragamuffins
were talking and shouting, and they laughed at the passers-by who came
over out of curiosity for a closer look.

"We sleep just as if we were in the open country," said one of the
idlers.

"It wouldn't be at all bad," added another, "to take a walk now over
to the Plaza Mayor and see whether they wouldn't give us a pound of
ham."

"It has trichinae in it, anyway."

"Take care of that spring-matress," bellowed a flat-nosed gamin who
was going about striking the sleepers with a stick in the shins. "Hey,
there, you're rumpling the sheets!"

At Manuel's side, a rachetic urchin with thick lips and streaked eyes
and one of his feet bandaged in dirty rags, was crying and groaning;
Manuel, engrossed in his own thoughts, had not noticed him before.

"Some howling you're doing," came to the sufferer from a boy who was
stretched out on the ground with his legs cramped close to his chest
and his head pillowed against a rock.

"It hurts like anything."

"Then shut up, grin and bear it. Hang yourself."

Manuel thought that he heard El Carnicer�n's voice and glanced toward
the speaker. The fellow's hat was pulled down over his eyes and his
face was not visible.

"Who's that?" asked Manuel of El Bizco.

"He's the captain of the cave gang: El Interprete."

"And what's he talking to the kid like that for?"

El Bizco shrugged his shoulders with a gesture of indifference.

"What's' the trouble?" Manuel inquired of the boy.

"I have a wound in my foot," replied the child, bursting again into
tears.

"Shut up, I tell you," interrupted El Interprete, aiming a kick at the
sufferer, who managed to escape the blow. "Go tell your troubles to
your bitch of a mother.... Damn it all! It's impossible to sleep
here."

"Then to hell with you!" shouted Manuel.

"Who are you talking to?" demanded El Interprete, shoving his cap back
on his head and revealing a brutish face with a flat nose and high
cheekbones.

"To you, you thief, you coward!"

El Interprete sprang to his feet and strode over to Manuel, who, in an
excess of fury seized him with both hands by the neck, kicked him in
the leg with his right heel, made him lose his balance and threw him
to the ground. There he thumped him violently. El Interprete, more
muscular than Manuel, was able to get to his feet again; but he had
lost his nerve and Manuel, gathering strength from his anger, threw
him down a second time and was about to crash a rock into his face
when a pair of municipal guards happened along and kicked them apart.
El Interprete went off disgraced.

The members of the crowd calmed down and went off, one after the
other, to resume their positions around the caldron.

Manuel sat down upon some paving blocks; the struggle had wiped out
the memory of the blow he had received that afternoon; he felt brave
and in a jesting mood, so, facing the curiosity-hunters that were
watching the group, some laughing and others eyeing the urchins with
pity, he addressed them.

"The session is about to close," he said. "Now we shall begin the
community singing lessons. We're about to commence snoring, ladies and
gentlemen. Let the public have no fear. We'll take good care of the
bedsheets. Tomorrow we'll send them to the river to be washed. Now is
the time. Whoever so desires," and he pointed to a rock, "may take
advantage of these pillows. They're excellent pillows, such as are
used by the Marquises of Archipipi. Whoever doesn't wish to sleep on
them, let him be gone and not bother us. Ea! Gentlemen! If you don't
pay I'll summon the servant and tell her to close...."

"It's the same with all of them," said one of the ragamuffins. "They
talk nonsense when they get sleepy. They all look as if they were
starved."

Manuel felt as garrulous as a mountebank. When he had wearied, he
leaned against a heap of stones and with arms crossed prepared to
sleep.

Shortly after this the group of curiosity-hunters had dispersed; only
a guard and an old gentleman were left, and they discussed the
ragamuffins in tones of pity.

The gentleman deplored the way these children were abandoned and said
that in other countries they built schools and asylums and a thousand
other things. The guard shook his head dubiously. At last he summed up
the conversation, saying in the tranquil manner of a Galician:

"Take my word for it: there's no good left in any of them."

Manuel, hearing this, began to tremble; he arose from his place on the
ground, left the Puerta del Sol and began to wander aimlessly about.

"There's no good left in any of them!" The remark had made a deep
impression upon him. Why wasn't he good? Why? He examined his life. He
wasn't bad, he had harmed nobody. He hated El Carnicer�n because that
fellow had robbed him of happiness, had made it impossible for him to
go on living in the one corner where he had found some affection and
shelter. Then contradicting himself, he imagined that perhaps he was
bad after all, and in this case the most he could do was to reform and
become better.

Absorbed in these reflections, he was passing along Alcal� Street when
he heard his name called several times. It was La Mell� and La
Rabanitos, skulking in a doorway.

"What do you want?" he asked.

"Nothing, man. Just a word with you. Have you come into your money
yet?"

"No. What are you doing?"

"Hiding here," answered La Mell�.

"Why, what's the trouble?"

"There's a round-up, and that skunk of an inspector wants to take us
to the station, even if we do pay him. Keep us company!"

Manuel accompanied them for a while; but they both picked up a couple
of men on the way and he was left alone. He returned to the Puerta del
Sol.

The night seemed to him endless; he walked around and walked yet
again; the electric lights were extinguished, the street-cars stopped
running, the square was left in darkness.

Between Montera and Alcal� Streets there was a caf� before whose
illuminated windows women passed up and down dressed in bright clothes
and wearing crape kerchiefs, singing, accosting benighted passers-by;
several loafers, lurking behind the lanterns, watched them and chatted
with them, giving them orders....

Then came a procession of street-women, touts and procurers. All of
parasitical, indolent, gay Madrid issued forth at these hours from the
taverns, the dens, the gambling-houses, the dives and vice resorts,
and amidst the poverty and misery that throbbed in the thoroughfares
these night-owls strutted by with their lighted cigars, conversing,
laughing, joking with the prostitutes, indifferent to the agony of all
these ragged, hungry, shelterless wretches who, shivering with the
cold, sought refuge in the doorways.

A few old strumpets remained at the street-corners, wrapped in their
cloaks, smoking....

It was long before the heavens grew bright; it was still night when
the coffee stands were opened, and the coachmen and ragamuffins went
up for their cup or glass. The gas lamps were extinguished.

The light from the watchmen's lanterns danced across the grey
pavement, which already was dimly lighted by the pale glow of dawn,
and the black silhouettes of the ragdealers stood out against the
heaps of ordure as they bent over to take the rubbish. Now and then
some pale benighted fellow with his coat collar raised, would glide by
as sinister as an owl before the growing light and soon some workmen
passed.... Industrious, honest; Madrid was preparing for its hard
daily task.

This transition from the feverish turmoil of night to the calm, serene
activity of morning plunged Manuel into profound thought.

He understood that the existence of the night-owls and that of the
working folk were parallel lives that never for an instant met. For
the ones, pleasure, vice, the night; for the others, labour, fatigue,
the sun. And it seemed to him, too, that he should belong to the
second class, to the folk who toil in the sun, not to those who dally
in the shadows.




END OF "TO BUSCA,"

(THE QUEST)


The second volume of the trilogy is called "Mala Hierba" (Weeds); the
third, "Aurora Roja" (Red Dawn).










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Quest, by P�o Baroja

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE QUEST ***

***** This file should be named 8496-8.txt or 8496-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/4/9/8496/

Produced by Eric Eldred, Cam, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
