Project Gutenberg's In Exile and Other Stories, by Mary Hallock Foote

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: In Exile and Other Stories

Author: Mary Hallock Foote


Release Date: July, 2005 [EBook #8506]
This file was first posted on July 17, 2003
Last Updated: May 20, 2013

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN EXILE AND OTHER STORIES ***




Produced by William Flis and the Online Distributed Proofreaders Team








IN EXILE

AND OTHER STORIES

By Mary Hallock Foote




CONTENTS.


IN EXILE

FRIEND BARTON'S "CONCERN"

THE STORY OF THE ALC�ZAR

A CLOUD ON THE MOUNTAIN

THE RAPTURE OF HETTY

THE WATCHMAN




IN EXILE


I.

Nicky Dyer and the schoolmistress sat upon the slope of a hill, one of a
low range overlooking an arid Californian valley. These sunburnt slopes
were traversed by many narrow footpaths, descending, ascending, winding
among the tangle of poison-oak and wild-rose bushes, leading from the
miners' cabins to the shaft-houses and tunnels of the mine which gave to
the hills their only importance. Nicky was a stout Cornish lad of thirteen,
with large light eyes that seemed mildly to protest against the sportive
relation which a broad, freckled, turned-up nose bore to the rest of his
countenance; he was doing nothing in particular, and did it as if he were
used to it. The schoolmistress sat with her skirts tucked round her ankles,
the heels of her stout little boots driven well into the dry, gritty
soil. There was in her attitude the tension of some slight habitual
strain--perhaps of endurance--as she leaned forward, her arms stretched
straight before her, with her delicate fingers interlocked. Whatever may
be the type of Californian young womanhood, it was not her type; you felt,
looking at her cool, clear tints and slight, straight outlines, that she
had winter in her blood.

She was gazing down into the valley, as one looks at a landscape who has
not yet mastered all its changes of expression; its details were blurred in
the hot, dusty glare; the mountains opposite had faded to a flat outline
against the indomitable sky. A light wind blew up the slope, flickering the
pale leaves of a manzanita, whose burnished, cinnamon-colored stems glowed
in the sun. As the breeze strengthened, the young girl stood up, lifting
her arms, to welcome its coolness on her bare wrists.

"Nicky, why do the trees in that hollow between the hills look so green?"

"There'll be water over there, miss; that's the Chilano's spring. I'm
thinkin' the old cow might 'a' strayed over that way somewheres; they
mostly goes for the water, wherever it is."

"Is it running water, Nicky,--not water in a tank?"

"Why, no, miss; it cooms right out o' the rock as pretty as iver you saw!
I often goes there myself for a drink, cos it tastes sort o' different,
coomin' out o' the ground like. We wos used to that kind o' water at 'ome."

"Let us go, Nicky," said the girl. "I should like to taste that water, too.
Do we cross the hill first, or is there a shorter way?"

"Over the 'ill's the shortest, miss. It's a bit of a ways, but you've been
longer ways nor they for less at th' end on't."

They "tacked" down the steepest part of the hill, and waded through a
shady hollow, where ferns grew rank and tall,--crisp, faded ferns, with an
aromatic odor which escaped by the friction of their garments, like the
perfume of warmed amber. They reached at length the green trees, a clump
of young cottonwoods at the entrance to a narrow ca�on, and followed the
dry bed of a stream for some distance, until water began to show among the
stones. The principal outlet of the spring was on a small plantation at the
head of the ca�on, rented of the "company" by a Chilian, or "the Chilano,"
as he was called; he was not at all a pastoral-looking personage, but, with
the aid of his good water, he earned a moderately respectable living by
supplying the neighboring cabins and the miners' boarding-house with green
vegetables. After a temporary disappearance, as if to purge its memory of
the Chilano's water-buckets, the spring again revealed itself in a thin,
clear trickle down the hollowed surface of a rock which closed the narrow
passage of the ca�on. Young sycamores and cottonwoods shut out the sun
above; their tangled roots, interlaced with vines still green and growing,
trailed over the edge of the rock, where a mass of earth had fallen; green
moss lined the hollows of the rock, and water-plants grew in the dark pools
below.

The strollers had left behind them the heat and glare; only the breeze
followed them into this green stillness, stirring the boughs overhead and
scattering spots of sunlight over the wet stones. Nicky, after enjoying
for a few moments the schoolmistress' surprised delight, proposed that she
should wait for him at the spring, while he went "down along" in search
of his cow. Nicky was not without a certain awe of the schoolmistress, as
a part of creation he had not fathomed in all its bearings; but when they
rambled on the hills together, he found himself less uneasily conscious of
her personality, and more comfortably aware of the fact that, after all,
she was "nothin' but a woman." He was a trifle disappointed that she showed
no uneasiness at being left alone, but consoled himself by the reflection
that she was "a good un to 'old 'er tongue," and probably felt more than
she expressed.

The schoolmistress did not look in the least disconsolate after Nicky's
departure. She gazed about her very contentedly for a while, and then
prepared to help herself to a drink of water. She hollowed her two hands
into a cup, and waited for it to fill, stooping below the rock, her lifted
skirt held against her side by one elbow, while she watched with a childish
eagerness the water trickle into her pink palms. Miss Frances Newell had
never looked prettier in her life. A pretty girl is always prettier in
the open air, with her head uncovered. Her cheeks were red; the sun just
touched the roughened braids of dark brown hair, and intensified the glow
of a little ear which showed beneath. She stooped to drink; but Miss
Frances was destined never to taste that virgin cup of water. There was a
trampling among the bushes, overhead; a little shower of dust and pebbles
pattered down upon her bent head, soiling the water. She let her hands fall
as she looked up, with a startled "Oh!" A pair of large boots were rapidly
making their way down the bank, and the cause of all this disturbance stood
before her,--a young man in a canvas jacket, with a leathern case slung
across his shoulder, and a small tin lamp fastened in front of the hat
which he took off while he apologized to the girl for his intrusion.

"Miss Newell! Forgive me for dropping down on you like a thousand of brick!
You've found the spring, I see."

Miss Frances stood with her elbows still pressed to her sides, though her
skirt had slipped down into the water, her wet palms helplessly extended.
"I was getting a drink," she said, searching with the tips of her fingers
among the folds of her dress for a handkerchief. "You came just in time to
remind me of the slip between the cup and the lip."

"I'm very sorry, but there is plenty of water left. I came for some myself.
Let me help you." He took from one of the many pockets stitched into the
breast and sides of his jacket a covered flask, detached the cup, and,
after carefully rinsing, filled and handed it to the girl. "I hope it
doesn't taste of 'store claret;' the water underground is just a shade
worse than that exalted vintage."

"It is delicious, thank you, and it doesn't taste in the least of claret.
Have you just come out of the mine?"

"Yes. It is measuring-up day. I've been toddling through the drifts and
sliding down chiflons"--he looked ruefully at the backs of his trousers
legs--"ever since seven o'clock this morning. Haven't had time to eat any
luncheon yet, you see." He took from another pocket a small package folded
in a coarse napkin. "I came here to satisfy the pangs of hunger and enjoy
the beauties of nature at the same time,--such nature as we have here. Will
you excuse me, Miss Newell? I'll promise to eat very fast."

"I'll excuse you if you will not ask me to eat with you."

"Oh, I've entirely too much consideration for myself to think of such a
thing; there isn't enough for two."

He seated himself, with a little sigh, and opened the napkin on the ground
before him. Miss Newell stood leaning against a rock on the opposite side
of the brook, regarding the young man with a shy and smiling curiosity.
"Meals," he continued, "are a reckless tribute to the weakness of the flesh
we all engage in three times a day at the boarding-house; a man must eat,
you know, if he expects to live. Have you ever tried any of Mrs. Bondy's
fare, Miss Newell?"

"I'm sure Mrs. Bondy tries to have everything very nice," the young girl
replied, with some embarrassment.

"Of course she does; she is a very good old girl. I think a great deal of
Mrs. Bondy; but when she asks me if I have enjoyed my dinner, I always make
a point of telling her the truth; she respects me for it. This is her idea
of sponge cake, you see." He held up admiringly a damp slab of some compact
pale-yellow substance, with crumbs of bread adhering to one side. "It is a
little mashed, but otherwise a fair specimen."

Miss Frances laughed. "Mr. Arnold, I think you are too bad. How can she
help it, with those dreadful Chinamen? But I would really advise you not to
eat that cake; it doesn't look wholesome."

"Oh, as to that, I've never observed any difference; one thing is about
as wholesome as another. Did you ever eat bacon fried by China Sam? The
sandwiches were made of that. You see I still live." The sponge cake was
rapidly disappearing. "Miss Newell, you look at me as if I were making away
with myself, instead of the cake,--will you appear at the inquest?"

"No, I will not testify to anything so unromantic; besides, it might be
inconvenient for Mrs. Bondy's cook." She put on her hat, and stepped along
the stones towards the entrance to the glen.

"You are not going to refuse me the last offices?"

"I am going to look for Nicky Dyer. He came with me to show me the spring,
and now he has gone to hunt for his cow."

"And you are going to hunt for him? I hope you won't try it, Miss Frances:
a boy on the track of a cow is a very uncertain object in life. Let me call
him, if you really must have him."

"Oh, don't trouble yourself. I suppose he will come after a while. I said I
would wait for him here."

"Then permit me to say that I think you had better do as you promised."

Miss Frances recrossed the stones, and seated herself, with a faint
deprecatory smile.

"I hope you don't mind if I stay," Arnold said, moving some loose stones to
make her seat more comfortable. "You have the prior right to-day, but this
is an old haunt of mine. I feel as if I were doing the honors; and to tell
you the truth, I am rather used up. The new workings are very hot and the
drifts are low. It's a combination of steam-bath and hoeing corn."

The girl's face cleared, as she looked at him. His thin cheek was pale
under the tan, and where his hat was pushed back the hair clung in damp
points to his forehead and temples.

"I should be very sorry to drive you away," she said. "I thought you looked
tired. If you want to go to sleep, or anything, I will promise to be very
quiet."

Arnold laughed. "Oh, I'm not such an utter wreck; but I'm glad you can be
very quiet. I was afraid you might be a little uproarious at times, you
know."

The girl gave a sudden shy laugh. It was really a giggle, but a very sweet,
girlish giggle. It called up a look of keen pleasure to Arnold's face.

"Now I call this decidedly gay," he remarked, stretching out his long legs
slowly, and leaning against a slanting rock, with one arm behind his head.
"Miss Frances, will you be good enough to tell me that my face isn't
dirty?"

"Truth compels me to admit that you have one little daub over your left
eyebrow."

"Thank you," said Arnold, rubbing it languidly with his handkerchief. His
hat had dropped off, and he did not replace it; he did not look at the
girl, but let his eyes rest on the thread of falling water that gleamed
from the spring. Miss Frances, regarding him with some timidity, thought:
How much younger he looks without his hat! He had that sensitive fairness
which in itself gives a look of youth and purity; the sternness of his
face lay in the curves which showed under his mustache, and in the silent,
dominant eye.

"You've no idea how good it sounds to a lonely fellow like me," he said,
"to hear a girl's laugh."

"But there are a great many women here," Miss Frances observed.

"Oh yes, there are women everywhere, such as they are; but it takes a nice
girl, a lady, to laugh!"

"I don't agree with you at all," replied Miss Frances coldly. "Some of
those Mexican women have the sweetest voices, speaking or laughing, that I
have ever heard; and the Cornish women, too, have very fresh, pure voices.
I often listen to them in the evening when I sit alone in my room. Their
voices sound so happy"--

"Well, then it is the home accent,--or I'm prejudiced. Don't laugh again,
please, Miss Frances; it breaks me all up." He moved his head a little, and
looked across at the girl to assure himself that her silence did not mean
disapproval. "I admit," he went on, "that I like our Eastern girls. I know
you are from the East, Miss Newell."

"I am from what I used to think was East," she said, smiling. "But
everything is East here; people from Indiana and Wisconsin say they are
from the East."

"Ah, but you are from our old Atlantic coast. I was sure of it when I first
saw you. If you will pardon me, I knew it by your way of dressing."

The young girl flushed with pleasure; then, with a reflective air: "I
confess myself, since you speak of clothes, to a feeling of relief when I
saw your hat the first Sunday after I came. Western men wear such dreadful
hats."

"Good!" he cried gayly. "You mean my hat that I _call_ a hat." He reached
for the one behind his head, and spun it lightly upward, where it settled
on a projecting branch. "I respect that hat myself,--my _other_ hat, I
mean; I'm trying to live up to it. Now, let me guess your State, Miss
Newell: is it Massachusetts?"

"No,--Connecticut; but at this distance it seems like the same thing."

"Oh, pardon me, there are very decided differences. I'm from Massachusetts
myself. Perhaps the points of difference show more in the women,--the ones
who stay at home, I mean, and become more local and idiomatic than the men.
You are not one of the daughters of the soil, Miss Newell."

She looked pained as she said, "I wish I were; but there is not room for us
all, where there is so little soil."

Arnold moved uneasily, extracted a stone from under the small of his
back and tossed it out of sight with some vehemence. "You think it goes
rather hard with women who are uprooted, then," he said. "I suppose it is
something a roving man can hardly conceive of,--a woman's attachment to
places, and objects, and associations; they are like cats."

Miss Newell was silent.

Arnold moved restlessly; then began again, with his eyes still on the
trickle of water: "Miss Newell, do you remember a poem--I think it is
Bryant's--called 'The Hunter of the Prairies'? It's no disgrace not to
remember it, and it may not be Bryant's."

"I remember seeing it, but I never read it. I always skipped those Western
things."

Arnold gave a short laugh, and said, "Well, you are punished, you see, by
going West yourself to hear me repeat it to you. I think I can give you the
idea in the Hunter's own words:--

  "'Here, with my rifle and my steed,
  And her who left the world for me'"--

The sound of his own voice in the stillness of the little glen, and a look
of surprise in the young girl's quiet eyes, brought a sudden access of
color to Arnold's face. "Hm-m-m," he murmured to himself, "it's queer how
rhymes slip away. Well, the last line ends in _free_. You see, it is a
man's idea of happiness,--a young man's. Now, how do you suppose _she_
liked it,--the girl, you know, who left the world, and all that? Did you
ever happen to see a poem or a story, written by a woman, celebrating the
joys of a solitary existence with the man of her heart?"

"I suppose that many a woman has tried it," Miss Newell said evasively,
"but I'm sure she"--

"Never lived to tell the tale?" cried Arnold.

"She probably had something else to do, while the hunter was riding around
with his gun," Miss Frances continued.

"Well, give her the odds of the rifle and the steed; give the man some
commonplace employment to take the swagger out of him; let him come home
reasonably tired and cross at night,--do you suppose he would find the
'kind' eyes and the 'smile'? I forgot to tell you that the Hunter of the
Prairies is always welcomed by a smile at night."

"He must have been an uncommonly fortunate man," she said.

"Of course he was; but the question is: Could any living man be so
fortunate? Come, Miss Frances, don't prevaricate!"

"Well, am I speaking for the average woman?"

"Oh, not at all,--you are speaking for the very nicest of women; any other
kind would be intolerable on a prairie."

"I should think, if she were very healthy," said Miss Newell, hesitating
between mischief and shyness, "and not too imaginative, and of a cheerful
disposition; and if he, the hunter, were above the average,--supposing that
she cared for him in the beginning,--I should think the smile might last a
year or two."

"Heavens, what a cynic you are! I feel like a mere daub of sentiment beside
you. There have been moments, do you know, even in this benighted mining
camp, when I have believed in that hunter and his smile!"

He got up suddenly, and stood against the rock, facing her. Although he
kept his cool, bantering tone, his breathing had quickened, and his eyes
looked darker.

"You may consider me a representative man, if you please: I speak for
hundreds of us scattered about in mining camps and on cattle ranches, in
lighthouses and frontier farms and military posts, and all the Godforsaken
holes you can conceive of, where men are trying to earn a living, or lose
one,--we are all going to the dogs for the want of that smile! What is to
become of us if the women whose smiles we care for cannot support life in
the places where we have to live? Come, Miss Frances, can't you make that
smile last at least two years?" He gathered a handful of dry leaves from a
broken branch above his head and crushed them in his long hands, sifting
the yellow dust upon the water below.

"The places you speak of are very different," the girl answered, with
a shade of uneasiness in her manner. "A mining camp is anything but a
solitude, and a military post may be very gay."

"Oh, the principle is the same. It is the absolute giving up of everything.
You know most women require a background of family and friends and
congenial surroundings; the question is whether _any_ woman can do without
them."

The young girl moved in a constrained way, and flushed as she said, "It
must always be an experiment, I suppose, and its success would depend, as I
said before, on the woman and on the man."

"An 'experiment' is good!" said Arnold, rather savagely. "I see you won't
say anything you can't swear to."

"I really do not see that I am called upon to say anything on the subject
at all!" said the girl, rising and looking at him across the brook with
indignant eyes and a hot glow on her cheek.

He did not appear to notice her annoyance.

"You are, because you know something about it, and most women don't: your
testimony is worth something. How long have you been here,--a year? I
wonder how it seems to a woman to live in a place like this a year! I hate
it all, you know,--I've seen so much of it. But is there really any beauty
here? I suppose beauty, and all that sort of thing, is partly within us,
isn't it?--at least, that's what the goody little poems tell us."

"I think it is very beautiful here," said Miss Frances, softening, as he
laid aside his strained manner, and spoke more quietly. "It is the kind
of place a happy woman might be very happy in; but if she were
sad--or--disappointed"--

"Well?" said Arnold, pulling at his mustache, and fixing a rather gloomy
gaze upon her.

"She would die of it! I really do not think there would be any hope for her
in a place like this."

"But if she were happy, as you say," persisted the young man, "don't
you think her woman's adaptability and quick imagination would help her
immensely? She wouldn't see what I, for instance, know to be ugly and
coarse; her very ignorance of the world would help her."

There was a vague, pleading look in his eyes. "Arrange it to suit
yourself," she said. "Only, I can assure you, if anything should happen to
her, it will be the--the hunter's fault."

"All right," said he, rousing himself. "That hunter, if I know him, is a
man who is used to taking risks! Where are you going?"

"I thought I heard Nicky."

They were both silent, and as they listened, footsteps, with a tinkling
accompaniment, crackled among the bushes below the ca�on. Miss Newell
turned towards the spring again. "I want one more drink before I go," she
said.

Arnold followed her. "Let us drink to our return. Let this be our fountain
of Trevi."

"Oh, no," said Miss Frances. "Don't you remember what your favorite Bryant
says about bringing the 'faded fancies of an elder world' into these
'virgin solitudes'?"

"Faded fancies!" cried Arnold. "Do you call that a faded fancy? It is as
fresh and graceful as youth itself, and as natural. I should have thought
of it myself, if there had been no fountain of Trevi."

"Do you think so?" smiled the girl. "Then imagination, it would seem, is
not entirely confined to homesick women."

"Come, fill the cup, Miss Frances! Nicky is almost here."

The girl held her hands beneath the trickle again, until they were brimming
with the clear sweet water.

"Drink first," said Arnold.

"I'm not sure that I want to return," she replied, smiling, with her eyes
on the space of sky between the treetops.

"Nonsense,--you must be morbid. Drink, drink!"

"Drink yourself; the water is all running away!"

He bent his head, and took a vigorous sip of the water, holding his hands
beneath hers, inclosing the small cup in the larger one. The small cup
trembled a little. He was laughing and wiping his mustache, when Nicky
appeared; and Miss Frances, suddenly brightening and recovering her freedom
of movement, exclaimed, "Why, Nicky! You have been _forever_! We must go at
once, Mr. Arnold; so good-by! I hope"--

She did not say what she hoped, and Arnold, after looking at her with an
interrogative smile a moment, caught his hat from the branch overhead, and
made her a great flourishing bow with it in his hand.

He did not follow her, pushing her way through the swaying, rustling ferns,
but he watched her light figure out of sight. "What an extraordinary ass
I've been making of myself!" He confided this remark to the stillness of
the little ca�on, and then, with long strides, took his way over the hills
in an opposite direction.

It was the middle of July when this little episode of the spring occurred.
The summer had reached its climax. The dust did not grow perceptibly
deeper, nor the fields browner, during the long brazen weeks that followed;
one only wearied of it all, more and more.

So thought Miss Newell, at least. It was her second summer in California,
and the phenomenon of the dry season was not so impressive on its
repetition. She had been surprised to observe how very brief had been the
charm of strangeness, in her experience of life in a new country. She began
to wonder if a girl, born and brought up among the hills of Connecticut,
could have the seeds of _ennui_ subtly distributed through her frame, to
reach a sudden development in the heat of a Californian summer. She longed
for the rains to begin, that in their violence and the sound of the wind
she might gain a sense of life in action by which to eke out her dull and
expressionless days. She was, as Nicky Dyer had said, "a good un to 'old
'er tongue," and therein lay her greatest strength as well as her greatest
danger.

Miss Newell boarded at Captain Dyer's. The prosperous ex-mining captain
was a good deal nearer to the primitive type than any man Miss Newell had
ever sat at table with in her life before, but she had a thorough respect
for him, and she felt that the time might come when she could enjoy
him--as a reminiscence. Mrs. Dyer was kindly, and not more of a gossip
than her neighbors; and there were no children,--only one grandchild,
the inoffensive Nicky. The ways of the house were somewhat uncouth, but
everything was clean and in a certain sense homelike. To Miss Newell's
homesick sensitiveness it seemed better than being stared at across the
boarding-house table by Boker and Pratt, and pitied by the engineer. She
had a little room at the Dyers', which was a reflection of herself so far
as a year's occupancy and very moderate resources could make it; perhaps
for that very reason she often found her little room an intolerable prison.
One night her homesickness had taken its worst form, a restlessness, which
began in a nervous inward throbbing and extended to her cold and tremulous
finger-tips. She went softly downstairs and out on the piazza, where the
moonlight lay in a brilliant square on the unpainted boards. The moonlight
increased her restlessness, but she could not keep away from it. She dared
not walk up and down the piazza, because the people in the street below
would see her; she stood there perfectly still, holding her elbows with her
hands, crouched into a little dark heap against the side of the house.

Lights were twinkling, far and near, over the hills, singly, and in
clusters. Black figures moved across the moonlit spaces in the street.
There were sounds of talking, laughing, and singing; dogs barking;
occasionally a stir and tinkle in the scrub, as a cow wandered past. The
engines throbbed from the distant shaft-houses. A miner's wife was hushing
her baby in the next house, and across the street a group of Mexicans were
talking all at once in a loud, monotonous cadence.

In her early days at the mines there had been a certain piquancy in her
sense of the contrast between herself and her circumstances, but that had
long passed into a dreary recognition of the fact that she had no real part
in the life of the place.

She recalled one afternoon when Arnold had passed the schoolhouse, and
found her sitting alone on the doorstep. He had stopped to ask if that
"mongrel pack on the hill were worrying the life out of her," and had added
with a laugh, in answer to her look of silent disapproval, "Oh, I mean the
dear lambs of your flock. I saw two of them just now on the trail, fighting
over a lame donkey. The clans were gathering on both sides; there will be
a pitched battle in a few minutes. The donkey was enjoying it. I think
he was asleep!" The day had been an unusually hard one, and the patient
little schoolmistress was just then struggling with a distracted sense of
unavailing effort. Arnold's grim banter had brought the tears, as blood
follows a blow. He got down from his horse, looking wretched at what he had
done. "I am a brute, I believe,--worse than any of the pack. You have so
much patience with them,--please have a little with me. Trust me, I am not
utterly blind to your sufferings. Indeed, Miss Newell, I see them, and they
make me savage!" With the gentlest touch he had lifted her hand, held it in
his a moment, and then had mounted his horse and ridden away.

Yes, he _did_ understand,--she felt sure of that. What an unutterable rest
it would be if she could go to some one with the small worries of her life!
But she could not yield to such impulses. It was different with men. She
had often thought of Arnold's words that day at the spring, all the more
that he had never, before or since, revealed so much of himself to her.
Under an apparently careless frankness and extravagance of speech he was a
reticent man; but lightly spoken as the words had been, were they not the
sparks and ashes blown from a deep and smothered core of fire? She seemed
to feel its glow on her cheek as she recalled his singular persistence and
the darkening of his imperious eyes. No, she would not permit herself to
think of that day at the spring.

There was a bright light in the engineer's office across the street. She
could see Arnold through the windows (for, like a man, he did not pull his
shades down) at one of the long drawing-tables. He worked late, it seemed.
He was writing; he wrote rapidly page after page, tearing each sheet from
what appeared to be a paper block, and tossing it on the table beside him;
he covered only one side of the paper, she noticed, thinking with a smile
of her own small economies. Presently he got up, swept the papers together
in his hands, and stooped over them. He is numbering and folding them,
she thought, and now he is directing the envelope,--to whom, I wonder!
He turned, and as he walked towards the window she saw him put something
into the pocket of his coat. He lighted a cigar, and began walking, with
long strides, up and down the room, one hand in his pocket; the other
he occasionally rubbed over his eyes and head, as if they hurt him. She
remembered that the engineer had headaches, and wished that somebody would
ask him to try valerian. Is he ever really lonely? she thought. What can
he, what can any man, know of loneliness? He may go out and walk about on
the hills; he may go away altogether, and take the risks of life somewhere
else. A woman must take no risks. There is not a house in the camp where
he might not enter to-night, if he chose; he might come over here and
talk to me. The East, with all its cherished memories and prejudices and
associations, seemed so hopelessly far away; they two alone, in that
strange, uncongenial new world which had crowded out the old, seemed to
speak a common language: and yet how little she really knew of him!

Suddenly the lights disappeared from the windows of the office. She heard
a door unlock, and presently the young man's figure crossed the street and
turned up the trail past the house.

Two other figures going up halted, and the taller one said, "Will you go up
on the hill, to-night, Arnold?"

"What for?" said Arnold, slackening his pace without stopping.

"Oh, nothing in particular,--to see the se�oritas."

"Oh, thank you, Boker, I've seen the se�oritas."

He walked quickly past the men, and the shorter one, who had not spoken,
called after him rather huskily,--

"W-what do you think of the little school-ma'am?"

Arnold turned back and confronted the speaker in silence.

"I say! Is she thin 'nough to suit you?" the heavy-playful one persisted.

"Shut up, Jack!" said his comrade. "You're a little high now, you know."

He dragged him on, up the trail; the voices of the two men blended with the
night chorus of the camp as they passed out of sight.

Miss Newell sat perfectly still for a while; then she went to her room, and
threw herself down on the bed, listening to an endless mental repetition of
those words that the faithless night had brought to her ear. The moonlight
had left the piazza, and crept round to the side of the house; it shone
in at the window, touching the girl's cold fingers pressed to her burning
cheeks and temples. She got up, drew the curtain, and groped her way back
to the bed, where she lay for hours, trying to convince herself that her
misery was out of all proportion to the cause, and that those coarse words
could make no real difference in her life.

They did make a little difference: they loosened the slight, indefinite
threads of intercourse which a year had woven between these two exiles.
Miss Newell was prepared to withdraw from any further overtures of
friendship from the engineer; but he made it unnecessary for her to do
so,--he made no overtures. On the night of Pratt's tipsy salutation he had
abruptly decided that a mining camp was no place for a nice girl, with no
acknowledged masculine protector. In Miss Newell's circumstances a girl
must be left entirely alone, or exposed to the gossip of the camp. He
knew very well which she would choose, and so he kept away,--though at
considerable loss to himself, he felt. It made him cross to watch her
pretty figure going up the trail every morning and to reflect that so much
sweetness and refinement should not be having its ameliorating influence on
his own barren and somewhat defiant existence.


II.

The autumn rains set in early, and the winter was unusually severe. Arnold
had a purpose which kept him hard at work and very happy in those days.

During the long December nights he was shut up in his office, plodding
over his maps and papers, or smoking in dreamy comfort by the fire. He was
seldom interrupted, for he had earned the character of a social ingrate and
hardened recluse in the camp. He had earned it quite unconsciously, and
was as little troubled by the fact as by its consequences. On the evening
of New Year's Day he crossed the street to the Dyers' and asked for Miss
Newell. She presently greeted him in the parlor, where she looked, Arnold
thought, more than ever out of place, among the bead baskets, and splint
frames inclosing photographs of deceased members of the Dyer family, and
the pallid walls, weak-legged chairs, and crude imaginings in worsted work.
Her apparent unconsciousness of these abominations was another source of
irritation. It is always irritating to a man to see a charming woman in an
unhappy and false position, where he is powerless to help her. Arnold had
not expected that it would be a very exhilarating occasion,--he remembered
the Dyer parlor,--but it was even less pleasant than he had expected. He
sat down, carefully, in a glued chair whose joints had opened with the
dry season and refused to close again; he did not know where the transfer
of his person might end. Captain Dyer was present, and told a great many
stories in a loud, tiring voice. Miss Frances sat by with some soft white
knitting in her hands, and her attitude of patient attention made Arnold
long to attack her with some savage pleasantries on the subject of
Christmas in a mining camp; it seemed to him that patience was a virtue
that could be carried too far, even in woman. Then Mrs. Dyer came in, and
manoeuvred her husband out into the passage; after some loudly suggestive
whispering there, she succeeded in getting him into the kitchen, and shut
the door. Arnold got up soon after that, and said good-evening.

Miss Newell remained in the parlor for some time, after he had gone, moving
softly about. She had gathered her knitting closely into her clasped hands;
the ball trailed after her, among the legs of the chairs, and when in
her silent promenade she had spun a grievous tangle of wool she sat down,
and dropped the work out of her hands with a helpless gesture. Her head
drooped, and tears trickled slowly between the slender white fingers
which covered her face. Presently the fingers descended to her throat and
clasped it close, as if to still an intolerable throbbing ache which her
half-suppressed tears had left.

At length she rose, picked up her work, and patiently followed the tangled
clue until she had recovered her ball; then she wound it all up neatly,
wrapped the knitting in a thin white handkerchief, and went to her room.

With the fine March weather--fine in spite of the light rains--the engineer
was laying out a road to the new shaft; it wound along the hillside where
Miss Newell had first seen the green trees, by the spring. The engineer's
orders included the building of a flume, carrying the water down from the
Chilano's plantation into a tank, built on the ruins of the rock which had
guarded the sylvan spring. The discordant voices of a gang of Chinamen
profaned the stillness which had framed Miss Frances' girlish laughter;
the blasting of the rock had loosened, to their fall, the clustering trees
above, and the brook below was a mass of trampled mud.

The engineer's visits to the spring gave him no pleasure, in those days. He
felt that he was the inevitable instrument of its desecration; but over the
hill, just in sight from the spring, carpenters were putting a new piazza
round a cottage that stood remote from the camp, where a spur of the hills
descended steeply towards the valley. Arnold took a great interest in this
cottage. He was frequently to be seen there in the evening, tramping up and
down the new piazza, and offering to the moon, that looked in through the
boughs of a live-oak at the end of the gallery, the incense of his lonely
cigar. Sometimes he would take the key of the front door from his pocket,
enter the silent house, and wander from one room to another, like a
restless but not unhappy ghost; the moonlight, touching his face, showed it
strangely stirred and softened. His was no melancholy madness.

Arnold was leaning on the gate of this cottage, one afternoon, when the
schoolmistress came down the trail from the camp. She did not appear to see
him, but turned off from the trail at a little distance from the cottage,
and took her way across the hill behind it. Arnold watched her a few
minutes, and then followed, overtaking her on the hills above the new road,
where she had sat with Nicky Dyer nearly a year ago.

"I don't like to see you wandering about here, alone," he said. "The men on
the road are a scratch gang, picked up anyhow, not like the regular miners.
I hope you are not going to the spring!"

"Why?" said she. "Did you not drink to our return?"

"But you would not drink with me, so the spell did not work; and now the
spring is gone,--all its beauty, I mean. The water is there, in a tank,
where the Chinamen fill their buckets night and morning, and the teamsters
water their horses. We'll go over there, if you would like to see the march
of modern improvements."

"No," she said; "I had rather remember it as it was; still, I don't believe
in being sentimental about such things. Let us sit down a while."

A vague depression, which Arnold had been aware of in her manner when they
met, became suddenly manifest in her paleness and in a look of dull pain in
her eyes.

"But you are hurt about it," he said. "I wish I hadn't told you in that
brutal way. I'm afraid I'm not many degrees removed from the primeval
savage, after all."

"Oh, you needn't mind," she said, after a moment. "That was the only place
I cared for, here, so now there will be nothing to regret when I go away."

"Are you going away, then? I'm very sorry to hear it; but of course I'm
not surprised. You couldn't be expected to stand it another year; those
children must have been something fearful."

"Oh, it wasn't the children."

"Well, I'm sorry. I had hoped"--

"Yes," said she, with a modest interrogation, as he hesitated, "what is it
you had hoped?"

"That I might indirectly be the means of making your life less lonely here.
You remember that 'experiment' we talked about at the spring?"

"That _you_ talked about, you mean."

"I am going to try it myself. Not because you were so
encouraging,--but--it's a risk anyway, you know, and I'm not sure the
circumstances make so much difference. I've known people to be wretched
with all the modern conveniences. I am going East for her in about two
weeks. How sorry she will be to find you gone! I wrote to her about you.
You might have helped each other; couldn't you stand it, Miss Newell, don't
you think, if you had another girl?"

"I'm afraid not," she said very gently. "I _must_ go home. You may be sure
she will not need me; you must see to it that she doesn't need--any one."

They were walking back and forth on the hill.

"I was just looking for the cottonwood-trees; are they gone too?" she
asked.

"Oh yes; there isn't a tree left in the ca�on. Don't you envy me my work?"

"I suppose everything we do seems like desecration to somebody. Here am I
making history very rapidly for this colony of ants." She looked down with
a rueful smile as she spoke.

"I wish you had the history of the entire species under your foot, and
could finish it at once."

"I'm not sure that I would; I'm not so fond of extermination as you pretend
to be."

"Well, keep the ants if you like them, but I am firm on the subject of
the camp children. There _are_ blessings that brighten as they take their
flight. I pay my monthly assessment for the doctor with the greatest
cheerfulness; if it wasn't for him, in this climate, they would crowd us
off the hill."

"Please don't!" she said wearily. "Even _I_ don't like to hear you talk
like that; I am sure _she_ will not."

He laughed softly. "You have often reminded me of her in little ways: that
was what upset me at the spring. I was very near telling you all about her
that day."

"I wish that you had!" she said. They were walking towards home now. "I
suppose you know it is talked of in the camp," she said, after a pause.
"Mr. Dyer told me, and showed me the house, a week ago. And now I must tell
you about my violets. I had them in a box in my room all winter. I should
like to leave them as a little welcome to her. Last night Nicky Dyer and
I planted them on the bank by the piazza under the climbing-rose; it was
a secret between Nicky and me, and Nicky promised to water them until she
came; but of course I meant to tell you. Will you look at them to-night,
please, and see if Nicky has been faithful?"

"I will, indeed," said Arnold. "That is just the kind of thing she
will delight in. If you are going East, Miss Newell, shall we not be
fellow-travelers? I should be so glad to be of any service."

"No, thank you. I am to spend a month in Santa Barbara, and escort an
invalid friend home. I shall have to say good-by, now. Don't go any farther
with me, please."

That night Arnold mused late, leaning over the railing of the new piazza
in the moonlight. He fancied that a faint perfume of violets came from the
damp earth below; but it could have been only fancy, for when he searched
the bank for them they were not there. The new sod was trampled, and a few
leaves and slight, uptorn roots lay scattered about, with some broken twigs
from the climbing-rose. He had found the gate open when he came, and the
Dyer cow had passed him, meandering peacefully up the trail.

       *       *       *       *       *

The crescent moon had waxed and waned since the night when it lighted the
engineer's musings through the wind-parted live-oak boughs, and another
slender bow gleamed in the pale, tinted haze of twilight. The month had
gone, like a feverish dream, to the young schoolmistress, as she lay in her
small, upper chamber, unconscious of all save alternate light and darkness,
and rest following pain. When, at last, she crept down the short staircase
to breathe the evening coolness, clinging to the stair-rail and holding her
soft white draperies close around her, she saw the pink light lingering
on the mountains, and heard the chorus to the "Sweet By and By" from the
miners' chapel on the hill. It was Sunday evening, and the house was
piously "emptied of its folk." She took her old seat by the parlor window,
and looked across to the engineer's office; its windows and doors were
shut, and the dogs of the camp were chasing each other over the loose
boards of the piazza floor. She laughed a weak, convulsive laugh, thinking
of the engineer's sallies of old upon that band of Ishmaelites, and of the
scrambling, yelping rush that followed. He must have gone East, else the
dogs had not been so bold. She looked down the valley where the mountains
parted seaward, the only break in the continuous barrier of land that cut
off her retreat and closed in about the atom of her own identity. The
thought of that immensity of distance made her faint.

There were steps on the porch,--not Captain Dyer's, for he and his good
wife were lending their voices to swell the stentorian chorus that was
shaking the church on the hill; the footsteps paused at the door, and
Arnold himself opened it. He had not, evidently, expected to see her.

"I was looking for some one to ask about you," he said. "Are you sure you
are able to be down?"

"Oh yes. I've been sitting up for several days. I wanted to see the
mountains again."

He was looking at her intently, while she flushed with weakness, and drew
the fringes of her shawl over her tremulous hands.

"How ill you have been! I have wished myself a woman, that I might do
something for you! I suppose Mrs. Dyer nursed you like a horse."

"Oh no; she was very good; but I don't remember much about the worst of it.
I thought you had gone home."

"Home! Where do you mean? I didn't know that I had ever boasted of any
reserved rights of that kind. I have no mortgage, in fact or sentiment, on
any part of the earth's surface, that I'm acquainted with!"

He spoke with a hard carelessness in his manner which make her shrink.

"I mean the East. I am homeless, too, but all the East seems like home to
me."

"You had better get rid of those sentimental, backward fancies as soon as
possible. The East concerns itself very little about us, I can tell you! It
can spare us."

She thrilled with pain at his words. "I should think you would be the last
one to say so,--you, who have so much treasure there."

"Will you please to understand," he said, turning upon her a face of bitter
calmness, "that I claim no treasure anywhere,--not even in heaven!"

She sat perfectly still, conscious that by some fatality of helpless
incomprehension every word that she said goaded him, and she feared to
speak again.

"Now I have hurt you," he said in his gentlest voice. "I am always hurting
you. I oughtn't to come near you with my rough edges! I'll go away now, if
you will tell me that you forgive me!"

She smiled at him without speaking, while her fair throat trembled with a
pulse of pain.

"Will you let me take your hand a moment? It is so long since I have
touched a woman's hand! God! how lonely I am! Don't look at me in that way;
don't pity me, or I shall lose what little manhood I have left!"

"What is it?" she said, leaning towards him. "There is something strange in
your face. If you are in trouble, tell me; it will help me to hear it. I am
not so very happy myself."

"Why should I add my load to yours? I seem always to impose myself upon
you, first my hopes, and now my--no, it isn't despair; it is only a kind
of brutal numbness. You must have the fatal gift of sympathy, or you would
never have seen my little hurt."

Miss Frances was not strong enough to bear the look in his eyes as he
turned them upon her, with a dreary smile. She covered her face with one
hand, while she whispered,--

"Is it--you have not lost her?"

"Yes! Or, rather, I never had her. I've been dreaming like a boy all these
years,--'In sleep a king, but waking, no such matter.'"

"It is not death, then?"

"No, she is not dead. She is not even false; that is, not very false. How
can I tell you how little it is, and yet how much! She is only a trifle
selfish. Why shouldn't she be? Why should we men claim the exclusive right
to choose the best for ourselves? It was selfish of me to ask her to share
such a life as mine; and she has gently and reasonably reminded me that
I'm not worth the sacrifice. It's quite true. I always knew I wasn't. She
put it very delicately and sweetly;--she's the sweetest girl you ever saw.
She'd marry me to-morrow if I could add myself, such as I am,--she doesn't
overrate me,--to what she has already; but an exchange she wasn't prepared
for. In all my life I never was so clearly estimated, body and soul. I
don't blame her, you understand. When I left her, three years ago, I saw my
way easily enough to a reputation, and an income, and a home in the East;
she never thought of anything else; I never taught her to look for anything
else. I dare say she rather enjoyed having a lover working for her in the
unknown West; she enjoyed the pretty letters she wrote me; but when it came
to the bare bones of existence in a mining camp, with a husband not very
rich or very distinguished, she had nothing to clothe them with. You said
once that to be happy here a woman must not have too much imagination; she
hadn't quite enough. I had to be dead honest with her when I asked her to
come. I told her there was nothing here but the mountains and the sunsets,
and a few items of picturesqueness which count with some people. Of course
I had to tell her I was but little better off than when I left. A man's
experience is something he cannot set forth at its value to himself; she
passed it over as a word of no practical meaning. There her imagination
failed her again. She took me frankly at my own estimate; and in justice to
her I must say I put myself at the lowest figures. I made a very poor show
on paper."

"You wrote to her!" exclaimed Miss Frances. "You did not go on? Oh, you
have made a great mistake! Do go: it cannot be too late. Letters are the
most untrusty things!"

"Wait," he said. "There is something else. She has a head for business;
she proposed that I should come East, and accept a superintendentship from
a cousin of hers, the owner of a gun-factory in one of those shady New
England towns women are so fond of. She intimated that he was in politics,
this cousin, and of course would expect his employees to become part of
his constituency. It's a very pretty little bribe, you see; when you add
the--the girl, it's enough to shake a man--who wants that girl. I'm not
worth much to myself, or to anybody else, apparently, but by Heaven I'll
not sell out as cheap as that!

"It all amounts to nothing except one more illusion gone. If there is a
woman on this earth that can love a man without knowing for what, and take
the chances of life with him without counting the cost, I have never known
her. I asked you once if a woman could do that. You hadn't the courage
to tell me the truth. I wouldn't have been satisfied if you had; but I'm
satisfied now."

"I believed she would be happy; I believe she would be, now, if only you
would go to her and persuade her to try."

"I persuade her! I would never try to persuade a woman to be my wife were I
dying for love of her! I don't think myself invented by nature to promote
the happiness of woman, in the aggregate or singly. I know there are men
who do: let them urge their claims. I thought that she loved me; that was
another illusion. She will probably marry the cousin, and become the most
loyal of his constituents. He is welcome to her; but there's a ghostly
blank somewhere. How I have tired you! You'll be in bed another week for
this selfishness of mine." He stopped, while a sudden thought brought a
change to his face. "But when are you going home?"

"I cannot go," she said. Her weakness came over her like a cloud, darkening
the room and pressing upon her heavily. "Will you give me your arm?"

At the stairs she stopped, and leaning against the wall looked at him with
wide, hopeless eyes.

"We are cut off from everything. My friend does not need me now; she has
gone home,--alone. She is dead!"

Arnold took a long walk upon the hills that night, and smoked a great
many cigars in gloomy meditation. He was thinking of two girls, as young
men who smoke a great many cigars without counting them often are; he was
also thinking of Arizona. He had fully made up his mind to resign, and
depart for that problematic region as soon as his place was filled; but an
alternative had presented itself to him with a pensive attractiveness,--an
alternative unmistakably associated with the fact that the schoolmistress
was to remain in her present isolated circumstances. It even had occurred
to him that there might be some question of duty involved in his "standing
by her," as he phrased it to himself, "till she got her color back." There
was an unconscious appeal in the last words he had heard her speak which
constrained him to do so. He was not in the habit of pitying himself, but
had there been another soul to follow this mental readjustment of himself
to his mutilated life, it would surely have pitied the eagerness with which
he clung to this one shadow of a duty to a fellow-creature. It was the
measure of his loneliness.

It was late in November. The rains had begun again with sound and fury;
with ranks of clouds forming along the mountain sides, and driven before
the sea-winds upward through the gulches; with days of breeze and sunshine,
when the fog veil was lightly lifted and blown apart, showing the valley
always greener; with days of lowering stillness, when the veil descended
and left the mountains alone, like islands of shadow rising from a sea of
misty whiteness.

On such a lowering day, Miss Frances stood at the junction of three trails,
in front of the door of the blacksmith's shop. She was wrapped in a dark
blue cloak, with the hood drawn over her head; the cool dampness had given
to her cheeks a clear, pure glow, and her brown eyes looked out with a
cheerful light. She was watching the parting of the mist in the valley
below; for a wind had sprung up, and now the rift widened, as the windows
of heaven might have opened, giving a glimpse of the world to the "Blessed
Damozel." All was dark above and around her; only a single shaft of
sunlight pierced the fog, and startled into life a hundred tints of
brightness in the valley. She caught the sparkle on the roofs and windows
of the town ten miles away; the fields of sunburnt stubble glowed a deep
Indian red; the young crops were tenderest emerald; and the line of the
distant bay, a steel-blue thread against the horizon.

Arnold was plodding up the lower trail on his gray mare, fetlock deep in
mud. He dismounted at the door of the shop, and called to him a small
Mexican lad with a cheek of the tint of ripe corn.

"Here, Pedro Segundo! Take this mare up to the camp! Can you catch?" He
tossed him a coin. "Bueno!"

"Mucho bueno!" said Pedro the First, looking on approvingly from the door
of his shop.

Arnold turned to the schoolmistress, who was smiling from her perch on a
pile of wet logs.

"I'm perfectly happy!" she said. "This east wind takes me home. I hear the
bluebirds, and smell the salt-marshes and the wood-mosses. I'm not sure but
that when the fog lifts we shall see white caps in the valley."

"I dare say there are some very good people down there," said Arnold, with
deliberation, "but all the same I should welcome an inundation. Think
what a climate this would be, if we could have the sea below us, knocking
against the rocks on still nights, and thundering at us in a storm!"

"Don't speak of it! It makes me long for a miracle, or a judgment, or
something that's not likely to happen."

"Meantime, I want you to come down the trail, and pass judgment on my
bachelor quarters. I can't stand the boarding-house any longer! By Jove,
I'm like the British footman in 'Punch,'--'what with them legs o' mutton
and legs o' pork, I'm a'most wore out! I want a new hanimal inwented!' I've
found an old girl down in the valley who consents to look after me and vary
the monotony of my dinners at the highest market price. She isn't here yet,
but the cabin is about ready. I want you to come down and look it over. I'm
a perfect barbarian about color! You can't put it on too thick and strong
to suit me. I dare say I need toning down."

They were slipping and sliding down the muddy trail, brushing the raindrops
from the live-oak scrub as they passed. A subtle underlying content had
lulled them both, of late, into an easier companionship than they had ever
found possible before, and they were gay with that enjoyment of wet weather
which is like an intoxication after seven months of drought.

"Now I suppose you like soft, harmonious tints and neutral effects. You're
a bit of a conservative in everything, I fear."

"I think I should like plenty of color here, or else positive white; the
monotony of the landscape and its own deep, low tones demand it. A neutral
house would fade into an ash heap under this sun."

"Good! Then you'll like my dark little den, with its barbaric reds and
blues."

They were at the gate of the little cottage, overlooking the valley. The
gleam of sunlight had faded and the fog curtain rolled back. The house
did indeed seem very dark as they entered. It was only a little after four
o'clock, but the cloudy twilight of a short November day was suddenly
descending upon them. The schoolmistress looked shyly around, while Arnold
tramped about the rooms and sprung the shades up as high as they would go.

They were in a small, irregular parlor, wainscoted and floored in redwood,
and lightly furnished with bamboo. This room communicated by a low arch
with the dining-room beyond.

"I have some flags and spurs and old trophies to hang up there," he said,
pointing to the arch; "and perhaps I can get you to sew the rings on the
curtain that's to hang underneath. I don't want too much of the society of
my angel from the valley, you know; besides, I want to shield her from the
vulgar gaze, as they do the picture of the Madonna."

"It will serve you right if she never comes at all!"

"Oh, she's pining to come. She's dying to sacrifice herself for twenty-five
dollars a month. Did I tell you, by the way, that I've had a rise in my
salary? There is a rise in the work, too, which rather overbalances the
increase of pay, but that's understood; for a good many years it will be
more work than wage, but at the other end I hope it will be more wage than
work. You don't seem to be very much interested in my affairs; if you knew
how seldom I speak of them to any one but yourself, you might perhaps deign
to listen."

"I am listening; but I'm thinking, too, that it's getting very late."

"See, here is my curtain!" he said, dragging out a breadth of heavy stuff.
He took it to the window, and threw it over a Chinese lounge that stood
beneath. "It's an old serape I picked up at Guadalajara five years ago:
the beauty of having a house is that all the old rubbish you have bored
yourself with for years immediately becomes respectable and useful. I
expect to become so myself. You don't say that you like my curtain!"

"I think it is very pagan looking, and rather--dirty."

"Well, I shan't make a point of the dirt. I dare say the thing would look
just as well if it was clean. Won't you try my lounge?" he said, as she
looked restlessly towards the door. "It was invented by a race that can
loaf more naturally than we do: it takes an American back some time to
relax enough to appreciate it."

Miss Frances half reluctantly drew her cloak about her, and yielded her
Northern slenderness to the long Oriental undulations of the couch. Her
head was thrown back, showing her fair throat and the sweet upward curves
of her lips and brows.

Arnold gazed at her with too evident delight.

"Why won't you sit still? You cannot deny that you have never been so
comfortable in your life before."

"It's a very good place to 'loaf and invite one's soul,'" she said, rising
to a sitting position; "but that isn't my occupation at present. I must go
home. It is almost dark."

"There is no hurry. I'm going with you. I want you to see how the little
room lights up. I've never seen it by firelight, and I'll have my
house-warming to-night!"

"Oh no, indeed! I must go back. There's the five o'clock whistle, now!"

"Well, we've an hour yet. You must get warm before you go."

He went out, and quickly returned with an armful of wood and shavings,
which he crammed into the cold fireplace.

"What a litter you have made! Do you think your mature angel from the
valley will stand that sort of thing?"

As she spoke, the rain descended in violence, sweeping across the piazza,
and obliterating the fast-fading landscape. They could scarcely see each
other in the darkness, and the trampling on the roof overhead made speech
a useless effort. Almost as suddenly as it had opened upon them the tumult
ceased, and in the silence that followed they listened to the heavy
raindrops spattering from the eaves.

Arnold crossed to the window, where Miss Frances stood shivering and
silent, with her hands clasped before her.

"I want you to light my fire," he said, with a certain concentration in his
voice.

"Why do you not light it yourself?" She drew away from his outstretched
hand. "It seems to me you are a bit of a tyrant in your own house."

He drew a match across his knee and held it towards her: by its gleam she
saw his pale, unsmiling face, and again that darkening of the eyes which
she remembered.

"Do you refuse me such a little thing,--my first guest? I ask it as a most
especial grace!"

She took the match, and knelt with it in her hands; but it only flickered a
moment, and went out. "It will not go for me. You must light it yourself."

He knelt beside her and struck another match. "We will try together," he
said, placing it in her fingers and closing his hand about them. He held
the trembling fingers and the little spark they guarded steadily against
the shaving. It kindled; the flame breathed and brightened and curled
upward among the crooked manzanita stumps, illuminating the two entranced
young faces bending before it. Miss Frances rose to her feet, and Arnold,
rising too, looked at her with a growing dread and longing in his eyes.

"You said to-day that you were happy, because in fancy you were at home. Is
that the only happiness possible to you here?"

"I am quite contented here," she said. "I am getting acclimated."

"Oh, don't be content: I am not; I am horribly otherwise. I want
something--so much that I dare not ask for it. You know what it
is,--Frances!"

"You said once that I reminded you--of her: is that the reason you--Am I
consoling you?"

"Good God! I don't want consolation! _That_ thing never existed; but here
is the reality; I cannot part with it. I wish you had as little as I have,
outside of this room where we two stand together!"

"I don't know that I have anything," she said under her breath.

"Then," said he, taking her in his arms, "I don't see but that we are ready
to enter the kingdom of heaven. It seems very near to me."

They are still in exile: they have joined the band of lotus-eaters who
inhabit that region of the West which is pervaded by a subtle breath from
the Orient, blowing across the seas between. Mrs. Arnold has not yet made
that first visit East which is said by her Californian friends to be so
disillusioning, and the old home still hovers, like a beautiful mirage, on
the receding horizon.




FRIEND BARTON'S "CONCERN."


It had been "borne in" upon him, more or less, during the long winter;
it had not relaxed when the frosts unlocked their hold and the streams
were set free from their long winter's silence, among the hills. He grew
restless and abstracted under "the turnings of the Lord's hand upon him,"
and his speech unconsciously shaped itself into the Biblical cadences which
came to him in his moments of spiritual exercise.

The bedrabbled snows of March shrank away before the keen, quickening
sunbeams; the hills emerged, brown and sodden, like the chrysalis of the
new year; the streams woke in a tumult, and all day and night their voices
called from the hills back of the mill: the waste-weir was a foaming
torrent, and spread itself in muddy shallows across the meadow, beyond
the old garden where the robins and bluebirds were house-hunting. Friend
Barton's trouble stirred with the life-blood of the year, and pressed
upon him sorely; but as yet he gave it no words. He plodded about, among
his lean kine, tempering the winds of March to his untimely lambs, and
reconciling unnatural ewes to their maternal duties.

Friend Barton had never heard of the doctrine of the survival of the
fittest, though it was the spring of 1812, and England and America were
investigating the subject on the seas, while the nations of Europe were
practically illustrating it. The "hospital tent," as the boys called an old
corn-basket, covered with carpet, which stood beside the kitchen chimney,
was seldom without an occupant,--a brood of chilled chickens, a weakly
lamb, or a wee pig (with too much blue in its pinkness), that had been
left behind by its stouter brethren in the race for existence. The old
mill hummed away through the day, and often late into the evening if time
pressed, upon the grists which added a thin, intermittent stream of tribute
to the family income. Whenever work was "slack," Friend Barton was sawing
or chopping in the woodshed adjoining the kitchen; every moment he could
seize or make he was there, stooping over the rapidly growing pile.

"Seems to me, father, thee's in a great hurry with the wood this spring. I
don't know when we've had such a pile ahead."

"'T won't burn up any faster for being chopped," Friend Barton said; and
then his wife Rachel knew that if he had a reason for being "forehanded"
with the wood, he was not ready to give it.

One rainy April afternoon, when the smoky gray distances began to take a
tinge of green, and through the drip and rustle of the rain the call of
the robins sounded, Friend Barton sat in the door of the barn, oiling the
road-harness. The old chaise had been wheeled out and greased, and its
cushions beaten and dusted.

An ox-team with a load of grain creaked up the hill and stopped at the
mill door. The driver, seeing Friend Barton's broad-brimmed drab felt hat
against the dark interior of the barn, came down the short lane leading
from the mill, past the house and farm-buildings.

"Fixin' up for travelin', Uncle Tommy?"

Vain compliments, such as worldly titles of Mr. and Mrs., were unacceptable
to Thomas Barton, and he was generally known and addressed as "Uncle Tommy"
by the world's people of a younger generation.

"It is not in man that walketh to direct his own steps, neighbor Jordan.
I am getting myself in readiness to obey the Lord, whichever way He shall
call me."

Farmer Jordan cast a shrewd eye over the premises. They wore that patient,
sad, exhumed look which old farm-buildings are apt to have in early spring.
The roofs were black with rain, and brightened with patches of green moss.
Farmer Jordan instinctively calculated how many "bunches o' shingle" would
be required to rescue them from the decline into which they had fallen,
indicated by these hectic green spots.

"Wal, the Lord calls most of us to stay at home and look after things, such
weather as this. Good plantin' weather; good weather for breakin' ground;
fust-rate weather for millin'! This is a reg'lar miller's rain, Uncle
Tommy. You'd ought to be takin' advantage of it. I've got a grist back
here; wish ye could manage to let me have it when I come back from store."

The grist was ground and delivered before Friend Barton went in to his
supper that night. Dorothy Barton had been mixing bread, and was wiping her
white arms and hands on the roller towel by the kitchen door, as her father
stamped and scraped his feet on the stones outside.

"There! I do believe I forgot to toll neighbor Jordan's rye," he said, as
he gave a final rub on the broom Dorothy handed out to him. "It's wonderful
how careless I get!"

"Well, father, I don't suppose thee'd ever forget, and toll a grist twice!"

"I believe I've been mostly preserved from mistakes of that kind," said
Friend Barton gently. "Well, well! To be sure," he continued musingly. "It
may be the Lord who stays my hand from gathering profit unto myself while
his lambs go unfed."

Dorothy put her hands on her father's shoulders: she was almost as tall as
he, and could look into his patient, troubled eyes.

"Father, I know what thee is thinking of, but do think long. It will be a
hard year; the boys ought to go to school; and mother is so feeble!"

Friend Barton's "concern" kept him awake that night. His wife watched by
his side, giving no sign, lest her wakeful presence should disturb his
silent wrestlings. The tall, cherry-wood clock in the entry measured the
hours, as they passed, with its slow, dispassionate tick.

At two o'clock Rachel Barton was awakened from her first sleep of weariness
by her husband's voice, whispering heavily in the darkness.

"My way is hedged up! I see no way to go forward. Lord, strengthen my
patience, that I murmur not, after all I have seen of thy goodness. I find
daily bread is very desirable; want and necessity are painful to nature;
but shall I follow Thee for the sake of the loaves, or will it do to
forsake Thee in times of emptiness and abasement?"

There was silence again, and restless tossings and sighings continued the
struggle.

"Thomas," the wife's voice spoke tremulously in the darkness, "my dear
husband, I know whither thy thoughts are tending. If the Spirit is with
thee, do not deny it for our sakes, I pray thee. The Lord did not give
thee thy wife and children to hang as a millstone round thy neck. I am thy
helpmeet, to strengthen thee in his service. I am thankful that I have my
health this spring better than usual, and Dorothy is a wonderful help. Her
spirit was sent to sustain me in thy long absences. Go, dear, and serve our
Master, who has called thee in these bitter strivings! Dorothy and I will
keep things together as well as we can. The way will open--never fear!" She
put out her hand and touched his face in the darkness; there were tears on
the furrowed cheeks. "Try to sleep, dear, and let thy spirit have rest.
There is but one answer to this call."

With the first drowsy twitterings of the birds, when the crescent-shaped
openings in the board shutters began to define themselves clearly in the
shadowy room, they arose and went about their morning tasks in silence.
Friend Barton's step was a little heavier than usual, and the hollows
round his wife's pale brown eyes were a little deeper. As he sat on the
splint-bottomed chair by the kitchen fireplace, drawing on his boots, she
placed her hands on his shoulders, and touched with her cheek the worn spot
on the top of his head.

"Thee will lay this concern before meeting to-morrow, father?"

"I had it on my mind to do so,--if my light be not quenched before then."

Friend Barton's light was not quenched. Words came to him, without
seeking,--a sure sign that the Spirit was with him,--in which to "open the
concern" that had ripened in his mind, of a religious visit to the meeting
constituting the yearly meetings of Philadelphia and Baltimore. A "minute"
was given him, encouraging him in the name, and with the full concurrence,
of the monthly meetings of Nine Partners and Stony Valley, to go wherever
the Truth might lead him.

While Friend Barton was thus freshly anointed, and "abundantly encouraged,"
his wife, Rachel, was talking with Dorothy, in the low upper chamber known
as the "wheel-room."

Dorothy was spinning wool on the big wheel, dressed in her light calico
short gown and brown quilted petticoat; her arms were bare, and her hair
was gathered away from her flushed cheeks and knotted behind her ears. The
roof sloped down on one side, and the light came from a long, low window
under the eaves. There was another window (shaped like a half-moon, high
up in the peak), but it sent down only one long beam of sunlight, which
glimmered across the dust and fell upon Dorothy's white neck.

The wheel was humming a quick measure and Dorothy trod lightly back and
forth, the wheel-pin in one hand, the other holding the tense, lengthening
thread, which the spindle devoured again.

"Dorothy, thee looks warm: can't thee sit down a moment, while I talk to
thee?"

"Is it anything important, mother? I want to get my twenty knots before
dinner." She paused as she joined a long tress of wool at the spindle. "Is
it anything about father?"

"Yes, it's about father, and all of us."

"I know," said Dorothy, with a sigh. "He's going away again!"

"Yes, dear. He feels that he is called. It is a time of trouble and
contention everywhere: 'the harvest,' truly, 'is plenteous, but the
laborers are few.'"

"There are not so many 'laborers' here, mother, though to be sure, the
harvest"--

"Dorothy, my daughter, don't let a spirit of levity creep into thy speech.
Thy father has striven and wrestled with his urgings. I've seen it working
on him all winter. He feels, now, it is the Lord's will."

"I don't see how he can be so sure," said Dorothy, swaying gloomily to and
fro against the wheel. "I don't care for myself, I'm not afraid of work,
but thee's not able to do what thee does now, mother. If I have outside
things to look after, how can I help thee as I should? And the boys are
about as much dependence as a flock of barn swallows!"

"Don't thee fret about me, dear; the way will open. Thy father has thought
and planned for us. Have patience while I tell thee. Thee knows that Walter
Evesham's pond is small and his mill is doing a thriving business?"

"Yes, indeed, I know it!" Dorothy exclaimed. "He has his own share, and
ours too, most of it!"

"Wait, dear, wait! Thy father has rented him the ponds, to use when his own
gives out. He is to have the control of the water, and it will give us a
little income, even though the old mill does stand idle."

"He may as well take the mill, too. If father is away all summer it will
be useless ever to start it again. Thee'll see, mother, how it will end,
if Walter Evesham has the custom and the water all summer. I think it's
miserable for a young man to be so keen about money."

"Dorothy, seems to me thee's hasty in thy judgments. I never heard that
said of Walter Evesham. His father left him with capital to improve his
mill. It does better work than ours; we can't complain of that. Thy father
was never one to study much after ways of making money. He felt he had no
right to more than an honest livelihood. I don't say that Walter Evesham's
in the wrong. We know that Joseph took advantage of his opportunities,
though I can't say that I ever felt much unity with some of his
transactions. What would thee have, my dear? Thee's discouraged with thy
father for choosing the thorny way, which we tread with him; but thee seems
no better satisfied with one who considers the flesh and its wants."

"I don't know, mother, what I want for myself; that doesn't matter; but
for thee I would have rest from all these cruel worries thee has borne so
long."

She buried her face in her mother's lap and put her strong young arms about
the frail, toil-bent form.

"There, there, dear. Try to rule thy spirit, Dorothy. Thee's too much
worked up about this. They are not worries to me. I am thankful we have
nothing to decide one way or the other, only to do our best with what is
given us. Thee's not thyself, dear. Go downstairs and fetch in the clothes,
and don't hurry; stay out till thee gets more composed."

Dorothy did not succeed in bringing herself into unity with her father's
call, but she came to a fuller realization of his struggle. When he bade
them good-by his face showed what it had cost him; but Rachel was calm and
cheerful. The pain of parting is keenest to those who go, but it stays
longer with those that are left behind.

"Dorothy, take good care of thy mother!" Friend Barton said, taking his
daughter's face between his hands and gravely kissing her brow between the
low-parted ripples of her hair.

"Yes, father," she said, looking into his eyes; "Thee knows I'm thy eldest
son."

They watched the old chaise swing round the corner of the lane, then the
pollard willows shut it from sight.

"Come, mother," said Dorothy, hurrying her in at the gate. "I'm going
to make a great pot of mush, and have it hot for supper, and fried for
breakfast, and warmed up with molasses for dinner, and there'll be some
cold with milk for supper, and we shan't have any cooking to do at all!"

They went around by the kitchen door. Rachel stopped in the woodshed, and
the tears rushed to her eyes.

"Dear father! How he has worked over that wood, early and late, to spare
us!"

We will not revive Dorothy's struggles with the farm-work, and with the
boys. They were an isolated family at the mill-house; their peculiar faith
isolated them still more, and they were twelve miles from meeting and the
settlement of Friends at Stony Valley. Dorothy's pride kept her silent
about her needs, lest they might bring reproach upon her father among the
neighbors, who would not be likely to feel the urgency of his spiritual
summons.

The summer heats came on apace and the nights grew shorter. It seemed
to Dorothy that she had hardly stretched out her tired young body and
forgotten her cares, in the low, attic bedroom, before the east was
streaked with light and the birds were singing in the apple-trees, whose
falling blossoms drifted in at the window.

One day in early June, Friend Barton's flock of sheep (consisting of nine
experienced ewes, six yearlings, and a sprinkling of close-curled lambs
whose legs had not yet come into mature relations with their bodies) was
gathered in a wattled inclosure, beside the stream that flowed into the
mill-head. It was supplied by the waste from the pond, and, when the gate
was shut, rambled easily over the gray slate pebbles, with here and there a
fall just forcible enough to serve as a douche-bath for a well-grown sheep.
The victims were panting in their heavy fleeces, and mingling their hoarse,
plaintive tremolo with the ripple of the water and the sound of young
voices in a frolic. Dorothy had divided her forces for the washing to the
best advantage. The two elder boys stood in midstream to receive the sheep,
which she, with the help of little Jimmy, caught and dragged to the bank.

The boys were at work now upon an elderly ewe, while Dorothy stood on the
brink of the stream braced against an ash sapling, dragging forward by the
fleece a beautiful but reluctant yearling. Her bare feet were incased in a
pair of moccasins that laced around the ankle; her petticoats were kilted,
and her broad hat bound down with a ribbon; one sleeve was rolled up, the
other had been sacrificed in a scuffle in the sheep-pen. The new candidate
for immersion stood bleating and trembling with her forefeet planted
against the slippery bank, pushing back with all her strength while Jimmy
propelled from the rear.

"Boys!" Dorothy's clear voice called across the stream. "_Do_ hurry! She's
been in long enough, now! Keep her head up, can't you, and squeeze the wool
_hard_! You're not _half_ washing! Oh, Reuby! thee'll drown her! Keep her
_head_ up!"

Another unlucky douse and another half-smothered bleat,--Dorothy released
the yearling and plunged to the rescue. "Go after that lamb, Reuby!" she
cried with exasperation in her voice. Reuby followed the yearling, that
had disappeared over the orchard slope, upsetting an obstacle in its path,
which happened to be Jimmy. He was wailing now on the bank, while Dorothy,
with the ewe's nose tucked comfortably in the bend of her arm, was parting
and squeezing the fleece, with the water swirling round her. Her stout arms
ached, and her ears were stunned with the incessant bleatings; she counted
with dismay the sheep still waiting in the pen. "Oh, Jimmy! Do stop crying,
or else go to the house!"

"He'd better go after Reuby," said Sheppard Barton, who was now Dorothy's
sole dependence.

"Oh yes, do, Jimmy, that's a good boy. Tell him to let the yearling go and
come back quick."

The water had run low that morning in Evesham's pond. He shut down the
mill, and strode up the hills, across lots, to raise the gate of the lower
Barton pond, which had been heading up for his use. He passed the cornfield
where, a month before, he had seen pretty Dorothy Barton dropping corn with
her brothers. It made him ache to think of Dorothy with her feeble mother,
the boys as wild as preachers' sons proverbially are, and the old farm
running down on her hands; the fences all needed mending, and there went
Reuben Barton, now, careering over the fields in chase of a stray yearling.
His mother's house was big, and lonely, and empty; and he flushed as he
thought of the "one ewe-lamb" he coveted out of Friend Barton's rugged
pastures.

As Evesham raised the gate, and leaned to watch the water swirl and gurgle
through the "trunk," sucking the long weeds with it, and thickening with
its tumult the clear current of the stream, the sound of voices and the
bleating of sheep came up from below. He had not the farming instincts in
his blood; the distant bleating, the hot June sunshine and cloudless sky
did not suggest to him sheep-washing; but now came a boy's voice shouting
and a cry of distress, and he remembered with a thrill that Friend Barton
used the stream for that peaceful purpose. He shut down the gate and tore
along through the ferns and tangled grass till he came to the sheep-pen,
where the bank was muddy and trampled. The prisoners were bleating drearily
and looking with longing eyes across to the other side, where those who had
suffered were now straying and cropping the short turf through the lights
and shadows of the orchard.

There was no other sign of life, except a broad hat with a brown ribbon
buffeted about in an eddy among the stones. The stream dipped now below the
hill, and the current, still racing fast with the impetus he had given it,
shot away amongst the hazel thickets that crowded close to the brink. He
was obliged to make a d�tour by the orchard and to come out below at the
"mill-head," a black, deep pool with an ugly ripple setting across it to
the head-gate. He saw something white clinging there, and ran round the
brink. It was the sodden fleece of the old ewe, which had been drifted
against the head-gate and held there to her death. Evesham, with a
sickening contraction of the heart, threw off his jacket for a plunge, when
Dorothy's voice called rather faintly from the willows on the opposite
bank.

"Don't jump! I'm here," she said. Evesham searched the willows and found
her seated in the sun, just beyond, half buried in a bed of ferns.

"I _shouldn't_ have called thee," she said shyly, as he sank pale and
panting beside her, "but thee looked--I thought thee was going to jump into
the mill-head!"

"I thought _you_ were there, Dorothy!"

"I was there quite long enough. Shep pulled me out; I was too tired to help
myself much." Dorothy held her palm pressed against her temple and the
blood trickled from beneath, streaking her pale, wet cheek.

"He's gone to the house to get me a cloak. I don't want mother to see me,
not yet," she said.

"I'm afraid you ought not to wait, Dorothy. Let me take you to the house,
won't you? I'm afraid you'll get a deadly chill."

Dorothy did not look in the least like death. She was blushing now, because
Evesham would think it so strange of her to stay, and yet she could not
rise in her wet clothes, that clung to her like the calyx to a bud.

"Let me see that cut, Dorothy!"

"Oh, it's nothing. I don't wish thee to look at it!"

"But I will! Do you want to make me your murderer, sitting there in your
wet clothes with a cut on your head?"

He drew away her hand; the wound, indeed, was no great affair, but he bound
it up deftly with strips of his handkerchief. Dorothy's wet curls touched
his fingers and clung to them, and her eyelashes drooped lower and lower.

"I think it was _very_ stupid of thee. Didn't thee hear us from the dam?
I'm sure we made noise enough."

"Yes, I heard you when it was too late. I heard the sheep before, but how
could I imagine that you, Dorothy, and three boys as big as cockerels, were
sheep-washing? It's the most preposterous thing I ever heard of!",

"Well, I can't help being a woman, and the sheep had to be washed. I think
there ought to be more men in the world when half of them are preaching and
fighting."

"If you'd only let the men who are left help you a little, Dorothy."

"I don't want any help. I only _don't_ want to be washed into the
mill-head."

They both laughed, and Evesham began again entreating her to let him take
her to the house.

"Hasn't thee a coat or something I could put around me until Shep comes?"
said Dorothy. "He must be here soon."

"Yes, I've a jacket here somewhere."

He sped away to find it, and faithless Dorothy, as the willows closed
between them, sprang to her feet and fled like a startled Naiad to the
house.

When Evesham, pushing through the willows, saw nothing but the bed of wet,
crushed ferns and the trail through the long grass where Dorothy's feet had
fled, he smiled grimly to himself, remembering that "ewe-lambs" are not
always as meek as they look.

That evening Rachel had received a letter from Friend Barton and was
preparing to read it aloud to the children. They were in the kitchen, where
the boys had been helping Dorothy in a desultory manner to shell corn for
the chickens; but now all was silence while Rachel wiped her glasses and
turned the large sheet of paper, squared with many foldings, to the candle.

She read the date, "'London Grove, 5th month, 22d.--Most affectionately
beloved.'" "He means us all," said Rachel, turning to the children with a
tender smile. "It's spelled with a small _b_."

"He means thee!" said Dorothy, laughing. "Thee's not such a very big
beloved."

There was a moment's silence. "I don't know that the opening of the letter
is of general interest," Rachel mused, with her eyes traveling slowly down
the page. "He says: 'In regard to my health, lest thee should concern
thyself, I am thankful to say I have never enjoyed better since years have
made me acquainted with my infirmities of body, and I earnestly hope that
my dear wife and children are enjoying the same blessing.

"'I trust the boys are not deficient in obedience and helpfulness. At
Sheppard's age I had already begun to take the duties of a man upon my
shoulders.'"

Sheppard giggled uncomfortably, and Dorothy laughed outright.

"Oh, if father only _knew_ how good the boys are! Mother, thee must write
and tell him about their 'helpfulness and obedience'! Thee can tell him
their appetites keep up pretty well; they manage to take their meals
regularly, and they are _always_ out of bed by eight o'clock to help me
hang up the milking-stool!"

"Just wait till thee gets into the mill-head again, Dorothy Barton! Thee
needn't come to _me_ to help thee out!"

"Go on, mother. Don't let the boys interrupt thee!"

"Well," said Rachel, rousing herself, "where was I? Oh, 'At Sheppard's
age'! Well, next come some allusions to the places where he has visited and
his spiritual exercises there. I don't know that the boys are quite old
enough to enter into this yet. Thee'd better read it thyself, Dorothy. I'm
keeping all father's letters for the boys to read when they are old enough
to appreciate them."

"Well, I think thee might read to us about where he's been preachin'. We
can understand a great deal more than thee thinks we can," said Shep in
an injured voice. "Reuby can preach some himself. Thee ought to hear him,
mother. It's almost as good as meetin'."

"I _wondered_ how Reuby spent his time," said Dorothy, and the mother
hastened to interpose.

"Well! here's a passage that may be interesting: 'On sixth day attended the
youths' meeting here, a pretty favored time on the whole. Joseph' (that's
Joseph Carpenter; he mentions him aways back) 'had good service in lively
testimony, while I was calm and easy without a word to say. At a meeting at
Plumstead we suffered long, but at length we felt relieved. The unfaithful
were admonished, the youth invited, and the heavy-hearted encouraged. It
was a heavenly time.' Heretofore he seems to have been closed up with
silence a good deal, but now the way opens continually for him to free
himself. He's been 'much favored,' he says, 'of late.' Reuby, what's thee
doing to thy brothers?" (Shep and Reuby, who had been persecuting Jimmy by
pouring handfuls of corn down the neck of his jacket until he had taken
refuge behind Dorothy's chair, were now recriminating with corn-cobs on
each other's faces.) "Dorothy, can't thee keep those boys quiet?"

"Did thee ever know them to be quiet?" said Dorothy, helping Jimmy to
relieve himself of his corn.

"Well now, listen." Rachel continued placidly, "'Second day, 27th' (of
fifth month, he means; the letter's been a long time coming), 'attended
their mid-week meeting at London Grove, where my tongue, as it were, clave
to the roof of my mouth, while Hannah Husbands was much favored and enabled
to lift up her voice like the song of an angel'"--

"Who's Hannah Husbands?" Dorothy interrupted.

"Thee doesn't know her, dear. She was second cousin to thy father's
stepmother; the families were not congenial, I believe, but she has a great
gift for the ministry."

"I should think she'd better be at home with her children, if she has any.
Fancy _thee_, mother, going about to strange meetings and lifting up thy
voice"--

"Hush, hush, Dorothy! Thy tongue's running away with thee. Consider the
example thee's setting the boys."

"Thee'd better write to father about Dorothy, mother. Perhaps Hannah
Husbands would like to know what she thinks about her preachin'."

"Well, now, be quiet, all of you. Here's something about Dorothy: 'I know
that my dear daughter Dorothy is faithful and loving, albeit somewhat quick
of speech and restive under obligation. I would have thee remind her that
an unwillingness to accept help from others argues a want of Christian
Meekness. Entreat her from me not to conceal her needs from our neighbors,
if so be she find her work oppressive. We know them to be of kindly
intention, though not of our way of thinking in all particulars. Let her
receive help from them, not as individuals, but as instruments of the
Lord's protection, which it were impiety and ingratitude to deny.'"

"There!" cried Shep. "That means thee is to let Luke Jordan finish the
sheep-washing. Thee'd better have done it in the first place. We shouldn't
have the old ewe to pick if thee had."

Dorothy was dimpling at the idea of Luke Jordan in the character of an
instrument of heavenly protection. She had not regarded him in that light,
it must be confessed, but had rejected him with scorn.

"He may, if he wants to," she said; "but you boys shall drive them over.
I'll have nothing to do with it."

"And shear them too, Dorothy? He asked to shear them long ago."

"Well, _let_ him shear them and keep the wool too."

"I wouldn't say that, Dorothy," said Rachel Barton. "We need the wool, and
it seems as if over-payment might not be quite honest, either."

"Oh, mother, mother! What a mother thee is!" cried Dorothy laughing and
rumpling Rachel's cap-strings in a tumultuous embrace.

"She's a great deal too good for _thee_, Dorothy Barton."

"She's too good for all of us. How did thee ever come to have such a
graceless set of children, mother?"

"I'm very well satisfied," said Rachel. "But now do be quiet and let's
finish the letter. We must get to bed some time to-night!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The wild clematis was in blossom now; the fences were white with it, and
the rusty cedars were crowned with virgin wreaths; but the weeds were thick
in the garden and in the potato patch. Dorothy, stretching her cramped
back, looked longingly up the shadowy vista of the farm-lane that had
nothing to do but ramble off into the remotest green fields, where the
daisies' faces were as white and clear as in early June.

One hot August night she came home late from the store. The stars were
thick in the sky; the katydids made the night oppressive with their rasping
questionings, and a hoarse revel of frogs kept the ponds from falling
asleep in the shadow of the hills.

"Is thee very tired to-night, Dorothy?" her mother asked, as she took her
seat on the low step of the porch. "Would thee mind turning old John out
thyself?"

"No, mother, I'm not tired. But why? Oh, _I_ know!" cried Dorothy with
a quick laugh. "The dance at Slocum's barn. I thought those boys were
uncommonly helpful."

"Yes, dear, it's but natural they should want to see it. Hark! we can hear
the music from here."

They listened, and the breeze brought across the fields the sound of
fiddles and the rhythmic tramp of feet, softened by the distance. Dorothy's
young pulses leaped.

"Mother, is it any harm for them just to see it? They have so little fun,
except what they get out of teasing and shirking."

"My dear, thy father would never countenance such a scene of frivolity, or
permit one of his children to look upon it; through our eyes and ears the
world takes possession of our hearts."

"Then I'm to spare the boys this temptation, mother? Thee will trust _me_
to pass the barn?"

"I would trust my boys, if they were thy age, Dorothy; but their resolution
is tender like their years."

It might be questioned whether the frame of mind in which the boys went to
bed that night under their mother's eye, for Rachel could be firm in a case
of conscience, was more improving than the frivolity of Slocum's barn.

"Mother," called Dorothy, looking in at the kitchen window where Rachel was
stooping over the embers in the fireplace to light a bedroom candle, "I
want to speak to thee."

Rachel came to the window, screening the candle with her hand.

"Will thee trust me to look at the dancing a little while? It is so very
near."

"Why, Dorothy, does thee want to?"

"Yes, mother, I believe I do. I've never seen a dance in my life. It cannot
ruin me to look just once."

Rachel stood puzzled.

"Thee's old enough to judge for thyself, Dorothy. But, my child, do not
tamper with thy inclinations through heedless curiosity. Thee knows thee's
more impulsive than I could wish for thy own peace."

"I'll be very careful, mother. If I feel in the least wicked I will come
straight away."

She kissed her mother's hand that rested on the window-sill. Rachel did
not like the kiss, nor Dorothy's brilliant eyes and flushed cheeks, as
the candle revealed them like a fair picture painted on the darkness. She
hesitated, but Dorothy sped away up the lane with old John lagging at his
halter.

Was it the music growing nearer that quickened her breathing, or only the
closeness of the night shut in between the wild grapevine curtains swung
from one dark cedar column to another? She caught the sweetbrier's breath
as she hurried by, and now a loop in the leafy curtain revealed the pond,
lying black in a hollow of the hills with a whole heaven of stars reflected
in it. Old John stumbled along over the stones, cropping the grass as he
went. Dorothy tugged at his halter and urged him on to the head of the
lane, where two farm-gates stood at right angles. One of them was open and
a number of horses were tethered in a row along the fence within. They
whinnied a cheerful greeting to John as Dorothy slipped his halter and shut
him into the field adjoining. Now should she walk into temptation with her
eyes and ears open? The gate stood wide, with only one field of perfumed
meadow-grass between her and the lights and music of Slocum's barn. The
sound of revelry by night could hardly have taken a more innocent form than
this rustic dancing of neighbors after a "raisin' bee," but had it been the
rout of Comus and his crew, and Dorothy the Lady Una trembling near, her
heart could hardly have throbbed more quickly as she crossed the dewy
meadow. A young maple stood within ten rods of the barn, and here she
crouched in shadow.

The great doors stood wide open and lanterns were hung from the beams,
lighting the space between the mows where a dance was set, with youths and
maidens in two long rows. The fiddlers sat on barrel-heads near the door;
a lantern hanging just behind projected their shadows across the square
of light on the trodden space in front, where they executed a grotesque
pantomime, keeping time to the music with spectral wavings and noddings.
The dancers were Dorothy's young neighbors, whom she had known, and yet not
known, all her life, but they had the strangeness of familiar faces seen
suddenly in some fantastic dream.

Surely that was Nancy Slocum in the bright pink gown heading the line of
girls, and that was Luke Jordan's sunburnt profile leaning from his place
to pluck a straw from the mow behind him. They were marching, and the
measured tramp of feet keeping solid time to the fiddles set a strange
tumult vibrating in Dorothy's blood; and now it stopped, with a thrill, as
she recognized that Evesham was there, marching with the young men, and
that his peer was not among them. The perception of his difference came
to her with a vivid shock. He was coming forward now with his light, firm
step, formidable in evening dress and with a smile of subtle triumph in his
eyes, to meet Nancy Slocum in the bright pink gown. Dorothy felt she hated
pink of all the colors her faith had abjured. She could see, in spite of
the obnoxious gown, that Nancy was very pretty. He was taking her first by
the right hand, then by the left, and turning her gayly about; and now they
were meeting again for the fourth or fifth time in the centre of the barn,
with all eyes upon them, and the music lingered while Nancy, holding out
her pink petticoats, coyly revolved around him. Then began a mysterious
turning and clasping of hands, and weaving of Nancy's pink frock and
Evesham's dark blue coat and white breeches in and out of the line of
figures, until they met at the door, and, taking each other by both hands,
swept with a joyous measure to the head of the barn. Dorothy gave a little
choking sigh.

What a senseless whirl it was. She was thrilling with a new and strange
excitement, too near the edge of pain to be long endured as a pleasure.
If this were the influence of dancing she did not wonder so much at her
father's scruples, and yet it held her like a spell.

All hands were lifted now, making an arch through which Evesham, holding
Nancy by the hands, raced, stooping and laughing. As they emerged at the
door, Evesham threw up his head to shake a brown lock back. He looked
flushed and boyishly gay, and his hazel eye searched the darkness with that
subtle ray of triumph in it which made Dorothy afraid. She drew back behind
the tree and pressed her hot cheek to the cool, rough bark. She longed
for the stillness of the starlit meadow, and the dim lane with its faint
perfumes and whispering leaves.

But now suddenly the music stopped and the dance broke up in a tumult of
voices. Dorothy stole backward in the shadow of the tree-trunk, until it
joined the darkness of the meadow, and then fled, stumbling along with
blinded eyes, the music still vibrating in her ears. Then came a quick rush
of footsteps behind her, swishing through the long grass. She did not look
back, but quickened her pace, struggling to reach the gate. Evesham was
there before her. He had swung the gate to and was leaning with his back
against it, laughing and panting.

"I've caught you, Dorothy, you little deceiver! You'll not get rid of me
to-night with any of your tricks. I'm going to take you home to your mother
and tell her you were peeping at the dancing."

"Mother knows that I came; I asked her," said Dorothy. Her knees were
trembling and her heart almost choked her with its throbbing.

"I'm so glad you don't dance, Dorothy. This is much nicer than the barn,
and the katydids are better fiddlers than old Darby and his son. I'll open
the gate if you will put your hand in mine, so that I can be sure of you,
you little runaway."

"I will stay here all night, first," said Dorothy, in a low, quivering
voice.

"As you choose. I shall be happy as long as you are here."

Dead silence, while the katydids seemed to keep time to their heart-beats;
the fiddles began tuning for another reel, and the horses, tethered near,
stretched out their necks with low, inquiring whinnies.

"Dorothy," said Evesham softly, leaning toward her and trying to see her
face in the darkness, "are you angry with me? Don't you think you deserve a
little punishment for the trick you played me at the mill-head?"

"It was all thy fault for insisting." Dorothy was too excited and angry to
cry, but she was as miserable as she had ever been in her life before. "I
didn't want thee to stay. People that force themselves where they are not
wanted must take what they get."

"What did you say, Dorothy?"

"I say I didn't want thee then. I do not want thee now. Thee may go back
to thy fiddling and dancing. I'd rather have one of those dumb brutes for
company to-night than thee, Walter Evesham."

"Very well; the reel has begun," said Evesham. "Fanny Jordan is waiting to
dance it with me, or if she isn't she ought to be. Shall I open the gate
for you?"

She passed out in silence, and the gate swung to with a heavy jar. She made
good speed down the lane and then waited outside the fence till her breath
came more quietly.

"Is that thee, Dorothy?" Rachel's voice called from the porch. She came out
to meet her daughter and they went along the walk together. "How damp thy
forehead is, child. Is the night so warm?" They sat down on the low steps
and Dorothy slid her arm under her mother's and laid her soft palm against
the one less soft by twenty years of toil for others. "Thee's not been
long, dear; was it as much as thee expected?"

"Mother, it was dreadful! I never wish to hear a fiddle again as long as I
live."

Rachel opened the way for Dorothy to speak further; she was not without
some mild stirrings of curiosity on the subject herself, but Dorothy had no
more to say.

They went into the house soon after, and as they separated for the night
Dorothy clung to her mother with a little nervous laugh.

"Mother, what is that text about Ephraim?"

"Ephraim is joined to idols?" Rachel suggested.

"Yes, Ephraim is joined to his idols," said Dorothy, lifting her head. "Let
him go!"

"Let him _alone_," corrected Rachel.

"Let him _alone_!" Dorothy repeated. "That is better yet."

"What's thee thinking of, dear?"

"Oh, I'm thinking about the dance in the barn."

"I'm glad thee looks at it in that light," said Rachel calmly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dorothy knelt by her bed in the low chamber under the eaves, crying to
herself that she was not the child of her mother any more.

She felt that she had lost something, that in truth had never been hers.
It was but the unconscious poise of her unawakened girlhood which had been
stirred; she had mistaken it for that abiding peace which is not lost or
won in a day.

Dorothy could no more stifle the spring thrills in her blood than she could
crush the color out of her cheek or brush the ripples out of her bright
hair, but she longed for the cool grays and the still waters. She prayed
that the "grave and beautiful damsel called Discretion" might take her by
the hand and lead her to that "upper chamber, whose name is Peace." She lay
awake listening to the music from the barn, and waiting through breathless
silences for it to begin again. She wondered if Fanny Jordan had grown any
prettier since she had seen her as a half-grown girl, and then she despised
herself for the thought. The katydids seemed to beat their wings upon her
brain, and all the noises of the night, far and near, came to her strained
senses as if her silent chamber were a whispering gallery. The clock struck
twelve, and in the silence that followed she missed the music; but voices
talking and laughing were coming down the lane. There was the clink of a
horse's hoof on the stones: now it was lost on the turf, and now they were
all trooping noisily past the house. She buried her head in her pillow and
tried to bury with it the consciousness that she was wondering if Evesham
were there laughing with the rest.

Yes, Evesham was there. He walked with Farmer Jordan, behind the young men
and girls, and discussed with him, somewhat absently, the war news and the
prices of grain.

As they passed the dark old house, spreading its wide roofs like a hen
gathering her chickens under her wing, he became suddenly silent. A white
curtain flapped in and out of an upper window. Evesham looked up and
slightly raised his hat, but his instinct failed him there,--it was the
window of the boys' room.

"Queer kinks them old Friend preachers gits into their heads sometimes,"
said Farmer Jordan, as they passed the empty mill. "Now what do you s'pose
took Uncle Tommy Barton off right on top of plantin', leavin' his wife 'n'
critters 'n' child'en to look after themselves? Mighty good preachin' it
ought to be to make up for such practicin'. Wonderful set ag'in the war,
Uncle Tommy is. He's a-preachin' up peace now. But Lord! all the preachin'
sense Moses won't keep men from fightin' when their blood's up and there's
ter'tory in it."

"It makes saints of the women," said Evesham shortly.

"Wal, yes. Saints in heaven before their time, some of 'em. There's
Dorothy, now. She'll hoe her row with any saint in the kingdom or out of
it. I never see a hulsomer-lookin' gal. My Luke, he run the furrers in
her corn-patch last May. Said it made him sick to see a gal like that
a-staggerin' after a plough. She wouldn't more 'n half let him. She's a
proud little piece. They're all proud, Quakers is. I never could see no
'poorness of spirit,' come to git at 'em. And they're wonderful clannish,
too. My Luke, he'd a notion he'd like to run the hull concern, Dorothy 'n'
all; but I told him he might's well p'int off. Them Quaker gals don't never
marry out o' meetin'. Besides, the farm's too poor."

"Good-night, Mr. Jordan," said Evesham suddenly. "I'm off across lots." He
leaped the fence, crashed through the alder hedgerow, and disappeared in
the dusky meadow.

Evesham was by no means satisfied with his experiments in planetary
distances. Somewhere, he felt sure, either in his orbit or hers, there
must be a point where Dorothy would be less insensible to the attraction
of atoms in the mass. Thus far she had reversed the laws of the spheres,
and the greater had followed the less. When she had first begun to hold a
permanent place in his thoughts he had invested her with something of that
atmosphere of peace and cool passivity which hedges in the women of her
faith. It had been like a thin, clear glass, revealing her loveliness,
but cutting off the magnetic currents. A young man is not long satisfied
with the mystery his thoughts have woven around the woman who is their
object. Evesham had grown impatient; he had broken the spell of her
sweet remoteness. He had touched her and found her human, deliciously,
distractingly human, but with a streak of that obduracy which history
has attributed to the Quakers under persecution. In vain he haunted the
mill-dam, and bribed the boys with traps and pop-guns, and lingered at the
well-curb to ask Dorothy for water that did not reach his thirst. She was
there in the flesh, with her arms aloft balancing the well-sweep, while he
stooped with his lips at the bucket; but in spirit she was unapproachable.
He felt, with disgust at his own persistence, that she even grudged him the
water. He grew savage and restless, and fretted over the subtle changes
that he counted in Dorothy as the summer waned. She was thinner and paler;
perhaps with the heats of harvest, which had not, indeed, been burdensome
from its abundance. Her eyes were darker and shyer, and her voice more
languid. Was she wearing down with all this work and care? A fierce disgust
possessed him that this sweet life should be cast into the breach between
faith and works.

He did not see that Rachel Barton had changed, too, with a change that
meant more, at her age, than Dorothy's flushings and palings. He did not
miss the mother's bent form from the garden, or the bench by the kitchen
door where she had been used to wash the milk-things.

Dorothy washed the milk-things now, and the mother spent her days in the
sunny east room, between her bed and the easy-chair, where she sat and
mused for hours over the five letters that she had received from her
husband in as many months. The boys had, in a measure, justified their
father's faith in them, since Rachel's illness, and Dorothy was released
from much of her out-door work; but the silence of the kitchen, when she
was there alone with her ironing and dish washing, was a heavier burden
than she had yet known.

Nature sometimes strikes in upon the hopeless monotony of life in remote
farmhouses with one of her phenomenal moods. They come like besoms of
destruction, but they scatter the web of stifling routine; they fling into
the stiffening pool the stone which jars the atoms into crystal.

The storms, that had ambushed in the lurid August skies and circled
ominously round the horizon during the first weeks of September, broke at
last in an equinoctial which was long remembered in the mill-house. It took
its place in the family calendar of momentous dates with the hard winter of
1800, with the late frost that had coated the incipient apples with ice and
frozen the new potatoes in the ground in the spring of '97, and with the
year the typhus had visited the valley.

The rain had been falling a night and a day; it had been welcomed with
thanksgiving, but it had worn out its welcome some hours since, and now the
early darkness was coming on without a lull in the storm. Dorothy and the
two older boys had made the rounds of the farm-buildings, seeing all safe
for the second night. The barns and mill stood on high ground, while the
house occupied the sheltered hollow between. Little streams from the hills
were washing in turbid currents across the lower levels; the waste-weir
roared as in early spring, the garden was inundated, and the meadow
a shallow pond. The sheep had been driven into the upper barn floor:
the chickens were in the corn-bin; and old John and the cows had been
transferred from the stable, that stood low, to the weighing floor of the
mill. A gloomy echoing and gurgling sounded from the dark wheel-chamber
where the water was rushing under the wheel and jarring it with its tumult.
At eight o'clock the woodshed was flooded and water began to creep under
the kitchen door. Dorothy and the boys carried armfuls of wood and stacked
them in the passage to the sitting-room, two steps higher up. At nine
o'clock the boys were sent protesting to bed, and Dorothy, looking out of
their window as she fumbled about in the dark for a pair of Shep's trousers
that needed mending, saw a lantern flickering up the road. It was Evesham
on his way to the mill-dams. The light glimmered on his oilskin coat as he
climbed the stile behind the well-curb.

"He raised the flood-gates at noon," Dorothy said to herself. "I wonder if
he is anxious about the dams." She resolved to watch for his return, but
she was busy settling her mother for the night when she heard his footsteps
on the porch. The roar of water from the hills startled Dorothy as she
opened the door; it had increased in violence within an hour. A gust of
wind and rain followed Evesham into the entry.

"Come in," she said, running lightly across the sitting-room to close the
door of her mother's room.

He stood opposite her on the hearth-rug and looked into her eyes, across
the estrangement of the summer. It was not Dorothy of the mill-head, or
of Slocum's meadow, or the cold maid of the well; it was a very anxious,
lonely little girl in a crumbling old house, with a foot of water in the
cellar and a sick mother in the next room. She had forgotten about Ephraim
and his idols; she picked up Shep's trousers from the rug, where she had
dropped them, and, looking intently at her thimble finger, told him she was
very glad that he had come.

"Did you think I would not come?" said he. "I'm going to take you home with
me, Dorothy,--you and your mother and the boys. It's not fit for you to be
here alone."

"Does thee know of any danger?"

"I know of none, but water's a thing you can't depend on. It's an ugly
rain; older men than your father remember nothing like it."

"I shall be glad to have mother go, and Jimmy; the house is very damp. It's
an awful night for her to be out, though."

"She _must_ go!" said Evesham. "You must all go. I'll be back in half an
hour"--

"_I_ shall not go," Dorothy said; "the boys and I must stay and look after
the stock."

"What's that?" Evesham was listening to a trickling of water outside the
door.

"Oh! it's from the kitchen. The door has blown open, I guess."

Dorothy looked out into the passage; a strong wind was blowing in from the
kitchen, where the water covered the floor and washed against the chimney.

"This is a nice state of things! What's all this wood here for?"

"The woodshed's under water."

"You must get yourself ready, Dorothy. I'll come for your mother first in
the chaise."

"I cannot go," she said. "I don't believe there is any danger. This old
house has stood for eighty years; it's not likely this is the first big
rain in all that time." Dorothy's spirits had risen. "Besides, I have a
family of orphans to take care of. See here," she said, stooping over a
basket in the shadow of the chimney. It was the "hospital tent," and as she
uncovered it, a brood of belated chickens stretched out their thin necks
with plaintive peeps.

Dorothy covered them with her hands and they nestled with comfortable
twitterings into silence.

"You're a kind of special providence, aren't you, Dorothy? But I've no
sympathy with chickens who will be born just in time for the equinoctial."

"_I_ didn't want them," said Dorothy, anxious to defend her management.
"The old hen stole her nest and she left them the day before the rain.
She's making herself comfortable now in the corn-bin."

"She ought to be made an example of; that's the way of the world,
however,--retribution doesn't fall always on the right shoulders. I must go
now. We'll take your mother and Jimmy first, and then, if you _won't_ come,
you shall let me stay with you. The mill is safe enough, anyhow."

Evesham returned with the chaise and a man, who, he insisted, should drive
away old John and the cows, so that Dorothy should have less care. The
mother was packed into the chaise with a vast collection of wraps, which
almost obliterated Jimmy. As they started, Dorothy ran out in the rain with
her mother's spectacles and the five letters, which always lay in a box on
the table by her bed. Evesham took her gently by the arms and lifted her
back across the puddles to the stoop.

As the chaise drove off, she went back into the sitting-room and crouched
on the rug, her wet hair shining in the firelight. She took out her
chickens one by one and held them under her chin, with tender words and
finger-touches. If September chickens have feelings as susceptible as their
bodies, Dorothy's orphans must have been imperiled by her caresses.

"Look here, Dorothy! Where's my trousers?" cried Shep, opening the door at
the foot of the stairs.

Reuby was behind him, fully arrayed in his own garment aforesaid, and
carrying the bedroom candle.

"Here they are--with a needle in them," said Dorothy. "What are you getting
up in the middle of the night for?"

"Well, I guess it's time somebody's up. Who's that man driving off our
cows?"

"Goosey! It's Walter Evesham's man. He came for mother and all of us, and
he's taken old John and the cows to save us so much foddering."

"Ain't we going too?"

"I don't see why we should, just because there happens to be a little water
in the kitchen. I've often seen it come in there before."

"Well, thee never saw anything like _this_ before--nor anybody else,
either," said Shep.

"I don't care," said Reuby, "I wish there'd come a reg'lar flood. We could
climb up in the mill-loft and go sailin' down over Jordan's meadows.
Wouldn't Luke Jordan open that big mouth of his to see us heave in sight
about cock-crow, wing and wing, and the old tackle a-swingin'!"

"Do hush!" said Dorothy. "We may have to try it yet."

"There's an awful roarin' from our window," said Shep. "Thee can't half
hear it down here. Come out on the stoop. The old ponds have got their
dander up this time."

They opened the door and listened, standing together on the low step. There
was, indeed, a hoarse murmur from the hills, which grew louder as they
listened.

"Now she's comin'! There goes the stable-door. There was only one hinge
left, anyway," said Reuby. "Mighty! Look at that wave!"

It crashed through the gate, swept across the garden and broke at their
feet, sending a thin sheet of water over the floor of the porch.

"Now it's gone into the entry. Why didn't thee shut the door, Shep?"

"Well, I think we'd better clear out, anyhow. Let's go over to the mill.
Say, Dorothy, shan't we?"

"Wait. There comes another wave."

The second onset was not so violent; but they hastened to gather together
a few blankets, and the boys filled their pockets with cookies, with a
delightful sense of unusualness and peril almost equal to a shipwreck or an
attack by Indians. Dorothy took her unlucky chickens under her cloak, and
they made a rush all together across the road and up the slope to the mill.

"Why didn't we think to bring a lantern?" said Dorothy, as they huddled
together on the platform of the scale. "Will thee go back after one, Shep?"

"If Reuby'll go, too."

"Well, _my_ legs are wet enough now. What's the use of a lantern? Mighty
Moses! What's that?"

"The old mill's got under way," cried Shep. "_She's_ going to tune up for
Kingdom Come."

A furious head of water was rushing along the race; the great wheel creaked
and swung over, and with a shudder the old mill awoke from its long sleep.
The cogs clenched their teeth, the shafting shook and rattled, the stones
whirled merrily round.

"Now she goes it!" cried Shep, as the humming increased to a tremor, and
the tremor to a wild, unsteady din, till the timbers shook and the bolts
and windows rattled. "I just wish father could hear them old stones hum."

"Oh, this is awful!" said Dorothy. She was shivering and sick with terror
at this unseemly midnight revelry of her grandfather's old mill. It was
as if it had awakened in a fit of delirium, and given itself up to a wild
travesty of its years of peaceful work.

Shep was creeping about in the darkness.

"Look here! We've got to stop this clatter somehow. The stones are hot now.
The whole thing'll burn up like tinder if we can't chock her wheels."

"Shep! Does thee _mean_ it?"

"Thee'll see if I don't. Thee won't need any lantern either."

"Can't we break away the race?"

"Oh, there's a way to stop it. There's the tip-trough, but it's downstairs
and we can't reach the pole."

"I'll go," said Dorothy.

"It's outside, thee knows. Thee'll get awful wet, Dorothy."

"Well, I'd just as soon be drowned as burned up. Come with me to the head
of the stairs."

They felt their way hand in hand in the darkness, and Dorothy went down
alone. She had forgotten about the "tip-trough," but she understood its
significance. In a few moments a cascade shot out over the wheel, sending
the water far into the garden.

"Right over my chrysanthemum bed," sighed Dorothy.

The wheel swung slower and slower, the mocking tumult subsided, and the old
mill sank into sleep again.

There was nothing now to drown the roaring of the floods and the steady
drive of the storm.

"There's a lantern," Shep called from the door. He had opened the upper
half and was shielding himself behind it. "I guess it's Evesham coming back
for us. He's a pretty good sort of a fellow after all; don't thee think so,
Dorothy? He owes us something for drowning us out at the sheep-washing."

"What does all this mean?" said Dorothy, as Evesham swung himself over the
half-door and his lantern showed them to each other in their various phases
of wetness.


"There's a big leak in the lower dam; I've been afraid of it all along;
there's something wrong in the principle of the thing."

Dorothy felt as if he had called her grandfather a fraud, and her father
a delusion and a snare. She had grown up in the belief that the mill-dams
were part of Nature's original plan in laying the foundations of the hills;
but it was no time to be resentful, and the facts were against her.

"Dorothy," said Evesham, as he tucked the buffalo about her, "this is the
second time I've tried to save you from drowning, but you never will wait.
I'm all ready to be a hero, but you won't be a heroine."

"I'm too practical for a heroine," said Dorothy. "There! I've forgotten my
chickens."

"I'm glad of it. Those chickens were a mistake. They oughtn't to be
perpetuated."

Youth and happiness can stand a great deal of cold water; but it was not to
be expected that Rachel Barton would be especially benefited by her night
journey through the floods. Evesham waited in the hall when he heard the
door of her room open next morning. Dorothy came slowly down the stairs;
he knew by her lingering-step and the softly closed door that she was not
happy.

"Mother is very sick," she answered his inquiry. "It is like the turn of
inflammation and rheumatism she had once before. It will be very slow,--and
oh, it is such suffering! Why do the best women in the world have to suffer
so?"

"Will you let me talk things over with you after breakfast, Dorothy?"

"Oh yes," she said, "there is so much to do and think about. I wish father
would come home!"

The tears came into Dorothy's eyes as she looked at him. Rest, such as she
had never known or felt the need of till now, and strength immeasurable,
since it would multiply her own by an unknown quantity, stood within reach
of her hand, but she might not put it out.

Evesham was dizzy with the struggle between longing and resolution. He
had braced his nerves for a long and hungry waiting, but fate had yielded
suddenly; the floods had brought her to him,--his flotsam and jetsam more
precious than all the guarded treasures of the earth. She had come, with
all her girlish, unconscious beguilements, and all her womanly cares and
anxieties too. He must strive against her sweetness, while he helped her to
bear her burdens.

"Now about the boys, Dorothy," he said, two hours later, as they stood
together by the fire in the low, oak-finished room, which was his office
and book-room. The door was ajar so that Dorothy might hear her mother's
bell. "Don't you think they had better be sent to school somewhere?"

"Yes," said Dorothy, "they ought to go to school,--but--well, I may as well
tell thee the truth. There's very little to do it with. We've had a poor
summer. I suppose I've managed badly, and mother has been sick a good
while."

"You've forgotten about the pond-rent, Dorothy."

"No," she said, with a quick flush, "I hadn't forgotten it, but I couldn't
_ask_ thee for it."

"I spoke to your father about monthly payments, but he said better leave
it to accumulate for emergencies. Shouldn't you call this an 'emergency,'
Dorothy?"

"But does thee think we ought to ask rent for a pond that has all leaked
away?"

"Oh, there's pond enough left, and I've used it a dozen times over this
summer. I should be ashamed to tell you, Dorothy, how my horn has been
exalted in your father's absence. However, retribution has overtaken me at
last; I'm responsible, you know, for all the damage last night. It was in
the agreement that I should keep up the dams."

"Oh!" said Dorothy; "is thee sure?"

Evesham laughed.

"If your father was like any other man, Dorothy, he'd make me 'sure,' when
he gets home. I will defend myself to this extent; I've patched and propped
them all summer, after every rain, and tried to provide for the fall
storms; but there's a flaw in the original plan"--

"Thee said that once before," said Dorothy. "I wish thee wouldn't say it
again."

"Why not?"

"Because I love those old mill-dams. I've trotted over them ever since I
could walk alone."

"You shall trot over them still. We will make them as strong as the
everlasting hills. They shall outlast our time, Dorothy."

"Well, about the rent," said Dorothy. "I'm afraid it will not take us
through the winter, unless there is something I can do. Mother couldn't
possibly be moved now; and if she could, it will be months before the house
is fit to live in. But we cannot stay here in comfort, unless thy mother
will let me make up in some way. Mother will not need me all the time, and
I know thy mother hires women to spin."

"She'll let you do all you like if it will make you any happier. But you
don't know how much money is coming to you. Come, let us look over the
figures."

He lowered the lid of the black mahogany secretary, placed a chair for
Dorothy and opened a great ledger before her, bending down, with one hand
on the back of the chair, the other turning the leaves of the ledger.
Considering the index and the position of the letter B in the alphabet, he
was a long time finding his place. Dorothy looked out of the window over
the tops of the yellowing woods to the gray and turbid river below. Where
the hemlocks darkened the channel of the glen she heard the angry floods
rushing down. The formless rain mists hung low and hid the opposite shore.

"See!" said Evesham, his finger wandering rather vaguely down the page.
"Your father went away on the 3d of May. The first month's rent came due on
the 3d of June. That was the day I opened the gate and let the water down
on you, Dorothy. I'm responsible for everything, you see,--even for the old
ewe that was drowned."

His words came in a dream as he bent over her, resting his unsteady hand
heavily on the ledger.

Dorothy laid her cheek on the date that she could not see and burst into
tears.

"Don't,--please don't!" he said, straightening himself and locking his
hands behind him. "I am human, Dorothy."

The weeks of Rachel's sickness that followed were perhaps the best
discipline Evesham's life had ever known. He held the perfect flower of his
bliss unclosing in his hand; yet he might barely permit himself to breathe
its fragrance. His mother had been a strong and prosperous woman; there had
been little he had ever been able to do for her. It was well for him to
feel the weight of helpless infirmity in his arms as he lifted Dorothy's
mother from side to side of her bed, while Dorothy's hands smoothed the
coverings. It was well for him to see the patient endurance of suffering,
such as his youth and strength defied. It was bliss to wait on Dorothy
and follow her with little watchful homages, received with a shy wonder
which was delicious to him; for Dorothy's nineteen years had been too full
of service to others to leave much room for dreams of a kingdom of her
own. Her silent presence in her mother's sick-room awed him. Her gentle,
decisive voice and ways, her composure and unshaken endurance through
nights of watching and days of anxious confinement and toil, gave him a new
reverence for the powers and mysteries of her unfathomable womanhood.

The time of Friend Barton's return drew near. It must be confessed that
Dorothy welcomed it with something of dread, and that Evesham did not
welcome it at all. On the contrary, the thought of it roused all his latent
obstinacy and aggressiveness. The first day or two after the momentous
arrival wore a good deal upon every member of the family, except Margaret
Evesham, who was provided with a philosophy of her own, that amounted
almost to a gentle obtuseness and made her a comfortable non-conductor,
preventing more electric souls from shocking each other.

On the morning of the fourth day, Dorothy came out of her mother's room
with a tray of empty dishes in her hands. She saw Evesham at the stair-head
and hovered about in the shadowy part of the hall till he should go down.

"Dorothy," he said, "I'm waiting for you." He took the tray from her and
rested it on the banisters. "Your father and I have talked over all the
business. He's got the impression that I'm one of the most generous fellows
in the world. I intend to leave him in that delusion for the present. Now
may I speak to him about something else, Dorothy? Have I not waited long
enough for my heart's desire?"

"Take care," said Dorothy softly,--"thee'll upset the tea-cups."

"Confound the tea-cups!" He stooped to place the irrelevant tray on the
floor, but now Dorothy was halfway down the staircase. He caught her on the
landing, and taking both her hands drew her down on the step beside him.

"Dorothy, this is the second time you've taken advantage of my trusting
nature. This time you shall be punished. You needn't try to hide your face,
you little traitor. There's no repentance in you!"

"If I'm to be punished there's no need of repentance."

"Oh, is that your Quaker doctrine? Dorothy, do you know, I've never heard
you speak my name, except once, and then you were angry with me."

"When was that?"

"The night I caught you at the gate. You said, 'I had rather have one of
those dumb brutes for company than thee, Walter Evesham.' You said it in
the fiercest little voice. Even the 'thee' sounded as if you hated me."

"I did," said Dorothy promptly. "I had reason to."

"Do you hate me now, Dorothy?"

"Not so much as I did then."

"What an implacable little Quaker you are."

"A tyrant is always hated," said Dorothy, trying to release her hands.

"If you will look in my eyes, Dorothy, and call me by my name, just once,
I'll let 'thee' go."

"Walter Evesham," said Dorothy, with great firmness and decision.

"No, that won't do! You must look at me, and say it softly, in a little
sentence, Dorothy."

"Will thee please let me go, Walter?"

Walter Evesham was a man of his word, but as Dorothy sped away, he looked
as if he wished that he was not.

The next evening Friend Barton sat by his wife's easy-chair drawn into the
circle of firelight, with his elbows on his knees and his head between his
hands.

The worn spot on the top of his head had widened considerably during the
summer, but Rachel looked stronger and brighter than she had done for many
a day. There was even a little flush on her cheek, but this might have come
from the excitement of a long talk with her husband.

"I'm sorry thee takes it so hard, Thomas. I was afraid thee would. But the
way didn't seem to open for me to do much. I can see now that Dorothy's
inclinations have been turning this way for some time; though it's not
likely she would own it, poor child; and Walter Evesham's not one who is
easily gainsaid. If thee could only feel differently about it, I can't say
but that it would make me very happy to see Dorothy's heart satisfied.
Can't thee bring thyself into unity with it, father? He's a nice young man.
They're nice folks. Thee can't complain of the blood. Margaret Evesham
tells me a cousin of hers married one of the Lawrences, so we are kind of
kin after all."

"I don't complain of the blood; they're well enough placed, as far as the
world is concerned. But their ways are not our ways, Rachel; their faith is
not our faith."

"Well, I can't see such a very great difference, come to live among
them. 'By their fruits ye shall know them.' To comfort the widow and the
fatherless, and keep ourselves unspotted from the world;--thee's always
preached that, father. I really can't see any more worldliness here than
among many households with us; and I'm sure if we haven't been the widow
and the fatherless this summer, we've been next to it."

Friend Barton raised his head: "Rachel," he said, "look at that!" He
pointed upward to an ancient sword with belt and trappings which gleamed on
the paneled chimney-piece, crossed by an old queen's-arm. Evesham had given
up his large, sunny room to Dorothy's mother, but he had not removed all
his lares and penates.

"Yes, dear; that's his grandfather's sword--Colonel Evesham, who was killed
at Saratoga."

"Why does he hang up that thing of abomination for a light and a guide to
his footsteps, if his way be not far from ours?"

"Why, father! Colonel Evesham was a good man. I dare say he fought for the
same reason that thee preaches, because he felt it to be his duty."

"I find no fault with him, Rachel. Doubtless he followed his light, as thee
says, but he followed it in better ways too. He cleared land and built a
homestead and a meeting-house. Why doesn't his grandson hang up his old
broadaxe and plowshare and worship them, if he must have idols, instead of
that symbol of strife and bloodshed. Does thee want our Dorothy's children
to grow up under the shadow of the sword?"

There was a stern light of prophecy in the old man's eyes.

"May be Walter Evesham would take it down," said Rachel simply, leaning
back and closing her eyes. "I never was much of a hand to argue, even if
I had the strength for it; but it would hurt me a good deal--I must say
it--if thee should deny Dorothy in this matter, Thomas. It's a very serious
thing for old folks to try to turn young hearts the way they think they
ought to go. I remember now,--I was thinking about it last night, and it
all came back as fresh--I don't know that I ever told thee about that young
Friend who visited me before I heard thee preach at Stony Valley? Well,
father, he was wonderful pleased with him, but I didn't feel any drawing
that way. He urged me a good deal, more than was pleasant for either of us.
He wasn't at all reconciled to thee, Thomas, if thee remembers."

"I remember," said Thomas Barton. "It was an anxious time."

"Well, dear, if father _had_ insisted and had sent thee away, I can't say
but life would have been a very different thing to me."

"I thank thee for saying it, Rachel." Friend Barton's head drooped. "Thee
has suffered much through me; thee's had a hard life, but thee's been well
beloved."

The flames leaped and flickered in the chimney; they touched the wrinkled
hands whose only beauty was in their deeds; they crossed the room and lit
the pillows where, for three generations, young heads had dreamed and gray
heads had watched and wearied; then they mounted to the chimney and struck
a gleam from the sword.

"Well, father," said Rachel, "what answer is thee going to give Walter
Evesham?"

"I shall say no more, my dear. Let the young folks have their way. There's
strife and contention enough in the world without my stirring up more. And
it may be I'm resisting the Master's will. I left her in his care; this may
be his way of dealing with her."

Walter Evesham did not take down his grandfather's sword. Fifty years later
another went up beside it, the sword of a young Evesham who never left the
field of Shiloh; and beneath them both hangs the portrait of the Quaker
grandmother, Dorothy Evesham, at the age of sixty-nine.

The golden ripples, silver now, are hidden under a "round-eared cap;" the
quick flush has faded in her cheek, and fold upon fold of snowy gauze and
creamy silk are crossed over the bosom that once thrilled to the fiddles of
Slocum's barn. She has found the cool grays and the still waters; but on
Dorothy's children rests the "Shadow of the Sword."




THE STORY OF THE ALC�ZAR.


It was told by Captain John to a boy from the mainland who was spending the
summer on the Island, as they sat together one August evening at sunset, on
a broken bowsprit which had once been a part of the Alc�zar.

It was dead low water in Southwest Harbor, a land-locked inlet that nearly
cut the Island in two, and was the gateway through which the fishing-craft
from the village at the harbor head found their way out into the great
Penobscot Bay. There were many days during the stern winter and bleak
spring months when the gate was blocked with ice or veiled in fog, but
nature relented a little toward the Island folk in the fall and sent them
sunny days for their late, scant harvesting, and steady winds for the
mackerel-fishing, to give them a little hope before the winter set in sharp
with the equinoctial. Now, at low tide, the bright gateway shone wide open,
as if to let out the waters that rise and fall ten feet in the inlet.
You could look far out, beyond the lighthouse on Creenlaw's Neck and the
islands that throng the mouth of the harbor, to the red spot of flame the
sunset had kindled below the rack of smoke-gray clouds. The color burned in
a dull gleam upon the water, broken by the dark shapes of shadowy islands;
the sail-boats at anchor in the muddy, glistening flats leaned over
disconsolately on their sides, in despair of ever again feeling the thrill
of the returning waters beneath their keels; and the gray, weather-beaten
houses crowded together on the brink of the cliff above the beach, looking
like a group of hooded old women watching for a belated sail, seemed to
have caught the expression of their inmates' lives. At high tide the hulk
of the Alc�zar had been full of water, which was now pouring out through a
hole in the planking of her side in a continuous, murmurous stream, like
the voice of a persistent talker in a silent company. The old ship looked
much too big for her narrow grave at the foot of the green cliff, in which
her anchor was deeply sunk and half overgrown with thistles. Her blunt bow
and the ragged stump of the figure-head rose, dark and high, above the wet
beach where Captain John sat with his absorbed listener. There were rifts
about her rail where the red sunset looked through. Her naked sides, that
for years had been moistened only by the perennial rains and snows, showed
rough and scaly like the armor of some fabled sea-monster. She was tethered
to the cliff by her rusty anchor-chain that swung across the space between,
serving as a clothes-line for the draggled driftweed left by the receding
tide to dry.

"She was a big ship for these parts," Captain John was saying. "There wan't
one like her ever come into these waters before. Lord! folks come down
from the Neck, and from Green's Landin', and Nor'east Harbor, and I don't
know but they come from the main, to see her when she was fust towed in.
And such work as they made of her name! Some called it one way and some
another. It's a kind of a Cubian name, they say. I expect there ain't
anybody round here that can call it right. However 'twas, old Cap'n Green
took and pried it off her starboard quarter, and somebody got hold of it
and nailed it up over the blacksmith's shop; and there you can see it now.
The old cap'n named her the Stranger when he had her refitted. May be you
could make out the tail of an S on her stern if you could git around there.
That name's been gone these forty year; seem's if she never owned to it,
and it didn't stick to her. She was never called anythin' but the Alc�zar,
long as ever I knew her, and I expect I know full's much about her as
anybody round here. 'Twas a-settin' here on this very beach at low water,
just's we be now, that the old man told me fust how he picked her up. It
took a wonderful holt on him, there's no doubt about that. He told it to
me more 'n once before the time come when he was to put the finish on to
it; but in a gen'ral way the cap'n wan't much of a talker, and he was
shy of this partic'lar business, for reasons that I expect nobody knows
much about. But a man most always likes to talk to somebody, no matter
how close-mouthed he may be. 'Twas just about this time o' year, fall
of '27, the year Parson Flavor was ordained, Cap'n Green had gone
a-mack'rel-fishin' with his two boys off Isle au Haut, and they did think
o' cruisin' out into Frenchman's Bay if the weather hel' steady. They was
havin' fair luck, hangin' round the island off and on for a matter of a
week, when it thickened up a little and set in foggy, and for two days
they didn't see the shore. The second evenin' the wind freshened from the
south'ard and east'ard and drove the fog in shore a bit, and the sun, just
before he set, looked like a big yellow ball through the fog and made a
sickly kind of a glimmer over the water. They was a-lyin' at anchor, and
all of a sudden, right to the wind'ard of 'em, this old ship loomed up,
driftin' in with the wind and flood-tide. They couldn't make her out,
and I guess for a minute the old cap'n didn't know but it was the Flyin'
Dutchman; but she hadn't a rag o' sail on her, and as she got nearer they
could see there wan't a man on board. The cap'n didn't like the looks of
her, but he knew she wan't no phantom, and he and one of his boys down with
the punt and went alongside. 'Twan't more 'n a quarter of a mile to her.
They hailed and couldn't git no answer. They knew she was a furriner by her
build, and she must 'a' been a long time at sea by her havin' barnacles
on her nigh as big's a mack'rel kit. Finally, they pulled up to her
fore--chains and clum aboard of her. I never see a ship abandoned at sea,
myself, but I ain't no doubt but what it made 'em feel kind o' shivery when
they looked aft along her decks, and not a soul in sight, and every-thin'
bleached, and gray, and iron-rusted, and the riggin' all slack and white's
though it had been chawed, and nothin' left of her sails but some old
rags flappin' like a last year's scarecrow. They went and looked in the
fo'k'sel: there wan't nothin' there but some chists, men's chists, with a
little old beddin' left in the bunks. They went down the companion-way:
cabin-door unlocked, everything in there as nat'ral's though it had just
been left, only 'twas kind o' mouldy-smellin'. I expect the cap'n give a
kind of a start as he looked around. 'Twan't no old greasy whaler's cabin,
nor no packet-ship neither. There wan't many craft like her on the seas in
them days. She was fixed up inside more like a gentleman's yacht is now.
Merchantmen in them days didn't have their Turkey carpets and their colored
wine-glasses jinglin' in the racks. While they was explorin' round in
there, movin' round kind o' cautious, the door of the cap'n's stateroom
swung open with a creak, just's though somebody was a-shovin' it slow like,
and the ship give a kind of a stir and a rustlin', moanin' sound, as if
she was a-comin' to life. The old man never made no secret but what he was
scairt when he went through her that night. 'Twan't so much what he said as
the way he looked when he told it. I expect he thought he'd seen enough,
about the time that door blew open. He said he knowed 'twas nothin' but a
puff o' wind struck her, and that he'd better be a-gittin' on to his own
craft before he lost her in the fog. So he went back and got under weigh,
and sent a line aboard of the stranger and took her in tow, and all that
night with a good southeast wind they kept a-movin' toward home. The old
man was kind o' res'less and wakeful, walkin' the decks and lookin' over
the stern at the big ship follerin' him like a ghost. The moonlight was a
little dull with fog, but he could see her, plain, a-comin' on before the
wind with her white riggin' and bare poles, and hear the water sousin'
under her bows. He said 'twas in his mind more 'n a dozen times to cut her
adrift. You see he had his misgivin's about her from the fust, though he
never let on what they was; but he hung on to her as a man will, sometimes,
agin feelin's that have more sense in 'em than reason, like as not. He knew
everybody at the Harbor would laugh at him for lettin' go such a prize as
that just for a notion, and it wan't his way, you may be sure; he didn't
need no one to tell him what she was wuth. Anyhow he hung to her, and next
day they beached her at high water, right over there by the old ship-yard.
He took Deacon S'lvine and his brother-in-law, Cap'n Purse--Pierce they
call it nowadays, but in the cap'n's time 'twas Purse. That sounds kind o'
broad and comfortable, like the cap'n's wescoat; but the family's thinnin'
down a good deal lately and gettin' kind o' sharp and lean, and may be
Pierce is more suitable. But 's I was sayin', Cap'n Green took them
two--cheerful, loud-talkin' men they was both of 'em--aboard of her to go
through her, for he hadn't no notion o' goin' into that cap'n's stateroom
alone, even in broad daylight; but 'twan't there the secret of her lay;
there wan't nothin' in there to scare anybody. She was trimmed up, I
tell you, just elegant. Real mahogany, none of your veneerin', but the
real stuff; lace curt'ins to the berth, lace on the pillows, and a satin
coverlid, rumpled up as though the cap'n had just turned out; and there was
his slippers handy--the greatest-lookin' slippers for a man you ever saw.
They wouldn't 'a' been too big for the neatest-footed woman in the Harbor.
But Land! they was just thick with mould, and so was everythin' in the
place, even to an old gittar with the strings most rotted off of it,
and the picters of fur-rin-lookin' women on the walls,--trinin'-lookin'
creeturs most of 'em. They hunted all through his desk, but couldn't find
no log. 'Twas plain enough that whoever'd left that ship had took pains
that she shouldn't tell no tales, and 'twan't long before they found out
the reason.

"When they come to go below,--there was considerable of a crowd on deck by
that time, standin' round while they knocked out the keys and took off the
fore-hatch,--Cap'n Green called on Cap'n Purse and the deacon to go down
with him; but they didn't 'pear to be very anxious, and the old man wan't
goin' to hang back for company with everybody lookin' at him, so he lit a
candle and went down, and the folks crowded round and waited for him. I was
there myself, 's close to him as I be to that fish barrel, when he come up,
his face white 's a sheet and the candle shakin' in his hand, and sot down
on the hatch-combin'.

"'Give me room!' says he, kind o' leanin' back on the crowd. 'Give me air,
can't you? She's full o' dead niggers. She's a slaver.'

"Now, 'twas the talk pretty gen'rally that the cap'n had had a hand in that
business himself in his early days, and that it set uncomfortable on him
afterwards. It never was known how he'd got his money. He didn't have any
to begin with. He was always a kind of a lone bird and dug his way along up
somehow. Nobody knows what was workin' on him while he sot there; he looked
awful sick. It was kind of quiet for a minute, but them that couldn't see
him kep' pushin' for'ards and callin' out: 'What d'you see? What's down
there?' And them close by wanted to know, all talkin' to once, why he
thought she was a slaver, and how long the niggers had been dead. Lord!
what a fuss there was. Everybody askin' the foolishest questions, and
crowdin' and squeezin', and them in front pushin' back away from the
hatchway, as if they expected the dead would rise and walk out o' that
black hole where they'd laid so long. They couldn't get much out o' the old
man, except that there was skel'tons scattered all over the after hold,
and that he knew she was a slaver by the way she was fixed up. '_How_'d he
know?' folks asked amongst themselves; but nobody liked to ask the cap'n.
As for how long them Africans had been dead, they had to find that out for
themselves,--all they ever did find out,--for the cap'n wouldn't talk about
it, and he wouldn't go down in her again. It 'peared's if he was satisfied.

"Wal, it made a terrible stir in the place. As I tell you, they come from
fifty mile around to see her. They had it all in the papers. Some had
one idee and some another about the way she come to be abandoned, all in
good shape and them human bein's in her hold. Some said ship-fever, some
said mutiny; but when they come to look her over and found there wan't a
water-cask aboard of her that hadn't s'runk up and gone to pieces, they
settled down on the notion that she was a Spanish or a Cubian slaver, or
may be a Portagee, got short o' water in the horse-latitudes; cap'n and
crew left her in the boats, and the niggers--Lord! it makes a body sick to
think o' them. That was always my the'ry 'bout her--short o' water; but
some folks wan't satisfied 'thout somethin' more ex-citin'. 'Twan't enough
for 'em to have all them creeturs dyin' down there by inches. They stuck to
it about some blood-stains on the linin' in her hold, but I tell you the
difference between old blood-stains and rust that's may be ten or fifteen
years old's might' hard to tell.

"Nobody knows what the old cap'n was thinkin' about in them days. 'Twas
full three month or more 'fore he went aboard of her ag'in. He let it be
known about that he wanted to sell her, but he couldn't git an offer even;
nobody seemed to want to take hold of her. Winter set in early and the ice
blocked her in, and there she lay, the lonesomest thing in sight. You never
see no child'n climbin' 'round on her, and there was a story that queer
noises like moanin' and clankin' of chains come out of her on windy nights;
but it might 'a' been the ice, crowdin' as she careened over and back with
the risin' and fallin' tide. But when spring opened, folks used to see the
old cap'n hangin' round the ship-yard and lookin' her over at low tide,
where the ice had cut the barnacles off of her.

"One night in the store he figgered up how much lumber she'd carry from
Bangor, and 'twan't long 'fore he had a gang o' men at work on her. It
seemed's though he was kind of infatuated with her. He was 'fraid of her,
but he couldn't let her alone. And she was a mighty well-built craft.
Floridy pine and live-oak and mahogany from the Mosquito coast; built in
Cadiz, most likely. Look at her now--she don't look to home here, does
she? She never did. She's as much like our harbor craft as one o' them
big, yallow-eyed, bare-necked buzzards is to one o' these here little
sand-peeps. But she was a handsome vessel. Them live-oak ribs'll outlast
your time, if you was to live to be old."

The two faces looked up at the hulk of the Alc�zar,--the blanched,
wave-worn messenger sent by the tropic seas into the far North with a tale
that the living had never dared to tell, and that had perished on the lips
of the dead. Its shadow, spreading broad upon the beach, made the gathering
twilight deeper. Out on the harbor the pale saffron light lingered, long
after the red had faded. How many tides had ebbed and flowed since the old
ship, chained at the foot of the cliff, had warmed in the waters of the
Gulf her bare, corrugated sides, warped by the frosts, stabbed by the ice
of pitiless Northern winters! Where were the sallow, dark-bearded faces
that had watched from her high poop the brief twilights die on that
"unshadowed main," which a century ago was the scene of some of the wildest
romances and blackest crimes in maritime history--the bright, restless
bosom that warmed into life a thousand serpents whose trail could be
traced through the hot, flower-scented Southern plazas and courts into the
peaceful white villages of the North!

"Sho! I'd no idee 'twas a-gittin' on so late," said Captain John. "There
ain't anybody watchin' out for me. I kin put my family under my hat, but I
don' know what your folks'll think's come o' you.

"Wal, the rest on 'twon't take long to tell. The old man had her fitted up
in good shape by the time the ice was out of the river, and run her up to
Bangor in ballast, and loaded her there for New York. He had an ugly trip
down the coast: lost his deck load and three men overboard in a southeaster
off Nantucket Shoals. It made the whole ship's company feel pretty solemn,
but the old man took it the hardest of any of 'em, and from that time seems
as if he lost his grip; the old scare settled back on him blacker 'n ever.
There wan't a man aboard of her that liked her. They all knew her story,
that she was the Alc�zar from nobody knows where, instead of the Stranger
from Newburyport. The cap'n had Newburyport put on to her because he was a
Newburyport man and all his vessels was built there. But she hadn't more 'n
touched the dock in New York before every one on 'em left her, even to the
cook. 'I'm leery o' this 'ere ship,' says one big Cornishman. 'No better
than a floatin' coffin, anyway,' was what they all said of her; and I guess
the cap'n would 'a' left her right there himself if it hadn't been for the
money he'd put into her. I expect he was a little too fond of money, may
be; but I've knowed others just as sharp's the old cap'n that didn't seem
to have his luck. The mate saw him two or three times while he was a-lyin'
in New York, and noticed he was drinkin' more 'n usual. He come home
light and anchored off the bar, just as a southeaster was a-comin' on. It
wouldn't 'a' been no trouble for him to have laid there, if he'd had good
ground-gear; but there 'twas ag'in, he'd been a leetle too savin'. He'd
used the old cables he found in her. The new mate didn't know nothin' about
her, and he put out one anchor. The cap'n had taken a kag o' New England
rum aboard and been drawin' on it pretty reg'lar all the way up, and as
the gale come on he got kind o' wild and went at it harder 'n ever. About
midnight the cable parted. They let go the other anchor, but it didn't snub
her for a minute, and she swung, broadside to, on to the bar. The men clum
into the riggin' before she struck, but the old cap'n was staggerin' 'round
decks, kind o' dazed and dumb-like, not tryin' to do anythin' to save
himself. The mate tried to git him into the riggin', seein' he wan't in no
condition to look out for himself; but the old man struck loose from his
holt and cried out to him through the noise:--

"'Let me alone! I've got to go with her. I tell ye I've got to go with
her!'

"The mate just had time to swing himself back into the mizzen-shrouds
before the sea broke over her and left the decks bare. The old ship pounded
over the bar in an hour or so, and drifted up here on to the beach where
she is now. Every man on board was saved except the cap'n. He 'went with
her,' sure enough.

"There was talk enough about that thing before they got done with it to 'a'
made the old man roll in his grave. They raked up all the stories about his
cruisin' on the Spanish main when he was a young man. They wan't stories
_he_'d ever told; he wan't much of a hand to talk about what he'd seen and
done on his v'yages. They never let him rest till 'twas pretty much the
gen'ral belief, and is to this day, that he knew more about that slaver
from the first than he ever owned to.

"I never had much to say about it, but 'twas plain enough to me. I had my
suspicions the mornin' he towed her in. He looked terrible shattered. It
'peared to me he wan't ever the same man afterwards.

"'I've got to go with her!' Them was his last words. He knew that ship
and him belonged together, same as a man and his sins. He knew she'd been
a-huntin' him up and down the western ocean for twenty year, with them dead
o' his'n in her hold,--and she'd hunted him down at last."

Captain John paused with this peroration: he dug a hole in the wet sand
with the toe of his boot, and watched it slowly fill.

"'Twas a bait most any one would 'a' smelt of, a six-hundred-ton ship and
every timber in her sound; but you'd 'a' thought he'd been more cautious,
knowin' what he did of her. She was bound to have him, though."

"Captain John," said the boy, a little hoarse from his long silence, "what
do you suppose it _was_ he did? Anything except just leave them--the
negroes, I mean?"

"Lord! Wan't that _enough_? To steal 'em, and then leave 'em
there--battened down like rats in the hold! However, I expect there ain't
anybody that can tell you the whole of that story. It's one of them
mysteries that rests with the dead.

"The new mate--the young fellow he brought on from New York--he married the
cap'n's daughter. None o' the Harbor boys ever seemed to jibe in with her.
I always had a notion that she was a touch above most of 'em, but she and
her mother was as good as a providence to them shipwrecked men when they
was throwed ashore, strangers in the place and no money; and it ended in
Rachel's takin' up with the mate and the whole family's leavin' the place.
It was long after all the talk died away that the widow come back and lived
here in the same quiet way she always had, till she was laid alongside the
old cap'n. There wan't a better woman ever walked this earth than Mary
Green, that was Mary Spofford."

Captain John rose from the bowsprit and rubbed his cramped knees before
climbing the hill. He parted with his young listener at the top and took
a lonely path across the shore-pasture to a little cabin, where no light
shone, built like the nest of a sea-bird on the edge of high-water mark.

On the gray beach below, a small, dingy yawl, with one sail loosely bundled
over the thwarts, leaned toward the door-latch as if listening for its
click. It had an almost human expression of patient though wistful waiting.
It was the poorest boat in the Harbor; it had no name painted on its stern,
but Captain John, in the solitude of his watery wanderings among the
islands and channels of the bay, always called her the Mary Spofford. The
boy from the main went home slowly along the village street toward the
many-windowed house in which his mother and sisters were boarding. There
were voices, calling and singing abroad on the night air, reflected
from the motionless, glimmering sheet of dark water below as from a
sounding-board. Cow-bells tinkled away among the winding paths along the
low, dim shores. The night-call of the heron from the muddy flats struck
sharply across the stillness, and from the outer bay came the murmur of the
old ground-swell, which never rests, even in the calmest weather.




A CLOUD ON THE MOUNTAIN.


Ruth Mary stood on the high river bank, looking along the beach below to
see if her small brother Tommy was lurking anywhere under the willows with
his fishing-pole. He had been sent half an hour before to the earth cellar
for potatoes, and Ruth Mary's father, Mr. Tully, was waiting for his
dinner.

She did not see Tommy; but while she lingered, looking at the river
hurrying down the shoot between the hills and curling up over the pebbles
of the bar, she saw a team of bay horses and a red-wheeled wagon come
rattling down the stony slope of the opposite shore. In the wagon she
counted four men. Three of them wore white, helmet-shaped hats that made
brilliant spots of light against the bank. The horses were driven half
their length into the stream and allowed to drink, as well as they could
for the swiftness of the current, while the men seemed to consult together,
the two on the front seat turning back to speak with the two behind, and
pointing across the river.

Ruth Mary watched them with much interest, for travelers such as these
seemed to be seldom came as far up Bear River valley as the Tullys' cattle
range. The visitors who came to them were mostly cow-boys looking up stray
cattle, or miners on their way to the "Banner district," or packers with
mule trains going over the mountains, to return in three weeks, or three
months, as their journey prospered. Fishermen and hunters came up into
the hills in the season of trout and deer, but they came as a rule on
horseback, and at a distance were hardly to be distinguished from the
cow-boys and the miners.

The men in the wagon were evidently strangers to that locality. They had
seen Ruth Mary watching them from the hill, and now one of them rose up in
the wagon and shouted across to her, pointing to the river.

She could not hear his words for the noise of the ripple and of the wind
which blew freshly down-stream, but she understood that he was inquiring
about the ford. She motioned up the river and called to him, though she
knew her words could not reach him, to keep on the edge of the ripple.
Her gestures, however, aided by the driver's knowledge of fords, were
sufficient; he turned his horses up-stream and they took water at the place
she had tried to indicate. The wagon sank to the wheel-hubs; the horses
kept their feet well, though the current was strong; the sun shone brightly
on the white hats and laughing faces of the men, on the guns in their
hands, on the red paint of the wagon and the warm backs of the horses
breasting the stream. When they were halfway across, one of the men tossed
a small, reluctant black dog over the wheel into the river, and all the
company, with the exception of the driver, who was giving his attention to
his horses, broke into hilarious shouts of encouragement to the swimmer
in his struggle with the current. It was carrying him down and would have
landed him, without effort of his own, on a strip of white sand beach under
the willows above the bend; but now the unhappy little object, merely a
black nose and two blinking anxious eyes above the water, had drifted into
an eddy, from which he cast forlorn glances toward his faithless friends in
the wagon. The dog was in no real peril, but Ruth Mary did not know this,
and her heart swelled with indignant pity. Only shyness kept her from
wading to his rescue. Now one of the laughing young men, thinking the joke
had gone far enough perhaps, and reckless of a wetting, leaped out into the
water, and, plunging along in his high boots, soon had the terrier by the
scruff of his neck, and waded ashore with his sleek, quivering little body
nestled in the bosom of his flannel hunting shirt.

A deep cut in the bank, through which the wagon was dragged, was screened
by willows. When the fording party had arrived at the top, Ruth Mary was
nowhere to be seen. "Where's that girl got to all of a sudden?" one of the
men demanded. They had intended to ask her several questions; but she was
gone, and the road before them plainly led to the low-roofed cabin, and
loosely built barn with straw and daylight showing through its cracks, the
newly planted poplar-trees above the thatched earth cellar, and all the
signs of a tentative home in this solitude of the hills.

They drove on slowly, the young man who had waded ashore, whom his comrades
addressed as Kirkwood or Kirk, walking behind the wagon with the dog in
his arms, responding to his whimpering claims for attention with teasing
caresses. The dog, it seemed, was the butt as well as the pet of the party.
As they approached the house he scrambled out of Kirkwood's arms and
lingered to take a roll in the sandy path, coming up a moment afterward
to be received with blighting sarcasms upon his appearance. After his
ignominious wetting he was quite unable to bear up under them, and slunk to
the rear with deprecatory blinks and waggings of his tail whenever one of
the men looked back.

Ruth Mary had run home quickly to tell her father, who was sitting in the
sun by the wood-pile, of the arrival of strangers from across the river.
Mr. Tully rose up deliberately and went to meet his guests, keeping between
his teeth the sliver of pine he had been chewing while waiting for his
dinner. It helped to bear him out in that appearance of indifference
he thought it well to assume, as if such arrivals were an every-day
occurrence.

"Hasn't Tommy got back yet, mother?" Ruth Mary asked as she entered the
house. Mrs. Tully was a stout, low-browed woman, with grayish yellow hair
of that dry and lifeless texture which shows declining health or want of
care. Her blue eyes looked faded in the setting of her tanned complexion.
She sat in a low chair, her knees wide apart, defined by her limp calico
draperies, rocking a child of two years, a fat little girl with flushed
cheeks and flaxen hair braided into tight knots on her forehead, who was
asleep in the large cushioned rocking-chair in the middle of the room. The
room was somewhat bare, for the shed-room outside was evidently the more
used part of the house. The cook stove was there in the inclosed corner,
and beside it a table and shelf with a tin hand-basin hanging beneath,
while the crannies of the logs on each side of the doorway were utilized
as shelves for all the household articles in frequent requisition that
were not hanging from nails driven into the logs, or from the projecting
roof-poles against the light.

Tommy had not returned, and Mrs. Tully suggested as a reason for his delay
that he had stopped somewhere to catch grasshoppers for bait.

"I should think he had enough of 'em in that bottle of his," Ruth Mary
said, "to last him till the 'hoppers come again. Some strange men forded
the river just now. Father's gone to speak to them. I guess he'll ask 'em
to stop to dinner."

Mrs. Tully got up heavily and went to the door. "Here, Angy,"--she
addressed a girl of eight or ten years who sat on the flat boulder that
was the cabin doorstep;--"you go get them taters; that's a good girl," she
added coaxingly, as Angy did not stir. "If your foot hurts you, you can
walk on your heel."

Angy, who was complaining of a stone-bruise, got up and limped away,
upsetting from her lap as she rose two kittens of tender years, who tumbled
over each other before getting their legs under them, and staggered off,
steering themselves jerkily with their tails.

"Oh, Angy!" Ruth Mary remonstrated, but she could not stay to comfort the
kittens. She ran up the short, crooked stairs leading to the garret bedroom
which she shared with Angy, hastily to put on her shoes and stockings and
brace her pretty figure, under the blue calico waist she wore, with her
first pair of stays, an important purchase made on her last visit to the
town in the valley, and to be worn now, if ever. It was hot at noon in the
bedroom under the roof, and by the time Ruth Mary had fortified herself
to meet the eyes of strangers she was uncomfortably flushed, and short of
breath besides from the pressure of the new stays. She went slowly down the
uneven stairs, wishing that she could walk as softly in her shoes as she
could barefoot.

Her father was talking to the strangers in the shed-room. They seemed tall
and formidable, under the low roof, against the flat glare of the sun on
the hard-swept ground in front of the shed. She waited inside until her
mother reminded her of the dinner half cooked on the stove; then she went
out shyly, the light falling on her downcast face and full white eyelids,
on her yellow hair, sun-faded and meekly parted over her forehead, which
was low like her mother's, but smooth as one of the white stones of the
river beach. Her fair skin was burned to a clear, light red tint, and her
blonde eyebrows and lashes showed silvery against it, but her chin was very
white underneath, and there was a white space behind each of her little
ears where her hair was knotted tightly away from her neck.

"This is my daughter," Mr. Tully said briefly; and then he gave some
hospitable orders about dinner which the strangers interrupted, saying that
they had brought a lunch with them and would not trouble the family until
supper-time.

They gathered up their hunting gear, and lifting their hats to Ruth Mary,
followed Mr. Tully, who had offered to show them the best fishing on that
part of the river.

Mr. Tully explained to his wife and daughter, as the latter placed the
dinner on the table, that three of the strangers were the engineers from
the railroad camp at Moor's Bridge, and the fourth was a packer and
teamster from the same camp; that they were all going up the river to look
at timber, and wanted a little sport by the way. They had expected to keep
on the other side of the river, but seeing the ranch on the opposite shore,
with wheel-tracks going down to the water, they had concluded to try the
ford and the fishing and ask for a night's accommodation.

"They don't want we should put ourselves out any. They're used to roughin'
it, they say. If you can git together somethin' to feed 'em on, mother,
they say they'd as soon sleep on the straw in the barn as anywheres else."

"There's plenty to eat, such as it is, but Ruth Mary'll have it all to do.
I can't be on my feet." Mrs. Tully spoke in a depressed tone, but to her
no less than to her husband was this little break welcome in the monotony
of their life in the hills, even though it brought with it a more vivid
consciousness of the family circumstances, and a review of them in the
light of former standards of comfort and gentility: for Mrs. Tully had been
a woman of some social pretensions, in the small Eastern village where she
was born. To all that to her guests made the unique charm of her present
home she had grown callous, if she had ever felt it at all, while dwelling
with an incurable regret upon the neatly painted houses and fenced
door-yards, the gatherings of women in their best clothes in primly
furnished parlors on summer afternoons, the church-going, the passing in
the street, and, more than all, the housekeeping conveniences she had been
used to, accumulated through many years' occupancy of the same house.

"Seems as though I hadn't any ambition left," she often complained to her
daughter. "There's nothin' here to do with, and nobody to do for. The most
of the folks we ever see wouldn't know sour-dough bread from salt-risin',
and as for dressin' up, I might keep the same clothes on from Fourth July
till Christmas--your father'd never know."

But Ruth Mary was haunted by no fleshpots of the past. As she dressed the
chickens and mixed the biscuit for supper, she paused often in her work
and looked towards the high pastures with the pale brown lights and purple
shadows on them, rolling away and rising towards the great timbered ridges,
and these lifting here and there along their profiles a treeless peak or
bare divide into the regions above vegetation. She had no misgivings about
her home. Fences would not have improved her father's vast lawn, to her
mind, or white paint the low-browed front of his dwelling; nor did she feel
the want of a stair-carpet and a parlor-organ. She was sure that they,
the strangers, had never seen anything more lovely than her beloved river
dancing down between the hills, tripping over rapids, wrinkling over
sand-bars of its own spreading, and letting out its speed down the long
reaches where the channel was deep.

About four o'clock she found leisure to stroll along the shore with Tommy,
whose competitive energies as a fisherman had been stimulated by the advent
of strange craftsmen with scientific-looking tackle. Tommy must forthwith
show what native skill could do with a willow pole and grasshoppers for
bait. But Ruth Mary's sense of propriety would by no means tolerate Tommy's
intruding his company upon the strangers, and to frustrate any rash,
gregarious impulses on his part she judged it best to keep him in sight.

Tommy knew of a deep pool under the willows which he could whip, unseen,
in the shady hours of the afternoon. Thither he led Ruth Mary, leaving her
seated upon the bank above him lest she should be tempted to talk, and so
interfere with his sport. The moments went by in silence, broken only by
the river; Ruth Mary happy on the high bank in the sun, Tommy happy by
the shady pool below, and now and then slapping a lively trout upon the
stones. Across the river two Chinamen were washing gravel in a rude miner's
cradle, paddling about on the river's brink, and anon staggering down from
the gravel bank above, with large square kerosene cans filled with pay
dirt balanced on either end of a pole across their meagre shoulders.
Bare-headed, in their loose garments, with their pottering movements and
wrinkled faces shining with heat, they looked like two weird, unrevered old
women working out some dismal penance. High up in the sky the great black
buzzards sailed and sailed on slanting wing; the wood doves coo-oo-ed from
the willow thickets that gathered the sunlight close to the water's edge.
A few horses and cattle moved like specks upon the sides of the hills,
cropping the bunchgrass, but the greater herds had been driven up into the
high pastures where the snow falls early; and all these lower hills were
bare of life, unless one might fancy that the far-off processions of pines
against the sky, marching up the northern sides of the divides, had a
solemn personality, going up like priests to a sacrifice, or that the
restless river, flowing through the midst of all and bearing the light of
the white noonday sky deep into the bosom of the darkest hills, had a soul
as well as a voice. In its sparkle and ever-changing motion it was like a
child among its elders at play. The hills seemed to watch it, and the great
cloud-heads as they looked down between the parting summits, and the three
tall pines, standing about a young bird's flight from each other by the
shore and mingling their fitful crooning with the river's babble.

It is pleasant to think of Ruth Mary, sitting high above the river, in the
peaceful afternoon, surrounded by the inanimate life that to her brought
the fullness of companionship and left no room for vain cravings; the
shadow creeping upward over her hands folded in her lap, the light resting
on her girlish face and meek, smooth hair. For this was during that
unquestioning time of content which may not always last, even in a life as
safe and as easily predicted as hers. But even now this silent communion
was interrupted by the appearance of one of Tommy's rivals. It was the
young man whose comrades called him Kirk, who came along the shore,
stooping under the willow boughs and scattering all their shadows lightly
traced on the stones below. He held his fishing-rod, couched like a lance,
in one hand, and a string of gleaming fish in the other.

Tommy, with practiced eye, rapidly counted them and saw with chagrin that
he was outnumbered, but another look satisfied him that the stranger's
catch was nearly all "white-fish" instead of trout. He caressed his own
dappled beauties complacently.

Kirkwood stopped and looked at them; he was evidently impressed by Tommy's
superior luck.

"Those are big fellows," he said; "did you catch them?"

"You don't suppose _she_ did?" said Tommy, with a jerk of his head towards
Ruth Mary.

Kirkwood looked up and smiled, seeing the young girl on her sunny perch.
The smile lingered pleasantly in his eyes as he seated himself on the
stones,--deliberately, as if he meant to stay.

Tommy watched him while he made himself comfortable, taking from his
pocket a short briar-wood pipe and a bag of tobacco, leisurely filling
the pipe and lighting it with a wax match held in the hollow of his
hands--apparently from habit, for there was no wind. He did not seem to
mind in the least that his legs were wet and that his trout were nearly
all white-fish. He was evidently a person of happy resources, and a
joy-compelling temperament that could find virtue in white-fish if it
couldn't get trout. He began to talk to Tommy, not without an amused
consciousness of Tommy's silent partner on the bank above, nor without an
occasional glance up at the maidenly head serenely exalted in the sunlight.
Nor did Ruth Mary fail to respond, with her down-bent looks, as simply and
unawares as the clouds turning their bright side to the sun.

Tommy, on his part, was stoutly withholding, in words, the admiration
his eyes could not help showing, of the strange fisherman's tools. He
cautiously felt the weight of the ringed and polished rod, and snapped it
lightly over the water; he was permitted to examine the book of flies and
to handle the reel, things in themselves fascinating, but to Tommy's mind
merely a hindrance and a snare to the understanding in the real business of
catching fish. Still, he admitted, where a man could take a whole day all
to himself like that, without fear of being called off at any moment by the
women on some frivolous household errand, he might afford to potter with
such things. Tommy kept the conservative attitude of native experience and
skill towards foreign innovation.

"If Joe Enselman was here," he said, "I bet he could ketch more fish in
half 'n hour, with a pole like this o' mine and a han'ful o' 'hoppers, than
any of you can in a whole week o' fishing with them fancy things."

"Oh, Tommy!" Ruth Mary expostulated, looking distressed.

"Who is this famous fisherman?" Kirkwood asked, smiling at Tommy's boast.

"Oh, he's a feller I know. He's a packer, and he owns ha'f o' father's
stock. He's goin' to marry our Sis soon's he gits back from Sheep Mountain,
and then he'll be my brother." Tommy had been a little reckless in his
desire for the distinction of a personal claim on the hero of his boyish
heart. He was even conscious of this himself, as he glanced up at his
sister.

Kirkwood's eyes involuntarily followed Tommy's. He withdrew them at once,
but not before he saw the troubled blush that reddened the girl's averted
face. It struck him, though he was not deeply versed in blushes, that it
was not quite the expression of happy, maidenly consciousness, when the
name of a lover is unexpectedly spoken.

It was the first time in her life that Ruth Mary had ever blushed at the
name of Joe Enselman. She could not understand why it should pain her to
have this young stranger hear of him in his relation to herself.

Before her blush had faded, Kirkwood had dismissed the subject of Ruth
Mary's engagement, with the careless reflection that Enselman was probably
not the right man, but that the primitive laws which decide such haphazard
unions doubtless provided the necessary hardihood of temperament wherewith
to meet their exigencies. She was a nice little girl, but possibly she was
not so sensitive as she looked.

His pipe had gone out, and after relighting it, he showed Tommy the gayly
pictured paper match-box from Havana, which opened with a spring, and
disclosed the matches lying in a little drawer within. Tommy's wistful
eyes, as he returned the box, prompted Kirkwood to make prudent search in
his pockets for a second box of matches before presenting Tommy with the
one his eyes coveted. Finding himself secure against want in the immediate
future, he gave himself up to the mild amusement of watching Tommy with his
new acquisition.

Tommy could not resist lighting one of the little tapers, which burned in
the sunlight with a still, clear flame like a fairy candle. Then a second
one was sacrificed. By this time the attraction had proved strong enough
to bring Ruth Mary down from her high seat in the sun. She looked scarcely
less a child than Tommy, as, with her face close to his, she watched the
pale flame flower wasting its waxen stem. Then she must needs light one
herself and hold it, with a little fixed smile on her face, till the flame
crept down and warmed her finger-tips.

"There," she said, putting it out with a breath, "don't let us burn any
more. It's too bad to waste 'em in the daylight."

"We will burn one more," said Kirkwood, "not for amusement, but for
information." And while he whittled a piece of driftwood into the shape of
a boat, he told Ruth Mary how the Hindoo maidens set their lighted lamps
afloat at night on the Ganges, and watch them perilously voyaging, to
learn, by the fate of the traveling flame, the safety of their absent
lovers.

He told it simply and gravely, as he might have described some fact in
natural history, for he rightly guessed that this little seed of sentiment
fell on virgin soil. According to Tommy, Ruth Mary was betrothed and soon
to be a wife, but Kirkwood was curiously sure that as yet she knew not
love, nor even fancy. Nor had he any deliberate intention of tampering with
her inexperience. He spoke of the lamps on the Ganges because they came
into his mind while Ruth Mary was bending over the wasting match flame;
any hesitation he might have had about introducing so delicate a topic was
conquered by an idle fancy that he would like to observe its effect upon
her almost pathetic innocence.

While he talked, interrupting himself as his whittling absorbed him, but
always conscious of her eyes upon his face, the boat took shape in his
hands. Tommy had failed to catch the connection between Hindoo girls and
boat-making, but was satisfied with watching Kirkwood's skillful fingers,
without paying much heed to his words. The stranger had, too, a wonderful
knife, with tools concealed in its handle, with one of which he bored a
hole for the mast. In the top of the mast he fixed a wax taper upright and
steady for the voyage.

Ruth Mary's cheeks grew red, as she suddenly perceived the intention of
Kirkwood's whittling.

"Now," he said, steadying the boat on the shallow ripple, "before we light
our beacon you must think of some one you care for, who is away. Perhaps
Tommy's friend, on Sheep Mountain?" he ventured softly, glancing at Ruth
Mary.

The color in her cheeks deepened, and again Kirkwood fancied it was not a
happy confusion that covered her downcast face.

"No?" he questioned, as Ruth Mary did not speak; "that is too serious,
perhaps. Well, then, make a little wish, and if the light is still alive
when the boat passes that rock--the flat one with two stones on top--the
wish will come true. But you must have faith, you know."

Ruth Mary looked at Kirkwood, the picture of faith in her sweet
seriousness. His heart smote him a little, but he met her wide-eyed gaze
with a gravity equal to her own.

"I would rather not wish for myself," she said, "but I will wish something
for you, if you want me to."

"That is very kind of you. Am I to know what it is to be?"

"Oh yes. You must tell me what to wish."

"That is easily done," said Kirkwood gayly. "Wish that I may come back some
other day, and sit here with you and Tommy by the river."

It was impossible not to see that Ruth Mary was blushing again. But she
answered him with a gentle courtesy that rebuked the foolish blush: "That
will be wishing for us all."

"Shall we light up then, and set her afloat?"

"I've made a wish," shouted Tommy; "I've wished Joe Enselman would bring me
an Injun pony: a good one that won't buck!"

"You must keep your wish for the next trip. This ship is freighted deep
enough already. Off she goes then, and good luck to the wish," said
Kirkwood, as the current took the boat, with the light at its peak burning
clearly, and swept it away. The pretty plaything dipped and danced a
moment, while the light wavered but still lived. Then a breath of wind
shook the willows, and the light was gone.

"Now it's my turn," Tommy exclaimed, wasting no sentiment on another's
failure. He rushed down the bank and into the shallow water to catch the
wishing-boat before it drifted away.

"All the same I'm coming back again," said Kirkwood, looking at Ruth Mary.

Tommy's wish fared no better than his sister's, but he bore up briskly,
declaring it was "all foolishness anyway," and accused Kirkwood of having
"just made it up for fun."

Kirkwood only laughed, and, ignoring Tommy, said to Ruth Mary, "The game
was hardly worth the candle, was it?"

"Was it a game?" she asked. "I thought you meant it for true."

"Oh no," he said; "when we try it in earnest we must find a smoother river
and a stronger light. Besides, you know, I'm coming back."

Ruth Mary kept her eyes upon his face, still questioning his seriousness,
but its quick changes of expression baffled while fascinating her. She
could not have told whether she thought him handsome or not, but she had a
desire to look at him all the time.

Suddenly her household duties recurred to her, and, refusing the help of
Kirkwood's hand, she sprang up the bank and hurried back to the house.
Kirkwood could see her head above the wild-rose thickets as she went along
the high path by the shore. He was more sure than ever that Enselman was
not the right man.

At supper Ruth Mary waited on the strangers in silence, while Angy kept the
cats and dogs "corraled," as her father called it, in the shed, that their
impetuous appetites might not disturb the feast.

Mr. Tully stood in the doorway and talked with his guests while they ate,
and Mrs. Tully, with the little two-year-old in her lap, rocked in the
large rocking-chair and sighed apologetically between her promptings of
Ruth Mary's attendance on the table.

Tommy hung about in a state of complete infatuation with the person and
conversation of his former rival. He was even beginning to waver in his
allegiance to his absent hero, especially as the wish about the Indian pony
had not come true.

During the family meal the young men sat outside in the shed-room, and
smoked and lazily talked together. Their words reached the silent group at
the table. Kirkwood's companions were deriding him as a recreant sportsman.
He puffed his short-stemmed pipe and looked at them tranquilly. He was not
dissatisfied with his share of the day's pleasure.

When Mr. Tully had finished his supper, he took the young men down to the
beach to look at his boat. Kirkwood had pointed it out to his comrades,
where it lay moored under the bank, and ventured the opinion of a boating
man that it had not been built in the mountains. But there he had
generalized too rashly.

"I built her myself," said Mr. Tully; "rip-sawed the lumber up here. My
young ones are as handy with her!" he boasted cheerfully, warmed by the
admiration his work called forth. "You'd never believe, to see 'em knocking
about in her, they hadn't the first one of 'em ever smelt salt water. Ruth
Mary now, the oldest of 'em, is as much to home in that boat as she is on
a hoss--and that's sayin' enough. She looks quiet, but she's got as firm a
seat and as light a hand as any cow-boy that ever put leg over a cayuse."

Mr. Tully, on being questioned, admitted willingly that he was an Eastern
man,--a Down-East lumberman and boat-builder. He couldn't say just why he'd
come West. Got restless, and his wife's health was always poor back there.
He had mined it some and had had considerable luck,--cleaned up several
thousands, the summer of '63, at Junction Bar. Put it in a sawmill and
got burned out. Then he took up this cattle range and went into stock, in
partnership with a young fellow from Montana, named Enselman. They expected
to make a good thing of it, but it was a long ways from anywheres; and for
months of the year they couldn't do any teaming. Had no way out except by
the horseback trail. The women found it lonesome. In winter no team could
get up that grade in the ca�on they call the "freeze-out," even if they
could cross the river, on account of the ice; and from April to August the
river was up so you couldn't ford.

All this in the intervals of business, for Mr. Tully, in his circuitous
way, was agreeing to build a boat for the engineers, after the model of his
own. He would have to go down to the camp at Moor's Bridge to build it, he
said, for suitable lumber could not be procured so far up the river, except
at great expense. It would take him better'n a month, anyhow, and he didn't
know what his women-folks would say to having him so long away. He would
see about it.

The four men sauntered up the path from the shore, Tommy bringing up the
rear with the little black-and-tan terrier. In default of a word from his
master, Tommy tried to make friends with the dog, but the latter, wide
awake and suspicious after dozing under the wagon all the afternoon, would
none of him. Possibly he divined that Tommy's attentions were not wholly
disinterested.

The family assembled for the evening in the shed-room. The women were
silent, for the talk was confined to masculine topics, such as the quality
of the placer claims up the river, the timber, the hunting, the progress
and prospects of the new railroad. Tommy, keeping himself forcibly awake,
was seeing two Kirkwoods where there was but one. The terrier had taken
shelter between Kirkwood's knees, after trying conclusions with the mother
of the kittens,--a cat of large experience and a reserved disposition, with
only one ear, but in full possession of her faculties.

Betimes the young men arose and said good-night. Mr. Tully was loath to
have the evening, with its rare opportunity for conversation, brought to a
close, but he was too modest a host to press his company upon his guests.
He went with them to their bed, on the clean straw in the barn, and if good
wishes could soften pillows the travelers would have slept sumptuously.
They did not know, in fact, how they slept, but woke, strong and joyous
over the beauty of the morning on the hills, and the prospect of continuing
their journey.

They parted from the family at the ranch with a light-hearted promise to
stop again on their way down the river. When they would return they were
gayly uncertain,--it might be ten days, it might be two weeks. It was a
promise that nestled with delusive sweetness in Ruth Mary's thoughts, as
she went silently about her work. She was helpful in all ways, and very
gentle with the children, but she lingered more hours dreaming by the
river, and often at twilight she climbed the hill back of the cabin and sat
there alone, her cheek in the hollow of her hand, until the great planes
of distance were lost, and all the hills drew together in one dark profile
against the sky.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Tully had been intending to spare Ruth Mary for a journey to town,
on some errands of a feminine nature which could not be intrusted to Mr.
Tully's larger but less discriminating judgment. Ruth Mary had never before
been known to trifle with an opportunity of this kind. Her rides to town
had been the one excitement of her life; looked forward to with eagerness
and discussed with tireless interest for many days afterwards. But now she
hung back with an unaccountable apathy, and made excuses for postponing the
ride from day to day, until the business became too pressing to be longer
neglected. She set off one morning at daybreak, following the horseback
trail, around the steep and sliding bluffs high above the river, or across
beds of broken lava rock,--arrested avalanches from the slowly crumbling
cliffs which crowned the bluff,--or picking her way at a soft-footed pace
through the thickets of the river bottoms. In such a low and sheltered
spot, scarcely four feet above the river, she found the engineers' camp,
a group of white tents shining among the willows. She keenly noted its
location and surroundings. The broken timbers of the old bridge projected
from the bank a short distance above the camp; a piece of weather-stained
canvas stretched over them formed a kind of awning shading the rocks below,
where the Chinese cook of the camp sat impassively fishing. The camp had a
deserted appearance, for the men were all at work, tunneling the hill half
a mile lower down. Her errands kept her so late that she was obliged to
stay over night at the house of a friend of her father's, who owned a fruit
ranch near the town. They were prosperous, talkative people, who loudly
pitied the isolation of the family in the upper valley.

Ruth Mary reached home about noon the next day, tired and several shades
more deeply sunburned, to find that she had passed the engineers, without
knowing it, on their way down the river by the wagon road on the other
side. They had stopped over night at the ranch and made an early start that
morning. Ruth Mary was obliged to listen to enthusiastic reminiscences,
from each member of the family, of the visit she had missed.

This was the last social event of the year. The willow copses turned
yellow and leaf-bare; the scarlet hips of the rosebushes looked as if tiny
finger-tips had left their prints upon them. The wreaths of wild clematis
faded ashen gray, and were scattered by the winds. The wood dove's cooing
no longer sounded at twilight in the leafless thickets. They had gone down
the river and the wild duck with them.

But the voice of the river, rising with the autumn rains, was loud on the
bar; the sky was hung with clouds that hid the hilltops or trailed their
ragged pennants below the summits. The mist lay cold on the river; it rose
with the sun, dissolving in soft haze that dulled the sunshine, and at
night, descending, shrouded the dark, hoarse water without stilling its
lament. Then the first snow fell, and ghostly companies of deer came out
upon the hills, or filed silently down the draws of the ca�ons at morning
and evening. The cattle had come down from the mountain pastures, and at
night congregated about the buildings with deep breathings and sighings;
the river murmured in its fretted channel; now and then the yelp of a
hungry coyote sounded from the hills.

The young men had said, among their light and pleasant sayings, that they
would like to come up again to the hills when the snow fell, and get a shot
at the deer; but they did not come, though often Ruth Mary stood on the
bank and looked across the swollen ford, and listened for the echo of
wheels among the hills.

About the 1st of November Mr. Tully went down to the camp at Moor's Bridge
to build the engineers' boat. The women were now alone at the ranch, but
Joe Enselman's return was daily expected. Mr. Tully, always cheerful, had
been confident that he would be home by the 5th.

The 5th of November and the 10th passed, but Enselman had not returned.
On the 12th, in the midst of a heavy fall of snow, his pack animals were
driven in by another man, a stranger to the women at the ranch, who said
that Enselman had changed his mind suddenly about coming home that fall,
and decided to go to Montana and "prove up" on his ranch there.

Mr. Tully's work was finished before the second week of December. On his
return to the ranch he brought with him a great brown paper bundle, which
the children opened by the cabin fire on the joyous evening of his arrival.
There were back numbers of the illustrated magazines and papers, stray
copies of which now and then had drifted into the hands of the voracious
young readers in the cabin. There were a few novels, selected by Kirkwood
from the camp library with especial reference to Ruth Mary. For Tommy there
was a duplicate of the wonderful pocket-knife that he had envied Kirkwood.
Angy was remembered with a little music-box, which played "Willie, we have
missed you" with a plaintive iteration that brought the sensitive tears
to Ruth Mary's eyes; and for Ruth Mary herself there was a lace pin of
hammered gold.

"He said it must be your wedding present from him, as you'd be married
likely before he saw you again," Mr. Tully said, with innocent pride in the
gift with which his daughter had been honored.

"Who said that?" Ruth Mary asked.

"Why, Mr. Kirkwood said it. He's the boss one of the whole lot to my
thinkin'. He's got that way with him some folks has! We had some real good
talks, evenings, down on the rocks under the old bridge,--I told him about
you and Enselman"--

"Father, I wish you hadn't done that." The protest in Ruth Mary's voice was
stronger than her words.

She had become slightly pale when Kirkwood's name was mentioned, but now,
as she held out the box with the trinket in it, a deep blush covered her
face.

"I cannot take it, father. Not with that message. He can wait till I am
married before he sends me his wedding present."

To her father's amazement, she burst into tears and went out into the
shed-room, leaving Kirkwood's ill-timed gift in his hands.

"What in all conscience' sake's got into her?" he demanded of his wife, "to
take offense at a little thing like that! She didn't use to be so techy."

Mrs. Tully nodded her head at him sagely and glanced at the children, a
hint that she understood Ruth Mary's state of mind, but could not explain
before them.

At bedtime, the father and mother being alone together, Mrs. Tully revealed
the cause of her daughter's sensitiveness, according to her theory of
it. "She's put out because Joe Enselman chose to wait till spring before
marryin', and went off to Montany instead of comin' home as he said he
would."

"Sho, sho!" said Mr. Tully. "That don't seem like Ruth Mary. She ain't in
any such a hurry as all that comes to. I've had it on my mind lately that
she took it a little too easy."

"You'll see," said the mother. "_She_ ain't in any hurry, but she likes
_him_ to be. She feels's if he thought more of money-makin' than he does of
her. She's like all girls. She won't use her reason and see it's all for
her in the end he's doin' it."

"Why didn't you tell her 'twas my plan, his goin' to Montany this fall?
He wouldn't listen to it nohow then. He'd rather lose his ranch than wait
any longer for Sis, so he said; but I guess he's seen the sense of what I
told him. 'Ruth Mary ain't a-goin' to run away,' I says, 'even if ye don't
prove up on her this fall.' You ought to 'a' told her, mother, 'twas my
proposition."

"I told her that and more too. I told her it showed he'd make a good
provider. She looked at me solemn as a graven image all the time I was
talkin' and not a word out of her. But that's Ruth Mary. I never said the
child was sullen, but she is just like your sister Ruth--the more she
feels, the less she talks."

"Well," said Mr. Tully, "that's all right, if that's it. That'll all
straighten out with time. It was natural perhaps she should fire up at
the talk about marryin' if she felt the bridegroom was hangin' back. Why,
Joe,--he'd eat the dirt she treads on, if he couldn't make her like him no
other way! He's most too foolish about her, to my thinkin'. That's what
took me so by surprise when word come back he'd gone to Montany after all;
I didn't expect anything so sensible of him."

"'Twas a reg'lar man's piece o' work anyhow," said Mrs. Tully
disconsolately.

"And you'll be sorry for it, I'm afraid. I never knew any good come of
puttin' off a marriage, where everything was suitable, just for a few
hundred acres of wild land, more or less."

"No use your worryin'," said Mr. Tully. "Young folks always has their
little troubles before they settle down--besides, what sort of a marriage
would it be if you or I could make it or break it?" But he bore himself
with a deprecating tenderness towards his daughter, in whose affairs he had
meddled, perhaps disastrously, as his better half feared.

       *       *       *       *       *

The winters of Idaho are not long, even in the higher valleys. Close upon
the cold footsteps of the retreating snows trooped the first wild flowers.
The sun seemed to laugh in the cloudless sky. The children were let loose
on the hills; their voices echoed the river's chime. Its waters, rising
with the melting snows, no longer babbled childishly on their way; they
shouted, and brawled, and tumbled over the bar, rolling huge pine trunks
along as if they were sticks of kindling wood.

One cool May evening, Ruth Mary, climbing the path from the beach, saw
there was a strange horse and two pack animals in the corral. She did not
stop to look at them, but, quickly guessing who their owner must be, she
went on to the house, her knees weak and trembling, her heart beating
heavily. Her father met her at the door and detained her outside. She was
prepared for his announcement. She knew that Joe Enselman had returned,
and that the time was come for her to prove her new resolve, born of the
winter's silent struggle.

"I thought I'd better have a few words with you, Ruthie, before you see
him--to prepare your mind. Set down here." Mr. Tully took his daughter's
hands in his own and held them while he talked.

"You thought it was queer Joe stayed away so long, didn't you?" Ruth
Mary opened her lips to speak, but no words came. "Well, I did," said
the father. "Though it was my plan first off. I might 'a' know'd it was
something more 'n business that kep' him. Joe's had an accident. It
happened to him just about the time he meant to 'a' started for home last
fall. It broke him all up,--made him feel like he didn't want to see any of
us just then. He was goin' along a trail through the woods one dark night;
he never knew what stunned him; must have been a twig or something struck
him in the eye; he was giddy and crazy-like for a spell; his horse took him
home. Well, he ain't got but one eye left, Joe ain't. There, Sis, I knew
you'd feel bad. But he's well. It's hurt his looks some, but what's looks!
We ain't any of us got any to brag on. Joe had some hopes at first he'd
git to seein' again out of the eye that was hurt, and so he sent home his
animals and put out for Salt Lake to show it to a doctor there; but it
wan't any use. The eye's gone; and it doos seem as if for the time bein'
some of Joe's grit had gone with it. He went up to Montany and tended to
his business, but it was all like a dumb show and no heart in it. It's cut
him pretty deep, through his bein' alone so long, perhaps, and thinkin'
about how you'd feel. And then he's pestered in his mind about marryin'. He
feels he's got no claim to you now. Says it ain't fair to ask a young girl
that's likely to have plenty good chances to tie up to what's left of him.
I wanted you should know about this before you go inside. It might hurt
him some to see a change in your face when you look at him first. As to
his givin' you your word back, that you'll settle between yourselves; but,
however you fix it, I guess you'll make it as easy as you can for Joe. I
don' know as ever I see a big strappin' fellow so put down."

Mr. Tully had waited, between his short and troubled sentences, for some
response from Ruth Mary, but she was still silent. Her hands felt cold
in his. As he released them she leaned suddenly forward and hid her face
against his shoulder. She shivered and her breast heaved, but she was not
weeping.

"There, there!" said Mr. Tully, stroking her head clumsily with his large
hand. "I've made a botch of it. I'd ought to 'a' let your mother told ye."

She pressed closer to him, and wrapped her arms around him without
speaking.

"I expect I better go in now," he said gently, putting her away from him.
"Will you come along o' me, or do you want to git a little quieter first?"

"You go in," Ruth Mary whispered. "I'll come soon."

It was not long before she followed her father into the house. No one was
surprised to see her white and tremulous. She seemed to know where Enselman
sat without raising her eyes; neither did he venture to look at her, as she
came to him, and stooping forward, laid her little cold hands on his.

"I'm glad you've come back," she said. Then sinking down suddenly on the
floor at his feet, she threw her apron over her head and sobbed aloud.

The father and mother wept too. Joe sat still, with a great and bitter
longing in his smitten countenance, but did not dare to comfort her.

"Pick her up, Joe," said Mr. Tully.

"Take hold of her, man, and show her you've got a whole heart if you ain't
got but one eye."

It was understood, as Ruth Mary meant that it should be, without more
words, that Enselman's misfortune would make no difference in their old
relation. The difference it had made in that new resolve born of the
winter's struggle she told to no one; for to no one had she confided her
resolve.

       *       *       *       *       *

Joe stayed two weeks at the ranch, and was comforted into a semblance of
his former hardy cheerfulness. But Ruth Mary knew that he was not happy.
One evening he asked her to go with him down the high shore path. He told
her that he was going to town the next day on business that might keep him
absent about a fortnight, and entreated her to think well of her promise
to him, for that on his return he should expect its fulfillment. For God's
sake he begged her to let no pity for his misfortune blind her to the
true nature of her feeling for him. He held her close to his heart and
kissed her many times. Did she love him so--and so?--he asked. Ruth Mary,
trembling, said she did not know. How could she help knowing? he demanded
passionately. Had her thoughts been with him all winter, as his had been
with her? Had she looked up the river towards the hills where he was
staying so long and wished for him, as he had gazed southward into the
valleys many and many a day, longing for the sweet blue eyes of his little
girl so far away?

Alas, Ruth Mary! She gazed almost wildly into his stricken face, distorted
by the anguish of his great love and his great dread. She wished that she
were dead. There seemed no other way out of her trouble.

The next morning, before she was dressed, Enselman rode away, and her
father went with him.

She was alone, now, in the midst of the hills she loved--alone as she
would never be again. She foresaw that she would not have the strength to
lay that last blow upon her faithful old friend,--the crushing blow that
perfect truth demanded. Her tenderness was greater than her truth.

       *       *       *       *       *

The river was now swollen to its greatest volume. Its voice, that had been
the babble of a child and the tumult of a boy, was now deep and heavy like
the chest notes of a strong man. Instead of the sparkling ripple on the
bar, there was a continuous roar of yellow, turbid water that could be
heard a mile away. There had been no fording for six weeks, nor would there
be again until late summer. The useless boat lay in the shallow wash that
filled the deep cut among the willows. The white sand beach was gone; heavy
waves swirled past the banks and sent their eddies up into the channels of
the hills to meet the streams of melted snow. Thunder clouds chased each
other about the mountains, or met in sudden downfalls of rain.

One sultry noon, when the sun had come out hot on the hills after a wet
morning, Ruth Mary, at work in the shed-room, heard a sound that drove the
color from her cheek. She ran out and looked up the river, listening to a
distant but ever increasing roar which could be heard above the incessant
laboring of the waters over the bar. Above the summit of Sheep Mountain, as
it seemed, a huge turban-shaped cloud had rolled itself up, and from its
central folds was discharging gray sheets of water that veered and slanted
with the wind, but were always distinct in their density against the
rain-charged atmosphere. How far away the floods were descending she did
not know; but that they were coming in a huge wall of water, overtaking and
swallowing up the river's current, she was as sure as that she had been
bred in the mountains.

Bare-headed, bare-armed as she was, without a backward look, she ran down
the hill to the place where the boat was moored. Tommy was there, sitting
in the boat and making the shallow water splash as he rocked from side to
side.

"Get out, Tommy, and let me have her, quick!" Ruth Mary called to him.

Tommy looked at her stolidly and kept on rocking. "What you want with her?"
he asked.

"Come out, for mercy's sake! Don't you _hear_ it? There's a cloud-burst on
the mountain."

Tommy listened. He did hear it, but he did not stir. "It'll be a bully
thing to see when it comes. What you doin'? You act like you was crazy," he
exclaimed, as Ruth Mary waded through the water and got into the boat.

"Tommy, you will kill me if you stop to talk! Don't you know the camp at
Moor's Bridge? Go home and tell mother I've gone to give 'em warning."

Tommy was instantly sobered. "I'm going with you," he said. "You can't
handle her alone in that current."

Ruth Mary, wild with the delay, every second of which might be the price of
precious lives, seized Tommy in her arms, hugged him close and kissed him,
and by main strength rolled him out into the water. He grasped the gunwale
with both hands. "You're going to be drowned," he shrieked, as if already
she were far away. She pushed off his hands and shot out into the current.

"Don't cry, Tommy, I'll get there somehow," she called back to him. She
could see nothing for the first few minutes of her journey but his little
wet, dismal figure toiling, sobbing, up the hill. It hurt her to have had
to be rough with him. But all the while she sat upright with her eyes on
the current, plying her paddle right and left, as rocks and driftwood
and eddies were passed. She heard it coming, that distant roar from the
hills, and prayed with beating heart that the wild current might carry her
faster--faster--past the draggled willow copses--past the beds of black
lava rock, and the bluffs with their patches of green moss livid in the
sunshine--hurling along, past glimpses of the well-known trail she had
followed dreamily on those peaceful rides she might never take again. The
thought did not trouble her, only the fear that she might be overtaken
before she reached the camp. For the waters were coming--or was it the wind
that brought that dread sound so near! She dared not look round lest she
should see, through the gates of the ca�on, the black lifted head of the
great wave, devouring the river behind her. How it would come swooping
down, between those high narrow walls of rock, her heart stood still to
think of. If the hills would but open and let it loose, over the empty
pastures--if the river would only hurry, hurry, hurry! She whispered the
word to herself with frantic repetition, and the oncoming roar behind her
answered her whisper of fear with its awful intoning.

She trembled with joy as the ca�on walls lowered and fell apart, and she
saw the blessed plains, the low green flats and the willows, and the white
tents of the camp, safe in the sunshine. Now if she be given but one
moment's grace to swing into the bank! The roar behind her made her faint
as she listened. For the first time she turned and looked back, and the cry
of her despair went up and was lost, as boat and message and messenger were
lost,--gone utterly, gorged at one leap by the senseless flood.

       *       *       *       *       *

At half past five o'clock that afternoon the men of the camp filed out of
the tunnel, along the new road-bed, with the low sunlight in their faces.
It was "Saturday night," and the whole force was in good humor. As they
tramped gayly along, tools and instruments glinting in the sun, word went
down the line that something unusual had been going on by the river. There
seemed to have been a wild uprising of its waters since they saw it last.
Then a shout from those ahead proclaimed the disaster at the bridge. The
Chinese cook, crouched among the rocks high up under the bluff, where he
had fled for safety when he heard the waters coming, rushed down to them
with wild wavings and gabblings, to tell them of a catastrophe that was
best described by its results. A few provisions were left them, stored in
a magazine under a rock on the hillside. They cooked their supper with the
splinters of the ruined blacksmith's hut. After supper, in the clear, pink
evening light, they wandered about on the slippery rocks, seeking whatever
fragments of their camp equipage the flood might have left them. Everything
had been swept away, and tons of mud and gravel covered the little green
meadow where their tents had stood. Kirkwood, straying on ahead of his
comrades, came to the rocks below the bridge timbers, from which the awning
had been torn away. The wet rocks glistened in the light, but there was a
whiter gleam which caught his eye. He stooped and crawled under the timbers
anchored in the bank, until he came to the spot of whiteness. Was this that
fair young girl from the hills, dragged here by the waters in their cruel
orgy, and then hidden by them as if in shame of their work? Kirkwood
recognized the simple features, the meek eyes, wide open in the searching
light. The mud that filled her garments had spared the pure young face.
Kirkwood gazed into it reverently, but the passionate sacrifice, the
useless warning, were sealed from him. She could not tell him why she was
there.

The three young men watched in turn, that night, by the little motionless
heap covered with Kirkwood's coat. Kirkwood was very sad about Ruth Mary,
yet he slept when his watch was over.

In the morning they nailed together some boards into the shape of a long
box. There was not a boat left on the river; fording was impossible. They
could only take her home by the trail. So once more Ruth Mary traveled that
winding path, high in the sunlight or low in the shade of the shore. A log
of driftwood, left by the great wave, slung on one side of a mule's pack
saddle, balanced the rude coffin on the other. No one meeting the three
engineers and their pack-mule filing down the trail would have known that
they were a funeral procession; but they were heavy-hearted as they rode
along, and Kirkwood would fain it had not been his part to ride ahead and
prepare the family at the ranch for their child's coming.

The mother, with Tommy and Angy hiding their faces against her, stood on
the hill and watched for it, and broke into cries as the mule with its
burden came in sight.

Kirkwood walked with them down the hill to meet it. His comrades
dismounted, and the three young men, with heads uncovered, carried the
coffin over the hill and set it down in the shed-room. Then Tommy, in a
burst of childish grief, made them know that this piteous sacrifice had
been for them.

The tunnel made its way through the hill, the sinuous road-bed wound up the
valley, new camps were built along its course; but when the young men sat
together of an evening and looked at the hills in the strange pink light, a
spell of quietness rested upon them which no one tried to explain.

       *       *       *       *       *

The railroad has been built these two years. Every summer brings tourists
up into the Bear River valley. They look with delight upon the mountain
stream, bounding down between the hills with the brightness of the morning
on its breast.

"There should be an idyl or a legend belonging to it," a pretty, dark-eyed
girl with a Boston accent said to Kirkwood, one moonlight evening late in
summer when the river was low, as they drifted softly down between its dim
shores. "Poor little Bear River! did nothing human ever happen near you to
give you a right to a prettier name?"

The river did not answer as it rippled over the bar, nor did Kirkwood speak
for it; but the wood dove's melancholy tremolo came from the misty willows
by the shore, and in some suddenly illumined place in his memory he saw
Ruth Mary, sitting on the high bank in the peaceful afternoon, the sunshine
resting on her smooth, fair hair, the shadow lending its softness to her
shy, down-bent face.

The pity of it, when he thinks of it sometimes, seems to him more than he
can bear. Yet if Ruth Mary had still been there at the ranch on the hills,
she would have been, to him, only "that nice little girl of Tully's who
married the one-eyed packer."




THE RAPTURE OF HETTY.


The dance was set for Christmas night at Walling's, a horse-ranch where
there were women, situated in a high, watered valley shut in by foothills,
sixteen miles from the nearest town. The cabin with its roof of shakes, the
sheds and corrals, can be seen from any divide between Packer's ferry and
the Fayette.

The "boys" had been generally invited, with one exception to the usual
company. The youngest of the sons of Basset, a pastoral and nomadic house,
was socially under a cloud, on the charge of having been "too handy with
the frying-pan brand."

The charge could not be substantiated, but the boy's name had been roughly
handled in those wide, loosely defined circles of the range where the force
of private judgment makes up for the weakness of the law, in dealing with
crimes that are difficult of detection and uncertain of punishment. He that
has obliterated his neighbor's brand or misapplied his own, is held as, in
the age of tribal government and ownership, was held the remover of his
neighbor's landmarks. A word goes forth against him potent as the levitical
curse, and all the people say amen.

As society's first public and pointed rejection of him the slight had
rankled with the son of Basset, and grievously it wore on him that
Hetty Rhodes was going, with the man who had been his earliest and most
persistent accuser: Hetty, prettiest of all the bunch-grass belles, who
never reproached nor quarreled, but judged people with her smile and let
them go. He had not complained, though he had her promise,--one of her
promises,--nor asked a hearing in his own defense. The sons of Basset
were many and poor; their stock had dwindled upon the range; her men-folk
condemned him, and Hetty believed, or seemed to believe, as the others.

Had she forgotten the night when two men's horses stood at her father's
fence,--the Basset boy's and that of him who was afterward his accuser; and
the other's horse was unhitched when the evening was but half spent, and
furiously ridden away, while the Basset boy's stood at the rails till close
upon midnight? Had the coincidence escaped her that from this night, of one
man's rage and another's bliss, the ugly charge had dated? Of these things
a girl may not testify.

They met in town on the Saturday before the dance, Hetty buying her
dancing-shoes at the back of the store, where the shoe-cases framed in a
snug little alcove for the exhibition of a "fit." The boy, in his belled
spurs and "shaps" of goat-hide, was lounging disconsolate and sulky
against one of the front counters; she wore a striped ulster, an enchanted
garment his arm had pressed, and a pink crocheted tam-o'-shanter cocked
bewitchingly over her dark eyes.

Her hair was ruffled, her cheeks were red, with the wind she had faced for
two hours on the spring-seat of her father's "dead axe" wagon. Critical
feminine eyes might have found her a trifle blowzy; the sick-hearted Basset
boy looked once,--he dared not look again.

Hetty coquetted with her partner in the shoe bargain, a curly-headed young
Hebrew, who flattered her familiarly and talked as if he had known her from
a child, but always with an eye to business. She stood, holding back her
skirts and rocking her instep from right to left, while she considered the
effect of the new style; patent-leather foxings and tan-cloth tops, and
heels that came under the middle of her foot, and narrow toes with tips of
stamped leather;--but what a price! More than a third of her chicken-money
gone for that one fancy's satisfaction. But who can know the joy of a
really distinguished choice in shoe-leather like one who in her childhood
has trotted barefoot through the sage-brush and associated shoes only with
cold weather or going to town? The Basset boy tried to fix his strained
attention upon anything rather than upon that tone of high jocosity between
Hetty and the shiny-haired clerk. He tried to summon his own self-respect
and leave the place.

What was the tax, he inquired, on those neck-handkerchiefs; and he pointed
with the loaded butt of his braided leather quirt to a row of dainty
silk mufflers, signaling custom from a cord stretched above the
gentlemen's-furnishing counter.

The clerk explained that the goods in question were first class, all silk,
brocaded, and of an extra size. Plainly he expected that a casual mention
of the price would cool the inexperienced customer's curiosity, especially
as the colors displayed in the handkerchiefs were not those commonly
affected by the cow-boy cult. The Basset boy threw down his last half-eagle
and carelessly called for the one with a blue border. The delicate "baby
blue" attracted him by its perishability, its suggestion of impossible
refinements beyond the soilure and dust of his own grimy circumstances. Yet
he pocketed his purchase as though it had been any common thing, not to
show his pride in it before the patronizing salesman.

He waited foolishly for Hetty, not knowing if she would even speak to him.
When she came at last, loitering down the shop, with her eyes on the gay
Christmas counters and her arms filled with bundles, he silently fell in
behind her and followed her to her father's wagon, where he helped her
unload her purchases.

"Been buying out the store?" he opened the conversation.

"Buying more than father'll want to pay for," she drawled, glancing at him
sweetly. Those entoiling looks of Hetty's dark-lashed eyes had grown to a
habit with her; even now the little Jewish salesman was smiling over his
brief portion in them. Her own coolness made her careless, as children are
in playing with fire.

"Here's some Christmas the old man won't have to pay for." A soft paper
parcel was crushed into her hand.

"Who is going to pay for it, I'd like to know? If it's some of your doings,
Jim Basset, I can't take it--so there!"

She thrust the package back upon him. He tore off the wrapper and let
the wind carry his rejected token into the trampled mud and slush of the
street.

Hetty screamed and pounced to the rescue. "What a shame! It's a beauty of
a handkerchief. It must have cost a lot of money. I shan't let you use it
so."

She shook it, and wiped away the spots from its delicate sheen, and folded
it into its folds again.

"_I_ don't want the thing." He spurned it fiercely.

"Then give it to some one else." She endeavored coquettishly to force it
into his hands, or into the pockets of his coat. He could not withstand her
thrilling little liberties in the face of all the street.

"I'll wear it Monday night," said he. "May be you think I won't be there?"
he added hoarsely, for he had noted her look of surprise, mingled with an
infuriating touch of pity. "You kin bank on it I'll be there."

Hetty toyed with the thought that after all it might be better that she
should not go to the dance. There might be trouble, for certainly Jim
Basset had looked as if he meant it when he had said he would be there; and
Hetty knew the temper of the company, the male portion of it, too well to
doubt what their attitude would be toward an inhibited guest who disputed
the popular verdict, and claimed social privileges which it had been agreed
that he had forfeited. But it was never really in her mind to deny herself
the excitement of going. She and her escort were among the first couples
to cross the snowy pastures stretching between her father's claim and the
lights of the lonely horse-ranch.

It was a cloudy night, the air soft, chill, and spring-like. Snow had
fallen early and frozen upon the ground; the stockmen welcomed the "chinook
wind" as the promise of a break in the hard weather. Shadows came out and
played upon the pale slopes, as the riders rose and dropped past one long
swell and another of dim country falling away like a ghostly land seeking
a ghostly sea. And often Hetty looked back, fearing, yet half hoping, that
the interdicted one might be on his way, among the dusky, straggling shapes
behind.

The company was not large, nor, up to nine o'clock, particularly merry.
The women were engaged in cooking supper, or were above in the roof-room
brushing out their crimps by the light of an unshaded kerosene lamp, placed
on the pine wash-stand which did duty as a dressing-table. The men's voices
came jarringly through the loose boards of the floor from below.

About that hour arrived the unbidden guest, and like the others he had
brought his "gun." He was stopped at the door and told that he could
not come in among the girls to make trouble. He denied that he had come
with any such intention. There were persons present,--he mentioned no
names,--who were no more eligible, socially speaking, than himself, and he
ranked himself low in saying so; where such as these could be admitted, he
proposed to show that he could. He offered, in evidence of his good faith
and peaceable intentions, to give up his gun; but on the condition that he
be allowed one dance with the partner of his choosing, regardless of her
previous engagements.

This unprecedented proposal was referred to the girls, who were charmed
with its audacity. But none of them spoke up for the outcast till Hetty
said she could not think what they were all afraid of; a dozen to one, and
that one without his weapon! Then the other girls chimed in and added their
timid suffrages.

There may have been some twinges of disappointment, there could hardly have
been surprise, when the black sheep directed his choice without a look
elsewhere to Hetty. She stood up, smiling but rather pale, and he rushed
her to the head of the room, securing the most conspicuous place before his
rival, who with his partner took the place of second couple opposite.

"Keep right on!" the fiddler chanted, in sonorous cadence to the music, as
the last figure of the set ended with "Promenade all!" He swung into the
air of the first figure again, smiling, with his cheek upon his instrument
and his eyes upon the floor. Hetty fancied that his smile meant more than
merely the artist's pleasure in the joy he evokes.

"_Keep_ your places!" he shouted again, after the "Promenade all!" a second
time had raised the dust and made the lamps flare, and lighted with smiles
of sympathy the rugged faces of the elders ranged against the walls. The
side couples dropped off exhausted, but the tops held the floor, and
neither of the men was smiling.

The whimsical fiddler invented new figures, which he "called off" in time
to his music, to vary the monotony of a quadrille with two couples missing.

The opposite girl was laughing hysterically; she could no longer dance nor
stand. The rival gentleman looked about him for another partner. One girl
jumped up, then, hesitating, sat down again. The music passed smoothly into
a waltz, and Hetty and her bad boy kept the floor, regardless of shouts and
protests warning the trespasser that his time was up and the game in other
hands.

Three times they circled the room; they looked neither to right nor left;
their eyes were upon each other. The men were all on their feet, the music
playing madly. A group of half-scared girls was huddled, giggling and
whispering, near the door of the dimly lighted shed-room. Into the midst
of them Hetty's partner plunged, with his breathless, smiling dancer in his
arms, passed into the dim outer place to the door where his horse stood
saddled, and they were gone.

They crossed the little valley known as Seven Pines; they crashed
through the thin ice of the creek; they rode double sixteen miles before
daybreak, Hetty wrapped in her lover's "slicker," with the blue-bordered
handkerchief, her only wedding-gift, tied over her blowing hair.




THE WATCHMAN.


I.

The far-Eastern company was counting its Western acres under water
contracts. The acres were in first crops, waiting for the water. The water
was dallying down its untried channel, searching the new dry earth-banks,
seeping, prying, and insinuating sly, minute forces which multiplied and
insisted tremendously the moment a rift had been made. And the orders were
to "watch" and "puddle;" and the watchmen were as other men, and some of
them doubtless remembered they were working for a company.

Travis, the black-eyed young lumberman from the upper Columbia, had been
sent down with a special word from the manager commending him as a tried
hand, equal to any post or service. The ditch superintendent was looking
for such a man. He gave him those five crucial miles between the head-gates
and Glenn's Ferry, the notorious beat that had sifted Finlayson's force
without yet finding a man who could keep the banks. Some said it was the
Arc-light saloon at Glenn's Ferry; some said it was the pretty girl at
Lark's.

Whatever it was, Travis raged at it in the silent hours of his one-man
watch; and the report had gone up the line now, three times since he had
taken hold, of breaks on his division. And the engineer would by no means
"weaken" on a question of the work, nor did the loyal watchman ask that any
one should weaken, to spare him. He was all eyes and ears; he watched by
daylight, he listened by dark, and the sounds that he heard in his dreams
were sounds of water searching the banks, swirling and sinking into holes,
or of mud subsiding with a wretched flop into the insidious current.

It was a queer country along the new ditch below the head-gates; as old and
sun-bleached and bony as the stony valleys of Arabia Petrea; all but that
strip of green that led the eye to where the river wandered, and that warm
brown strip of sown land extending field by field below the ditch.

Lark's ranch was the first one below the head-gates, lying between the
river and the ditch, an old homesteader's claim, sub-irrigated by means of
rude dams ponding the natural sloughs. The worn-out land, never drained,
was foul and sour, lapsing into swamps, the black alkali oozing and
spreading from pools in its boggy pastures.

A few pioneer fruit-trees still bloomed and bore, undiscouraged by neglect,
and cast homelike shadows on the weedy grass around the cabin and sheds
that slouched at all angles, with nails starting and shingles warping in
the sun.

Similar weather-stains and odd kicks and bulges the old rancher's person
exhibited, when he came out to sun himself of a rimy morning, when cobwebs
glittered on the short, late grass, and his joints reminded him that the
rains were coming. And up and down the cow-trail below the ditch, morning
and evening, went his dairy-herd to pasture; and after them loitered Nancy,
on a strawberry pony with milk white mane and tail.

The lights and shadows chased her in and out among the willows and fleecy
cottonwoods and tall swamp-grasses; but Travis rode in the glare, on
the high ditch-bank, and, although they passed each other daily, he had
never had a good look at the "pretty girl at Lark's." But one morning the
white-faced heifer broke away and bolted up the ditch-bank, and in a cloud
of sun-smitten dust Nancy followed, a figure of virginal wrath with scarlet
cheeks and wind-blown hair. Reining her pony on the narrow bank, she called
across to Travis in a voice as clear and fresh as her colors:--

"Head her off, can't you? _What_ are you about!" This last to the pony, who
was behaving "mean."

"Ride to the bridge and head her this way. I can drive her up the bank,"
Travis responded.

Nancy obeyed him, and waited at the bridge while he endeavored to persuade
the heifer of the error of her ways. The heifer was not easily persuaded,
and Travis was wet to the waist before he had got her out; but he lost
nothing of the bright figure guarding the bridge, a slender shape all
pink and blue and dark blue, with hair like the sun on brown water,
and a perfect seat, and a ringing voice calling thanks and bewildering
encouragement to her ally in the stream. And this was old Solomon's
daughter!

But "Oh, my Nancy!" the boys would groan, with excess of appreciation
beyond words, and for that Nancy heeded them not: and now Travis knew that
the boys were right.

"Thank you ever so much!" her clear voice lilted, as the discomfited
runaway dashed down the bank to the path she had forsaken. "I'm ever so
sorry she dug all those bad tracks in the ditch. Will they do any harm?"

Travis assured her that nothing did harm if only it were known in time.

"What is the matter with it, anyhow,--the ditch? Isn't it built right?"

"The ditch is the prettiest I ever saw," Travis responded, with all the
warmth of his unrequited devotion to that faithless piece of engineering.
"All new ditches need watching till the banks get settled."

"Well, I should say that _you_ watched! Don't you ever stir off that bank?"

"I eat and sleep sometimes."

"You must have a pretty dry camp up above. Wouldn't you like some milk once
in a while?"

"Thanks; I never happened to fall in with the milkman on my beat."

"We have lots to spare, and buttermilk too, if you're not too proud to come
for it. The others used to."

"I guess I don't quite catch on."

"The other watchmen, the boys who were here before you."

"Oh," said Travis coldly.

"Well, any time you choose to come down I'll save some for you," said the
girl, as if that matter were settled.

"I'm afraid it is rather off my beat," Travis hesitated, "but I'm just as
much obliged."

Nancy straightened herself haughtily. "Oh, it is nothing to be obliged for,
if you don't care to come."

"I did not say I didn't care," Travis protested; but she was gone. The dust
flew, and presently her dark blue skirt and the pony's silver tail flashed
past the willows in the low grounds.

"I shall never see her again," he mourned. "So much for those other fellows
spoiling her idea of a watchman's duty. Of course she thought I could come
if I wanted to. Did she ask them, I wonder?"

Nancy was piqued, but not resentful. The more he did not come, as evening
after evening smiled upon the level land; the more she thought of Travis,
alone in his dusty camp, alone on his blinding beat; the more she dwelt
upon the singularity and constancy of his refusal, the more she respected
him for it.

So one day he did see her again. She was sitting on the bridge planks,
leaning forward, her arms in her lap, her hat tipped back, a star of white
sunlight touching her forehead. She lifted her head when she heard him
coming and put her hand over her eyes, as if she were dizzy with watching
the water.

"How's the ditch?" she called in a voice of sweetest cheer. She was on her
feet now, and he saw how entrancing she was, in a blue muslin frock and a
broad white hat with a wreath of pink roses bestrewing the tilted brim. Had
they got company at the ranch? was his jealous reflection.

"How's the ditch behaving itself these days?" she repeated.

"Much as usual, thank you," Travis beamed from his saddle.

"Breaking, as usual?"

"Yes; it broke night before last."

"Well, I don't believe it's much of a ditch, anyhow. I wouldn't fret about
it if I was you. Don't you think I'm very good-natured, after your snubbing
me so? Here I've brought you a basket of apples, seeing you wouldn't spare
time from your old ditch to come for them yourself. That in the napkin is a
little pat of fresh butter." She lifted the grape-leaves that covered the
basket. "I thought it might taste good in camp."

"Good! Well, I rather guess it will taste good! See here, I can't ever
thank you for this--for bringing it yourself." He had few words, but his
looks were moderately expressive.

Nancy blushed with pleasure. "Well, I had to--when folks are so wrapped up
in their business. There, with Susan's compliments! Susan's the heifer you
rounded up for me in the ditch. I know she made you a lot of work, tracking
holes in your banks you're so fussy about. Do you really think it is a good
ditch?"

"I am positive it is."

"Then if anything goes wrong down here they will lay the blame on you?"

"They are welcome to. That's what I am here for."

Nancy openly acknowledged her approval of a man that stood right up to his
work and would take no odds of any one.

"The other boys were always complaining and saying it was the ditch. But
there, I know it is mean of me to talk about them."

"I guess it won't go any further," said Travis dryly.

"Well, I hope not. They were good boys enough, but pretty trifling
watchmen, I shouldn't wonder."

Travis had nothing to say to this, but he made a mental note or two.

"When will you give me a chance to return your basket?"

"Why, anytime; there's no hurry about the basket. Have you any regular
times?"

He looked away, dissembling his joy in the question, and answered as if he
were making an official report,--

"I leave camp at six, patrol the line to the ferry and back, lay off an
hour, and down again at eleven. Back in camp at three, and two hours for
dinner. On again at five, and back in camp at nine. I pass this bridge, for
instance, at seven and nine of a morning, twelve and two afternoons, and
six and eight in the evening."

"Six and eight," Nancy mused, with a slight increase of color. "Well, I can
stop some evening after cow-time, I suppose; but it isn't any matter about
the basket."

Six evenings, going and coming, Travis delayed in passing the bridge,
on the watch for Nancy; six times he filled the basket with such late
field-flowers as he could find, and she never came. On the seventh evening
his heart announced her, from as far off as his eyes beheld her. This
time she was in white, without her hat, and she wore a blue ribbon in
her gold-brown braids,--a blue ribbon in her braids, and a red, red rose
in either cheek; and her colors, and the colors of the sky, floated like
flowers on the placid water.

"Well, where is the basket, then?" she merrily demanded.

"I left it behind, for luck."

"For luck? What sort of luck?"

"Six times I brought it, and you were never here; so to-night I just
kicked it into the tent and came off without it. It seems to have been
about the right thing to do."

"What, my basket!"

"Your basket. And it was filled with wild flowers, the prettiest I could
find. It's your own fault for not coming before."

"I never set any day that I know of. I have been up to town."

Travis was not pleased to hear it.

"Yes; and I saw your company's manager. What a young man he is! I had no
idea managers were ever young. And stylish--my! I'm sure I hope he'll know
me when he sees me again," she added, coloring and dropping her eyes.

Travis grimly expressed the opinion that he probably would. Nancy continued
to strike the wrong note with cruel precision; she could not have done
better had she calculated her words; and all the while looking as innocent
as the shining water under her feet,--and that last time she had been so
kind!

And the ditch was as provoking as Nancy, rewarding his devotion with breaks
that defied all explanation. It was not possible that the patience of
the management could hold out much longer; and when he should have been
dismissed in disgrace from his post, Nancy would lightly class him as
another of those "good boys enough, but trifling watchmen."


II.

The first dry moon was just past the full. At nine o'clock the sky began to
whiten above the long, bare ridge of the side-hill cut. At half past, the
edge of the moon's disk clove the sky-line, and the shadow of the ridge
crept down among the willows and tule-beds of the bottom. At ten the shadow
had shrunk; it lay black on the ditch-bank, but the whispering treetops
below were turning in silver light that flickered along the cow-path and
caught the still eye of a dark, shallow pool among the tules.

Nancy had chosen this night for a stroll to the bridge, where Travis might
be expected to pass, any time between eight o'clock and moonrise. Instead
of Travis came a man whom she recognized as one of the watchmen from a
lower division. He saluted her, after the custom of the country, claiming
nothing on personal grounds but the privilege to look rather hard at the
girlish figure silhouetted against the water. It was yet early enough for
sky-gleams to linger on still pools, or to color the wimpling reaches of
the ditch.

Nancy was disappointed; she had not come out to see a strange rider passing
on Travis's gray horse. Her little plans were disconcerted. She had waited
for what she considered a dignified interval, before seeming to take
cognizance of her watchman's hours; now it appeared that the part of
dignity might be overdone. Had Travis been superseded on his beat? She was
conscious of missing him already. Her walk home, through the confidential
willows, struck a chill of loneliness which the aspect of the house did not
dispel. All was as dark and empty as she had left it. Was her father still
at work at those tedious dams? This had been his given reason for frequent
absences of late, after his usual working hours; though why he should
choose the dark nights for mending his dams Nancy had not asked herself.
To-night she wanted him, or somebody, to drive away this queer new ache
that made the moonlight too large and still for one little girl to wander
in alone.

She searched for him. He was in none of the expected places; the dank
fields were as empty as the house. She turned back to the ditch; from its
high bank she could see farther into the shadowy places of the bottom.

Travis, meanwhile, had been leisurely pursuing his evening beat. He had
overtaken one of his fellow-watchmen, on foot, walking to town, had lent
him his horse for the last two miles to camp, and invited him to help
himself to what he could find for supper, without waiting for his host.

"It is a still night," said Travis; "I'll mog along slowly up the ditch,
and put in a little extra listening: it's at night the water talks."

Long after the rider had passed on, the tread of his horse's hoofs was
heard, diminishing on the hard-tramped bank; a loosened stone rattled down
and splashed into the water; the wind rustled in the tule-beds; then all
surface sounds ceased, and the only talker was the ditch, chuckling and
dawdling like an idle child on its errand, which it could not be persuaded
to take seriously, to the desert lands.

Travis came to the ticklish spot near the bridge, and stopped to listen.
Here the ditch cut through beds of clean sand, where the water might sink
and work back into the old ground, the sand holding it like a sponge, till
all the bottom became a bog, and the banks sank in one wide-spread, general
wash-out. The first symptom of such deep-seated trouble would be the
water's motion in the ditch,--whirling round and round as if boring a hole
in the bottom.

Travis laid his ear to the current, for he could judge of the water's
movement by the sound. All seemed right at the bridge, but far up the ditch
he was aware of a new demonstration. He listened awhile, and then walked on
with long, light steps and gained upon the sound, which persisted, defining
itself as a muffled churning at marked intervals, with now and then a
wait between. The prodding was of some tool at work under water, at the
ditch-bank.

He crossed to the upper side, and moved forward cautiously along the ridge,
crouching that his figure might not be seen against the sky.

Nancy had gone up the cow-trail, past the low grounds, and was just
climbing the bank when a dark shape, of man or beast, crashed down the
opposite slope and shot like a slide of rock into the water.

A half-choked cry followed the plunge, then ugly sounds of a scuffle under
the ditch-bank--men breathing hard, sighing and snorting; and somebody
gasped as if he were being held down till his breath was gone.

"Get in there, you old muskrat! You shall stop your own breaks if it takes
your cursed carcass to do it! Now then, have you got your breath?"

Nancy stayed only to hear a voice that was her father's, convulsed with
terror and the chill of his repeated duckings, begging to be spared the
anguish of drowning by night in three feet of ditch-water.

"Mr. Travis," she screamed, "you let my father be, whatever you are doing
to him! Father, you come right home and get on dry clothes!"

Travis was as much amazed as if Diana with the moon on her forehead had
appeared on the ditch-bank to take old Solomon Lark under her maiden
protection; but no less he stuck to his prize of war.

"Your father hasn't time to change his clothes just yet, Miss Nancy; he's
got some work to do first."

"Who are you, to be setting my father to work? Let go of him this minute!
You are drowning him; you are choking him to death!" sobbed the frantic
girl. The shadow fortunately withheld the details of her father's
condition, but she had seen enough. Had Travis been drinking? Was the man
bereft of his senses?

He was quite himself apparently,--hideously cool, yet roused, and his voice
cut like steel.

"You had better go home, Miss Nancy, and light a fire and warm a blanket
for your father's bed. He'll be pretty cold before he gets through with
this night's work."

After this cruel speech he took no more notice of Nancy, but leaped upon
the ditch-bank and began hurling earth in great shovelfuls, patting the old
man on the head with his cold tool whenever he tried to clamber up after
him.

"You'd better not try _that_," he roared in a terrible voice that wounded
Nancy like a blow. "Get in there, now! Puddle, puddle, or I'll have you
buried to the ears in five minutes!"

It was shocking, hideous, like a horrible dream. The earth rattled down all
about Solomon, and frequently upon him; the water was thick with mud, and
the wretched old man tramped and puddled for dear life, helping to mend the
hole which he had secretly dug where no eye could discover, till the water
had fingered it and enlarged the mischief to a break.

It was the work of vermin, and as such Travis had treated his prisoner.
Nancy felt the insult as keenly as she abhorred the cruelty. She fled,
hysterical with wrath and despair at her own helplessness. But while she
made ready the means of consolation at home, her thinking powers came back,
and, between what she suspected and what she remembered, she was not wholly
in the dark as to the truth between her father and Travis.

There was no one to warm Travis's blankets, when he fell back upon camp
about daybreak, reeking with cold perspiration, soaked with ditch-water and
sore in every muscle from his frenzy of shoveling. He had had no supper
the night before; his guest had eaten all the cooked food, burned all his
light-wood kindlings, and forgotten to cover the bread-pail, and his bread
was full of sand. He didn't think much of those tenderfeet, who called
themselves ditch-men, on that lower division where there was no work at all
to speak of.

He began--worse comfort--to consider his police work from a daughter's
point of view. Alas for himself and Nancy! His idyl of the ditch was
shattered like the tender sky-reflections that bloomed on its still waters,
and vanished when the waters were troubled. His own thoughts were as that
roily pool where he had ducked the old man in the darkness. He overslept
himself, after thinking he should not sleep at all, and started down
his beat not until noon of the next day. Halfway to the bridge on the
ditch-bank he met Nancy Lark. She gave him a note, which he dismounted to
take, she vouchsafing no greeting, not even a look, and standing apart
while he read it, with the air of a martyr to duty.

Mr. Travis [the letter ran],--I am a death-struck man in consequence of
your outrageous treatment of me last evening. I've took a dum chill, and
it has hit me in the vitals through standing in water up to my armpits. If
you think your fool ditch is worth more than a Human's life, though your
company's enemy, that's for you to settle as you can when the time comes
you'll have to. I don't ask any favors. But if you got anny desency left in
you through working for that fish-livered company of bondholders coming out
here to stomp us farmers into the dirt, you will call this bizness quits. I
aint in no shape to fight ditches no more. You have put me where I be, and
the less said on both sides the better, it looks to me. If that's so you
can say so by word or writing. I should prefer writing as I aint got that
confidence I might have. Yours truly,

SOLOMON LARK.

"Miss Nancy," said Travis gently, "is your father very sick this morning?"

"I don't know," Nancy replied.

"Have you sent for a doctor?"

"He won't let me."

"Have you read this letter?" She flashed an indignant look at him.

"I wish you would, then."

"It is not my letter. I don't know what's in it, and I don't care to know."

"Do you know what your father was doing in the ditch last night?"

"Helping you to mend it, at the risk of his life, because you made him,"
Nancy answered quickly.

"Helping to mend a hole he made himself, so there would be a nice little
break in the morning."

The subject rested there, till Travis, forced to take the defensive,
asked:--

"Do you believe me?"

"Believe what?"

"What I have just told you about your father?"

"Oh," she said, "it makes no difference to me. I knew my father pretty well
before I ever saw you. If you think he was doing that, why, I suppose you
will have to think so. But even if he was, I don't call that any reason you
should half drown him, and make him work himself to death beside."

"But the water was warm! And I did the work. What was it to tread dirt for
an hour or so on a summer's night? Wasn't he in the ditch when I found
him?"

"I don't know, I'm sure," said Nancy. "I know that you kept him there."

"Well, I hope he'll keep out of the ditch after this. Working at ditches
at night isn't good for his health. But you needn't be alarmed about him
this time; I think he'll recover. But remember this: last night I was
the company's watchman; I had an ugly piece of work to do and I did it;
but, fair play or foul, whatever may happen between your father and me,
remember, it is only my work, and you are not in it."

"Well, I guess I'm in it if my father is," said Nancy, "and that is
something for you to remember."

"Oh, hang the work and the ditch and all the ditches!" thought Travis;
yet it was the ditch that had put color and soul and meaning into his
life,--that had given him sight of Nancy. And it was not his work nor
his convictions about it that stood between them now; it was her woman's
contempt for justice and reason where her feelings were concerned. The case
was simple as Nancy saw it; too simple, for it left him out in the cold. He
would have had it complicated by a little more feeling in his direction.

"Well, have I got your answer?" she asked. "Father said I was to bring an
answer, but not to let you come."

"He need not be afraid," said Travis bitterly. "If he will leave my
ditch-banks alone, I shall not meddle with him. Tell him, if there are no
more breaks there will be nothing to report. This break is mended--the
break in the ditch, I mean."

"Then you will not tell?" Nancy stole a look at him that was half a plea.

"You would even promise to like me a little, wouldn't you, if you couldn't
get the old man off any other way?" he mocked her sorrowfully. "Well, I had
rather have you hate me than stoop to coax me, as I've seen girls do"--

He might be satisfied, she passionately answered; she hated him enough. She
hated his work, and the hateful way he did it.

"You are an unmerciful man!" she accused him, with a sob in her voice. "You
don't know the trouble my father has had; how many years he has worked,
with nothing but his hands; and now your company comes and claims the
water, and turns the river, that belongs to everybody, into their big
ditch. I'd like to know how they came to own this river! And when they have
got it all in their ditch, all the little ditches and the ponds will go
dry. We were here years before any of you ever thought of coming, or knew
there was a country here at all. It's claim-jumping; and not a cent will
they pay, and laugh at us besides, and call us mossbacks. I don't blame my
father one bit, if he did break the ditch. If you are here to watch, then
watch!--watch me! Perhaps you think I've had a hand in your breaks?"

Travis turned pale. He had made the mistake of trying to reason with Nancy,
and now he felt that he must go on, in justice to his case, though she
was far away from all his arguments, rapt in the grief, the wrath, the
conviction, of her plea.

"You talk as women talk who only hear one side," he replied. "But you
people down here don't know the company's intentions; they don't ask, and
when they do they won't believe what they are told. That talk against
companies is an old politicians' drive. This country is too big for single
men to handle; companies save years of waiting. This one will bring the
railroads and the markets, and boom up the price of land. The ditch your
father hates so will make him a rich man in five years, if he does nothing
but sit still and let it come.

"As for water, why do you cry before you are hurt? Nobody can steal a
river. That is more politicians' talk, to make out they are the settlers'
friends. We are the settlers' friends, because we are the friends of the
country's boom; it can't boom without us. Why should _I_ believe in this
company? I'm a poor man, a settler like your father. I've got land of my
own, but I can see we farmers can't do everything for ourselves; it's
cheaper to pay a company to help us. They are just peddlers of water, and
we buy it. Who owns the other, then? Don't we own them just as much as they
own us?

"Come, if you can't feel it's so, leave hating us at least till we have
done all these things you accuse us of. Wait till we take all the water
and ruin your land. Most of these farmers along the river have got too
much water; they are ruining their own land. So I tell your father, but he
thinks he knows it all."

"He is some older than you are, anyhow."

"He is too old to be working nights in ditches. Tell him so from me, will
you?"

"Oh, I'll tell him! I don't think you will be troubled much with us around
your ditch, after this. I went to the bridge last night because I thought
you were nice, and a friend. I had a respect for you more than for any of
the others. I might have come to think better of the ditch; but I've had
all the ditch I want, and all the watchmen. Never, till I die, shall I
forget how my father looked," she passionately returned to the charge. "An
old man like him! Why didn't you put me in and make me tread dirt for you?
The water was _warm_; and I'm enough better able than he was!"

"I'll get right down here and let you tread on me, and be proud to have
you, if it will cure the sight of what you saw me do last night. I was mad,
don't you understand? I have to answer for all this foolishness of your
father's, remember. It had to be stopped."

"Was there no way to stop it but half drowning him, and insulting him
besides?"

"Yes, there is another way; inform the company, and have him shut up in the
Pen. _I_ thought I let the old man off pretty easy. But if you prefer the
other way, why, next time there's a break, we can try it."

"I'm sure we ought to thank you for your kindness," said Nancy. "And if we
are Companied out of house and home, and father made a criminal, we shall
thank you still more. Good-morning."

Their eyes met and hers fell. She turned away, and he remounted and rode
on up the ditch, angry, as a man can be only with one he might have loved,
down to those dregs of bitterness that lurk at the bottom of the soundest
heart.


III.

He was but an idle watchman all that day, so sure he was that the ditch was
right and Solomon the author of all his troubles; and Solomon was "fixed"
at last. Weariness overcame him, and at the end of his beat he slept, under
the lee of the ditch-bank, instead of returning to his camp.

Next morning he was riding along at his usual pace when it struck him how
incredibly the ditch had fallen. The line of silt that marked the water's
normal depth now stood exposed and dry, full two feet above its running,
and the pulse of the current had weakened as though it were ebbing fast.

He put his horse to a run, and lightened ship as he went, casting off his
sack of oats, then his coat and such tools as he could spare; he might
have been traced to the scene of disaster by his impedimenta strewing the
ditch-bank.

The water had had hours the start of him; its work was sickening to behold.
A part of the bank had gone clean out, and the ditch was returning to the
river by way of Solomon Lark's alfalfa fields. The homestead itself was in
danger.

He cut sage-brush and tore up tules by the roots, and piled them as a
wing-dam against the outer bank, and heaped dirt like mad upon the mats;
and as he worked, alone, where forty men were needed, came Nancy, with
glowing face, flying down the ditch-bank, calling the word of exquisite
relief:--

"I've shut off the water. Was that right?"

Right! He had been wishing himself two men, nay, three: one at the bank,
and one at the gates, and one carrying word to Finlayson.

"Can I do anything else?"

"Yes; make Finlayson's camp quick as you can," Travis panted over a
shovelful of dirt he was heaving.

"Yes; what shall I tell him?"

"Tell him to send up everything he has got; every man and team and
scraper."

Nancy was gone, but in a few moments she was back again, wringing her
hands, and as white as a cherry-blossom.

"The water is all down round the house, and father is alone in bed crying
like a child."

"There's nothing to cry about now. You turned off the water; see, it has
almost stopped."

"Can I leave him with you?"

"Great Scott! I'll take care of him! But go, there's a blessed girl. You
will save the ditch."

Nancy went, covering the desert miles as a bird flies; she exulted in this
chance for reparation. But long after Finlayson's forces had arrived and
gone to work, she came lagging wearily homeward, all of a color, herself
and the pony, with the yellow road. She had refused a fresh horse at the
ditch-camp, and, sparing the whip, reached home not until after dark.

Her father's excitement in his hours of loneliness had waxed to a pitch
of childish frenzy. He wept, he cursed, he counted his losses, and when
his daughter said, to comfort him, "Why, father, surely they must pay for
this!" he threw himself about in his bed and gave way to lamentations in
which the secret of his wildness came out. He had done the thing himself;
and he dared not risk suspicion, and the investigation that would follow a
heavy claim for damages.

Nancy could not believe him. "Father, do be quiet; you didn't do any such
thing," she insisted. "How could you, when I know you haven't stirred out
of this bed since night before last? Hush, now; you are dreaming; you are
out of your head."

"I guess I know what I done. I ain't crazy, and I ain't a fool. I made this
hole first, before he caught me at the upper one. I made this one to keep
him busy on his way up, so's the upper one could get a good start. The
upper one wouldn't 'a' hurt us. It's jest like my cussed luck! I knew it
was a-comin', but I didn't think I'd get it like this. It's all his fault,
the great lazy loafer, sleepin' at the bottom of his beat, 'stead o' comin'
up as he'd ought to have done last evening. He wasted the whole night,--and
calls himself a watchman!"


"Well, I'm glad of it," Nancy cried excitedly. "I'm just _glad_ we are
washed out, and I hope this will end it!" and she burst into tears, and ran
out of the room.

She sat by herself, weeping and storming, in the dark little shed-room.

"Nancy!" she heard her father calling, "Nancy, child!... Where's that gal
taken herself off to?... Are you a-settin' up your back on account of that
ditch? If you are, you ain't no child of mine.... I'm dum sorry I let on
a word to her about it. How do I know but she's off with it now, to that
watchman feller. I'll be put in the papers--an old man informed on by his
darter, and he on his last sick bed!... Nancy, I say, where be you a-hidin'
yourself?"

Nancy returned to her forlorn charge, and after a while the old man fell
asleep. She put out the lamp, for she could see to move about the room by
the light of the sage-brush bonfires that flared along the ditch, lighting
the men and teams, all Finlayson's force, at work upon the broken banks.

The sight was wild and alluring; she went out to watch the strange army of
shadows shifting and intermingling against a wall of flame.

There was a distressful space to cross, of sand and slippery mud and
drowned vegetation, including the remains of her garden; the look of
everything was changed. Only the ditch-bank against the reddened sky
supplied the usual landmark. Its crest was black with shovelers, and up
and down in lurid light climbed the scraper-teams; climbed and dumped, and
dropped over the bank to climb again, like figures in a stage procession.
There was a bedlam roar and crackle of pitchy fires, rattle of harness,
clank of scraper-pans, shouts of men to the cattle, oaths and words of
command; and this would go forward unceasingly till the banks held water.
And what was the use of contending?

Nancy felt bitterly the insignificance of such small scattered folk as her
father, pitiful even in their spite. Their vengeance was like the malice of
field-mice or rabbits, which the farmers fenced out of their fields into
the desert where they belonged. What could such as they do either to help
or hinder this invincible march of capital into the country where they,
with untold hardships, had located the first claims? And some of them were
ready enough, for a little temporary relief, to part with their birthright
to these clever sons of Jacob.

"Out we go, to find some other wilderness for them to take away from us! We
are only mossbacks," said the daughter of Esau.

As she spoke, half aloud to herself, a man rushed past her down the bank,
flattened himself on his hands, laid his face to the water, and drank and
paused to pant, and drank again, while she could have counted a score. Then
he lifted his head, sighed, and stretched himself back with a groan of
complete exhaustion.

The firelight touched his face, and showed her Travis: haggard,
hollow-eyed, soaked with ditch-water, and matted with mud, looking as if he
had been dragged bodily through the ditch-bank, like thread through a piece
of cloth.

Nancy did not try to avoid him.

"Oh, is it you?" he marveled, softly smiling up at her. "What a splendid
ride you made! Did nobody thank you? Finlayson said he couldn't find you
when he was leaving camp."

Nancy answered not a word; she was trembling so that she feared to betray
herself by speaking.

"I was coming to say good-by, when I had washed my face," he continued. "I
got my time to-night."

"Your time?"

"My time-check. They are going to put another man in my place. So you
needn't hate me any longer on account of the ditch; you can transfer all
that to the next fellow."

"Isn't that just like them? They never can do anything fair!"

"Like who? Do you suppose I'm going to kick about it? The only wonder is
they kept me on so long."

Every word of Travis's was a knife in Nancy's conscience, to say nothing
of her pride. She hugged her arms in her shawl, and rocked herself to and
fro. Travis crawled up the bank a little way further, and stretched himself
humbly beside her. The dark shadows under his aching eyes started a pang of
pity in the girl's heart, sore beset as she was with troubles of her own.

"I'm glad it's duskish," he remarked, "so you can't see the sweet state I'm
in. I'm all over top-soil. You might rent me to a Chinaman for twenty-five
dollars an acre; and I don't need any irrigating either."

An irresponsible laugh from Nancy was followed by a sob. Then she gathered
herself to speak.

"See here, do you want to stay on this ditch?"

"Of course I do. I wanted to stay till I had straightened out my own
record, and shown what the ditch can do. But no management under heaven
could stand such work as this."

"Then stay, if you want to. You have only to say the word. You said you'd
inform if there was a next time, and there is. Father did it. He made this
break, too; he made them both the same night, and didn't dare to tell of
this one. Now, go and clear yourself and get back your beat."

"Are you sure of this you are telling me?"

"Well, I guess so. It isn't the sort of thing I'd be likely to make up. And
I say you can tell if you want to. I make you a present of the information.
If father isn't willing to take the consequences, I am; and they half
belong to me. I won't have anybody sheltering us, or losing by us. We have
got no quarrel with you."

"That is brave of you. I wish it was something more than brave," sighed
Travis. "But I want it all myself. I can't spare this information to the
company. You didn't do it for them, did you?"

"When I go telling on my father to save a ditch, I guess it will be after
now," said Nancy. "If that rich company, with all its men and watchmen and
teams and money, can't protect itself from one poor old man"--

"Never mind the company," said Travis. "What's mine is mine. This word you
gave to me, it doesn't belong to my employers. You have saved me to myself;
now I shall not go kicking myself for sleeping that night on my beat. It's
not so bad--oh, not half so bad--for me!"

"Then go tell them, and get the credit for it. Don't you mean to?"

She could not see him smile. "When I tell, you will hear of it."

"But you talked about your record."

"I shall have to go to work and make a new record. Ah, if you would be as
kind as you are brave! Was it all just for pride you told me this? Don't
you care, not the least bit, about my part--that I am down and out of
everything?"

"It's your own fault, then. I have told you how you can clear yourself and
stay."

"And lose my chance with you! I was thinking of coming back, some day, to
tell you--what you must know already. Nancy, you do know!"

"You forget," shivered Nancy; "I am the daughter of the man you called"--

"Is that fair--to bring that up now?"

"You mustn't deceive yourself. There are some things that can't be
forgotten."

"How did _I_ know what I was saying? A man isn't always responsible."

"I heard you," said Nancy. "There are things we say when we are raging mad
at a person, and there are things we say when we think them the dirt under
our feet. You kept him down with your dirt-shovel, and you called him--what
I can't ever forget."

"And is this the only hitch between us?"

"I should think it was enough. Who despises my father despises me."

"But I do not despise him," Travis did not scruple to assert. "The quarrel
was not mine; and I'm not a ditch-man any longer. I will apologize to your
father."

"Oh, I know it costs you nothing to apologize. You don't mind father--an
old man like him! You'd take him in, and give him his meals, and pat him on
the head as you would the house-dog that bites because he's old and cross.
Well, I'll let you know I don't want you to forgive him, and apologize, and
all that stuff. I want you to get even with him."

"Be satisfied," said Travis. "The only count I have against your father is
through his daughter. There is no way for me to get even with you. And when
you have spoiled a man's life just for one angry word"--

"Not angry," she interrupted. "I could have forgiven you that."

"For one word, then. And you call it square when you have given me a piece
of information to use for myself, against you! I will go back now and go to
work. They can't say I haven't earned my wages on this beat."

He looked down at her, longing to gather her, with all her thorny
sweetness, to his breast; but her attitude forbade him.

"Can't we shake hands?" he said. They shook hands in silence, and he went
back and finished the night in the ranks of the shovelers,--to work well,
to love well, and to get his discharge at last. Yet Travis was not sorry
that he had taken those five miles below Glenn's Ferry: he had found
something to work for.

The company's officials marveled, as the weeks went by, that nothing was
heard of Solomon Lark. He had ever been the sturdiest beggar for damages on
the ditch. If he lacked an occasion he could invent one; he was known to
be a fanatic on the subject of the small farmers' wrongs: yet now, with a
veritable claim to sue for, the old protestant was dumb. Had Solomon turned
the other cheek? There were jokes about it in the office; they looked to
have some fun with Solomon yet.

In the early autumn the joking ceased. There was a final reason for the
old man's silence,--Solomon was dead. His ranch was rented to a Chinese
vegetable-gardener who bought water from the ditch.

The company, through its officials, was disposed to recognize this unspoken
claim that had perished on the lips of the dead. They made an estimate, and
offered Nancy Lark a fair sum in consideration of her father's losses by
the ditch.

It was unusual for a company to volunteer a settlement of this kind; it
was still more unusual for the indemnity to be refused. Nancy declined, by
letter, first; then the manager asked her to call at the office. She did
not come. He took pains to hunt her up at the house of her friends in town.
He might have delegated the call, but he chose to make it in person, and
was struck by an added dignity, a finer beauty in the saddened face of the
girl whom he remembered as a bit of a rustic coquette.

He went over the business with her. She was perfectly intelligent in the
matter; there had been no misunderstanding. Why then would she not take
what belonged to her? Companies were not in the habit of paying claims that
were claims of sentiment.

"I have made no claim," said Nancy.

"But you have one. You inherited one. We do not propose to rob"--

She put out her hand with a gesture of appeal.

"My father had no claim. He never made one, nor meant to make one. I am
the best judge of what belongs to me. I don't want this money, and I will
never take one cent of it. But there is a claim you can settle, if you are
hunting up claims. It won't cost you anything," she faltered, as if some
unguarded impulse had hurried her into a subject that she hardly knew how
to go on with. She moved her chair back a little from the light.

"There was one of your watchmen, on the Glenn's Ferry beat, who lost his
place on account of those breaks coming one after another"--

"Yes," said the manager; "there were several that did. Which man do you
refer to?"

The name, she thought, was Travis. Then, blushing, she spoke out
courageously:--

"It was Mr. Travis. He was discharged just after the big break. You thought
it was his carelessness, but it was not. I am the only one that can say
so, and I know it. You lost the best watchman you ever had on the ditch
when you took his name off your pay-roll. He worked for more than just his
money's worth, and it hurt him to lose that place."

"Are you aware that he made the worst record of any man on the line?"

"I don't care what his record was; he kept a good watch. It's no concern
of mine to say so," she said. Trembling and red and white, the tears
shining in her honest eyes, she persisted: "He had his reasons for never
explaining, and they were nothing to be ashamed of. I think you might
believe me!"

"I do," said the manager, willing to spare her. "I will attend to the case
of Mr. Travis when I see him. I do not think he has left the country. In
fact, he was inquiring about you only the other day, in the office, and he
seemed very much concerned to hear of your--of the loss you have suffered.
Shall I say that you spoke a good word for him?"

"You need not do that," she answered with spirit. "He knows whether he kept
watch. But you may say that I ask, as a favor, that he will answer all your
questions; and you need not be afraid to question him."

Travis was given back his beat, but no more explicit exoneration would he
accept. The reason of his reinstatement was not made public, and naturally
there was gossip about it among other discharged watchmen who had not been
invited to try again.

Two of these cynic philosophers, popularly known as sore-heads,
foregathered one morning at Glenn's Ferry and began to discuss the
management and the ditch.

"Travis don't seem to have so much trouble with the water this year as he
had last," the first ex-watchman remarked. "Used to get away with him on an
average once a week, so I hear."

"He's married his girl," the other explained sarcastically. "He's got more
time to look after the ditch."

There is no sand, now, in Travis's bread; the prettiest girl on the ditch
makes it for him, and walks beside him when the lights are fair and the
shadows long on the ditch-bank. And it is a pleasure to record that both
Nancy and the ditch are behaving as dutifully as girls and water can be
expected to do, when taken from their self-found paths and committed to the
sober bounds of responsibility.

Flowers bloom upon its banks, heaven is reflected in its waters, fair and
broad are the fertile pastures that lie beyond; but the best-trained ditch
can never be a river, nor the gentlest wife a girl again.









End of Project Gutenberg's In Exile and Other Stories, by Mary Hallock Foote

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN EXILE AND OTHER STORIES ***

***** This file should be named 8506-8.txt or 8506-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/5/0/8506/

Produced by William Flis and the Online Distributed Proofreaders Team

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

