The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Uninhabited House, by Mrs. J. H. Riddell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Uninhabited House

Author: Mrs. J. H. Riddell

Posting Date: April 10, 2014 [EBook #8602]
Release Date: August, 2005
First Posted: July 27, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNINHABITED HOUSE ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Martin Agren, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version
by Al Haines.










THE UNINHABITED HOUSE

MRS. J. H. RIDDELL




CONTENTS


   1. MISS BLAKE--FROM MEMORY
   2. THE CORONER'S INQUEST
   3. OUR LAST TENANT
   4. MYSELF AND MISS BLAKE
   5. THE TRIAL
   6. WE AGREE TO COMPROMISE
   7. MY OWN STORY
   8. MY FIRST NIGHT AT RIVER HALL
   9. A TEMPORARY PEACE
  10. THE WATCHER IS WATCHED
  11. MISS BLAKE ONCE MORE
  12. HELP
  13. LIGHT AT LAST
  14. A TERRIBLE INTERVIEW
  15. CONCLUSION




1. MISS BLAKE--FROM MEMORY


If ever a residence, "suitable in every respect for a family of
position," haunted a lawyer's offices, the "Uninhabited House," about
which I have a story to tell, haunted those of Messrs. Craven and Son,
No. 200, Buckingham Street, Strand.

It did not matter in the least whether it happened to be let or unlet:
in either case, it never allowed Mr. Craven or his clerks, of whom I was
one, to forget its existence.

When let, we were in perpetual hot water with the tenant; when unlet, we
had to endeavour to find some tenant to take that unlucky house.

Happy were we when we could get an agreement signed for a couple of
years--although we always had misgivings that the war waged with the
last occupant would probably have to be renewed with his successor.

Still, when we were able to let the desirable residence to a solvent
individual, even for twelve months, Mr. Craven rejoiced.

He knew how to proceed with the tenants who came blustering, or
threatening, or complaining, or bemoaning; but he did not know what
to do with Miss Blake and her letters, when no person was liable
for the rent.

All lawyers--I am one myself, and can speak from a long and varied
experience--all lawyers, even the very hardest, have one client, at all
events, towards whom they exhibit much forbearance, for whom they feel a
certain sympathy, and in whose interests they take a vast deal of
trouble for very little pecuniary profit.

A client of this kind favours me with his business--he has favoured me
with it for many years past. Each first of January I register a vow he
shall cost me no more time or money. On each last day of December I
find he is deeper in my debt than he was on the same date a
twelvemonth previous.

I often wonder how this is--why we, so fierce to one human being,
possibly honest and well-meaning enough, should be as wax in the hand of
the moulder, when another individual, perhaps utterly disreputable,
refuses to take "No" for an answer.

Do we purchase our indulgences in this way? Do we square our accounts
with our own consciences by remembering that, if we have been as stone
to Dick, Tom, and Harry, we have melted at the first appeal of Jack?

My principal, Mr. Craven--than whom a better man never breathed--had an
unprofitable client, for whom he entertained feelings of the profoundest
pity, whom he treated with a rare courtesy. That lady was Miss Blake;
and when the old house on the Thames stood tenantless, Mr. Craven's bed
did not prove one of roses.

In our firm there was no son--Mr. Craven had been the son; but the old
father was dead, and our chief's wife had brought him only daughters.

Still the title of the firm remained the same, and Mr. Craven's own
signature also.

He had been junior for such a number of years, that, when Death sent a
royal invitation to his senior, he was so accustomed to the old form,
that he, and all in his employment, tacitly agreed it was only fitting
he should remain junior to the end.

A good man. I, of all human beings, have reason to speak well of him.
Even putting the undoubted fact of all lawyers keeping one unprofitable
client into the scales, if he had not been very good he must have washed
his hands of Miss Blake and her niece's house long before the period at
which this story opens.

The house did not belong to Miss Blake. It was the property of her
niece, a certain Miss Helena Elmsdale, of whom Mr. Craven always spoke
as that "poor child."

She was not of age, and Miss Blake managed her few pecuniary affairs.

Besides the "desirable residence, suitable," etcetera, aunt and niece
had property producing about sixty-five pounds a year. When we could let
the desirable residence, handsomely furnished, and with every
convenience that could be named in the space of a half-guinea
advertisement, to a family from the country, or an officer just returned
from India, or to an invalid who desired a beautiful and quiet abode
within an easy drive of the West End--when we could do this, I say, the
income of aunt and niece rose to two hundred and sixty-five pounds a
year, which made a very material difference to Miss Blake.

When we could not let the house, or when the payment of the rent was in
dispute, Mr. Craven advanced the lady various five and ten pound notes,
which, it is to be hoped, were entered duly to his credit in the Eternal
Books. In the mundane records kept in our offices, they always appeared
as debits to William Craven's private account.

As for the young men about our establishment, of whom I was one, we
anathematised that house. I do not intend to reproduce the language we
used concerning it at one period of our experience, because eventually
the evil wore itself out, as most evils do, and at last we came to look
upon the desirable residence as an institution of our firm--as a sort of
_cause celebre_, with which it was creditable to be associated--as a
species of remarkable criminal always on its trial, and always certain
to be defended by Messrs. Craven and Son.

In fact, the Uninhabited House--for uninhabited it usually was, whether
anyone was answerable for the rent or not--finally became an object of
as keen interest to all Mr. Craven's clerks as it became a source of
annoyance to him.

So the beam goes up and down. While Mr. Craven pooh-poohed the
complaints of tenants, and laughed at the idea of a man being afraid of
a ghost, we did not laugh, but swore. When, however, Mr. Craven began to
look serious about the matter, and hoped some evil-disposed persons were
not trying to keep the place tenantless, our interest in the old house
became absorbing. And as our interest in the residence grew, so,
likewise, did our appreciation of Miss Blake.

We missed her when she went abroad--which she always did the day a fresh
agreement was signed--and we welcomed her return to England and our
offices with effusion. Safely I can say no millionaire ever received
such an ovation as fell to the lot of Miss Blake when, after a foreign
tour, she returned to those lodgings near Brunswick Square, which her
residence ought, I think, to have rendered classic.

She never lost an hour in coming to us. With the dust of travel upon
her, with the heat and burden of quarrels with railway porters, and
encounters with cabmen, visible to anyone who chose to read the signs
of the times, Miss Blake came pounding up our stairs, wanting to see
Mr. Craven.

If that gentleman was engaged, she would sit down in the general office,
and relate her latest grievance to a posse of sympathising clerks.

"And he says he won't pay the rent," was always the refrain of these
lamentations.

"It is in Ireland he thinks he is, poor soul!" she was wont to declare.

"We'll teach him different, Miss Blake," the spokesman of the party
would declare; whilst another ostentatiously mended a pen, and a
third brought down a ream of foolscap and laid it with a thump before
him on the desk.

"And, indeed, you're all decent lads, though full of your tricks,"
Miss Blake would sometimes remark, in a tone of gentle reproof. "But
if you had a niece just dying with grief, and a house nobody will live
in on your hands, you would not have as much heart for fun, I can tell
you that."

Hearing which, the young rascals tried to look sorrowful, and failed.

In the way of my profession I have met with many singular persons,
but I can safely declare I never met with any person so singular as
Miss Blake.

She was--I speak of her in the past tense, not because she is dead, but
because times and circumstances have changed since the period when we
both had to do with the Uninhabited House, and she has altered in
consequence--one of the most original people who ever crossed my path.

Born in the north of Ireland, the child of a Scottish-Ulster mother and
a Connaught father, she had ingeniously contrived to combine in her own
person the vices of two distinct races, and exclude the virtues of both.

Her accent was the most fearful which could be imagined. She had the
brogue of the West grafted on the accent of the North. And yet there
was a variety about her even in this respect. One never could tell,
from visit to visit, whether she proposed to pronounce "written" as
"wrutten" or "wretten";[Footnote: The wife of a celebrated Indian
officer stated that she once, in the north of Ireland, heard Job's
utterance thus rendered--"Oh! that my words were wr_u_tten, that they
were pr_e_nted in a b_u_ke."] whether she would elect to style her
parents, to whom she made frequent reference, her "pawpaw and mawmaw,"
or her "pepai and memai."

It all depended with whom Miss Blake had lately been most intimate. If
she had been "hand and glove" with a "nob" from her own country--she was
in no way reticent about thus styling her grander acquaintances, only
she wrote the word "knob"--who thought to conceal his nationality by
"awing" and "hawing," she spoke about people being "morried" and wearing
"sockcloth and oshes." If, on the contrary, she had been thrown into the
society of a lady who so far honoured England as to talk as some people
do in England, we had every A turned into E, and every U into O, while
she minced her words as if she had been saying "niminy piminy" since she
first began to talk, and honestly believed no human being could ever
have told she had been born west of St. George's Channel.

But not merely in accent did Miss Blake evidence the fact that her birth
had been the result of an injudicious cross; the more one knew of her,
the more clearly one saw the wrong points she threw out.

Extravagant to a fault, like her Connaught father, she was in no respect
generous, either from impulse or calculation.

Mean about minor details, a turn of character probably inherited from
the Ulster mother, she was utterly destitute of that careful and honest
economy which is an admirable trait in the natives of the north of
Ireland, and which enables them so frequently, after being strictly
just, to be much more than liberal.

Honest, Miss Blake was not--or, for that matter, honourable either. Her
indebtedness to our firm could not be considered other than a matter of
honour, and yet she never dreamt of paying her debt to Mr. Craven.

Indeed, to do Miss Blake strict justice, she never thought of paying the
debts she owed to anyone, unless she was obliged to do so.

Nowadays, I fear it would fare hard with her were she to try her old
tactics with the British tradesman; but, in the time of which I am
writing, co-operative societies were not, and then the British tradesman
had no objection, I fancy, to be gulled.

Perhaps, like the lawyer and the unprofitable client, he set-off being
gulled on one side his ledger against being fleeced on the other.

Be this as it may, we were always compounding some liability for Miss
Blake, as well as letting her house and fighting with the tenants.

At first, as I have said, we found Miss Blake an awful bore, but we
generally ended by deciding we could better spare a better man. Indeed,
the months when she did not come to our office seemed to want flavour.

Of gratitude--popularly supposed to be essentially characteristic of the
Irish--Miss Blake was utterly destitute. I never did know--I have never
known since, so ungrateful a woman.

Not merely did she take everything Mr. Craven did for her as a right,
but she absolutely turned the tables, and brought him in her debtor.

Once, only once, that I can remember, he ventured to ask when it would
be convenient for her to repay some of the money he had from time to
time advanced.

Miss Blake was taken by surprise, but she rose equal to the occasion.

"You are joking, Mr. Craven," she said. "You mean, when will I want to
ask you to give me a share of the profits you have made out of the
estate of my poor sister's husband. Why, that house has been as good as
an annuity to you. For six long years it has stood empty, or next to
empty, and never been out of law all the time."

"But, you know, Miss Blake, that not a shilling of profit has accrued to
me from the house being in law," he pleaded. "I have always been too
glad to get the rent for you, to insist upon my costs, and, really--."

"Now, do not try to impose upon me," she interrupted, "because it is of
no use. Didn't you make thousands of the dead man, and now haven't you
got the house? Why, if you never had a penny of costs, instead of all
you have pocketed, that house and the name it has brought to you, and
the fame which has spread abroad in consequence, can't be reckoned as
less than hundreds a year to your firm. And yet you ask me for the
return of a trumpery four or five sovereigns--I am ashamed of you! But I
won't imitate your bad example. Let me have five more to-day, and you
can stop ten out of the Colonel's first payment."

"I am very sorry," said my employer, "but I really have not five pounds
to spare."

"Hear him," remarked Miss Blake, turning towards me. "Young man"--Miss
Blake steadily refused to recognise the possibility of any clerk being
even by accident a gentleman--"will you hand me over the newspaper?"

I had not the faintest idea what she wanted with the newspaper, and
neither had Mr. Craven, till she sat down again deliberately--the latter
part of this conversation having taken place after she rose, preparatory
to saying farewell--opened the sheet out to its full width, and
commenced to read the debates.

"My dear Miss Blake," began Mr. Craven, after a minute's pause, "you
know my time, when it is mine, is always at your disposal, but at the
present moment several clients are waiting to see me, and--"

"Let them wait," said Miss Blake, as he hesitated a little. "Your time
and their time is no more valuable than mine, and I mean to stay
_here_," emphasising the word, "till you let me have that five pounds.
Why, look, now, that house is taken on a two years' agreement, and you
won't see me again for that time--likely as not, never; for who can tell
what may happen to anybody in foreign parts? Only one charge I lay upon
you, Mr. Craven: don't let me be buried in a strange country. It is bad
enough to be so far as this from my father and my mother's remains, but
I daresay I'll manage to rest in the same grave as my sister, though
Robert Elmsdale lies between. He separated us in life--not that she ever
cared for him; but it won't matter much when we are all bones and dust
together--"

"If I let you have that five pounds," here broke in Mr. Craven, "do I
clearly understand that I am to recoup myself out of Colonel Morris'
first payment?"

"I said so as plain as I could speak," agreed Miss Blake; and her speech
was very plain indeed.

Mr. Craven lifted his eyebrows and shrugged his shoulders, while he drew
his cheque-book towards him.

"How is Helena?" he asked, as he wrote the final legendary flourish
after Craven and Son.

"Helena is but middling, poor dear," answered Miss Blake--on that
occasion she called her niece Hallana. "She frets, the creature, as is
natural; but she will get better when we leave England. England is a
hard country for anyone who is all nairves like Halana."

"Why do you never bring her to see me?" asked Mr. Craven, folding up
the cheque.

"Bring her to be stared at by a parcel of clerks!" exclaimed Miss Blake,
in a tone which really caused my hair to bristle. "Well-mannered, decent
young fellows in their own rank, no doubt, but not fit to look at my
sister's child. Now, now, Mr. Craven, ought Kathleen Blake's--or,
rather, Kathleen Elmsdale's daughter to serve as a fifth of November guy
for London lads? You know she is handsome enough to be a duchess, like
her mother."

"Yes, yes, I know," agreed Mr. Craven, and handed over the cheque.

After I had held the door open for Miss Blake to pass out, and closed it
securely and resumed my seat, Miss Blake turned the handle and treated
us to another sight of her bonnet.

"Good-bye, William Craven, for two years at any rate; and if I never see
you again, God bless you, for you've been a true friend to me and that
poor child who has nobody else to look to," and then, before Mr. Craven
could cross the room, she was gone.

"I wonder," said I, "if it will be two years before we see her again?"

"No, nor the fourth of two years," answered my employer. "There is
something queer about that house."

"You don't think it is haunted, sir, do you?" I ventured.

"Of course not," said Mr. Craven, irritably; "but I do think some one
wants to keep the place vacant, and is succeeding admirably."

The question I next put seemed irrelevant, but really resulted from a
long train of thought. This was it:

"Is Miss Elmsdale very handsome, sir?"

"She is very beautiful," was the answer; "but not so beautiful as her
mother was."

Ah me! two old, old stories in a sentence. He had loved the mother, and
he did not love the daughter. He had seen the mother in his bright,
hopeful youth, and there was no light of morning left for him in which
he could behold the child.

To other eyes she might, in her bright spring-time, seem lovely as an
angel from heaven, but to him no more such visions were to be
vouchsafed.

If beauty really went on decaying, as the ancients say, by this time
there could be no beauty left. But oh! greybeard, the beauty remains,
though our eyes may be too dim to see it; the beauty, the grace, the
rippling laughter, and the saucy smiles, which once had power to stir to
their very depths our hearts, friend--our hearts, yours and mine,
comrade, feeble, and cold, and pulseless now.




2. THE CORONER'S INQUEST


The story was told to me afterwards, but I may as well weave it in with
mine at this juncture.

From the maternal ancestress, the Demoiselles Blake inherited a certain
amount of money. It was through no fault of the paternal Blake--through
no want of endeavours on his part to make ducks and drakes of all
fortune which came in his way, that their small inheritance remained
intact; but the fortune was so willed that neither the girls nor he
could divert the peaceful tenure of its half-yearly dividends.

The mother died first, and the father followed her ere long, and then
the young ladies found themselves orphans, and the possessors of a fixed
income of one hundred and thirty pounds a year.

A modest income, and yet, as I have been given to understand, they might
have married well for the money.

In those days, particularly in Ireland, men went very cheap, and the
Misses Blake, one and both, could, before they left off mourning, have
wedded, respectively, a curate, a doctor, a constabulary officer, and
the captain of a government schooner.

The Misses Blake looked higher, however, and came to England, where rich
husbands are presumably procurable. Came, but missed their market. Miss
Kathleen found only one lover, William Craven, whose honest affection
she flouted; and Miss Susannah found no lover at all.

Miss Kathleen wanted a duke, or an earl--a prince of the blood royal
being about that time unprocurable; and an attorney, to her Irish ideas,
seemed a very poor sort of substitute. For which reason she rejected the
attorney with scorn, and remained single, the while dukes and earls were
marrying and intermarrying with their peers or their inferiors.

Then suddenly there came a frightful day when Kathleen and Susannah
learned they were penniless, when they understood their trustee had
robbed them, as he had robbed others, and had been paying their interest
out of what was left of their principal.

They tried teaching, but they really had nothing to teach. They tried
letting lodgings. Even lodgers rebelled against their untidiness and
want of punctuality.

The eldest was very energetic and very determined, and the youngest very
pretty and very conciliatory. Nevertheless, business is business, and
lodgings are lodgings, and the Misses Blake were on the verge of
beggary, when Mr. Elmsdale proposed for Miss Kathleen and was accepted.

Mr. Craven, by that time a family man, gave the bride away, and secured
Mr. Elmsdale's business.

Possibly, had Mrs. Elmsdale's marriage proved happy, Mr. Craven might
have soon lost sight of his former love. In matrimony, as in other
matters, we are rarely so sympathetic with fulfilment as with
disappointment. The pretty Miss Blake was a disappointed woman after she
had secured Mr. Elmsdale. She then understood that the best life could
offer her was something very different indeed from the ideal duke her
beauty should have won, and she did not take much trouble to conceal her
dissatisfaction with the arrangements of Providence.

Mr. Craven, seeing what Mr. Elmsdale was towards men, pitied her.
Perhaps, had he seen what Mrs. Elmsdale was towards her husband, he
might have pitied him; but, then, he did not see, for women are
wonderful dissemblers.

There was Elmsdale, bluff in manner, short in person, red in the face,
cumbersome in figure, addicted to naughty words, not nice about driving
fearfully hard bargains, a man whom men hated, not undeservedly; and
yet, nevertheless, a man capable of loving a woman with all the veins of
his heart, and who might, had any woman been found to love him, have
compassed earthly salvation.

There were those who said he never could compass eternal; but they
chanced to be his debtors--and, after all, that question lay between
himself and God. The other lay between himself and his wife, and it must
be confessed, except so far as his passionate, disinterested love for an
utterly selfish woman tended to redeem and humanise his nature, she
never helped him one step along the better path.

But, then, the world could not know this, and Mr. Craven, of whom I am
speaking at the moment, was likely, naturally, to think Mr. Elmsdale all
in the wrong.

On the one hand he saw the man as he appeared to men: on the other he
saw the woman as she appeared to men, beautiful to the last; fragile,
with the low voice, so beautiful in any woman, so more especially
beautiful in an Irish woman; with a languid face which insured
compassion while never asking for it; with the appearance of a martyr,
and the tone and the manner of a suffering saint.

Everyone who beheld the pair together, remarked, "What a pity it was
such a sweet creature should be married to such a bear!" but Mr.
Elmsdale was no bear to his wife: he adored her. The selfishness, the
discontent, the ill-health, as much the consequence of a peevish,
petted temper, as of disease, which might well have exhausted the
patience and tired out the love of a different man, only endeared her
the more to him.

She made him feel how inferior he was to her in all respects; how
tremendously she had condescended, when she agreed to become his wife;
and he quietly accepted her estimation of him, and said with a humility
which was touching from its simplicity:

"I know I am not worthy of you, Kathleen, but I do my best to make
you happy."

For her sake, not being a liberal man, he spent money freely; for her
sake he endured Miss Blake; for her sake he bought the place which
afterwards caused us so much trouble; for her sake, he, who had always
scoffed at the folly of people turning their houses into stores for
"useless timber," as he styled the upholsterer's greatest triumphs,
furnished his rooms with a lavish disregard of cost; for her sake, he,
who hated society, smiled on visitors, and entertained the guests she
invited, with no grudging hospitality. For her sake he dressed well,
and did many other things which were equally antagonistic to his
original nature; and he might just as well have gone his own way, and
pleased himself only, for all the pleasure he gave her, or all the
thanks she gave him.

If Mr. Elmsdale had come home drunk five evenings a week, and beaten his
wife, and denied her the necessaries of life, and kept her purse in a
chronic state of emptiness, she might very possibly have been extremely
grateful for an occasional kind word or smile; but, as matters stood,
Mrs. Elmsdale was not in the least grateful for a devotion, as beautiful
as it was extraordinary, and posed herself on the domestic sofa in the
character of a martyr.

Most people accepted the representation as true, and pitied her. Miss
Blake, blissfully forgetful of that state of impecuniosity from which
Mr. Elmsdale's proposal had extricated herself and her sister, never
wearied of stating that "Katty had thrown herself away, and that Mr.
Elmsdale was not fit to tie her shoe-string."

She generously admitted the poor creature did his best; but, according
to Blake, the poor creature's best was very bad indeed.

"It's not his fault, but his misfortune," the lady was wont to remark,
"that he's like dirt beside her. He can't help his birth, and his
dragging-up, and his disreputable trade, or business, or whatever he
likes to call it; he can't help never having had a father nor mother to
speak of, and not a lady or gentleman belonging to the family since it
came into existence. I'm not blaming him, but it is hard for Kathleen,
and she reared as she was, and accustomed to the best society in
Ireland,--which is very different, let me tell you, from the best
anybody ever saw in England."

There were some who thought, if Mrs. Elmsdale could tolerate her
sister's company, she might without difficulty have condoned her
husband's want of acquaintance with some points of grammar and
etiquette; and who said, amongst themselves, that whereas he only
maltreated, Miss Blake mangled every letter in the alphabet; but these
carping critics were in the minority.

Mrs. Elmsdale was a beauty, and a martyr; Mr. Elmsdale a rough beast,
who had no capacity of ever developing into a prince. Miss Blake was a
model of sisterly affection, and if eccentric in her manner, and
bewildering in the vagaries of her accent, well, most Irish people, the
highest in rank not excepted, were the same. Why, there was Lord
So-and-so, who stated at a public meeting that "roight and moight were
not always convartible tarms"; and accepted the cheers and laughter
which greeted his utterance as evidence that he had said something
rather neat.

Miss Blake's accent was a very different affair indeed from those
wrestles with his foe in which her brother-in-law always came off
worsted. He endured agonies in trying to call himself Elmsdale, and
rarely succeeded in styling his wife anything except Mrs. HE. I am told
Miss Blake's mimicry of this peculiarity was delicious: but I never was
privileged to hear her delineation, for, long before the period when
this story opens, Mr. Elmsdale had departed to that land where no
confusion of tongues can much signify, and where Helmsdale no doubt
served his purpose just as well as Miss Blake's more refined
pronunciation of his name.

Further, Miss Helena Elmsdale would not allow a word in depreciation of
her father to be uttered when she was near, and as Miss Helena could on
occasion develop a very pretty little temper, as well as considerable
power of satire, Miss Blake dropped out of the habit of ridiculing Mr.
Elmsdale's sins of omission and commission, and contented herself by
generally asserting that, as his manner of living had broken her poor
sister's heart, so his manner of dying had broken her--Miss
Blake's--heart.

"It is only for the sake of the orphan child I am able to hold up at
all," she would tell us. "I would not have blamed him so much for
leaving us poor, but it was hard and cruel to leave us disgraced into
the bargain"; and then Miss Blake would weep, and the wag of the office
would take out his handkerchief and ostentatiously wipe his eyes.

She often threatened to complain of that boy--a merry, mischievous young
imp--to Mr. Craven; but she never did so. Perhaps because the clerks
always gave her rapt attention; and an interested audience was very
pleasant to Miss Blake.

Considering the nature of Mr. Elmsdale's profession, Miss Blake had
possibly some reason to complain of the extremely unprofitable manner in
which he cut up. He was what the lady described as "a dirty
money-lender."

Heaven only knows how he drifted into his occupation; few men, I
imagine, select such a trade, though it is one which seems to exercise
an enormous fascination for those who have adopted it.

The only son of a very small builder who managed to leave a few hundred
pounds behind him for the benefit of Elmsdale, then clerk in a
contractor's office, he had seen enough of the anxieties connected with
his father's business to wash his hands of bricks and mortar.

Experience, perhaps, had taught him also that people who advanced money
to builders made a very nice little income out of the capital so
employed; and it is quite possible that some of his father's
acquaintances, always in want of ready cash, as speculative folks
usually are, offered such terms for temporary accommodation as tempted
him to enter into the business of which Miss Blake spoke so
contemptuously.

Be this as it may, one thing is certain--by the time Elmsdale was thirty
he had established a very nice little connection amongst needy men:
whole streets were mortgaged to him; terraces, nominally the property of
some well-to-do builder, were virtually his, since he only waited the
well-to-do builder's inevitable bankruptcy to enter into possession. He
was not a sixty per cent man, always requiring some very much better
security than "a name" before parting with his money; but still even
twenty per cent, usually means ruin, and, as a matter of course, most of
Mr. Elmsdale's clients reached that pleasant goal.

They could have managed to do so, no doubt, had Mr. Elmsdale never
existed; but as he was in existence, he served the purpose for which it
seemed his mother had borne him; and sooner or later--as a rule, sooner
than later--assumed the shape of Nemesis to most of those who "did
business" with him.

There were exceptions, of course. Some men, by the help of exceptional
good fortune, roguery, or genius, managed to get out of Mr. Elmsdale's
hands by other paths than those leading through Basinghall or Portugal
Streets; but they merely proved the rule.

Notably amongst these fortunate persons may be mentioned a Mr. Harrison
and a Mr. Harringford--'Arrison and 'Arringford, as Mr. Elmsdale called
them, when he did not refer to them as the two Haitches.

Of these, the first-named, after a few transactions, shook the dust of
Mr. Elmsdale's office off his shoes, sent him the money he owed by his
lawyer, and ever after referred to Mr. Elmsdale as "that thief," "that
scoundrel," that "swindling old vagabond," and so forth; but, then,
hard words break no bones, and Mr. Harrison was not very well thought
of himself.

His remarks, therefore, did Mr. Elmsdale very little harm--a
money-lender is not usually spoken of in much pleasanter terms by those
who once have been thankful enough for his cheque; and the world in
general does not attach a vast amount of importance to the opinions of a
former borrower. Mr. Harrison did not, therefore, hurt or benefit his
quondam friend to any appreciable extent; but with Mr. Harringford the
case was different.

He and Elmsdale had been doing business together for years, "everything
he possessed in the world," he stated to an admiring coroner's jury
summoned to sit on Mr. Elmsdale's body and inquire into the cause of
that gentleman's death--"everything he possessed in the world, he owed
to the deceased. Some people spoke hardly of him, but his experience of
Mr. Elmsdale enabled him to say that a kinder-hearted, juster, honester,
or better-principled man never existed. He charged high interest,
certainly, and he expected to be paid his rate; but, then, there was no
deception about the matter: if it was worth a borrower's while to take
money at twenty per cent, why, there was an end of the matter. Business
men are not children," remarked Mr. Harringford, "and ought not to
borrow money at twenty per cent, unless they can make thirty per cent,
out of it." Personally, he had never paid Mr. Elmsdale more than twelve
and a half or fifteen per cent.; but, then, their transactions were on a
large scale. Only the day before Mr. Elmsdale's death--he hesitated a
little over that word, and became, as the reporters said, "affected"--he
had paid him twenty thousand pounds. The deceased told him he had urgent
need of the money, and at considerable inconvenience he raised the
amount. If the question were pressed as to whether he guessed for what
purpose that sum was so urgently needed, he would answer it, of course;
but he suggested that it should not be pressed, as likely to give pain
to those who were already in terrible affliction.

Hearing which, the jury pricked up their ears, and the coroner's
curiosity became so intense that he experienced some difficulty in
saying, calmly, that, "as the object of his sitting there was to elicit
the truth, however much he should regret causing distress to anyone, he
must request that Mr. Harringford, whose scruples did him honour, would
keep back no fact tending to throw light upon so sad an affair."

Having no alternative after this but to unburden himself of his secret,
Mr. Harringford stated that he feared the deceased had been a heavy
loser at Ascot. Mr. Harringford, having gone to that place with some
friends, met Mr. Elmsdale on the race-course. Expressing astonishment at
meeting him there, Mr. Elmsdale stated he had run down to look after a
client of his who he feared was going wrong. He said he did not much
care to do business with a betting man. In the course of subsequent
conversation, however, he told the witness he had some money on the
favourite.

As frequently proves the case, the favourite failed to come in first:
that was all Mr. Harringford knew about the matter. Mr. Elmsdale never
mentioned how much he had lost--in fact, he never referred again, except
in general terms, to their meeting. He stated, however, that he must
have money, and that immediately; if not the whole amount, half, at all
events. The witness found, however, he could more easily raise the
larger than the smaller sum. There had been a little unpleasantness
between him and Mr. Elmsdale with reference to the demand for money made
so suddenly and so peremptorily, and he bitterly regretted having even
for a moment forgotten what was due to so kind a friend.

He knew of no reason in the world why Mr. Elmsdale should have committed
suicide. He was, in business, eminently a cautious man, and Mr.
Harringford had always supposed him to be wealthy; in fact, he believed
him to be a man of large property. Since the death of his wife, he had,
however, noticed a change in him; but still it never crossed the
witness's mind that his brain was in any way affected.

Miss Blake, who had to this point postponed giving her evidence, on
account of the "way she was upset," was now able to tell a sympathetic
jury and a polite coroner all she knew of the matter.

"Indeed," she began, "Robert Elmsdale had never been the same man since
her poor sister's death; he mooned about, and would sit for half an
hour at a time, doing nothing but looking at a faded bit of the
dining-room carpet."

He took no interest in anything; if he was asked any questions about the
garden, he would say, "What does it matter? _she_ cannot see it now."

"Indeed, my lord," said Miss Blake, in her agitation probably
confounding the coroner with the chief justice, "it was just pitiful to
see the creature; I am sure his ways got to be heart-breaking."

"After my sister's death," Miss Blake resumed, after a pause, devoted by
herself, the jury, and the coroner to sentiment, "Robert Elmsdale gave
up his office in London, and brought his business home. I do not know
why he did this. He would not, had she been living, because he always
kept his trade well out of her sight, poor man. Being what she was, she
could not endure the name of it, naturally. It was not my place to say
he shouldn't do what he liked in his own house, and I thought the
excitement of building a new room, and quarrelling with the builder, and
swearing at the men, was good for him. He made a fireproof place for his
papers, and he fitted up the office like a library, and bought a
beautiful large table, covered with leather; and nobody to have gone in
would have thought the room was used for business. He had a Turkey
carpet on the floor, and chairs that slipped about on castors; and he
planned a covered way out into the road, with a separate entrance for
itself, so that none of us ever knew who went out or who came in. He
kept his affairs secret as the grave."

"No," in answer to the coroner, who began to think Miss Blake's
narrative would never come to an end. "I heard no shot: none of us
did: we all slept away from that part of the house; but I was restless
that night, and could not sleep, and I got up and looked out at the
river, and saw a flare of light on it. I thought it odd he was not
gone to bed, but took little notice of the matter for a couple of
hours more, when it was just getting gray in the morning, and I
looked out again, and still seeing the light, slipped on a
dressing-wrapper and my slippers, and ran downstairs to tell him he
would ruin his health if he did not go to his bed.

"When I opened the door I could see nothing; the table stood between me
and him; but the gas was flaring away, and as I went round to put it
out, I came across him lying on the floor. It never occurred to me he
was dead; I thought he was in a fit, and knelt down to unloose his
cravat, then I found he had gone.

"The pistol lay on the carpet beside him--and that," finished Miss
Blake, "is all I have to tell."

When asked if she had ever known of his losing money by betting, she
answered it was not likely he would tell her anything of that kind.

"He always kept his business to himself," she affirmed, "as is the way
of most men."

In answer to other questions, she stated she never heard of any losses
in business; there was plenty of money always to be had for the asking.
He was liberal enough, though perhaps not so liberal latterly, as before
his wife's death; she didn't know anything of the state of his affairs.
Likely, Mr. Craven could tell them all about that.

Mr. Craven, however, proved unable to do so. To the best of his belief,
Mr. Elmsdale was in very easy circumstances. He had transacted a large
amount of business for him, but never any involving pecuniary loss or
anxiety; he should have thought him the last man in the world to run
into such folly as betting; he had no doubt Mrs. Elmsdale's death had
affected him disastrously. He said more than once to witness, if it were
not for the sake of his child, he should not care if he died that night.

All of which, justifying the jury in returning a verdict of "suicide
while of unsound mind," they expressed their unanimous opinion to that
effect--thus "saving the family the condemnation of _felo de se_"
remarked Miss Blake.

The dead man was buried, the church service read over his remains, the
household was put into mourning, the blinds were drawn up, the windows
flung open, and the business of life taken up once more by the
survivors.




3. OUR LAST TENANT


It is quite competent for a person so to manage his affairs, that,
whilst understanding all about them himself, another finds it next to
impossible to make head or tail of his position.

Mr. Craven found that Mr. Elmsdale had effected this feat; entries there
were in his books, intelligible enough, perhaps, to the man who made
them, but as so much Hebrew to a stranger.

He had never kept a business banking account; he had no regular journal
or ledger; he seemed to have depended on memoranda, and vague and
uncertain writings in his diary, both for memory and accuracy; and as
most of his business had been conducted _viva voce_, there were few
letters to assist in throwing the slightest light on his transactions.

Even from the receipts, however, one thing was clear, viz., that he had,
since his marriage, spent a very large sum of money; spent it lavishly,
not to say foolishly. Indeed, the more closely Mr. Craven looked into
affairs, the more satisfied he felt that Mr. Elmsdale had committed
suicide simply because he was well-nigh ruined.

Mortgage-deeds Mr. Craven himself had drawn up, were nowhere to be
found; neither could one sovereign of the money Mr. Harringford paid be
discovered.

Miss Blake said she believed "that Harringford had never paid at all";
but this was clearly proved to be an error of judgment on the part of
that impulsive lady. Not merely did Harringford hold the receipt for the
money and the mortgage-deeds cancelled, but the cheque he had given to
the mortgagee bore the endorsement--"Robert Elmsdale"; while the clerk
who cashed it stated that Mr. Elmsdale presented the order in person,
and that to him he handed the notes.

Whatever he had done with the money, no notes were to be found; a
diligent search of the strong room produced nothing more important than
the discovery of a cash-box containing three hundred pounds; the
title-deeds of River Hall--such being the modest name by which Mr.
Elmsdale had elected to have his residence distinguished; the leases
relating to some small cottages near Barnes; all the letters his wife
had ever written to him; two locks of her hair, one given before
marriage, the other cut after her death; a curl severed from the head of
my "baby daughter"; quantities of receipts--and nothing more.

"I wonder he can rest in his grave," said Miss Blake, when at last she
began to realize, in a dim sort of way, the position of affairs.

According to the River Hall servants' version, Mr. Elmsdale did anything
rather than rest in his grave. About the time the new mourning had been
altered to fit perfectly, a nervous housemaid, who began perhaps to find
the house dull, mooted the question as to whether "master walked."

Within a fortnight it was decided in solemn conclave that master did;
and further, that the place was not what it had been; and moreover, that
in the future it was likely to be still less like what it had been.

There is a wonderful instinct in the lower classes, which enables them
to comprehend, without actual knowledge, when misfortune is coming upon
a house: and in this instance that instinct was not at fault.

Long before Mr. Craven had satisfied himself that his client's estate
was a very poor one, the River Hall servants, one after another, had
given notice to leave--indeed, to speak more accurately, they did not
give notice, for they left; and before they left they took care to
baptize the house with such an exceedingly bad name, that neither for
love nor money could Miss Blake get a fresh "help" to stay in it for
more than twenty-four hours.

First one housemaid was taken with "the shivers"; then the cook had "the
trembles"; then the coachman was prepared to take his solemn affidavit,
that, one night long after everyone in the house to his knowledge was in
bed, he "see from his room above the stables, a light a-shining on the
Thames, and the figures of one or more a passing and a repassing across
the blind." More than this, a new page-boy declared that, on a certain
evening, before he had been told there was anything strange about the
house, he heard the door of the passage leading from the library into
the side-road slam violently, and looking to see who had gone out by
that unused entrance, failed to perceive sign of man, woman, or child,
by the bright moonlight.

Moved by some feeling which he professed himself unable to "put a name
on," he proceeded to the door in question, and found it barred, chained,
and bolted. While he was standing wondering what it meant, he noticed
the light as of gas shining from underneath the library door; but when
he softly turned the handle and peeped in, the room was dark as the
grave, and "like cold water seemed running down his back."

Further, he averred, as he stole away into the hall, there was a sound
followed him as between a groan and a cry. Hearing which statement, an
impressionable charwoman went into hysterics, and had to be recalled to
her senses by a dose of gin, suggested and taken strictly as a medicine.

But no supply of spirituous liquors, even had Miss Blake been disposed
to distribute anything of the sort, could induce servants after a time
to remain in, or charwomen to come to, the house. It had received a bad
name, and that goes even further in disfavour of a residence than it
does against a man or woman.

Finally, Miss Blake's establishment was limited to an old creature
almost doting and totally deaf, the advantages of whose presence might
have been considered problematical; but, then, as Miss Blake remarked,
"she was somebody."

"And now she has taken fright," proceeded the lady. "How anyone could
make her hear their story, the Lord in heaven alone knows; and if there
was anything to see, I am sure she is far too blind to see it; but she
says she daren't stay. She does not want to see poor master again till
she is dead herself."

"I have got a tenant for the house the moment you like to say you will
leave it," said Mr. Craven, in reply. "He cares for no ghost that ever
was manufactured. He has a wife with a splendid digestion, and several
grown-up sons and daughters. They will soon clear out the shadows; and
their father is willing to pay two hundred and fifty pounds a year."

"And you think there is really nothing more of any use amongst
the papers?"

"I am afraid not--I am afraid you must face the worst."

"And my sister's child left no better off than a street beggar,"
suggested Miss Blake.

"Come, come," remonstrated Mr. Craven; "matters are not so bad as all
that comes to. Upon three hundred a year, you can live very comfortable
on the Continent; and--"

"We'll go," interrupted Miss Blake; "but it is hard lines--not that
anything better could have been expected from Robert Elmsdale."

"Ah! dear Miss Blake, the poor fellow is dead. Remember only his
virtues, and let his faults rest."

"I sha'n't have much to burden my memory with, then," retorted Miss
Blake, and departed.

Her next letter to my principal was dated from Rouen; but before that
reached Buckingham Street, our troubles had begun.

For some reason best known to himself, Mr. Treseby, the good-natured
country squire possessed of a wife with an excellent digestion, at the
end of two months handed us half a year's rent, and requested we should
try to let the house for the remainder of his term, he, in case of our
failure, continuing amenable for the rent. In the course of the three
years we secured eight tenants, and as from each a profit in the way of
forfeit accrued, we had not to trouble Mr. Treseby for any more money,
and were also enabled to remit some small bonuses--which came to her,
Miss Blake assured us, as godsends--to the Continent.

After that the place stood vacant for a time. Various care-takers were
eager to obtain the charge of it, but I only remember one who was not
eager to leave.

That was a night-watchman, who never went home except in the daytime,
and then to sleep, and he failed to understand why his wife, who was a
pretty, delicate little creature, and the mother of four small
children, should quarrel with her bread and butter, and want to leave
so fine a place.

He argued the matter with her in so practical a fashion, that the
nearest magistrate had to be elected umpire between them.

The whole story of the place was repeated in court, and the
night-watchman's wife, who sobbed during the entire time she stood in
the witness-box, made light of her black eye and numerous bruises, but
said, "Not if Tim murdered her, could she stay alone in the house
another night."

To prevent him murdering her, he was sent to gaol for two months, and
Mr. Craven allowed her eight shillings a week till Tim was once more a
free man, when he absconded, leaving wife and children chargeable to
the parish.

"A poor, nervous creature," said Mr. Craven, who would not believe that
where gas was, any house could be ghost-ridden. "We must really try to
let the house in earnest."

And we did try, and we did let, over, and over, and over again,
always with a like result, till at length Mr. Craven said to me: "Do
you know, Patterson, I really am growing very uneasy about that house
on the Thames. I am afraid some evil-disposed person is trying to
keep it vacant."

"It certainly is very strange," was the only remark I felt capable
of making.

We had joked so much about the house amongst ourselves, and ridiculed
Miss Blake and her troubles to such an extent, that the matter bore no
serious aspect for any of us juniors.

"If we are not soon able to let it," went on Mr. Craven, "I shall advise
Miss Blake to auction off the furniture and sell the place. We must not
always have an uninhabited house haunting our offices, Patterson."

I shook my head in grave assent, but all the time I was thinking the day
when that house ceased to haunt our offices, would be a very dreary one
for the wags amongst our clerks. "Yes, I certainly shall advise Miss
Blake to sell," repeated Mr. Craven, slowly.

Although a hard-working man, he was eminently slow in his ideas
and actions.

There was nothing express about our dear governor; upon no special
mental train did he go careering through life. Eminently he preferred
the parliamentary pace: and I am bound to say the life-journey so
performed was beautiful exceedingly, with waits not devoid of interest
at little stations utterly outside his profession, with kindly talk to
little children, and timid women, and feeble men; with a pleasant smile
for most with whom he came in contact, and time for words of kindly
advice which did not fall perpetually on stony ground, but which
sometimes grew to maturity, and produced rich grain of which himself
beheld the garnering.

Nevertheless, to my younger and quicker nature, he did seem often
very tardy.

"Why not advise her now?" I asked.

"Ah! my boy," he answered, "life is very short, yet it is long enough to
have no need in it for hurry."

The same day, Colonel Morris appeared in our office. Within a fortnight,
that gallant officer was our tenant; within a month, Mrs. Morris, an
exceedingly fine lady, with grown-up children, with very young children
also, with ayahs, with native servants, with English servants, with a
list of acquaintances such as one may read of in the papers the day
after a Queen's drawing-room, took possession of the Uninhabited House,
and, for about three months, peace reigned in our dominions.

Buckingham Street, as represented by us, stank in the nostrils of no
human being.

So far we were innocent of offence, we were simply ordinary solicitors
and clerks, doing as fully and truly as we knew how, an extremely good
business at rates which yielded a very fair return to our principal.

The Colonel was delighted with the place, he kindly called to say; so
was Mrs. Morris; so were the grown-up sons and daughters of Colonel and
Mrs. Morris; and so, it is to be presumed, were the infant branches of
the family.

The native servants liked the place because Mr. Elmsdale, in view of his
wife's delicate health, had made the house "like an oven," to quote Miss
Blake. "It was bad for her, I know," proceeded that lady, "but she would
have her own way, poor soul, and he--well, he'd have had the top brick
of the chimney of a ten-story house off, if she had taken a fancy for
that article."

Those stoves and pipes were a great bait to Colonel Morris, as well as a
source of physical enjoyment to his servants.

He, too, had married a woman who was not always easy to please; but
River Hall did please her, as was natural, with its luxuries of heat,
ease, convenience, large rooms opening one out of another, wide
verandahs overlooking the Thames, staircases easy of ascent; baths, hot,
cold, and shower; a sweet, pretty garden, conservatory with a door
leading into it from the spacious hall, all exceedingly cheap at two
hundred pounds a year.

Accordingly, at first, the Colonel was delighted with the place, and not
the less so because Mrs. Morris was delighted with it, and because it
was also so far from town, that he had a remarkably good excuse for
frequently visiting his club.

Before the new-comers, local tradesmen bowed down and did worship.

Visitors came and visitors went, carriages appeared in shoals, and
double-knocks were plentiful as blackberries. A fresh leaf had evidently
been turned over at River Hall, and the place meant to give no more
trouble for ever to Miss Blake, or Mr. Craven, or anybody. So, as I have
said, three months passed. We had got well into the dog-days by that
time; there was very little to do in the office. Mr. Craven had left for
his annual holiday, which he always took in the company of his wife and
daughters--a correct, but possibly a depressing, way of spending a
vacation which must have been intended to furnish some social variety in
a man's life; and we were all very idle, and all very much inclined to
grumble at the heat, and length, and general slowness of the days, when
one morning, as I was going out in order to send a parcel off to Mrs.
Craven, who should I meet coming panting up the stairs but Miss Blake!

"Is that you, Patterson?" she gasped. I assured her it was I in the
flesh, and intimated my astonishment at seeing her in hers.

"Why, I thought you were in France, Miss Blake," I suggested.

"That's where I have just come from," she said. "Is Mr. Craven in?" I
told her he was out of town.

"Ay--that's where everybody can be but me," she remarked, plaintively.
"They can go out and stay out, while I am at the beck and call of all
the scum of the earth. Well, well, I suppose there will be quiet for me
sometime, if only in my coffin."

As I failed to see that any consolatory answer was possible, I made no
reply. I only asked:

"Won't you walk into Mr. Craven's office, Miss Blake?"

"Now, I wonder," she said, "what good you think walking into his office
will do me!"

Nevertheless, she accepted the invitation. I have, in the course of
years, seen many persons suffering from heat, but I never did see any
human being in such a state as Miss Blake was that day.

Her face was a pure, rich red, from temple to chin; it resembled nothing
so much as a brick which had been out for a long time, first in the sun
and the wind, and then in a succession of heavy showers of rain. She
looked weather-beaten, and sun-burnt, and sprayed with salt-water, all
at once. Her eyes were a lighter blue than I previously thought eyes
could be. Her cheek-bones stood out more prominently than I had thought
cheek-bones capable of doing. Her mouth--not quite a bad one, by the
way--opened wider than any within my experience; and her teeth, white
and exposed, were suggestive of a set of tombstones planted outside a
stonemason's shop, or an upper and lower set exhibited at the entrance
to a dentist's operating-room. Poor dear Miss Blake, she and those
pronounced teeth parted company long ago, and a much more becoming
set--which she got exceedingly cheap, by agreeing with the maker to
"send the whole of the city of London to her, if he liked"--now occupy
their place.

But on that especial morning they were very prominent. Everything, in
fact, about the lady, or belonging to her, seemed exaggerated, as if the
heat of the weather had induced a tropical growth of her mental and
bodily peculiarities. Her bonnet was crooked beyond even the ordinary
capacity of Miss Blake's head-gear; the strings were rolled up till they
looked like ropes which had been knotted under her chin. A veil, as
large and black as a pirate's flag, floated down her back; her shawl was
at sixes and sevens; one side of her dress had got torn from the bodice,
and trailed on the ground leaving a broadly-marked line of dust on the
carpet. She looked as if she had no petticoats on; and her boots--those
were the days ere side-springs and buttons obtained--were one laced
unevenly, and the other tied on with a piece of ribbon.

As for her gloves, they were in the state we always beheld them; if she
ever bought a new pair (which I do not believe), she never treated us to
a sight of them till they had been long past decent service. They never
were buttoned, to begin with; they had a wrinkled and haggard
appearance, as if from extreme old age. If their colour had originally
been lavender, they were always black with dirt; if black, they were
white with wear.

As a bad job, she had, apparently, years before, given up putting a
stitch in the ends of the fingers, when a stitch gave way; and the
consequence was that we were perfectly familiar with Miss Blake's
nails--and those nails looked as if, at an early period of her life, a
hammer had been brought heavily down upon them. Mrs. Elmsdale might well
be a beauty, for she had taken not only her own share of the good looks
of the family, but her sister's also.

We used often, at the office, to marvel why Miss Blake ever wore a
collar, or a tucker, or a frill, or a pair of cuffs. So far as clean
linen was concerned, she would have appeared infinitely brighter and
fresher had she and female frippery at once parted company. Her laces
were always in tatters, her collars soiled, her cuffs torn, and her
frills limp. I wonder what the natives thought of her in France! In
London, we decided--and accurately, I believe--that Miss Blake, in the
solitude of her own chamber, washed and got-up her cambrics and fine
linen--and it was a "get-up" and a "put-on" as well.

Had any other woman, dressed like Miss Blake, come to our office, I fear
the clerks would not have been over-civil to her. But Miss Blake was our
own, our very own. She had grown to be as our very flesh and blood. We
did not love her, but she was associated with us by the closest ties
that can subsist between lawyer and client. Had anything happened to
Miss Blake, we should, in the event of her death, have gone in a body to
her funeral, and felt a want in our lives for ever after.

But Miss Blake had not the slightest intention of dying: we were not
afraid of that calamity. The only thing we really did dread was that
some day she might insist upon laying the blame of River Hall remaining
uninhabited on our shoulders, and demand that Mr. Craven should pay her
the rent out of his own pocket.

We knew if she took that, or any other pecuniary matter, seriously in
hand, she would carry it through; and, between jest and earnest, we were
wont to speculate whether, in the end, it might not prove cheaper to our
firm if Mr. Craven were to farm that place, and pay Miss Blake's niece
an annuity of say one hundred a year.

Ultimately we decided that it would, but that such a scheme was
impracticable, because Miss Blake would always think we were making a
fortune out of River Hall, and give us no peace till she had a share of
the profit.

For a time, Miss Blake--after unfastening her bonnet-strings, and taking
out her brooch and throwing back her shawl--sat fanning herself with a
dilapidated glove, and saying, "Oh dear! oh dear! what is to become of
me I cannot imagine." But, at length, finding I was not to be betrayed
into questioning, she observed:

"If William Craven knew the distress I am in, he would not be out of
town enjoying himself, I'll be bound."

"I am quite certain he would not," I answered, boldly. "But as he is
away, is there nothing we can do for you?"

She shook her head mournfully. "You're all a parcel of boys and children
together," was her comprehensive answer.

"But there is our manager, Mr. Taylor," I suggested.

"Him!" she exclaimed. "Now, if you don't want me to walk out of the
office and never set foot in it again, don't talk to me about Taylor."

"Has Mr. Taylor offended you?" I ventured to inquire.

"Lads of your age should not ask too many questions," she replied. "What
I have against Taylor is nothing to you; only don't make me desperate by
mentioning his name."

I hastened to assure her that it should never be uttered by me again in
her presence, and there ensued a pause, which she filled by looking
round the office and taking a mental inventory of everything it
contained.

Eventually, her survey ended in this remark, "And he can go out of town
as well, and keep a brougham for his wife, and draw them daughters of
his out like figures in a fashion-book, and my poor sister's child
living in a two-pair lodging."

"I fear, Miss Blake," I ventured, "that something is the matter at
River Hall."

"You fear, do you, young man?" she returned. "You ought to get a
first prize for guessing. As if anything else could ever bring me
back to London."

"Can I be of no service to you in the matter?"

"I don't think you can, but you may as well see his letter." And diving
into the depths of her pocket, she produced Colonel Morris'
communication, which was very short, but very much to the purpose.

    "Not wishing," he said, "to behave in any unhandsome manner, I send
    you herewith" (herewith meant the keys of River Hall and his letter)
    "a cheque for one half-year's rent. You must know that, had I been
    aware of the antecedents of the place, I should never have become
    your tenant; and I must say, considering I have a wife in delicate
    health, and young children, the deception practised by your lawyers
    in concealing the fact that no previous occupant has been able to
    remain in the house, seems most unpardonable. I am a soldier, and,
    to me, these trade tricks appear dishonourable. Still, as I
    understand your position is an exceptional one, I am willing to
    forgive the wrong which has been done, and to pay six months' rent
    for a house I shall no longer occupy. In the event of these
    concessions appearing insufficient, I beg to enclose the names of my
    solicitors, and have the honour, madam, to remain

    "Your most obedient servant,

    "HERCULES MORRIS."

In order to gain time, I read this letter twice over; then,
diplomatically, as I thought, I said:

"What are you going to do, Miss Blake?"

"What are _you_ going to do, is much nearer the point, I am thinking!"
retorted that lady. "Do you imagine there is so much pleasure or profit
in keeping a lawyer, that people want to do lawyer's work for
themselves?"

Which really was hard upon us all, considering that so long as she
could do her work for herself, Miss Blake ignored both Mr. Craven and
his clerks.

Not a shilling of money would she ever, if she could help it, permit to
pass through our hands--not the slightest chance did she ever
voluntarily give Mr. Craven of recouping himself those costs or loans in
which her acquaintance involved her sister's former suitor.

Had he felt any inclination--which I am quite certain he never did--to
deduct Miss Helena's indebtedness, as represented by her aunt, out of
Miss Helena's income, he could not have done it. The tenant's money
usually went straight into Miss Blake's hands.

What she did with it, Heaven only knows. I know she did not buy
herself gloves!

Twirling the Colonel's letter about, I thought the position over.

"What, then," I asked, "do you wish us to do?"

Habited as I have attempted to describe, Miss Blake sat at one side of a
library-table. In, I flatter myself, a decent suit of clothes, washed,
brushed, shaved, I sat on the other. To ordinary observers, I know I
must have seemed much the best man of the two--yet Miss Blake got the
better of me.

She, that dilapidated, red-hot, crumpled-collared, fingerless-gloved
woman, looked me over from head to foot, as I conceived, though my boots
were hidden away under the table, and I declare--I swear--she put me out
of countenance. I felt small under the stare of a person with whom I
would not then have walked through Hyde Park in the afternoon for almost
any amount of money which could have been offered to me.

"Though you are only a clerk," she said at length, apparently quite
unconscious of the effect she had produced, "you seem a very decent sort
of young man. As Mr. Craven is out of the way, suppose you go and see
that Morris man, and ask him what he means by his impudent letter."

I rose to the bait. Being in Mr. Craven's employment, it is unnecessary
to say I, in common with every other person about the place, thought I
could manage his business for him very much better than he could manage
it for himself; and it had always been my own personal conviction that
if the letting of the Uninhabited House were entrusted to me, the place
would not stand long empty.

Miss Blake's proposition was, therefore, most agreeable; but still, I
did not at once swallow her hook. Mr. Craven, I felt, might scarcely
approve of my taking it upon myself to call upon Colonel Morris while
Mr. Taylor was able and willing to venture upon such a step, and I
therefore suggested to our client the advisability of first asking Mr.
Craven's opinion about the affair.

"And keep me in suspense while you are writing and answering and running
up a bill as long as Midsummer Day," she retorted. "No, thank you. If
you don't think my business worth your attention, I'll go to somebody
that may be glad of it." And she began tying her strings and feeling
after her shawl in a manner which looked very much indeed like carrying
out her threat.

At that moment I made up my mind to consult Taylor as to what ought to
be done. So I appeased Miss Blake by assuring her, in a diplomatic
manner, that Colonel Morris should be visited, and promising to
communicate the result of the interview by letter.

"That you won't," she answered. "I'll be here to-morrow to know what he
has to say for himself. He is just tired of the house, like the rest of
them, and wants to be rid of his bargain."

"I am not quite sure of that," I said, remembering my principal's
suggestion. "It is strange, if there really is nothing objectionable
about the house, that _no one_ can be found to stay in it. Mr. Craven
has hinted that he fancies some evil-disposed person must be playing
tricks, in order to frighten tenants away."

"It is likely enough," she agreed. "Robert Elmsdale had plenty of
enemies and few friends; but that is no reason why we should
starve, is it?"

I failed to see the logical sequence of Miss Blake's remark,
nevertheless I did not dare to tell her so; and agreed it was no reason
why she and her niece should be driven into that workhouse which she
frequently declared they "must come to."

"Remember," were her parting words, "I shall be here to-morrow morning
early, and expect you to have good news for me."

Inwardly resolving not to be in the way, I said I hoped there would be
good news for her, and went in search of Taylor.

"Miss Blake has been here," I began. "THE HOUSE is empty again. Colonel
Morris has sent her half a year's rent, the keys, and the address of his
solicitors. He says we have acted disgracefully in the matter, and she
wants me to go and see him, and declares she will be back here first
thing to-morrow morning to know what he has to say for himself. What
ought I to do?"

Before Mr. Taylor answered my question, he delivered himself of a
comprehensive anathema which included Miss Blake, River Hall, the late
owner, and ourselves. He further wished he might be essentially
etceteraed if he believed there was another solicitor, besides Mr.
Craven, in London who would allow such a hag to haunt his offices.

"Talk about River Hall being haunted," he finished; "it is we who are
witch-ridden, I call it, by that old Irishwoman. She ought to be burnt
at Smithfield. I'd be at the expense of the faggots!"

"What have you and Miss Blake quarrelled about?" I inquired. "You say
she is a witch, and she has made me take a solemn oath never to mention
your name again in her presence."

"I'd keep her presence out of these offices, if I was Mr. Craven," he
answered. "She has cost us more than the whole freehold of River Hall
is worth."

Something in his manner, more than in his words, made me comprehend that
Miss Blake had borrowed money from him, and not repaid it, so I did not
press for further explanation, but only asked him once again what I
ought to do about calling upon Colonel Morris.

"Call, and be hanged, if you like!" was the reply; and as Mr. Taylor was
not usually a man given to violent language, I understood that Miss
Blake's name acted upon his temper with the same magical effect as a red
rag does upon that of a turkey-cock.




4. MYSELF AND MISS BLAKE


Colonel Morris, after leaving River Hall, had migrated temporarily to a
fashionable West End hotel, and was, when I called to see him, partaking
of tiffin in the bosom of his family, instead of at his club.

As it was notorious that he and Mrs. Morris failed to lead the most
harmonious of lives, I did not feel surprised to find him in an
extremely bad temper.

In person, short, dapper, wiry, thin, and precise, his manner matched
his appearance. He had martinet written on every square foot of his
figure. His moustache was fiercely waxed, his shirt-collar inflexible,
his backbone stiff, while his shoulder-blades met flat and even behind.
He held his chin a little up in the air, and his walk was less a march
than a strut.

He came into the room where I had been waiting for him, as I fancied he
might have come on a wet, cold morning to meet an awkward-squad. He held
the card I sent for his inspection in his hand, and referred to it,
after he had looked me over with a supercilious glance.

"Mr. Patterson, from Messrs. Craven and Son," he read slowly out loud,
and then added:

"May I inquire what Mr. Patterson from Messrs. Craven and Son
wants with me?"

"I come from Miss Blake, sir," I remarked.

"It is here written that you come from Messrs. Craven and Son," he said.

"So I do, sir--upon Miss Blake's business. She is a client of ours, as
you may remember."

"I do remember. Go on."

He would not sit down himself or ask me to be seated, so we stood
throughout the interview. I with my hat in my hand, he twirling his
moustache or scrutinising his nails while he talked.

"Miss Blake has received a letter from you, sir, and has requested me to
ask you for an explanation of it."

"I have no further explanation to give," he replied.

"But as you took the house for two years, we cannot advise Miss Blake to
allow you to relinquish possession in consideration of your having paid
her six months' rent."

"Very well. Then you can advise her to fight the matter, as I suppose
you will. I am prepared to fight it."

"We never like fighting, if a matter can be arranged amicably," I
answered. "Mr. Craven is at present out of town; but I know I am only
speaking his words, when I say we shall be glad to advise Miss Blake to
accept any reasonable proposition which you may feel inclined to make."

"I have sent her half a year's rent," was his reply; "and I have
refrained from prosecuting you all for conspiracy, as I am told I might
have done. Lawyers, I am aware, admit they have no consciences, and I
can make some allowance for a person in Miss Blake's position,
otherwise."

"Yes, sir?" I said, interrogatively.

"I should never have paid one penny. It has, I find, been a well-known
fact to Mr. Craven, as well as to Miss Blake, that no tenant can remain
in River Hall. When my wife was first taken ill there--in consequence of
the frightful shock she received--I sent for the nearest medical man,
and he refused to come; absolutely sent me a note, saying, 'he was very
sorry, but he must decline to attend Mrs. Morris. Doubtless, she had her
own physician, who would be happy to devote himself to the case.'"

"And what did you do?" I asked, my pulses tingling with awakened
curiosity.

"Do!" he repeated, pleased, perhaps, to find so appreciative a listener.
"I sent, of course, for the best advice to be had in London, and I went
to the local doctor--a man who keeps a surgery and dispenses
medicines--myself, to ask what he meant by returning such an insolent
message in answer to my summons. And what do you suppose he said by way
of apology?"

"I cannot imagine," I replied.

"He said he would not for ten times over the value of all the River
Hall patients, attend a case in the house again. 'No person can live in
it,' he went on, 'and keep his, her, or its health. Whether it is the
river, or the drains, or the late owner, or the devil, I have not an
idea. I can only tell you no one has been able to remain in it since
Mr. Elmsdale's death, and if I attend a case there, of course I say,
Get out of this at once. Then comes Miss Blake and threatens me with
assault and battery--swears she will bring an action against me for
libelling the place; declares I wish to drive her and her niece to the
workhouse, and asserts I am in league with some one who wants to keep
the house vacant, and I am sick of it. Get what doctor you choose, but
don't send for me.'"

"Well, sir?" I suggested.

"Well! I don't consider it well at all. Here am I, a man returning to
his native country--and a beastly country it is!--after nearly thirty
years' absence, and the first transaction upon which I engage proves a
swindle. Yes, a swindle, Mr. Patterson. I went to you in all good faith,
took that house at your own rent, thought I had got a desirable home,
and believed I was dealing with respectable people, and now I find I was
utterly deceived, both as regards the place and your probity. You knew
the house was uninhabitable, and yet you let it to me."

"I give you my word," I said, "that we really do not know yet in what
way the house is uninhabitable. It is a good house, as you know; it is
well furnished; the drainage is perfect; so far as we are concerned, we
do not believe a fault can be found with the place. Still, it has been a
fact that tenants will not stay in it, and we were therefore glad to let
it to a gentleman like yourself, who would, we expected, prove above
subscribing to that which can only be a vulgar prejudice."

"What is a vulgar prejudice?" he asked.

"The idea that River Hall is haunted," I replied.

"River Hall is haunted, young man," he said, solemnly.

"By what?" I asked.

"By some one who cannot rest in his grave," was the answer.

"Colonel Morris," I said, "some one _must_ be playing tricks in
the house."

"If so, that some one does not belong to this world," he remarked.

"Do you mean really and seriously to tell me you believe in ghosts?" I
asked, perhaps a little scornfully.

"I do, and if you had lived in River Hall, you would believe in them
too," he replied. "I will tell you," he went on, "what I saw in the
house myself. You know the library?"

I nodded in assent. We did know the library. There our trouble seemed to
have taken up its abode.

"Are you aware lights have frequently been reflected from that room,
when no light has actually been in it?"

I could only admit this had occasionally proved a ground of what we
considered unreasonable complaint.

"One evening," went on the Colonel, "I determined to test the matter for
myself. Long before dusk I entered the room and examined it
thoroughly--saw to the fastenings of the windows, drew up the blinds,
locked the door, and put the key in my pocket. After dinner I took a
cigar and walked up and down the grass path beside the river, until
dark. There was no light--not a sign of light of any kind, as I turned
once more and walked up the path again; but as I was retracing my steps
I saw that the room was brilliantly illuminated. I rushed to the nearest
window and looked in. The gas was all ablaze, the door of the strong
room open, the table strewed with papers, while in an office-chair drawn
close up to the largest drawer, a man was seated counting over
bank-notes. He had a pile of them before him, and I distinctly saw that
he wetted his fingers in order to separate them."

"Most extraordinary!" I exclaimed. I could not decently have said
anything less; but I confess that I had in my recollection the fact of
Colonel Morris having dined.

"The most extraordinary part of the story is still to come," he
remarked. "I hurried at once into the house, unlocked the door, found
the library in pitch darkness, and when I lit the gas the strong room
was closed; there was no office-chair in the room, no papers were on the
table--everything, in fact, was precisely in the same condition as I had
left it a few hours before. Now, no person in the flesh could have
performed such a feat as that."

"I cannot agree with you there," I ventured. "It seems to me less
difficult to believe the whole thing a trick, than to attribute the
occurrence to supernatural agency. In fact, while I do not say it is
impossible for ghosts to be, I cannot accept the fact of their
existence."

"Well, I can, then," retorted the Colonel. "Why, sir, once at the Cape
of Good Hope--" but there he paused. Apparently he recollected just in
time that the Cape of Good Hope was a long way from River Hall.

"And Mrs. Morris," I suggested, leading him back to the banks of the
Thames. "You mentioned some shock--"

"Yes," he said, frankly. "She met the same person on the staircase I saw
in the library. He carried in one hand a lighted candle, and in the
other a bundle of bank-notes. He never looked at her as he passed--never
turned his head to the spot where she stood gazing after him in a
perfect access of terror, but walked quietly downstairs, crossed the
hall, and went straight into the library without opening the door. She
fainted dead away, and has never known an hour's good health since."

"According to all accounts, she had not before, or good temper either,"
I thought; but I only said, "You had told Mrs. Morris, I presume, of
your adventure in the library?"

"No," he answered; "I had not; I did not mention it to anyone except a
brother officer, who dined with me the next evening."

"Your conversation with him might have been overheard, I
suppose," I urged.

"It is possible, but scarcely probable," he replied. "At all events, I
am quite certain it never reached my wife's ears, or she would not have
stayed another night in the house."

I stood for a few moments irresolute, but then I spoke. I told him how
much we--meaning Messrs. Craven and Son--his manager and his cashier,
and his clerks, regretted the inconvenience to which he had been put;
delicately I touched upon the concern we felt at hearing of Mrs. Morris'
illness. But, I added, I feared his explanation, courteous and ample as
it had been, would not satisfy Miss Blake, and trusted he might, upon
consideration, feel disposed to compromise the matter.

"We," I added, "will be only too happy to recommend our client to accept
any reasonable proposal you may think it well to make."

Whereupon it suddenly dawned upon the Colonel that he had been
showing me all his hand, and forthwith he adopted a very natural
course. He ordered me to leave the room and the hotel, and not to
show my face before him again at my peril. And I obeyed his
instructions to the letter.

On the same evening of that day I took a long walk round by the
Uninhabited House.

There it was, just as I had seen it last, with high brick walls dividing
it from the road; with its belt of forest-trees separating it from the
next residence, with its long frontage to the river, with its closed
gates and shuttered postern-door.

The entrance to it was not from the main highway, but from a lane which
led right down to the Thames; and I went to the very bottom of that lane
and swung myself by means of a post right over the river, so that I
might get a view of the windows of the room with which so ghostly a
character was associated. The blinds were all down and the whole place
looked innocent enough.

The strong, sweet, subtle smell of mignonette came wafted to my senses,
the odours of jessamine, roses, and myrtle floated to me on the evening
breeze. I could just catch a glimpse of the flower-gardens, radiant with
colour, full of leaf and bloom.

"No haunted look there," I thought. "The house is right enough, but some
one must have determined to keep it empty." And then I swung myself back
into the lane again, and the shadow of the high brick wall projected
itself across my mind as it did across my body.

"Is this place to let again, do you know?" said a voice in my ear, as I
stood looking at the private door which gave a separate entrance to that
evil-reputed library.

The question was a natural one, and the voice not unpleasant, yet I
started, having noticed no one near me.

"I beg your pardon," said the owner of the voice. "Nervous, I fear!"

"No, not at all, only my thoughts were wandering. I beg your pardon--I
do not know whether the place is to let or not."

"A good house?" This might have been interrogative, or uttered as an
assertion, but I took it as the former, and answered accordingly.

"Yes, a good house--a very good house, indeed," I said.

"It is often vacant, though," he said, with a light laugh.

"Through no fault of the house," I added.

"Oh! it is the fault of the tenants, is it?" he remarked, laughing once
more. "The owners, I should think, must be rather tired of their
property by this time."

"I do not know that," I replied. "They live in hope of finding a good
and sensible tenant willing to take it."

"And equally willing to keep it, eh?" he remarked. "Well, I, perhaps, am
not much of a judge in the matter, but I should say they will have to
wait a long time first."

"You know something about the house?" I said, interrogatively.

"Yes," he answered, "most people about here do, I fancy--but least said
soonest mended"; and as by this time we had reached the top of the lane,
he bade me a civil good-evening, and struck off in a westerly direction.

Though the light of the setting sun shone full in my face, and I had to
shade my eyes in order to enable me to see at all, moved by some feeling
impossible to analyse, I stood watching that retreating figure.
Afterwards I could have sworn to the man among ten thousand.

A man of about fifty, well and plainly dressed, who did not appear to be
in ill-health, yet whose complexion had a blanched look, like forced
sea-kale; a man of under, rather than over middle height, not of slight
make, but lean as if the flesh had been all worn off his bones; a man
with sad, anxious, outlooking, abstracted eyes, with a nose slightly
hooked, without a trace of whisker, with hair thin and straight and
flaked with white, active and lithe in his movements, a swift walker,
though he had a slight halt. While looking at him thrown up in relief
against the glowing western sky, I noticed, what had previously escaped
my attention, that he was a little deformed. His right shoulder was
rather higher than the other. A man with a story in his memory, I
imagined; a man who had been jilted by the girl he loved, or who had
lost her by death, or whose wife had proved faithless; whose life, at
all events, had been marred by a great trouble. So, in my folly, I
decided; for I was young then, and romantic, and had experienced some
sorrow myself connected with pecuniary matters.

For the latter reason, it never perhaps occurred to me to associate the
trouble of my new acquaintance, if he could be so called, with money
annoyances. I knew, or thought I knew, at all events, the expression
loss of fortune stamps on a man's face; and the look which haunted me
for days after had nothing in it of discontent, or self-assertion, or
struggling gentility, or vehement protest against the decrees of
fortune. Still less was it submissive. As I have said, it haunted me for
days, then the memory grew less vivid, then I forgot the man altogether.
Indeed, we shortly became so absorbed in the fight between Miss Blake
and Colonel Morris, that we had little time to devote to the
consideration of other matters.

True to her promise, Miss Blake appeared next morning in Buckingham
Street. Without bestowing upon me even the courtesy of "good morning,"
she plunged into the subject next her heart.

"Did you see him?" she asked.

I told her I had. I repeated much of what he said; I assured her he
was determined to fight the matter, and that although I did really not
think any jury would give a verdict in his favour, still I believed,
if the matter came into court, it would prevent our ever letting the
house again.

"I should strongly recommend you, Miss Blake," I finished, "to keep what
he offers, and let us try and find another tenant."

"And who asked you to recommend anything, you fast young man?" she
demanded. "I am sure I did not, and I am very sure Mr. Craven would not
be best pleased to know his clerks were setting themselves up higher
than their master. You would never find William Craven giving himself
airs such as you young whipper-snappers think make you seem of some
consequence. I just tell him what I want done, and he does it, and you
will please to do the same, and serve a writ on that villain without an
hour's delay."

I asked on what grounds we were to serve the writ. I pointed out that
Colonel Morris did not owe her a penny, and would not owe her a penny
for some months to come; and in reply she said she would merely inquire
if I meant that she and her poor niece were to go to the workhouse.

To this I answered that the amount already remitted by Colonel Morris
would prevent such a calamity, but she stopped my attempt at consolation
by telling me not to talk about things I did not understand.

"Give me William Craven's address," she added, "and I will write to
him direct. I wonder what he means by leaving a parcel of ignorant
boys to attend to his clients while he is away enjoying himself! Give
me his address, and some paper and an envelope, and I can write my
letter here."

I handed her the paper and the envelope, and placed pen and ink
conveniently before her, but I declined to give her Mr. Craven's
address. We would forward the letter, I said; but when Mr. Craven went
away for his holiday, he was naturally anxious to leave business behind
as much as possible.

Then Miss Blake took steady aim, and fired at me. Broadside after
broadside did she pour into my unprotected ears; she opened the vials of
her wrath and overwhelmed me with reproaches; she raked up all the
grievances she had for years been cherishing against England, and by
some sort of verbal legerdemain made me responsible for every evil she
could recollect as ever having happened to her. Her sister's marriage,
her death, Mr. Elmsdale's suicide, the unsatisfactory state of his
affairs, the prejudice against River Hall, the defection of Colonel
Morris--all these things she laid at my door, and insisted on making me
responsible for them.

"And now," she finished, pushing back her bonnet and pulling off her
gloves, "I'll just write my opinion of you to Mr. Craven, and I'll wait
till you direct the envelope, and I'll go with you to the post, and I'll
see you put the letter in the box. If you and your fine Colonel Morris
think you can frighten or flatter me, you are both much mistaken, I can
tell you that!"

I did not answer her. I was too greatly affronted to express what I felt
in words. I sat on the other side of the table--for I would not leave
her alone in Mr. Craven's office--sulking, while she wrote her letter,
which she did in a great, fat, splashing sort of hand, with every other
word underlined; and when she had done, and tossed the missive over to
me, I directed it, took my hat, and prepared to accompany her to the
Charing Cross office.

We went down the staircase together in silence, up Buckingham Street,
across the Strand, and so to Charing Cross, where she saw me drop the
letter into the box. All this time we did not exchange a syllable, but
when, after raising my hat, I was about to turn away, she seized hold of
my arm, and said, "Don't let us part in bad blood. Though you are only a
clerk, you have got your feelings, no doubt, and if in my temper I hurt
them, I am sorry. Can I say more? You are a decent lad enough, as times
go in England, and my bark is worse than my bite. I didn't write a word
about you to William Craven. Shake hands, and don't bear malice to a
poor lonely woman."

Thus exhorted, I took her hand and shook it, and then, in token of
entire amity, she told me she had forgotten to bring her purse with her
and could I let her have a sovereign. She would pay me, she declared
solemnly, the first day she came again to the office.

This of course I did not believe in the least, nevertheless I gave
her what she required--and Heaven knows, sovereigns were scarce
enough with me then--thankfully, and felt sincerely obliged to her
for making herself my debtor. Miss Blake did sometimes ruffle one's
feathers most confoundedly, and yet I knew it would have grieved me
had we parted in enmity.

Sometimes, now, when I look upon her quiet and utterly respectable old
age--when I contemplate her pathetic grey hair and conventional lace
cap--when I view her clothed like other people and in her right mind, I
am very glad indeed to remember I had no second thought about that
sovereign, but gave it to her--with all the veins of my heart, as she
would have emphasised the proceeding.

"Though you have no name to speak of," observed Miss Blake as she
pocketed the coin, "I think there must be some sort of blood in you. I
knew Pattersons once who were connected by marriage with a great duke in
the west of Ireland. Can you say if by chance you can trace relationship
to any of them?"

"I can say most certainly not, Miss Blake," I replied. "We are
Pattersons of nowhere and relations of no one."

"Well, well," remarked the lady, pityingly, "you can't help that, poor
lad. And if you attend to your duties, you may yet be a rich City
alderman."

With which comfort she left me, and wended her homeward way through St.
Martin's Lane and the Seven Dials.




5. THE TRIAL


Next day but one Mr. Craven astonished us all by walking into the office
about ten o'clock. He looked stout and well, sunburnt to a degree, and
all the better physically for his trip to the seaside. We were
unfeignedly glad to see him. Given a good employer, and it must be an
extremely bad employe who rejoices in his absence. If we were not
saints, we were none of us very black sheep, and accordingly, from the
porter to the managing clerk, our faces brightened at sight of our
principal.

But after the first genial "how are you" and "good morning," Mr.
Craven's face told tales: he had come back out of sorts. He was vexed
about Miss Blake's letter, and, astonishing to relate, he was angry with
me for having called upon Colonel Morris.

"You take too much upon you, Patterson," he remarked. "It is a growing
habit with you, and you must try to check it."

I did not answer him by a word; my heart seemed in my mouth; I felt as
if I was choking. I only inclined my head in token that I heard and
understood, and assented; then, having, fortunately, work to attend to
out of doors, I seized an early opportunity of slipping down the
staircase and walking off to Chancery Lane. When I returned, after
hours, to Buckingham Street, one of the small boys in the outer office
told me I was to go to Mr. Craven's room directly.

"You'll catch it," remarked the young fiend. "He has asked for you a
dozen times, at least."

"What can be wrong now?" I thought, as I walked straight along the
passage to Mr. Craven's office.

"Patterson," he said, as I announced my return.

"Yes, sir?"

"I spoke hastily to you this morning, and I regret having done so."

"Oh! sir," I cried. And that was all. We were better friends than ever.
Do you wonder that I liked my principal? If so, it is only because I am
unable to portray him as he really was. The age of chivalry is past; but
still it is no exaggeration to say I would have died cheerfully if my
dying could have served Mr. Craven.

Life holds me now by many and many a nearer and dearer tie than was the
case in those days so far and far away; nevertheless, I would run any
risk, encounter any peril, if by so doing I could serve the man who in
my youth treated me with a kindness far beyond my deserts.

He did not, when he came suddenly to town in this manner, stop at
his own house, which was, on such occasions, given over to charwomen
and tradespeople of all descriptions; but he put up at an
old-fashioned family hotel where, on that especial evening, he asked
me to dine with him.

Over dessert he opened his mind to me on the subject of the "Uninhabited
House." He said the evil was becoming one of serious magnitude. He
declared he could not imagine what the result might prove. "With all the
will in the world," he said, "to assist Miss Blake and that poor child,
I cannot undertake to provide for them. Something must be done in the
affair, and I am sure I cannot see what that something is to be. Since
Mr. Elmsdale bought the place, the neighbourhood has gone down. If we
sold the freehold as it stands, I fear we should not get more than a
thousand pounds for it, and a thousand pounds would not last Miss Blake
three years; as for supposing she could live on the interest, that is
out of the question. The ground might be cut up and let for business
purposes, of course, but that would be a work of time. I confess, I do
not know what to think about the matter or how to act in it."

"Do you suppose the place really is haunted?" I ventured to inquire.

"Haunted?--pooh! nonsense," answered Mr. Craven, pettishly. "Do I
suppose this room is haunted; do I believe my offices are haunted? No
sane man has faith in any folly of the kind; but the place has got a bad
name; I suspect it is unhealthy, and the tenants, when they find that
out, seize on the first excuse which offers. It is known we have
compromised a good many tenancies, and I am afraid we shall have to
fight this case, if only to show we do not intend being patient for
ever. Besides, we shall exhaust the matter: we shall hear what the
ghost-seers have to say for themselves on oath. There is little doubt of
our getting a verdict, for the British juryman is, as a rule, not
imaginative."

"I think we shall get a verdict," I agreed; "but I fancy we shall never
get another tenant."

"There are surely as good fish in the sea as ever came out of it," he
answered, with a smile; "and we shall come across some worthy country
squire, possessed of pretty daughters, who will be delighted to find so
cheap and sweet a nest for his birds, when they want to be near London."

"I wish sir," I said, "you would see Colonel Morris yourself. I am quite
certain that every statement he made to me is true in his belief. I do
not say, I believe him; I only say, what he told me justifies the
inference that some one is playing a clever game in River Hall," and
then I repeated in detail all the circumstances Colonel Morris had
communicated to me, not excepting the wonderful phenomenon witnessed by
Mr. Morris, of a man walking through a closed door.

Mr. Craven listened to me in silence, then he said, "I will not see
Colonel Morris. What you tell me only confirms my opinion that we must
fight this question. If he and his witnesses adhere to the story you
repeat, on oath, I shall then have some tangible ground upon which to
stand with Miss Blake. If they do not--and, personally, I feel satisfied
no one who told such a tale could stand the test of cross-examination--we
shall then have defeated the hidden enemy who, as I believe, lurks behind
all this. Miss Blake is right in what she said to you: Robert Elmsdale
must have had many a good hater. Whether he ever inspired that different
sort of dislike which leads a man to carry on a war in secret, and try to
injure this opponent's family after death, I have no means of knowing. But
we must test the matter now, Patterson, and I think you had better call
upon Colonel Morris and tell him so."

This service, however, to Mr. Craven's intense astonishment, I
utterly declined.

I told him--respectfully, of course: under no possible conditions of
life could I have spoken other than respectfully to a master I loved so
well--that if a message were to be delivered _viva voce_ from our
office, it could not be so delivered by me.

I mentioned the fact that I felt no desire to be kicked downstairs. I
declared that I should consider it an unseemly thing for me to engage in
personal conflict with a gentleman of Colonel Morris's years and social
position, and, as a final argument, I stated solemnly that I believed no
number of interviews would change the opinions of our late tenant or
induce him to alter his determination.

"He says he will fight," I remarked, as a finish to my speech, "and I am
confident he will till he drops."

"Well, well," said Mr. Craven, "I suppose he must do so then; but
meantime it is all very hard upon me."

And, indeed, so it proved; what with Miss Blake, who, of course,
required frequent advances to sustain her strength during the
approaching ordeal; what with policemen, who could not "undertake to be
always a-watching River Hall"; what with watchmen, who kept their vigils
in the nearest public-house as long as it was open, and then peacefully
returned home to sleep; what with possible tenants, who came to us
imagining the place was to let, and whom we referred to Colonel Morris,
who dismissed them, each and all, with a tale which disenchanted them
with the "desirable residence"--it was all exceeding hard upon Mr.
Craven and his clerks till the quarter turned when we could take action
about the matter.

Before the new year was well commenced, we were in the heat of the
battle. We had written to Colonel Morris, applying for one quarter's
rent of River Hall. A disreputable blackguard of a solicitor would have
served him with a writ; but we were eminently respectable: not at the
bidding of her most gracious Majesty, whose name we invoked on many and
many of our papers, would Mr. Craven have dispensed with the
preliminary letter; and I feel bound to say I follow in his footsteps
in that respect.

To this notice, Colonel Morris replied, referring us to his solicitors.

We wrote to them, eliciting a reply to the effect that they would
receive service of a writ. We served that writ, and then, as Colonel
Morris intended to fight, instructed counsel.

Meanwhile the "Uninhabited House," and the furniture it contained, was,
as Mr. Taylor tersely expressed the matter, "Going to the devil."

We could not help that, however--war was put upon us, and go to war we
felt we must.

Which was all extremely hard upon Mr. Craven. To my knowledge, he had
already, in three months, advanced thirty pounds to Miss Blake, besides
allowing her to get into his debt for counsel's fees, and costs out of
pocket, and cab hire, and Heaven knows what besides--with a
problematical result also. Colonel Morris' solicitors were sparing no
expenses to crush us. Clearly they, in a blessed vision, beheld an
enormous bill, paid without difficulty or question. Fifty guineas here
or there did not signify to their client, whilst to us--well, really,
let a lawyer be as kind and disinterested as he will, fifty guineas
disbursed upon the suit of an utterly insolvent, or persistently
insolvent, client means something eminently disagreeable to him.

Nevertheless, we were all heartily glad to know the day of war was come.
Body and soul, we all went in for Miss Blake, and Helena, and the
"Uninhabited House." Even Mr. Taylor relented, and was to be seen
rushing about with papers in hand relating to the impending suit of
Blake _v_. Morris.

"She is a blank, blank woman," he remarked to me; "but still the case is
interesting. I don't think ghosts have ever before come into court in my
experience."

And we were all of the same mind. We girt up our loins for the fight.
Each of us, I think, on the strength of her celebrity, lent Miss Blake a
few shillings, and one or two of our number franked her to luncheon.

She patronized us all, I know, and said she should like to tell our
mothers they had reason to be proud of their sons. And then came a
dreadfully solemn morning, when we went to Westminster and championed
Miss Blake.

Never in our memory of the lady had she appeared to such advantage as
when we met her in Edward the Confessor's Hall. She looked a little
paler than usual, and we felt her general get-up was a credit to our
establishment. She wore an immense fur tippet, which, though then of an
obsolete fashion, made her look like a three-per-cent. annuitant going
to receive her dividends. Her throat was covered with a fine white lawn
handkerchief; her dress was mercifully long enough to conceal her
boots; her bonnet was perfectly straight, and the strings tied by some
one who understood that bows should be pulled out and otherwise
fancifully manipulated. As she carried a muff as large as a big drum,
she had conceived the happy idea of dispensing altogether with gloves,
and I saw that one of the fingers she gave me to shake was adorned with
a diamond ring.

"Miss Elmsdale's," whispered Taylor to me. "It belonged to her mother."

Hearing which, I understood Helena had superintended her aunt's toilet.

"Did you ever see Miss Elmsdale?" I inquired of our manager.

"Not for years," was the answer. "She bade fair to be pretty."

"Why does not Miss Blake bring her out with her sometimes?" I asked.

"I believe she is expecting the Queen to give her assent to her marrying
the Prince of Wales," explained Taylor, "and she does not wish her to
appear much in public until after the wedding."

The court was crammed. Somehow it had got into the papers--probably
through Colonel Morris' gossips at the club--that ours was likely to
prove a very interesting case, and though the morning was damp and
wretched, ladies and gentlemen had turned out into the fog and drizzle,
as ladies and gentlemen will when there seems the least chance of a new
sensation being provided for them.

Further, there were lots of reporters.

"It will be in every paper throughout the kingdom," groaned Taylor. "We
had better by far have left the Colonel alone."

That had always been my opinion, but I only said, "Well, it is of no use
looking back now."

I glanced at Mr. Craven, and saw he was ill at ease. We had considerable
faith in ourselves, our case, and our counsel; but, then, we could not
be blind to the fact that Colonel Morris' counsel were men very much
better known than our men--that a cloud of witnesses, thirsting to
avenge themselves for the rent we had compelled them to pay for an
uninhabitable house, were hovering about the court--(had we not seen and
recognized them in the Hall?)--that, in fact, there were two very
distinct sides to the question, one represented by Colonel Morris and
his party, and the other by Miss Blake and ourselves.

Of course our case lay in a nutshell. We had let the place, and Colonel
Morris had agreed to take it. Colonel Morris now wanted to be rid of his
bargain, and we were determined to keep him to it. Colonel Morris said
the house was haunted, and that no one could live in it. We said the
house was not haunted, and that anybody could live in it; that River
Hall was "in every respect suited for the residence of a family of
position"--see advertisements in _Times_ and _Morning Post_.

Now, if the reader will kindly consider the matter, it must be an
extremely difficult thing to prove, in a court of law, that a house, by
reason solely of being haunted, is unsuitable for the residence of a
gentleman of position.

Smells, bad drainage, impure water, unhealthiness of situation,
dampness, the absence of advantages mentioned, the presence of small
game--more odious to tenants of furnished houses than ground game to
farmers--all these things had, we knew, been made pretexts for
repudiation of contracts, and often successfully, but we could find no
precedent for ghosts being held as just pleas upon which to relinquish a
tenancy; and we made sure of a favourable verdict accordingly.

To this day, I believe that our hopes would have been justified by the
result, had some demon of mischief not put it into the head of
Taylor--who had the management of the case--that it would be a good
thing to get Miss Blake into the witness-box.

"She will amuse the jury," he said, "and juries have always a kindly
feeling for any person who can amuse them."

Which was all very well, and might be very true in a general way, but
Miss Blake proved the exception to his rule.

Of course she amused the jury, in fact, she amused everyone. To get her
to give a straightforward answer to any question was simply impossible.

Over and over again the judge explained to her that "yes" or "no" would
be amply sufficient; but all in vain. She launched out at large in
reply to our counsel, who, nevertheless, when he sat down, had gained
his point.

Miss Blake declared upon oath she had never seen anything worse than
herself at River Hall, and did not believe anybody else ever had.

She had never been there during Colonel Morris' tenancy, or she must
certainly have seen something worse than a ghost, a man ready and
anxious to "rob the orphan," and she was going to add the "widow" when
peals of laughter stopped her utterance. Miss Blake had no faith in
ghosts resident at River Hall, and if anybody was playing tricks about
the house, she should have thought a "fighting gentleman by profession"
capable of getting rid of them.

"Unless he was afraid," added Miss Blake, with withering irony.

Then up rose the opposition counsel, who approached her in an easy,
conversational manner.

"And so you do not believe in ghosts, Miss Blake?" he began.

"Indeed and I don't," she answered.

"But if we have not ghosts, what is to become of the literature of your
country?" he inquired.

"I don't know what you mean, by talking about my country," said Miss
Blake, who was always proclaiming her nationality, and quarrelling with
those who discovered it without such proclamation.

"I mean," he explained, "that all the fanciful legends and beautiful
stories for which Ireland is celebrated have their origin in the
supernatural. There are, for instance, several old families who have
their traditional banshee."

"For that matter, we have one ourselves," agreed Miss Blake, with
conscious pride.

At this junction our counsel interposed with a suggestion that there was
no insinuation about any banshee residing at River Hall.

"No, the question is about a ghost, and I am coming to that. Different
countries have different usages. In Ireland, as Miss Blake admits, there
exists a very ladylike spirit, who announces the coming death of any
member of certain families. In England, we have ghosts, who appear after
the death of some members of some families. Now, Miss Blake, I want you
to exercise your memory. Do you remember a night in the November after
Mr. Elmsdale's death?"

"I remember many nights in many months that I passed broken-hearted in
that house," she answered, composedly; but she grew very pale; and
feeling there was something unexpected behind both question and answer,
our counsel looked at us, and we looked back at him, dismayed.

"Your niece, being nervous, slept in the same room as that occupied by
you?" continued the learned gentleman.

"She did," said Miss Blake. Her answer was short enough, and direct
enough, at last.

"Now, on the particular November night to which I refer, do you
recollect being awakened by Miss Elmsdale?"

"She wakened me many a time," answered Miss Blake, and I noticed that
she looked away from her questioner, and towards the gallery.

"Exactly so; but on one especial night she woke you, saying, her father
was walking along the passage; that she knew his step, and that she
heard his keys strike against the wall?"

"Yes, I remember that," said Miss Blake, with suspicious alacrity.
"She kept me up till daybreak. She was always thinking about him,
poor child."

"Very natural indeed," commented our adversary. "And you told her not to
be foolish, I daresay, and very probably tried to reassure her by saying
one of the servants must have passed; and no doubt, being a lady
possessed of energy and courage, you opened your bedroom door, and
looked up and down the corridor?"

"Certainly I did," agreed Miss Blake.

"And saw nothing--and no one?"

"I saw nothing."

"And then, possibly, in order to convince Miss Elmsdale of the full
extent of her delusion, you lit a candle, and went downstairs."

"Of course--why wouldn't I?" said Miss Blake, defiantly.

"Why not, indeed?" repeated the learned gentleman, pensively. "Why
not?--Miss Blake being brave as she is witty. Well, you went
downstairs, and, as was the admirable custom of the house--a custom
worthy of all commendation--you found the doors opening from the hall
bolted and locked?"

"I did."

"And no sign of a human being about?"

"Except myself," supplemented Miss Blake.

"And rather wishing to find that some human being besides yourself was
about, you retraced your steps, and visited the servants' apartments?"

"You might have been with me," said Miss Blake, with an angry sneer.

"I wish I had," he answered. "I can never sufficiently deplore the fact
of my absence. And you found the servants asleep?"

"Well, they seemed asleep," said the lady; "but that does not prove that
they were so."

"Doubtless," he agreed. "Nevertheless, so far as you could judge, none
of them looked as if they had been wandering up and down the corridors?"

"I could not judge one way or another," said Miss Blake: "for the tricks
of English servants, it is impossible for anyone to be up to."

"Still, it did not occur to you at the time that any of them was
feigning slumber?"

"I can't say it did. You see, I am naturally unsuspicious," explained
Miss Blake, naively.

"Precisely so. And thus it happened that you were unable to confute Miss
Elmsdale's fancy?"

"I told her she must have been dreaming," retorted Miss Blake. "People
who wake all of a sudden often confound dreams with realities."

"And people who are not in the habit of awaking suddenly often do the
same thing," agreed her questioner; "and so, Miss Blake, we will pass
out of dreamland, and into daylight--or rather foglight. Do you
recollect a particularly foggy day, when your niece, hearing a favourite
dog moaning piteously, opened the door of the room where her father
died, in order to let it out?"

Miss Blake set her lips tight, and looked up at the gallery. There was
a little stir in that part of the court, a shuffling of feet, and
suppressed whispering. In vain the crier shouted, "Silence! silence,
there!" The bustle continued for about a minute, and then all became
quiet again. A policeman stated "a female had fainted," and our
curiosity being satisfied, we all with one accord turned towards our
learned friend, who, one hand under his gown, holding it back, and the
other raised to emphasise his question, had stood in this picturesque
attitude during the time occupied in carrying the female out, as if
done in stone.

"Miss Blake, will you kindly answer my question?" he said, when order
once again reigned in court.

"You're worse than a heathen," remarked the lady, irrelevantly.

"I am sorry you do not like me," he replied, "for I admire you very
much; but my imperfections are beside the matter in point. What I want
you to tell us is, did Miss Elmsdale open that door?"

"She did--the creature, she did," was the answer; "her heart was always
tender to dumb brutes."

"I have no doubt the young lady's heart was everything it ought to be,"
was the reply; "and for that reason, though she had an intense
repugnance to enter the room, she opened the door to let the dog out."

"She said so: I was not there," answered Miss Blake.

Whereupon ensued a brisk skirmish between counsel as to whether Miss
Blake could give evidence about a matter of mere hearsay. And after they
had fought for ten minutes over the legal bone, our adversary said he
would put the question differently, which he did, thus:

"You were sitting in the dining-room, when you were startled by hearing
a piercing shriek."

"I heard a screech--you can call it what you like," said Miss Blake,
feeling an utter contempt for English phraseology.

"I stand corrected; thank you, Miss Blake. You heard a screech, in
short, and you hurried across the hall, and found Miss Elmsdale in a
fainting condition, on the floor of the library. Was that so?"

"She often fainted: she is all nairves," explained poor Miss Blake.

"No doubt. And when she regained consciousness, she entreated to be
taken out of that dreadful room."

"She never liked the room after her father's death: it was natural,
poor child."

"Quite natural. And so you took her into the dining-room, and there,
curled upon the hearthrug, fast asleep, was the little dog she fancied
she heard whining in the library."

"Yes, he had been away for two or three days, and came home hungry
and sleepy."

"Exactly. And you have, therefore, no reason to believe he was
shamming slumber."

"I believe I am getting very tired of your questions and
cross-questions," she said, irritably.

"Now, what a pity!" remarked her tormentor; "for I could never tire of
your answers. At all events, Miss Elmsdale could not have heard him
whining in the library--so called."

"She might have heard some other dog," said Miss Blake.

"As a matter of fact, however, she stated to you there was no dog in
the room."

"She did. But I don't think she knew whether there was or not."

"In any case, she did not see a dog; you did not see one; and the
servants did not."

"I did not," replied Miss Blake; "as to the servants, I would not
believe them on their oath."

"Hush! hush! Miss Blake," entreated our opponent. "I am afraid you must
not be quite so frank. Now to return to business. When Miss Elmsdale
recovered consciousness, which she did in that very comfortable
easy-chair in the dining-room--what did she tell you?"

"Do you think I am going to repeat her half-silly words?" demanded Miss
Blake, angrily. "Poor dear, she was out of her mind half the time, after
her father's death."

"No doubt; but still, I must just ask you to tell us what passed. Was it
anything like this? Did she say, 'I have seen my father. He was coming
out of the strong-room when I lifted my head after looking for Juan, and
he was wringing his hands, and seemed in some terrible distress'?"

"God forgive them that told you her words," remarked Miss Blake; "but
she did say just those, and I hope they'll do you and her as played
eavesdropper all the good I wish."

"Really, Miss Blake," interposed the judge.

"I have no more questions to ask, my lord," said Colonel Morris'
counsel, serenely triumphant. "Miss Blake can go down now."

And Miss Blake did go down; and Taylor whispered in my ear:

"She had done for us."




6. WE AGREE TO COMPROMISE


Colonel Morris' side of the case was now to be heard, and heads were
bending eagerly forward to catch each word of wisdom that should fall
from the lips of Serjeant Playfire, when I felt a hand, cold as ice,
laid on mine, and turning, beheld Miss Blake at my elbow.

She was as white as the nature of her complexion would permit, and her
voice shook as she whispered:

"Take me away from this place, will you?"

I cleared a way for her out of the court, and when we reached
Westminster Hall, seeing how upset she seemed, asked if I could get
anything for her--"a glass of water, or wine," I suggested, in my
extremity.

"Neither water nor wine will mend a broken heart," she answered,
solemnly; "and mine has been broken in there"--with a nod she indicated
the court we had just left.

Not remembering at the moment an approved recipe for the cure of such a
fracture, I was cudgelling my brains to think of some form of reply not
likely to give offence, when, to my unspeakable relief, Mr. Craven came
up to where we stood.

"I will take charge of Miss Blake now, Patterson," he said,
gravely--very gravely; and accepting this as an intimation that he
desired my absence, I was turning away, when I heard Miss Blake say:

"Where is she--the creature? What have they done with her at all?"

"I have sent her home," was Mr. Craven's reply. "How could you be so
foolish as to mislead me as you have done?"

"Come," thought I, smelling the battle afar off, "we shall soon have
Craven _v_. Blake tried privately in our office." I knew Mr. Craven
pretty well, and understood he would not readily forgive Miss Blake for
having kept Miss Helena's experiences a secret from him.

Over and over I had heard Miss Blake state there was not a thing really
against the house, and that Helena, poor dear, only hated the place
because she had there lost her father.

"Not much of a loss either, if she could be brought to think so,"
finished Miss Blake, sometimes.

Consequently, to Mr. Craven, as well as to all the rest of those
connected with the firm, the facts elicited by Serjeant Playfire were
new as unwelcome.

If the daughter of the house dreamed dreams and beheld visions, why
should strangers be denied a like privilege? If Miss Elmsdale believed
her father could not rest in his grave, how were we to compel belief as
to calm repose on the part of yearly tenants?

"Playfire has been pitching into us pretty strong," remarked Taylor,
when I at length elbowed my way back to where our manager sat. "Where is
Mr. Craven?"

"I left him with Miss Blake."

"It is just as well he has not heard all the civil remarks Playfire made
about our connection with the business. Hush! he is going to call his
witnesses. No, the court is about to adjourn for luncheon."

Once again I went out into Westminster Hall, and was sauntering idly up
and down over its stones when Mr. Craven joined me.

"A bad business this, Patterson," he remarked.

"We shall never get another tenant for that house," I answered.

"Certainly no tenant will ever again be got through me," he said,
irritably; and then Taylor came to him, all in a hurry, and explaining
he was wanted, carried him away.

"They are going to compromise," I thought, and followed slowly in the
direction taken by my principal.

How I knew they were thinking of anything of the kind, I cannot say, but
intuitively I understood the course events were taking.

Our counsel had mentally decided that, although the jury might feel
inclined to uphold contracts and to repudiate ghosts, still, it would be
impossible for them to overlook the fact that Colonel Morris had rented
the place in utter ignorance of its antecedents, and that we had, so
far, taken a perhaps undue advantage of him; moreover, the gallant
officer had witnesses in court able to prove, and desirous of proving,
that we had over and over again compromised matters with dissatisfied
tenants, and cancelled agreements, not once or twice, but many, times;
further, on no single occasion had Miss Blake and her niece ever slept a
single night in the uninhabited house from the day when they left it; no
matter how scarce of money they chanced to be, they went into lodgings
rather than reside at River Hall. This was beyond dispute and Miss
Blake's evidence supplied the reason for conduct so extraordinary.

For some reason the house was uninhabitable. The very owners could not
live in it; and yet--so in imagination we heard Serjeant Playfire
declaim--"The lady from whom the TRUTH had that day been reluctantly
wrung had the audacity to insist that delicate women and tender children
should continue to inhabit a dwelling over which a CURSE seemed
brooding--a dwelling where the dead were always striving for mastery
with the living; or else pay Miss Blake a sum of money which should
enable her and the daughter of the suicide to live in ease and luxury on
the profits of DECEPTION."

And looking at the matter candidly, our counsel did not believe the jury
could return a verdict. He felt satisfied, he said, there was not a
landlord in the box, that they were all tenants, who would consider the
three months' rent paid over and above the actual occupation rent,
ample, and more than ample, remuneration.

On the other hand, Serjeant Playfire, whose experience of juries was
large, and calculated to make him feel some contempt for the judgment of
"twelve honest men" in any case from pocket-picking to manslaughter, had
a prevision that, when the judge had explained to Mr. Foreman and
gentlemen of the jury, the nature of a contract, and told them
supernatural appearances, however disagreeable, were not recognized in
law as a sufficient cause for breaking an agreement, a verdict would be
found for Miss Blake.

"There must be one landlord amongst them," he considered; "and if there
is, he will wind the rest round his finger. Besides, they will take the
side of the women, naturally; and Miss Blake made them laugh, and the
way she spoke of her niece touched them; while, as for the Colonel, he
won't like cross-examination, and I can see my learned friend means to
make him appear ridiculous. Enough has been done for honour--let us
think of safety."

"For my part," said Colonel Morris, when the question was referred to
him, "I am not a vindictive man, nor, I hope, an ungenerous foe; I do
not like to be victimized, and I have vindicated my principles. The
victory was mine in fact, if not in law, when that old Irishwoman's
confession was wrung out of her. So, therefore, gentlemen, settle the
matter as you please--I shall be satisfied."

And all the time he was inwardly praying some arrangement might be come
to. He was brave enough in his own way, but it is one thing to go into
battle, and another to stand legal fire without the chance of sending a
single bullet in return. Ridicule is the vulnerable spot in the heel of
many a modern Achilles; and while the rest of the court was "convulsed
with laughter" over Miss Blake's cross-examination, the gallant Colonel
felt himself alternately turning hot and cold when he thought that
through even such an ordeal he might have to pass. And, accordingly, to
cut short this part of my story, amongst them the lawyers agreed to
compromise the matter thus--

Colonel Morris to give Miss Blake a third quarter's rent--in other
words, fifty pounds more, and each side to pay its own costs.

When this decision was finally arrived at, Mr. Craven's face was a
study. Full well he knew on whom would fall the costs of one side. He
saw in prophetic vision the fifty pounds passing out of his hands into
those of Miss Blake, but no revelation was vouchsafed on the subject of
loans unpaid, of costs out of pocket, or costs at all. After we left
court he employed himself, I fancy, for the remainder of the afternoon
in making mental calculations of how much poorer a man Mrs. Elmsdale's
memory, and the Uninhabited House had left him; and, upon the whole, the
arithmetical problem could not have proved satisfactory when solved.

The judge complimented everyone upon the compromise effected. It was
honourable in every way, and creditable to all parties concerned, but
the jury evidently were somewhat dissatisfied at the turn affairs had
taken, while the witnesses were like to rend Colonel Morris asunder.

"They had come, at great inconvenience to themselves, to expose the
tactics of that Blake woman and her solicitor," so they said; "and they
thought the affair ought not to have been hushed up."

As for the audience, they murmured openly. They received the statement
that the case was over, with groans, hisses, and other marks of
disapproval, and we heard comments on the matter uttered by disappointed
spectators all the way up Parliament Street, till we arrived at that
point where we left the main thoroughfare, in order to strike across to
Buckingham Street.

There--where Pepys once lived--we betook ourselves to our books and
papers, with a sense of unusual depression in the atmosphere. It was a
gray, dull, cheerless afternoon, and more than one of us, looking out
at the mud bank, which, at low water, then occupied the space now laid
out as gardens, wondered how River Hall, desolate, tenantless,
uninhabited, looked under that sullen sky, with the murky river flowing
onward, day and night, day and night, leaving, unheeding, an unsolved
mystery on its banks.

For a week we saw nothing of Miss Blake, but at the end of that time, in
consequence of a somewhat imperative summons from Mr. Craven, she called
at the office late one afternoon. We comprehended she had selected that,
for her, unusual time of day for a visit, hoping our principal might
have left ere she arrived; but in this hope she was disappointed: Mr.
Craven was in, at leisure, and anxious to see her.

I shall never forget that interview. Miss Blake arrived about five
o'clock, when it was quite dark out of doors, and when, in all our
offices except Mr. Craven's, the gas was flaring away triumphantly. In
his apartment he kept the light always subdued, but between the fire and
the lamp there was plenty of light to see that Miss Blake looked ill and
depressed, and that Mr. Craven had assumed a peculiar expression, which,
to those who knew him best, implied he had made up his mind to pursue a
particular course of action, and meant to adhere to his determination.

"You wanted to see me," said our client, breaking the ice.

"Yes; I wanted to tell you that our connection with the River Hall
property must be considered at an end."

"Well, well, that is the way of men, I suppose--in England."

"I do not think any man, whether in England or Ireland, could have done
more for a client than I have tried to do for you, Miss Blake," was the
offended answer.

"I am sure I have never found fault with you," remarked Miss Blake,
deprecatingly.

"And I do not think," continued Mr. Craven, unheeding her remark, "any
lawyer ever met with a worse return for all his trouble than I have
received from you."

"Dear, dear," said Miss Blake, with comic disbelief in her tone, "that
is very bad."

"There are two classes of men who ought to be treated with entire
confidence," persisted Mr. Craven, "lawyers and doctors. It is as
foolish to keep back anything from one as from another."

"I daresay," argued Miss Blake; "but we are not all wise alike,
you know."

"No," remarked my principal, who was indeed no match for the lady, "or
you would never have allowed me to take your case into court in
ignorance of Helena having seen her father."

"Come, come," retorted Miss Blake; "you do not mean to say you believe
she ever did see her father since he was buried, and had the stone-work
put all right and neat again, about him? And, indeed, it went to my
heart to have a man who had fallen into such bad ways laid in the same
grave with my dear sister, but I thought it would be unchristian--"

"We need not go over all that ground once more, surely," interrupted Mr.
Craven. "I have heard your opinions concerning Mr. Elmsdale frequently
expressed ere now. That which I never did hear, however, until it proved
too late, was the fact of Helena having fancied she saw her father after
his death."

"And what good would it have done you, if I had repeated all the child's
foolish notions?"

"This, that I should not have tried to let a house believed by the owner
herself to be uninhabitable."

"And so you would have kept us without bread to put in our mouths, or a
roof over our heads."

"I should have asked you to do at first what I must ask you to do at
last. If you decline to sell the place, or let it unfurnished, on a long
lease, to some one willing to take it, spite of its bad character, I
must say the house will never again be let through my instrumentality,
and I must beg you to advertise River Hall yourself, or place it in the
hands of an agent."

"Do you mean to say, William Craven," asked Miss Blake, solemnly, "that
you believe that house to be haunted?"

"I do not," he answered. "I do not believe in ghosts, but I believe the
place has somehow got a bad name--perhaps through Helena's fancies, and
that people imagine it is haunted, and get frightened probably at sight
of their own shadows. Come, Miss Blake, I see a way out of this
difficulty; you go and take up your abode at River Hall for six months,
and at the end of that time the evil charm will be broken."

"And Helena dead," she observed.

"You need not take Helena with you."

"Nor anybody else, I suppose you mean," she remarked. "Thank you, Mr.
Craven; but though my life is none too happy, I should like to die a
natural death, and God only knows whether those who have been peeping
and spying about the place might not murder me in my bed, if I ever went
to bed in the house; that is--"

"Then, in a word, you do believe the place is haunted."

"I do nothing of the kind," she answered, angrily; "but though I have
courage enough, thank Heaven, I should not like to stay all alone in any
house, and I know there is not a servant in England would stay there
with me, unless she meant to take my life. But I tell you what, William
Craven, there are lots of poor creatures in the world even poorer than
we are--tutors and starved curates, and the like. Get one of them to
stay at the Hall till he finds out where the trick is, and I won't mind
saying he shall have fifty pounds down for his pains; that is, I mean,
of course, when he has discovered the secret of all these strange
lights, and suchlike."

And feeling she had by this proposition struck Mr. Craven under the
fifth rib, Miss Blake rose to depart.

"You will kindly think over what I have said," observed Mr. Craven.

"I'll do that if you will kindly think over what I have said," she
retorted, with the utmost composure; and then, after a curt
good-evening, she passed through the door I held open, nodding to me, as
though she would have remarked, "I'm more than a match for your master
still, young man."

"What a woman that is!" exclaimed Mr. Craven, as I resumed my seat.

"Do you think she really means what she says about the fifty pounds?"
I inquired.

"I do not know," he answered, "but I know I would cheerfully pay that
sum to anyone who could unravel the mystery of River Hall."

"Are you in earnest, sir?" I asked, in some surprise.

"Certainly I am," he replied.

"Then let me go and stay at River Hall," I said. "I will undertake to
run the ghost to earth for half the money."




7. MY OWN STORY


It is necessary now that I should tell the readers something about my
own antecedents.

Aware of how uninteresting the subject must prove, I shall make that
something as short as possible.

Already it will have been clearly understood, both from my own hints,
and from Miss Blake's far from reticent remarks on my position, that I
was a clerk at a salary in Mr. Craven's office.

But this had not always been the case. When I went first to Buckingham
Street, I was duly articled to Mr. Craven, and my mother and sister, who
were of aspiring dispositions, lamented that my choice of a profession
had fallen on law rather than soldiering.

They would have been proud of a young fellow in uniform; but they did
not feel at all elated at the idea of being so closely connected with a
"musty attorney."

As for my father, he told me to make my own choice, and found the money
to enable me to do so. He was an easy-going soul, who was in the
miserable position of having a sufficient income to live on without
exerting either mind or body; and yet whose income was insufficient to
enable him to have superior hobbies, or to gratify any particular taste.
We resided in the country, and belonged to the middle class of
comfortable, well-to-do English people. In our way, we were somewhat
exclusive as to our associates--and as the Hall and Castle residents
were, in their way, exclusive also, we lived almost out of society.

Indeed, we were very intimate with only one family in our neighbourhood;
and I think it was the example of the son of that house which first
induced me to think of leading a different existence from that in which
my father had grown as green and mossy as a felled tree.

Ned Munro, the eldest hope of a proud but reduced stock, elected to
study for the medical profession.

"The life here," he remarked, vaguely indicating the distant houses
occupied by our respective sires, "may suit the old folks, but it does
not suit me." And he went out into the wilderness of the world.

After his departure I found that the life at home did not suit me
either, and so I followed his lead, and went, duly articled, to Mr.
Craven, of Buckingham Street, Strand. Mr. Craven and my father were old
friends. To this hour I thank Heaven for giving my father such a friend.

After I had been for a considerable time with Mr. Craven, there came a
dreadful day, when tidings arrived that my father was ruined, and my
immediate presence required at home. What followed was that which is
usual enough in all such cases, with this difference--the loss of his
fortune killed my father.

From what I have seen since, I believe when he took to his bed and
quietly gave up living altogether, he did the wisest and best thing
possible under the circumstances. Dear, simple, kindly old man, I cannot
fancy how his feeble nature might have endured the years which followed;
filled by my mother and sister with lamentations, though we knew no
actual want--thanks to Mr. Craven.

My father had been dabbling in shares, and when the natural
consequence--ruin, utter ruin, came to our pretty country home, Mr.
Craven returned me the money paid to him, and offered me a salary.

Think of what this kindness was, and we penniless; while all the time
relations stood aloof, holding out nor hand nor purse, till they saw
whether we could weather the storm without their help.

Amongst those relations chanced to be a certain Admiral Patterson, an
uncle of my father. When we were well-to-do he had not disdained to
visit us in our quiet home, but when poverty came he tied up his
purse-strings and ignored our existence, till at length, hearing by a
mere chance that I was supporting my mother and sister by my own
exertions (always helped by Mr. Craven's goodness), he said, audibly,
that the "young jackanapes must have more in him than he thought," and
wrote to beg that I would spend my next holiday at his house.

I was anxious to accept the invitation, as a friend told me he felt
certain the old gentleman would forward my views; but I did not choose
to visit my relative in shabby clothes and with empty pockets;
therefore, it fell out that I jumped at Miss Blake's suggestion, and
closed with Mr. Craven's offer on the spot.

Half fifty--twenty-five--pounds would replenish my wardrobe, pay my
travelling expenses, and leave me with money in my pocket, as well.

I told Mr. Craven all this in a breath. When I had done so he
laughed, and said:

"You have worked hard, Patterson. Here is ten pounds. Go and see your
uncle; but leave River Hall alone."

Then, almost with tears, I entreated him not to baulk my purpose. If I
could rid River Hall of its ghost, I would take money from him, not
otherwise. I told him I had set my heart on unravelling the mystery
attached to that place, and I could have told him another mystery at the
same time, had shame not tied my tongue. I was in love--for the first
time in my life--hopelessly, senselessly, with a face of which I thought
all day and dreamed all night, that had made itself in a moment part and
parcel of my story, thus:

I had been at Kentish Town to see one of our clients, and having
finished my business, walked on as far as Camden Town, intending to take
an omnibus which might set me down somewhere near Chancery Lane.

Whilst standing at the top of College Street, under shelter of my
umbrella, a drizzling rain falling and rendering the pavement dirty and
slippery, I noticed a young lady waiting to cross the road--a young lady
with, to my mind, the sweetest, fairest, most lovable face on which my
eyes had ever rested. I could look at her without causing annoyance,
because she was so completely occupied in watching lumbering vans, fast
carts, crawling cabs, and various other vehicles, which chanced at that
moment to be crowding the thoroughfare, that she had no leisure to
bestow even a glance on any pedestrian.

A governess, I decided: for her dress, though neat, and even elegant,
was by no means costly; moreover, there was an expression of settled
melancholy about her features, and further, she carried a roll, which
looked like music, in her hand. In less time than it has taken me to
write this paragraph, I had settled all about her to my own
satisfaction.

Father bankrupt. Mother delicate. Young brothers and sisters, probably,
all crying aloud for the pittance she was able to earn by giving lessons
at so much an hour.

She had not been long at her present occupation, I felt satisfied,
for she was evidently unaccustomed to being out in the streets alone
on a wet day.

I would have offered to see her across the road, but for two reasons:
one, because I felt shy about proffering my services; the other, because
I was exceedingly doubtful whether I might not give offence by speaking.

After the fashion of so many of her sex, she made about half a dozen
false starts, advancing as some friendly cabby made signs for her to
venture the passage, retreating as she caught sight of some coming
vehicle still yards distant.

At last, imagining the way clear, she made a sudden rush, and had just
got well off the curb, when a mail phaeton turned the corner, and in one
second she was down in the middle of the road, and I struggling with the
horses and swearing at the driver, who, in his turn, very heartily
anathematized me.

I do not remember all I said to the portly, well-fed, swaggering cockney
upstart; but there was so much in it uncomplimentary to himself and his
driving, that the crowd already assembled cheered, as all crowds will
cheer profane and personal language; and he was glad enough to gather up
his reins and touch his horses, and trot off, without having first gone
through the ceremony of asking whether the girl he had so nearly driven
over was living or dead.

Meantime she had been carried into the nearest shop, whither I
followed her.

I do not know why all the people standing about imagined me to be her
brother, but they certainly did so, and, under that impression, made way
for me to enter the parlour behind the shop, where I found my poor
beauty sitting, faint and frightened and draggled, whilst the woman of
the house was trying to wipe the mud off her dress, and endeavouring to
persuade her to swallow some wine-and-water.

As I entered, she lifted her eyes to mine, and said, "Thank you, sir.
I trust you have not got hurt yourself," so frankly and so sweetly
that the small amount of heart her face had left me passed into her
keeping at once.

"Are you much hurt?" I replied by asking.

"My arm is, a little," she answered. "If I could only get home! Oh! I
wish I were at home."

I went out and fetched a cab, and assisted her into it. Then I asked her
where the man should drive, and she gave me the name of the street which
Miss Blake, when in England, honoured by making her abode. Miss Blake's
number was 110. My charmer's number was 15. Having obtained this
information, I closed the cab-door, and taking my seat beside the
driver, we rattled off in the direction of Brunswick Square.

Arrived at the house, I helped her--when, in answer to my knock, an
elderly woman appeared, to ask my business--into the narrow hall of a
dreary house. Oh! how my heart ached when I beheld her surroundings! She
did not bid me good-bye; but asking me into the parlour, went, as I
understood, to get money to pay the cabman.

Seizing my opportunity, I told the woman, who still stood near the door,
that I was in a hurry, and leaving the house, bade the driver take me to
the top of Chancery Lane.

On the next Sunday I watched No. 15, till I beheld my lady-fair come
forth, veiled, furred, dressed all in her dainty best, prayer-book in
hand, going alone to St. Pancras Church--not the old, but the
new--whither I followed her.

By some freak of fortune, the verger put me into the same pew as that in
which he had just placed her.

When she saw me her face flushed crimson, and then she gave a little
smile of recognition.

I fear I did not much heed the service on that particular Sunday; but I
still felt shy, so shy that, after I had held the door open for her to
pass out, I allowed others to come between us, and did not dare to
follow and ask how she was.

During the course of the next week came Miss Blake and Mr. Craven's
remark about the fifty pounds; and within four-and-twenty hours
something still more astounding occurred--a visit from Miss Blake and
her niece, who wanted "a good talking-to"--so Miss Blake stated.

It was a dull, foggy day, and when my eyes rested on the younger lady, I
drew back closer into my accustomed corner, frightened and amazed.

"You were in such a passion yesterday," began Miss Blake, coming into
the office, dragging her blushing niece after her, "that you put it out
of my head to tell you three things--one, that we have moved from our
old lodgings; the next, that I have not a penny to go on with; and the
third, that Helena here has gone out of her mind. She won't have River
Hall let again, if you please. She intends to go out as a
governess--what do you think of that?--and nothing I can say makes any
impression upon her. I should have thought she had had enough of
governessing the first day she went out to give a lesson: she got
herself run over and nearly killed; was brought back in a cab by some
gentleman, who had the decency to take the cab away again: for how we
should have paid the fare, I don't know, I am sure. So I have just
brought her to you to know if her mother's old friend thinks it is a
right thing for Kathleen Elmsdale's daughter to put herself under the
feet of a parcel of ignorant, purse-proud snobs?"

Mr. Craven looked at the girl kindly. "My dear," he said, "I think, I
believe, there will be no necessity for you to do anything of that kind.
We have found a person--have we not, Patterson?--willing to devote
himself to solving the River Hall mystery. So, for the present at all
events, Helena--"

He paused, for Helena had risen from her seat and crossed the room to
where I sat.

"Aunt, aunt," she said, "this is the gentleman who stopped the horses,"
and before I could speak a word she held my hand in hers, and was
thanking me once again with her beautiful eyes.

Miss Blake turned and glared upon me. "Oh! it was you, was it?" she
said, ungraciously. "Well, it is just what I might have expected, and me
hoping all the time it was a lord or a baronet, at the least."

We all laughed--even Miss Elmsdale laughed at this frank
confession; but when the ladies were gone, Mr. Craven, looking at
me pityingly, remarked:

"This is a most unfortunate business, Patterson. I hope--I do hope, you
will not be so foolish as to fall in love with Miss Elmsdale."

To which I made no reply. The evil, if evil it were, was done. I had
fallen in love with Miss Blake's niece ere those words of wisdom dropped
from my employer's lips.




8. MY FIRST NIGHT AT RIVER HALL


It was with a feeling of depression for which I could in no way account
that, one cold evening, towards the end of February, I left Buckingham
Street and wended my way to the Uninhabited House. I had been eager to
engage in the enterprise; first, for the sake of the fifty pounds
reward; and secondly, and much more, for the sake of Helena Elmsdale. I
had tormented Mr. Craven until he gave a reluctant consent to my desire.
I had brooded over the matter until I became eager to commence my
investigations, as a young soldier may be to face the enemy; and yet,
when the evening came, and darkness with it; when I set my back to the
more crowded thoroughfares, and found myself plodding along a lonely
suburban road, with a keen wind lashing my face, and a suspicion of rain
at intervals wetting my cheeks, I confess I had no feeling of enjoyment
in my self-imposed task.

After all, talking about a haunted house in broad daylight to one's
fellow-clerks, in a large London office, is a very different thing from
taking up one's residence in the same house, all alone, on a bleak
winter's night, with never a soul within shouting distance. I had made
up my mind to go through with the matter, and no amount of mental
depression, no wintry blasts, no cheerless roads, no desolate goal,
should daunt me; but still I did not like the adventure, and at every
step I felt I liked it less.

Before leaving town I had fortified my inner man with a good dinner and
some excellent wine, but by the time I reached River Hall I might have
fasted for a week, so faint and spiritless did I feel.

"Come, this will never do," I thought, as I turned the key in the
door, and crossed the threshold of the Uninhabited House. "I must not
begin with being chicken-hearted, or I may as well give up the
investigation at once."

The fires I had caused to be kindled in the morning, though almost out
by the time I reached River Hall, had diffused a grateful warmth
throughout the house; and when I put a match to the paper and wood laid
ready in the grate of the room I meant to occupy, and lit the gas, in
the hall, on the landing, and in my sleeping-apartment, I began to think
things did not look so cheerless, after all.

The seals which, for precaution's sake, I had placed on the various
locks, remained intact. I looked to the fastenings of the hall-door,
examined the screws by which the bolts were attached to the wood, and
having satisfied myself that everything of that kind was secure, went
up to my room, where the fire was now crackling and blazing famously,
put the kettle on the hob, drew a chair up close to the hearth,
exchanged my boots for slippers, lit a pipe, pulled out my law-books,
and began to read.

How long I had read, I cannot say; the kettle on the hob was boiling, at
any rate, and the coals had burned themselves into a red-hot mass of
glowing cinders, when my attention was attracted--or rather, I should
say, distracted--by the sound of tapping outside the window-pane. First
I listened, and read on, then I laid down my book and listened more
attentively. It was exactly the noise which a person would make tapping
upon glass with one finger.

The wind had risen almost to a tempest, but, in the interval between
each blast, I could hear the tapping as distinctly as if it had been
inside my own skull--tap, tap, imperatively; tap, tap, tap, impatiently;
and when I rose to approach the casement, it seemed as if three more
fingers had joined in the summons, and were rapping for bare life.

"They have begun betimes," I thought; and taking my revolver in one
hand, with the other I opened the shutters, and put aside the blind.

As I did so, it seemed as if some dark body occupied one side of the
sash, while the tapping continued as madly as before.

It is as well to confess at once that I was for the moment frightened.
Subsequently I saw many wonderful sights, and had some terrible
experiences in the Uninhabited House; but I can honestly say, no sight
or experience so completely cowed me for the time being, as that dull
blackness to which I could assign no shape, that spirit-like rapping of
fleshless fingers, which seemed to increase in vehemence as I obeyed
its summons.

Doctors say it is not possible for the heart to stand still and a human
being live, and, as I am not a doctor, I do not like to contradict their
dogma, otherwise I could positively declare my heart did cease beating
as I listened, looking out into the night with the shadow of that
darkness projecting itself upon my mind, to the impatient tapping, which
was now distinctly audible even above the raging of the storm.

How I gathered sufficient courage to do it, I cannot tell; but I put my
face close to the glass, thus shutting out the gas and fire-light, and
saw that the dark object which alarmed me was a mass of ivy the wind had
detached from the wall, and that the invisible fingers were young
branches straying from the main body of the plant, which, tossed by the
air-king, kept striking the window incessantly, now one, now two, now
three, tap, tap, tap; tap, tap; tap, tap; and sometimes, after a long
silence, all together, tap-p-p, like the sound of clamming bells.

I stood for a minute or two, listening to the noise, so as to satisfy
myself as to its cause, then I laid down the revolver, took out my
pocket-knife, and opened the window. As I did so, a tremendous blast
swept into the room, extinguishing the gas, causing the glowing coals to
turn, for a moment, black on one side and to fiercest blaze on the
other, scattering the dust lying on the hearth over the carpet, and
dashing the ivy-sprays against my face with a force which caused my
cheeks to smart and tingle long afterwards.

Taking my revenge, I cut them as far back as I could, and then, without
closing the window, and keeping my breath as well as I could, I looked
out across the garden over the Thames, away to the opposite bank, where
a few lights glimmered at long intervals. "An eerie, lonely place for a
fellow to be in all by himself," I continued; "and yet, if the rest of
the ghosts, bodiless or clothed with flesh, which frequent this house
prove to be as readily laid as those ivy-twigs, I shall earn my
money--and--my--thanks, easily enough."

So considering, I relit the gas, replenished the fire, refilled my pipe,
reseated myself by the hearth, and with feet stretched out towards the
genial blaze, attempted to resume my reading.

All in vain: I could not fix my attention on the page; I could not
connect one sentence with another. When my mind ought to have
concentrated its energies upon Justice That, and Vice-Chancellor This,
and Lord Somebody Else, I felt it wandering away, trying to fit together
all the odds and ends of evidence worthy or unworthy concerning the
Uninhabited House. Which really was, as we had always stated, a good
house, a remarkably good house, well furnished, suitable in every
respect, &c.

Had I been a "family of respectability," or a gentleman of position,
with a large number of servants, a nice wife, and a few children
sprinkled about the domestic picture, I doubt not I should have enjoyed
the contemplation of that glowing fire, and rejoiced in the idea of
finding myself located in so desirable a residence, within an easy
distance of the West End; but, as matters stood, I felt anything rather
than elated.

In that large house there was no human inmate save myself, and I had an
attack of nervousness upon me for which I found it impossible to
account. Here was I, at length, under the very roof where my mistress
had passed all her childish days, bound to solve the mystery which was
making such havoc with her young life, permitted to essay a task, the
accomplishment of which should cover me with glory, and perhaps restore
peace and happiness to her heart; and yet I was _afraid_. I did not
hesitate to utter that word to my own soul then, any more than I
hesitate to write it now for those who list to read: for I can truly say
I think there are few men whose courage such an adventure would not try
were they to attempt it; and I am sure, had any one of those to whom I
tell this story been half as much afraid as I, he would have left River
Hall there and then, and allowed the ghosts said to be resident, to
haunt it undisturbed for evermore.

If I could only have kept memory from running here and there in quest of
evidence pro and con the house being haunted, I should have fared
better: but I could not do this.

Let me try as I would to give my attention to those legal studies that
ought to have engrossed my attention, I could not succeed in doing so:
my thoughts, without any volition on my part, kept continually on the
move; now with Miss Blake in Buckingham Street, again with Colonel
Morris on the river walk, once more with Miss Elmsdale in the library;
and went constantly flitting hither and thither, recalling the
experiences of a frightened lad, or the terror of an ignorant woman; yet
withal I had a feeling that in some way memory was playing me false, as
if, when ostentatiously bringing out all her stores for me to make or
mar as I could, she had really hidden away, in one of her remotest
corners, some link, great or little as the case might be, but still,
whether great or little, necessary to connect the unsatisfactory
narratives together.

Till late in the night I sat trying to piece my puzzle together, but
without success. There was a flaw in the story, a missing point in it,
somewhere, I felt certain. I often imagined I was about to touch it,
when, heigh! presto! it eluded my grasp.

"The whole affair will resolve itself into ivy-boughs," I finally,
if not truthfully, decided. "I am satisfied it is all--ivy," and I
went to bed.

Now, whether it was that I had thought too much of the ghostly
narratives associated with River Hall, the storminess of the night, the
fact of sleeping in a strange room, or the strength of a tumbler of
brandy-and-water, in which brandy took an undue lead, I cannot tell; but
during the morning hours I dreamed a dream which filled me with an
unspeakable horror, from which I awoke struggling for breath, bathed in
a cold perspiration, and with a dread upon me such as I never felt in
any waking moment of my life.

I dreamt I was lying asleep in the room I actually occupied, when I was
aroused from a profound slumber by the noise produced by some one
tapping at the window-pane. On rising to ascertain the cause of this
summons, I saw Colonel Morris standing outside and beckoning me to join
him. With that disregard of space, time, distance, and attire which
obtains in dreams, I at once stepped out into the garden. It was a
pitch-dark night, and bitterly cold, and I shivered, I know, as I heard
the sullen flow of the river, and listened to the moaning of the wind
among the trees.

We walked on for some minutes in silence, then my companion asked me if
I felt afraid, or if I would go on with him.

"I will go where you go," I answered.

Then suddenly he disappeared, and Playfire, who had been his counsel at
the time of the trial, took my hand and led me onwards.

We passed through a doorway, and, still in darkness, utter darkness,
began to descend some steps. We went down--down--hundreds of steps as it
seemed to me, and in my sleep, I still remembered the old idea of its
being unlucky to dream of going downstairs. But at length we came to the
bottom, and then began winding along interminable passages, now so
narrow only one could walk abreast, and again so low that we had to
stoop our heads in order to avoid striking the roof.

After we had been walking along these for hours, as time reckons in such
cases, we commenced ascending flight after flight of steep stone-steps.
I laboured after Playfire till my limbs ached and grew weary, till,
scarcely able to drag my feet from stair to stair, I entreated him to
stop; but he only laughed and held on his course the more rapidly, while
I, hurrying after, often stumbled and recovered myself, then stumbled
again and lay prone.

The night air blew cold and chill upon me as I crawled out into an
unaccustomed place and felt my way over heaps of uneven earth and
stones that obstructed my progress in every direction. I called out
for Playfire, but the wind alone answered me; I shouted for Colonel
Morris; I entreated some one to tell me where I was; and in answer
there was a dead and terrible silence. The wind died away; not a
breath of air disturbed the heavy stillness which had fallen so
suddenly around me. Instead of the veil of merciful blackness which
had hidden everything hitherto from view, a gray light spread slowly
over the objects around, revealing a burial-ground, with an old church
standing in the midst--a burial-ground where grew rank nettles and
coarse, tall grass; where brambles trailed over the graves, and weeds
and decay consorted with the dead.

Moved by some impulse which I could not resist, I still held on my
course, over mounds of earth, between rows of headstones, till I reached
the other side of the church, under the shadow of which yawned an open
pit. To the bottom of it I peered, and there beheld an empty coffin; the
lid was laid against the side of the grave, and on a headstone,
displaced from its upright position, sat the late occupant of the grave,
looking at me with wistful, eager eyes. A stream of light from within
the church fell across that one empty grave, that one dead watcher.

"So you have come at last," he said; and then the spell was broken, and
I would have fled, but that, holding me with his left hand, he pointed
with his right away to a shadowy distance, where the gray sky merged
into deepest black.

I strained my eyes to discover the object he strove to indicate, but I
failed to do so. I could just discern something flitting away into the
darkness, but I could give it no shape or substance.

"Look--look!" the dead man said, rising, in his excitement, and
clutching me more firmly with his clay-cold fingers.

I tried to fly, but I could not; my feet were chained to the spot. I
fought to rid myself of the clasp of the skeleton hand, and then we fell
together over the edge of the pit, and I awoke.




9. A TEMPORARY PEACE


It was scarcely light when I jumped out of bed, and murmuring, "Thank
God it was only a dream," dressed myself with all speed, and flinging
open the window, looked out on a calm morning after the previous
night's storm.

Muddily and angrily the Thames rolled onward to the sea. On the opposite
side of the river I could see stretches of green, with here and there a
house dotting the banks.

A fleet of barges lay waiting the turn of the tide to proceed to their
destination. The voices of the men shouting to each other, and
blaspheming for no particular reason, came quite clear and distinct
over the water. The garden was strewed with twigs and branches blown
off the trees during the night; amongst them the sprigs of ivy I had
myself cut off.

An hour and a scene not calculated to encourage superstitious fancies,
it may be, but still not likely to enliven any man's spirits--a quiet,
dull, gray, listless, dispiriting morning, and, being country-bred, I
felt its influence.

"I will walk into town, and ask Ned Munro to give me some breakfast," I
thought, and found comfort in the idea.

Ned Munro was a doctor, but not a struggling doctor. He was not rich,
but he "made enough for a beginner": so he said. He worked hard for
little pay; "but I mean some day to have high pay, and take the world
easy," he explained. He was blessed with great hopes and good courage;
he had high spirits, and a splendid constitution. He neither starved
himself nor his friends; his landlady "loved him as her son"; and
there were several good-looking girls who were very fond of him, not
as a brother.

But Ned had no notion of marrying, yet awhile. "Time enough for that,"
he told me once, "when I can furnish a good house, and set up a
brougham, and choose my patients, and have a few hundreds lying idle in
the bank."

Meantime, as no one of these items had yet been realized, he lived in
lodgings, ate toasted haddocks with his morning coffee, and smoked and
read novels far into the night.

Yes, I could go and breakfast with Munro. Just then it occurred to me
that the gas I had left lighted when I went to bed was out; that the
door I had left locked was open.

Straight downstairs I went. The gas in the hall was out, and every door
I had myself closed and locked the previous morning stood ajar, with the
seal, however, remaining intact.

I had borne as much as I could: my nerves were utterly unhinged.
Snatching my hat and coat, I left the house, and fled, rather than
walked, towards London.

With every step I took towards town came renewed courage; and when I
reached Ned's lodgings, I felt ashamed of my pusillanimity.

"I have been sleep-walking, that is what it is," I decided. "I have
opened the doors and turned off the gas myself, and been frightened at
the work of my own hands. I will ask Munro what is the best thing to
insure a quiet night."

Which I did accordingly, receiving for answer--

"Keep a quiet mind."

"Yes, but if one cannot keep a quiet mind; if one is anxious and
excited, and----"

"In love," he finished, as I hesitated.

"Well, no; I did not mean that," I said; "though, of course, that might
enter into the case also. Suppose one is uneasy about a certain amount
of money, for instance?"

"Are you?" he asked, ignoring the general suggestiveness of my remark.

"Well, yes; I want to make some if I can."

"Don't want, then," he advised. "Take my word for it, no amount of money
is worth the loss of a night's rest; and you have been tossing about all
night, I can see. Come, Patterson, if it's forgery or embezzlement, out
with it, man, and I will help you if I am able."

"If it were either one or the other, I should go to Mr. Craven," I
answered, laughing.

"Then it must be love," remarked my host; "and you will want to take me
into your confidence some day. The old story, I suppose: beautiful girl,
stern parents, wealthy suitor, poor lover. I wonder if we could interest
her in a case of small-pox. If she took it badly, you might have a
chance; but I have a presentiment that she has been vaccinated."

"Ned," was my protest, "I shall certainly fling a plate at your head."

"All right, if you think the exertion would do you good," he answered.
"Give me your hand, Patterson"; and before I knew what he wanted with
it, he had his fingers on my wrist.

"Look here, old fellow," he said; "you will be laid up, if you don't
take care of yourself. I thought so when you came in, and I am sure of
it now. What have you been doing?"

"Nothing wrong, Munro," I answered, smiling in spite of myself. "I have
not been picking, or stealing, or abducting any young woman, or courting
my neighbour's wife; but I am worried and perplexed. When I sleep I have
dreadful dreams--horrible dreams," I added, shuddering.

"Can you tell me what is worrying and perplexing you?" he asked, kindly,
after a moment's thought.

"Not yet, Ned," I answered; "though I expect I shall have to tell
you soon. Give me something to make me sleep quietly: that is all I
want now."

"Can't you go out of town?" he inquired.

"I do not want to go out of town," I answered.

"I will make you up something to strengthen your nerves," he said, after
a pause; "but if you are not better--well, before the end of the week,
take my advice, and run down to Brighton over Sunday. Now, you ought to
give me a guinea for that," he added, laughing. "I assure you, all the
gold-headed cane, all the wonderful chronometer doctors who pocket
thousands per annum at the West End, could make no more of your case
than I have done."

"I am sure they could not," I said, gratefully; "and when I have the
guinea to spare, be sure I shall not forget your fee."

Whether it was owing to his medicine, or his advice, or his cheery,
health-giving manner, I have no idea; but that night, when I walked
towards the Uninhabited House, I felt a different being.

On my way I called at a small corn-chandler's, and bought a quartern of
flour done up in a thin and utterly insufficient bag. I told the man the
wrapper would not bear its contents, and he said he could not help that.

I asked him if he had no stronger bags. He answered that he had, but he
could not afford to give them away.

I laid down twopence extra, and inquired if that would cover the expense
of a sheet of brown paper.

Ashamed, he turned aside and produced a substantial bag, into which he
put the flour in its envelope of curling-tissue.

I thanked him, and pushed the twopence across the counter. With a grunt,
he thrust the money back. I said good-night, leaving current coin of the
realm to the amount indicated behind me.

Through the night be shouted, "Hi! sir, you've forgotten your change."

Through the night I shouted back, "Give your next customer its value in
civility."

All of which did me good. Squabbling with flesh and blood is not a bad
preliminary to entering a ghost-haunted house.

Once again I was at River Hall. Looking up at its cheerless portal, I
was amazed at first to see the outside lamp flaring away in the
darkness. Then I remembered that all the other gas being out, of course
this, which I had not turned off, would blaze more brightly.

Purposely I had left my return till rather late. I had gone to one of
the theatres, and remained until a third through the principal piece.
Then I called at a supper-room, had half a dozen oysters and some stout;
after which, like a giant refreshed, I wended my way westward.

Utterly false would it be for me to say I liked the idea of entering the
Uninhabited House; but still, I meant to do it, and I did.

No law-books for me that night; no seductive fire; no shining lights all
over the house. Like a householder of twenty years' standing, I struck a
match, and turned the gas on to a single hall-lamp. I did not trouble
myself even about shutting the doors opening into the hall; I only
strewed flour copiously over the marble pavement, and on the first
flight of stairs, and then, by the servant's passages, crept into the
upper story, and so to bed.

That night I slept dreamlessly. I awoke in broad daylight, wondering why
I had not been called sooner, and then remembered there was no one to
call, and that if I required hot water, I must boil it for myself.

With that light heart which comes after a good night's rest, I put on
some part of my clothing, and was commencing to descend the principal
staircase, when my proceedings of the previous night flashed across my
mind; and pausing, I looked down into the hall. No sign of a foot on the
flour. The white powder lay there innocent of human pressure as the
untrodden snow; and yet, and yet, was I dreaming--could I have been
drunk without my own knowledge, before I went to bed? The gas was ablaze
in the hall and on the staircase, and every door left open over-night
was close shut.

Curiously enough, at that moment fear fell from me like a garment which
has served its turn, and in the strength of my manhood, I felt able to
face anything the Uninhabited House might have to show.

Over the latter part of that week, as being utterly unimportant in its
events or consequences, I pass rapidly, only saying that, when Saturday
came, I followed Munro's advice, and ran down to Brighton, under the
idea that by so doing I should thoroughly strengthen myself for the next
five days' ordeal. But the idea was a mistaken one. The Uninhabited
House took its ticket for Brighton by the same express; it got into the
compartment with me; it sat beside me at dinner; it hob-nobbed to me
over my own wine; uninvited it came out to walk with me; and when I
stood still, listening to the band, it stood still too. It went with me
to the pier, and when the wind blew, as the wind did, it said, "We were
quite as well off on the Thames."

When I woke, through the night, it seemed to shout, "Are you any better
off here?" And when I went to church the next day it crept close up to
me in the pew, and said, "Come, now, it is all very well to say you are
a Christian; but if you were really one you would not be afraid of the
place you and I wot of."

Finally, I was so goaded and maddened that I shook my fist at the sea,
and started off by the evening train for the Uninhabited House.

This time I travelled alone. The Uninhabited House preceded me.

There, in its old position, looking gloomy and mysterious in the
shadows of night, I found it on my return to town; and, as if tired of
playing tricks with one who had become indifferent to their vagaries,
all the doors remained precisely as I had left them; and if there were
ghosts in the house that night, they did not interfere with me or the
chamber I occupied.

Next morning, while I was dressing, a most remarkable thing occurred; a
thing for which I was in no wise prepared. Spirits, and sights and
sounds supposed appropriate to spirithood, I had expected; but for a
modest knock at the front door I was not prepared.

When, after hurriedly completing my toilet, I undrew the bolts and undid
the chain, and opened the door wide, there came rushing into the house a
keen easterly wind, behind which I beheld a sad-faced woman, dressed in
black, who dropped me a curtsey, and said:

"If you please, sir--I suppose you are the gentleman?"

Now, I could make nothing out of this, so I asked her to be good enough
to explain.

Then it all came out: "Did I want a person to char?"

This was remarkable--very. Her question amazed me to such an extent that
I had to ask her in, and request her to seat herself on one of the hall
chairs, and go upstairs myself, and think the matter over before I
answered her.

It had been so impressed upon me that no one in the neighbourhood would
come near River Hall, that I should as soon have thought of Victoria by
the grace of God paying me a friendly visit, as of being waited on by a
charwoman.

I went downstairs again.

At sight of me my new acquaintance rose from her seat, and began curling
up the corner of her apron.

"Do you know," I said, "that this house bears the reputation of
being haunted?"

"I have heard people say it is, sir," she answered.

"And do you know that servants will not stay in it--that tenants will
not occupy it?"

"I have heard so, sir," she answered once again.

"Then what do you mean by offering to come?" I inquired.

She looked up into my face, and I saw the tears come softly stealing
into her eyes, and her mouth began to pucker, ere, drooping her head,
she replied:

"Sir, just three months ago, come the twentieth, I was a happy woman. I
had a good husband and a tidy home. There was not a lady in the land I
would have changed places with. But that night, my man, coming home in a
fog, fell into the river and was drowned. It was a week before they
found him, and all the time--while I had been hoping to hear his step
every minute in the day--I was a widow."

"Poor soul!" I said, involuntarily.

"Well, sir, when a man goes, all goes. I have done my best, but still I
have not been able to feed my children--his children--properly, and the
sight of their poor pinched faces breaks my heart, it do, sir," and she
burst out sobbing.

"And so, I suppose," I remarked, "you thought you would face this house
rather than poverty?"

"Yes, sir. I heard the neighbours talking about this place, and you,
sir, and I made up my mind to come and ask if I mightn't tidy up things
a bit for you, sir. I was a servant, sir, before I married, and I'd be
so thankful."

Well, to cut the affair shorter for the reader than I was able to do for
myself, I gave her half a crown, and told her I would think over her
proposal, and let her hear from me--which I did. I told her she might
come for a couple of hours each morning, and a couple each evening, and
she could bring one of the children with her if she thought she was
likely to find the place lonely.

I would not let her come in the day-time, because, in the quest I
had set myself, it was needful I should feel assured no person could
have an opportunity of elaborating any scheme for frightening me, on
the premises.

"Real ghosts," said I to Mr. Craven, "I do not mind; but the physical
agencies which may produce ghosts, I would rather avoid." Acting on
which principle I always remained in the house while Mrs. Stott--my
charwoman was so named--cleaned, and cooked, and boiled, and put
things straight.

No one can imagine what a revolution this woman effected in my ways and
habits, and in the ways and habits of the Uninhabited House.

Tradesmen called for orders. The butcher's boy came whistling down the
lane to deliver the rump-steak or mutton-chop I had decided on for
dinner; the greengrocer delivered his vegetables; the cheesemonger took
solemn affidavit concerning the freshness of his stale eggs and the
superior quality of a curious article which he called country butter,
and declared came from a particular dairy famed for the excellence of
its produce; the milkman's yahoo sounded cheerfully in the morning
hours; and the letter-box was filled with cards from all sorts and
descriptions of people--from laundresses to wine merchants, from
gardeners to undertakers.

The doors now never shut nor opened of their own accord. A great peace
seemed to have settled over River Hall.

It was all too peaceful, in fact. I had gone to the place to hunt a
ghost, and not even the ghost of a ghost seemed inclined to reveal
itself to me.




10. THE WATCHER IS WATCHED


I have never been able exactly to satisfy my own mind as to the precise
period during my occupation of the Uninhabited House when it occurred to
me that I was being watched. Hazily I must have had some consciousness
of the fact long before I began seriously to entertain the idea.

I felt, even when I was walking through London, that I was being often
kept in sight by some person. I had that vague notion of a stranger
being interested in my movements which it is so impossible to define to
a friend, and which one is chary of seriously discussing with oneself.
Frequently, when the corner of a street was reached, I found myself
involuntarily turning to look back; and, prompted by instinct, I
suppose, for there was no reason about the matter, I varied my route to
and from the Uninhabited House, as much as the nature of the roads
permitted. Further, I ceased to be punctual as to my hours of business,
sometimes arriving at the office late, and, if Mr. Craven had anything
for me to do Cityward, returning direct from thence to River Hall
without touching Buckingham Street.

By this time February had drawn to a close, and better weather might
therefore have been expected; instead of which, one evening as I paced
westward, snow began to fall, and continued coming down till somewhere
about midnight.

Next morning Mrs. Stott drew my attention to certain footmarks on the
walks, and beneath the library and drawing-room windows--the footmarks,
evidently, of a man whose feet were not a pair. With the keenest
interest, I examined these traces of a human pursuer. Clearly the
footprints had been made by only one person, and that person deformed in
some way. Not merely was the right foot-track different from that of the
left, but the way in which its owner put it to the ground must have been
different also. The one mark was clear and distinct, cut out in the snow
with a firm tread, while the other left a little broken bank at its
right edge, and scarcely any impression of the heel.

"Slightly lame," I decided. "Eases his right foot, and has his boots
made to order."

"It is very odd," I remarked aloud to Mrs. Stott.

"That it is, sir," she answered; adding, "I hope to gracious none of
them mobsmen are going to come burglaring here!" "Pooh!" I replied;
"there is nothing for them to steal, except chairs and tables, and I
don't think one man could carry many of them away."

The whole of that day I found my thoughts reverting to those foot-marks
in the snow. What purpose anyone proposed to serve by prowling about
River Hall I could not imagine. Before taking up my residence in the
Uninhabited House, I had a theory that some malicious person or persons
was trying to keep the place unoccupied--nay, further, imagination
suggested the idea that, owing to its proximity to the river, Mr.
Elmsdale's Hall might have taken the fancy of a gang of smugglers, who
had provided for themselves means of ingress and egress unknown to the
outside world. But all notions of this kind now seemed preposterous.

Slowly, but surely, the conviction had been gaining upon me that, let
the mystery of River Hall be what it would, no ordinary explanation
could account for the phenomena which it had presented to tenant after
tenant; and my own experiences in the house, slight though they were,
tended to satisfy me there was something beyond malice or interest at
work about the place.

The very peace vouchsafed to me seemed another element of mystery, since
it would certainly have been natural for any evil-disposed person to
inaugurate a series of ghostly spectacles for the benefit of an
investigator like myself; and yet, somehow, the absence of supernatural
appearances, and the presence of that shadowy human being who thought it
worth while to track my movements, and who had at last left tangible
proof of his reality behind him in the snow, linked themselves together
in my mind.

"If there is really anyone watching me," I finally decided, "there must
be a deeper mystery attached to River Hall than has yet been suspected.
Now, the first thing is to make sure that some one is watching me, and
the next to guard against danger from him."

In the course of the day, I made a, for me, curious purchase. In a
little shop, situated in a back street, I bought half a dozen reels of
black sewing-cotton.

This cotton, on my return home, I attached to the trellis-work outside
the drawing-room window, and wound across the walk and round such trees
and shrubs as grew in positions convenient for my purpose.

"If these threads are broken to-morrow morning, I shall know I have a
flesh-and-blood foe to encounter," I thought.

Next morning I found all the threads fastened across the walks leading
round by the library and drawing-room snapped in two.

It was, then, flesh and blood I had come out to fight, and I decided
that night to keep watch.

As usual, I went up to my bedroom, and, after keeping the gas burning
for about the time I ordinarily spent in undressing, put out the light,
softly turned the handle of the door, stole, still silently, along the
passage, and so into a large apartment with windows which overlooked
both the library and drawing-room.

It was here, I knew, that Miss Elmsdale must have heard her father
walking past the door, and I am obliged to confess that, as I stepped
across the room, a nervous chill seemed for the moment to take my
courage captive.

If any reader will consider the matter, mine was not an enviable
position. Alone in a desolate house, reputed to be haunted, watching
for some one who had sufficient interest in the place to watch it and
me closely.

It was still early--not later than half-past ten. I had concluded to
keep my vigil until after midnight, and tried to while away the time
with thoughts foreign to the matter in hand.

All in vain, however. Let me force what subject I pleased upon my
mind, it reverted persistently to Mr. Elmsdale and the circumstances
of his death.

"Why did he commit suicide?" I speculated. "If he had lost money, was
that any reason why he should shoot himself?"

People had done so, I was aware; and people, probably, would continue to
do so; but not hard-headed, hard-hearted men, such as Robert Elmsdale
was reputed to have been. He was not so old that the achievement of a
second success should have seemed impossible. His credit was good, his
actual position unsuspected. River Hall, unhaunted, was not a bad
property, and in those days he could have sold it advantageously.

I could not understand the motive of his suicide, unless, indeed, he was
mad or drunk at the time. And then I began to wonder whether anything
about his life had come out on the inquest--anything concerning habits,
associates, and connections. Had there been any other undercurrent,
besides betting, in his life brought out in evidence, which might help
me to a solution of the mystery?

"I will ask Mr. Craven to-morrow," I thought, "whether he has a copy of
the _Times_, containing a report of the inquest. Perhaps--"

What possibility I was about to suggest to my own mind I shall never now
know, for at that moment there flamed out upon the garden a broad,
strong flame of light--a flame which came so swiftly and suddenly, that
a man, creeping along the River Walk, had not time to step out of its
influence before I had caught full sight of him. There was not much to
see, however. A man about the middle height, muffled in a cloak, wearing
a cap, the peak of which was drawn down over his forehead: that was all
I could discern, ere, cowering back from the light, he stole away into
the darkness.

Had I yielded to my first impulse, I should have rushed after him in
pursuit; but an instant's reflection told me how worse than futile such
a wild-goose chase must prove. Cunning must be met with cunning,
watching with watching.

If I could discover who he was, I should have taken the first step
towards solving the mystery of River Hall; but I should never do so by
putting him on his guard. The immediate business lying at that moment to
my hand was to discover whence came the flare of light which, streaming
across the walk, had revealed the intruder's presence to me. For that
business I can truthfully say I felt little inclination.

Nevertheless, it had to be undertaken. So, walking downstairs, I
unlocked and opened the library-door, and found, as I anticipated, the
room in utter darkness. I examined the fastenings of the shutters--they
were secure as I had left them; I looked into the strong-room--not even
a rat lay concealed there; I turned the cocks of the gas lights--but no
gas whistled through the pipes, for the service to the library was
separate from that of the rest of the house, and capable of being shut
off at pleasure. I, mindful of the lights said to have been seen
emanating from that room, had taken away the key from the internal tap,
so that gas could not be used without my knowledge or the possession of
a second key. Therefore, as I have said, it was no surprise to me to
find the library in darkness. Nor could I say the fact of the light
flaring, apparently, from a closely-shut-up room surprised me either.
For a long time I had been expecting to see this phenomenon: now, when I
did see it, I involuntarily connected the light, the apartment, and the
stranger together.

For he was no ghost. Ghosts do not leave footmarks behind them in the
snow. Ghosts do not break threads of cotton. It was a man I had seen in
the garden, and it was my business to trace out the connection between
him and the appearances at River Hall.

Thinking thus, I left the library, extinguished the candle by the aid of
which I had made the investigations stated above, and after lowering the
gaslight I always kept burning in the hall, began ascending the broad,
handsome staircase, when I was met by the figure of a man descending the
steps. I say advisedly, the figure; because, to all external appearance,
he was as much a living man as myself.

And yet I knew the thing which came towards me was not flesh and
blood. Knew it when I stood still, too much stupefied to feel afraid.
Knew it, as the figure descended swiftly, noiselessly. Knew it, as,
for one instant, we were side by side. Knew it, when I put out my hand
to stop its progress, and my hand, encountering nothing, passed
through the phantom as through air. Knew, it, when I saw the figure
pass through the door I had just locked, and which opened to admit the
ghostly visitor--opened wide, and then closed again, without the help
of mortal hand.

After that I knew nothing more till I came to my senses again and found
myself half lying, half sitting on the staircase, with my head resting
against the banisters. I had fainted; but if any man thinks I saw in a
vision what I have described, let him wait till he reaches the end of
this story before expressing too positive an opinion about the matter.

How I passed the remainder of that night, I could scarcely tell.
Towards morning, however, I fell asleep, and it was quite late when I
awoke: so late, in fact, that Mrs. Stott had rung for admittance
before I was out of bed.

That morning two curious things occurred: one, the postman brought a
letter for the late owner of River Hall, and dropped it in the box;
another, Mrs. Stott asked me if I would allow her and two of the
children to take up their residence at the Uninhabited House. She
could not manage to pay her rent, she explained, and some kind
friends had offered to maintain the elder children if she could keep
the two youngest.

"And I thought, sir, seeing how many spare rooms there are here, and the
furniture wanting cleaning, and the windows opening when the sun is out,
that perhaps you would not object to my staying here altogether. I
should not want any more wages, sir, and I would do my best to give
satisfaction."

For about five minutes I considered this proposition, made to me whilst
sitting at breakfast, and decided in favour of granting her request. I
felt satisfied she was not in league with the person or persons engaged
in watching my movements; it would be well to have some one in care of
the premises during my absence, and it would clearly be to her interest
to keep her place at River Hall, if possible.

Accordingly, when she brought in my boots, I told her she could remove
at once if she liked.

"Only remember one thing, Mrs. Stott," I said. "If you find any ghosts
in the dark corners, you must not come to me with any complaints."

"I sleep sound, sir," she answered, "and I don't think any ghosts will
trouble me in the daytime. So thank you, sir; I will bring over a few
things and stay here, if you please."

"Very good; here is the key of the back door," I answered; and in five
minutes more I was trudging Londonward.

As I walked along I decided not to say anything to Mr. Craven concerning
the previous night's adventures; first, because I felt reluctant to
mention the apparition, and secondly, because instinct told me I should
do better to keep my own counsel, and confide in no one, till I had
obtained some clue to the mystery of that midnight watcher.

"Now here's a very curious thing!" said Mr. Craven, after he had opened
and read the letter left at River Hall that morning. "This is from a man
who has evidently not heard of Mr. Elmsdale's death, and who writes to
say how much he regrets having been obliged to leave England without
paying his I O U held by my client. To show that, though he may have
seemed dishonest, he never meant to cheat Mr. Elmsdale, he encloses a
draft on London for the principal and interest of the amount due."

"Very creditable to him," I remarked. "What is the amount, sir?"

"Oh! the total is under a hundred pounds," answered Mr. Craven; "but
what I meant by saying the affair seemed curious is this: amongst Mr.
Elmsdale's papers there was not an I O U of any description."

"Well, that is singular," I observed; then asked, "Do you think Mr.
Elmsdale had any other office besides the library at River Hall?"

"No," was the reply, "none whatever. When he gave up his offices in
town, he moved every one of his papers to River Hall. He was a reserved,
but not a secret man; not a man, for instance, at all likely to lead a
double life of any sort."

"And yet he betted," I suggested.

"Certainly that does puzzle me," said Mr. Craven. "And it is all against
my statement, for I am certain no human being, unless it might be Mr.
Harringford, who knew him in business, was aware of the fact."

"And what is your theory about the absence of all-important documents?"
I inquired.

"I think he must have raised money on them," answered Mr. Craven.

"Are you aware whether anyone else ever produced them?" I asked.

"I am not; I never heard of their being produced: but, then, I should
not have been likely to hear." Which was very true, but very
unsatisfactory. Could we succeed in tracing even one of those papers, a
clue might be found to the mystery of Mr. Elmsdale's suicide.

That afternoon I repaired to the house of one of our clients, who had, I
knew, a file of the _Times_ newspapers, and asked him to allow me to
look at it.

I could, of course, have seen a file at many places in the city, but I
preferred pursuing my investigations where no one was likely to watch
the proceeding.

"_Times!_ bless my soul, yes; only too happy to be able to oblige Mr.
Craven. Walk into the study, there is a good fire, make yourself quite
at home, I beg, and let me send you a glass of wine."

All of which I did, greatly to the satisfaction of the dear old
gentleman.

Turning over the file for the especial year in which Mr. Elmsdale had
elected to put a pistol to his head, I found at last the account of the
inquest, which I copied out in shorthand, to be able to digest it more
fully at leisure; and as it was growing dusk, wended my way back to
Buckingham Street.

As I was walking slowly down one side of the street, I noticed a man
standing within the open door of a house near Buckingham Gate.

At any other time I should not have given the fact a second thought, but
life at River Hall seemed to have endowed me with the power of making
mountains out of molehills, of regarding the commonest actions of my
fellows with distrust and suspicion; and I was determined to know more
of the gentleman who stood back in the shadow, peering out into the
darkening twilight.

With this object I ran upstairs to the clerk's office, and then passed
into Mr. Craven's room. He had gone, but his lamp was still burning, and
I took care to move between it and the window, so as to show myself to
any person who might be watching outside; then, without removing hat or
top-coat, I left the room, and proceeded to Taylor's office, which I
found in utter darkness. This was what I wanted; I wished to see without
being seen; and across the way, standing now on the pavement, was the
man I had noticed, looking up at our offices.

"All right," thought I, and running downstairs, I went out again, and
walked steadily up Buckingham Street, along John Street, up Adam Street,
as though _en route_ to the Strand. Before, however, I reached that
thoroughfare, I paused, hesitated, and then immediately and suddenly
wheeled round and retraced my steps, meeting, as I did so, a man walking
a few yards behind me and at about the same pace.

I did not slacken my speed for a moment as we came face to face; I did
not turn to look back after him; I retraced my steps to the office;
affected to look out some paper, and once again pursued my former route,
this time without meeting or being followed by anyone, and made my way
into the City, where I really had business to transact.

I could have wished for a longer and a better look at the man who
honoured me so far as to feel interested in my movements; but I did not
wish to arouse his suspicions.

I had scored one trick; I had met him full, and seen his face
distinctly--so distinctly that I was able to feel certain I had seen it
before, but where, at the moment, I could not remember.

"Never mind," I continued: "that memory will come in due time; meanwhile
the ground of inquiry narrows, and the plot begins to thicken."




11. MISS BLAKE ONCE MORE


Upon my return to River Hall I found in the letter-box an envelope
addressed to ---- Patterson, Esq.

Thinking it probably contained some circular, I did not break the seal
until after dinner; whereas, had I only known from whom the note came,
should I not have devoured its contents before satisfying the pangs of
physical hunger!

Thus ran the epistle:--

    "DEAR SIR,--

    "Until half an hour ago I was ignorant that you were the person who
    had undertaken to reside at River Hall. If you would add another
    obligation to that already conferred upon me, _leave that terrible
    house at once_. What I have seen in it, you know; what may happen to
    you, if you persist in remaining there, I tremble to think. For the
    sake of your widowed mother and only sister, you ought not to expose
    yourself to a risk which is _worse than useless_. I never wish to
    hear of River Hall being let again. Immediately I come of age, I
    shall sell the place; and if anything could give me happiness in
    this world, it would be to hear the house was razed to the ground.
    Pray! pray! listen to a warning, which, believe me, is not idly
    given, and leave a place which has already been the cause of so much
    misery to yours, gratefully and sincerely,

    "HELENA ELMSDALE."

It is no part of this story to tell the rapture with which I gazed upon
the writing of my "lady-love." Once I had heard Miss Blake remark, when
Mr. Craven was remonstrating with her on her hieroglyphics, that "Halana
wrote an 'unmaning hand,' like all the rest of the English," and, to
tell the truth, there was nothing particularly original or
characteristic about Miss Elmsdale's calligraphy.

But what did that signify to me? If she had strung pearls together, I
should not have valued them one-half so much as I did the dear words
which revealed her interest in me.

Over and over I read the note, at first rapturously, afterwards with a
second feeling mingling with my joy. How did she know it was I who had
taken up my residence at River Hall? Not a soul I knew in London,
besides Mr. Craven, was aware of the fact, and he had promised
faithfully to keep my secret.

Where, then, had Miss Elmsdale obtained her information? from whom
had she learned that I was bent on solving the mystery of the
"Uninhabited House"?

I puzzled myself over these questions till my brain grew uneasy with
vain conjectures.

Let me imagine what I would--let me force my thoughts into what grooves
I might--the moment the mental pressure was removed, my suspicions
fluttered back to the man whose face seemed not unfamiliar.

"I am confident he wants to keep that house vacant," I decided. "Once
let me discover who he is, and the mystery of the 'Uninhabited House'
shall not long remain a mystery."

But then the trouble chanced to be how to find out who he was. I could
not watch and be watched at the same time, and I did not wish to take
anyone into my confidence, least of all a professional detective.

So far fortune had stood my friend; I had learnt something suspected by
no one else, and I made up my mind to trust to the chapter of accidents
for further information on the subject of my unknown friend.

When Mr. Craven and I were seated at our respective tables, I
said to him:

"Could you make any excuse to send me to Miss Blake's to-day, sir?"

Mr. Craven looked up in utter amazement. "To Miss Blake's!" he repeated.
"Why do you want to go there?"

"I want to see Miss Elmsdale," I answered, quietly enough, though I felt
the colour rising in my face as I spoke.

"You had better put all that nonsense on one side, Patterson," he
remarked. "What you have to do is to make your way in the world, and you
will not do that so long as your head is running upon pretty girls.
Helena Elmsdale is a good girl; but she would no more be a suitable wife
for you, than you would be a suitable husband for her. Stick to law, my
lad, for the present, and leave love for those who have nothing more
important to think of."

"I did not want to see Miss Elmsdale for the purpose you imply," I said,
smiling at the vehemence of Mr. Craven's advice. "I only wish to ask her
one question."

"What is the question?"

"From whom she learned that I was in residence at River Hall," I
answered, after a moment's hesitation.

"What makes you think she is aware of that fact?" he inquired.

"I received a note from her last night, entreating me to leave the
place, and intimating that some vague peril menaced me if I persisted in
remaining there."

"Poor child! poor Helena!" said Mr. Craven, thoughtfully; then spreading
a sheet of note-paper on his blotting-pad, and drawing his cheque-book
towards him, he proceeded:

"Now remember, Patterson, I trust to your honour implicitly. You must
not make love to that girl; I think a man can scarcely act more
dishonourably towards a woman, than to induce her to enter into what
must be, under the best circumstances, a very long engagement."

"You may trust me, sir," I answered, earnestly. "Not," I added, "that I
think it would be a very easy matter to make love to anyone with Miss
Blake sitting by."

Mr. Craven laughed; he could not help doing so at the idea I had
suggested. Then he said, "I had a letter from Miss Blake this morning
asking me for money."

"And you are going to let her have some of that hundred pounds you
intended yesterday to place against her indebtedness to you," I
suggested.

"That is so," he replied. "Of course, when Miss Helena comes of age, we
must turn over a new leaf--we really must."

To this I made no reply. It would be a most extraordinary leaf, I
considered, in which Miss Blake did not appear as debtor to my
employer but it scarcely fell within my province to influence Mr.
Craven's actions.

"You had better ask Miss Blake to acknowledge receipt of this," said my
principal, holding up a cheque for ten pounds as he spoke. "I am afraid
I have not kept the account as I ought to have done."

Which was undeniably true, seeing we had never taken a receipt from
her at all, and that loans had been debited to his private account
instead of to that of Miss Blake. But true as it was, I only answered
that I would get her acknowledgment; and taking my hat, I walked off
to Hunter Street.

Arrived there, I found, to my unspeakable joy, that Miss Blake was out,
and Miss Elmsdale at home.

When I entered the shabby sitting-room where her beauty was so
grievously lodged, she rose and greeted me with kindly words, and sweet
smiles, and vivid blushes.

"You have come to tell me you are not going ever again to that dreadful
house," she said, after the first greeting and inquiries for Miss Blake
were over. "You cannot tell the horror with which the mere mention of
River Hall now fills me."

"I hope it will never be mentioned to you again till I have solved the
mystery attached to it," I answered.

"Then you will not do what I ask," she cried, almost despairingly.

"I cannot," was my reply. "Miss Elmsdale, you would not have a soldier
turn back from the battle. I have undertaken to find out the secret
attached to your old home, and, please God, I shall succeed in my
endeavours."

"But you are exposing yourself to danger, to--"

"I must take my chance of that. I cannot, if I would, turn back now, and
I would not if I could. But I have come to you for information. How did
you know it was I who had gone to River Hall?"

The colour flamed up in her face as I put the question.

"I--I was told so," she stammered out.

"May I ask by whom?"

"No, Mr. Patterson, you may not," she replied. "A--a friend--a kind
friend, informed me of the fact, and spoke of the perils to which you
were exposing yourself--living there all alone--all alone," she
repeated. "I would not pass a night in the house again if the whole
parish were there to keep me company, and what must it be to stay in
that terrible, terrible place alone! You are here, perhaps, because you
do not believe--because you have not seen."

"I do believe," I interrupted, "because I have seen; and yet I mean to
go through with the matter to the end. Have you a likeness of your
father in your possession, Miss Elmsdale?" I asked.

"I have a miniature copied from his portrait, which was of course
too large to carry from place to place," she answered. "Why do you
wish to know?"

"If you let me see it, I will reply to your question," I said.

Round her dear throat she wore a thin gold chain. Unfastening this, she
handed to me the necklet, to which was attached a locket enamelled in
black. It is no exaggeration to say, as I took this piece of personal
property, my hand trembled so much that I could not open the case.

True love is always bashful, and I loved the girl, whose slender
neck the chain had caressed, so madly and senselessly, if you will,
that I felt as if the trinket were a living thing, a part and parcel
of herself.

"Let me unfasten it," she said, unconscious that aught save awkwardness
affected my manipulation of the spring. And she took the locket and
handed it back to me open, wet with tears--her tears.

Judge how hard it was for me then to keep my promise to Mr. Craven and
myself--how hard it was to refrain from telling her all my reasons for
having ever undertaken to fight the dragon installed at River Hall.

I thank God I did refrain. Had I spoken then, had I presumed upon her
sorrow and her simplicity, I should have lost something which
constitutes the sweetest memory of my life.

But that is in the future of this story, and meantime I was looking at
the face of her father.

I looked at it long and earnestly; then I closed the locket, softly
pressing down the spring as I did so, and gave back miniature and chain
into her hand.

"Well, Mr. Patterson?" she said, inquiringly.

"Can you bear what I have to tell?" I asked.

"I can, whatever it may be," she answered.

"I have seen that face at River Hall."

She threw up her arms with a gesture of despair.

"And," I went on, "I may be wrong, but I think I am destined to solve
the mystery of its appearance."

She covered her eyes, and there was silence between us for a minute,
when I said:

"Can you give me the name of the person who told you I was at
River Hall?"

"I cannot," she repeated. "I promised not to mention it."

"He said I was in danger."

"Yes, living there all alone."

"And he wished you to warn me."

"No; he asked my aunt to do so, and she refused; and so I--I thought I
would write to you without mentioning the matter to her."

"You have done me an incalculable service," I remarked, "and in return I
will tell you something."

"What is that?" she asked.

"From to-night I shall not be alone in the house."

"Oh! how thankful I am!" she exclaimed; then instantly added, "Here
is my aunt."

I rose as Miss Blake entered, and bowed.

"Oh! it is you, is it?" said the lady. "The girl told me some one
was waiting."

Hot and swift ran the colour to my adored one's cheeks.

"Aunt," she observed, "I think you forget this gentleman comes from
Mr. Craven."

"Oh, no! my dear, I don't forget Mr. Craven, or his clerks either,"
responded Miss Blake, as, still cloaked and bonneted, she tore open Mr.
Craven's envelope.

"I am to take back an answer, I think," said I.

"You are, I see," she answered. "He's getting mighty particular, is
William Craven. I suppose he thinks I am going to cheat him out of his
paltry ten pounds. Ten pounds, indeed! and what is that, I should like
to know, to us in our present straits! Why, I had more than twice ten
yesterday from a man on whom we have no claim--none whatever--who,
without asking, offered it in our need."

"Aunt," said Miss Elmsdale, warningly.

"If you will kindly give me your acknowledgment, Miss Blake, I should
like to be getting back to Buckingham Street," I said. "Mr. Craven will
wonder at my absence."

"Not a bit of it," retorted Miss Blake. "You and Mr. Craven understand
each other, or I am very much mistaken; but here is the receipt, and
good day to you."

I should have merely bowed my farewell, but that Miss Elmsdale stood up
valiantly.

"Good-bye, Mr. Patterson," she said, holding out her dainty hand, and
letting it lie in mine while she spoke. "I am very much obliged to you.
I can never forget what you have done and dared in our interests."

And I went out of the room, and descended the stairs, and opened the
front door, she looking graciously over the balusters the while, happy,
ay, and more than happy.

What would I not have done and dared at that moment for Helena Elmsdale?
Ah! ye lovers, answer!




12. HELP


"There has been a gentleman to look at the house, sir, this afternoon,"
said Mrs. Stott to me, when, wet and tired, I arrived, a few evenings
after my interview with Miss Elmsdale, at River Hall.

"To look at the house!" I repeated. "Why, it is not to let."

"I know that, sir, but he brought an order from Mr. Craven's office to
allow him to see over the place, and to show him all about. For a widow
lady from the country, he said he wanted it. A very nice gentleman, sir;
only he did ask a lot of questions, surely--"

"What sort of questions?" I inquired.

"Oh! as to why the tenants did not stop here, and if I thought there was
anything queer about the place; and he asked how you liked it, and how
long you were going to stay; and if you had ever seen aught strange in
the house.

"He spoke about you, sir, as if he knew you quite well, and said you
must be stout-hearted to come and fight the ghosts all by yourself. A
mighty civil, talkative gentleman--asked me if I felt afraid of living
here, and whether I had ever met any spirits walking about the stairs
and passages by themselves."

"Did he leave the order you spoke of just now behind him?"

"Yes, sir. He wanted me to give it back to him; but I said I must keep
it for you to see. So then he laughed, and made the remark that he
supposed, if he brought the lady to see the place, I would let him in
again. A pleasant-spoken gentleman, sir--gave me a shilling, though I
told him I did not require it."

Meantime I was reading the order, written by Taylor, and dated two
years back.

"What sort of looking man was he?" I asked.

"Well, sir, there was not anything particular about him in any way.
Not a tall gentleman, not near so tall as you, sir; getting into
years, but still very active and light-footed, though with something
of a halt in his way of walking. I could not rightly make out what it
was; nor what it was that caused him to look a little crooked when you
saw him from behind.

"Very lean, sir; looked as if the dinners he had eaten done him no good.
Seemed as if, for all his pleasant ways, he must have seen trouble, his
face was so worn-like."

"Did he say if he thought the house would suit?" I inquired.

"He said it was a very nice house, sir, and that he imagined anybody not
afraid of ghosts might spend two thousand a year in it very comfortably.
He said he should bring the lady to see the place, and asked me
particularly if I was always at hand, in case he should come tolerably
early in the morning."

"Oh!" was my comment, and I walked into the dining-room, wondering what
the meaning of this new move might be; for Mrs. Stott had described, to
the best of her ability, the man who stood watching our offices in
London; and--good heavens!--yes, the man I had encountered in the lane
leading to River Hall, when I went to the Uninhabited House, after
Colonel Morris' departure.

"That is the man," thought I, "and he has some close, and deep, and
secret interest in the mystery associated with this place, the origin of
which I must discover."

Having arrived at this conclusion, I went to bed, for I had caught a bad
cold, and was aching from head to foot, and had been sleeping ill, and
hoped to secure a good night's rest.

I slept, it is true, but as for rest, I might as well, or better, have
been awake. I fell from one dream into another; found myself wandering
through impossible places; started in an agony of fear, and then dozed
again, only to plunge into some deeper quagmire of trouble; and through
all there was a vague feeling I was pursuing a person who eluded all my
efforts to find him; playing a terrible game of hide-and-seek with a man
who always slipped away from my touch, panting up mountains and running
down declivities after one who had better wind and faster legs than I;
peering out into the darkness, to catch a sight of a vague figure
standing somewhere in the shadow, and looking, with the sun streaming
into my eyes and blinding me, adown long white roads filled with a
multitude of people, straining my sight to catch a sight of the coming
traveller, who yet never came.

When I awoke thoroughly, as I did long and long before daybreak, I knew
I was ill. I had a bad sore throat and an oppression at my chest which
made me feel as if I was breathing through a sponge. My limbs ached more
than had been the case on the previous evening whilst my head felt
heavier than a log of teak.

"What should I do if I were to have a bad illness in that house?" I
wondered to myself, and for a few minutes I pondered over the expediency
of returning home; but this idea was soon set aside.

Where could I go that the Uninhabited House would not be a haunting
presence? I had tried running away from it once before, and found it
more real to me in the King's Road, Brighton, than on the banks of the
Thames. No!--ill or well, I would stay on; the very first night of my
absence might be the night of possible explanation.

Having so decided, I dressed and proceeded to the office, remaining
there, however, only long enough to write a note to Mr. Craven, saying I
had a very bad cold, and begging him to excuse my attendance.

After that I turned my steps to Munro's lodgings. If it were possible
to avert an illness, I had no desire to become invalided in Mr.
Elmsdale's Hall.

Fortunately, Munro was at home and at dinner. "Just come in time, old
fellow," he said, cheerily. "It is not one day in a dozen you would have
found me here at this hour. Sit down, and have some steak. Can't
eat--why, what's the matter, man? You don't mean to say you have got
another nervous attack. If you have, I declare I shall lodge a complaint
against you with Mr. Craven."

"I am not nervous," I answered; "but I have caught cold, and I want you
to put me to rights."

"Wait till I have finished my dinner," he replied; and then he proceeded
to cut himself another piece of steak--having demolished which, and seen
cheese placed on the table, he said:

"Now, Harry, we'll get to business, if you please. Where is this cold
you were talking about?"

I explained as well as I could, and he listened to me without
interruption. When I had quite finished, he said:

"Hal Patterson, you are either becoming a hypochondriac, or you are
treating me to half confidences. Your cold is not worth speaking about.
Go home, and get to bed, and take a basin of gruel, or a glass of
something hot, after you are in bed, and your cold will be well in the
morning. But there is something more than a cold the matter with you.
What has come to you, to make a few rheumatic pains and a slight sore
throat seem of consequence in your eyes?"

"I am afraid of being ill," I answered.

"Why are you afraid of being ill? why do you imagine you are going to be
ill? why should you fall ill any more than anybody else?"

I sat silent for a minute, then I said, "Ned, if I tell you, will you
promise upon your honour not to laugh at me?"

"I won't, if I can help it. I don't fancy I shall feel inclined to
laugh," he replied.

"And unless I give you permission, you will not repeat what I am going
to tell you to anyone?"

"That I can safely promise," he said. "Go on."

And I went on. I began at the beginning and recited all the events
chronicled in the preceding pages; and he listened, asking no questions,
interposing no remark.

When I ceased speaking, he rose and said he must think over the
statements I had made.

"I will come and look you up to-night, Patterson," he observed. "Go home
to River Hall, and keep yourself quiet. Don't mention that you feel ill.
Let matters go on as usual. I will be with you about nine. I have an
appointment now that I must keep."

Before nine Munro appeared, hearty, healthy, vigorous as usual.

"If this place were in Russell Square," he said, after a hasty glance
round the drawing-room, "I should not mind taking a twenty-one years'
lease of it at forty pounds a year, even if ghosts were included in the
fixtures."

"I see you place no credence in my story," I said, a little stiffly.

"I place every credence in your story," was the reply. "I believe you
believe it, and that is saying more than most people could say nowadays
about their friends' stories if they spoke the truth."

It was of no use for me to express any further opinion upon the matter.
I felt if I talked for a thousand years I should still fail to convince
my listener there was anything supernatural in the appearances beheld at
River Hall. It is so easy to pooh-pooh another man's tale; it is
pleasant to explain every phenomenon that the speaker has never
witnessed; it is so hard to credit that anything absolutely
unaccountable on natural grounds has been witnessed by your dearest
friend, that, knowing my only chance of keeping my temper and preventing
Munro gaining a victory over me was to maintain a discreet silence, I
let him talk on and strive to account for the appearances I had
witnessed in his own way.

"Your acquaintance of the halting gait and high shoulder may or might
have some hand in the affair," he finished. "My own opinion is he has
not. The notion that you are being watched, is, if my view of the
matter be correct, only a further development of the nervous excitement
which has played you all sort of fantastic tricks since you came to
this house. If anyone does wander through the gardens, I should set him
down as a monomaniac or an intending burglar, and in any case the very
best thing you can do is to pack up your traps and leave River Hall to
its fate."

I did not answer; indeed, I felt too sick at heart to do so. What he
said was what other people would say. If I could not evolve some clearer
theory than I had yet been able to hit on, I should be compelled to
leave the mystery of River Hall just as I had found it. Miss Blake had,
I knew, written to Mr. Craven that the house had better be let again, as
there "was no use in his keeping a clerk there in free lodgings for
ever": and now came Ned Munro, with his worldly wisdom, to assure me
mine was a wild-goose chase, and that the only sensible course for me to
pursue was to abandon it altogether. For the first time, I felt
disheartened about the business, and I suppose I showed my
disappointment, for Munro, drawing his chair nearer to me, laid a
friendly hand on my shoulder and said:

"Cheer up, Harry! never look so downhearted because your nervous system
has been playing you false. It was a plucky thing to do, and to carry
out; but you have suffered enough for honour, and I should not continue
the experiment of trying how much you can suffer, were I in your shoes."

"You are very kind, Munro," I answered; "but I cannot give up. If I had
all the wish in the world to leave here to-night, a will stronger than
my own would bring me back here to-morrow. The place haunts me. Believe
me, I suffer less from its influence, seated in this room, than when I
am in the office or walking along the Strand."

"Upon the same principle, I suppose, that a murderer always carries the
memory of his victim's face about with him; though he may have felt
callously indifferent whilst the body was an actual presence."

"Precisely," I agreed.

"But then, my dear fellow, you are not a murderer in any sense of the
word. You did not create the ghosts supposed to be resident here."

"No; but I feel bound to find out who did," I answered.

"That is, if you can, I suppose?" he suggested.

"I feel certain I shall," was the answer. "I have an idea in my mind,
but it wants shape. There is a mystery, I am convinced, to solve which,
only the merest hint is needed."

"There are a good many things in this world in the same position, I
should say," answered Munro. "However, Patterson, we won't argue about
the matter; only there is one thing upon which I am determined--after
this evening, I will come and stay here every night. I can say I am
going to sleep out of town. Then, if there are ghosts, we can hunt them
together; if there are none, we shall rest all the better. Do you agree
to that?" and he held out his hand, which I clasped in mine, with a
feeling of gratitude and relief impossible to describe.

As he said, I had done enough for honour; but still I could not give
up, and here was the support and help I required so urgently, ready
for my need.

"I am so much obliged," I said at last.

"Pooh! nonsense!" he answered. "You would do as much or more for me any
day. There, don't let us get sentimental. You must not come out, but,
following the example of your gallant Colonel Morris, I will, if you
please, smoke a cigar in the garden. The moon must be up by this time."

I drew back the curtains and unfastened the shutter, which offered
egress to the grounds, then, having rung for Mrs. Stott to remove the
supper-tray, I sat down by the fire to await Munro's return, and began
musing concerning the hopelessness of my position, the gulf of poverty
and prejudice and struggle that lay between Helena and myself.

I was determined to win her; but the prize seemed unattainable as the
Lord Mayor's robes must have appeared to Whittington, when he stood at
the foot of Highgate Hill; and, prostrated as I was by that subtle
malady to which as yet Munro had given no name, the difficulties grew
into mountains, the chances of success dwarfed themselves into
molehills.

Whilst thus thinking vaguely, purposelessly, but still most miserably, I
was aroused from reverie by the noise of a door being shut cautiously
and carefully--an outer door, and yet one with the sound of which I was
unacquainted.

Hurrying across the hall, I flung the hall-door wide, and looked out
into the night. There was sufficient moonlight to have enabled me to
discern any object moving up or down the lane, but not a creature was in
sight, not a cat or dog even traversed the weird whiteness of that
lonely thoroughfare.

Despite Munro's dictum, I passed out into the night air, and went down
to the very banks of the Thames. There was not a boat within hail. The
nearest barge lay a couple of hundred yards from the shore.

As I retraced my steps, I paused involuntarily beside the door, which
led by a separate entrance to the library.

"That is the door which shut," I said to myself, pressing my hand gently
along the lintel, and sweeping the hitherto unbroken cobwebs away as I
did so. "If my nerves are playing me false this time, the sooner their
tricks are stopped the better, for no human being opened this door, no
living creature has passed through it."

Having made up my mind on which points, I re-entered the house, and
walked into the drawing-room, where Munro, pale as death, stood draining
a glass of neat brandy.

"What is the matter?" I cried, hurriedly. "What have you seen, what--"

"Let me alone for awhile," he interrupted, speaking in a thick, hoarse
whisper; then immediately asked, "Is that the library with the windows
nearest the river?"

"Yes," I answered.

"I want to go into that room," he said, still in the same tone.

"Not now," I entreated. "Sit down and compose yourself; we will go into
it, if you like, before you leave."

"Now, now--this minute," he persisted. "I tell you, Patterson, I must
see what is in it."

Attempting no further opposition, I lit a couple of candles, and giving
one into his hand, led the way to the door of the library, which I
unlocked and flung wide open.

To one particular part Munro directed his steps, casting the light
from his candle on the carpet, peering around in search of something
he hoped, and yet still feared, to see. Then he went to the shutters
and examined the fastenings, and finding all well secured, made a
sign for me to precede him out of the room. At the door he paused,
and took one more look into the darkness of the apartment, after
which he waited while I turned the key in the lock, accompanying me
back across the hall.

When we were once more in the drawing-room, I renewed my inquiry as to
what he had seen; but he bade me let him alone, and sat mopping great
beads of perspiration off his forehead, till, unable to endure the
mystery any longer, I said:

"Munro, whatever it may be that you have seen, tell me all, I entreat.
Any certainty will be better than the possibilities I shall be conjuring
up for myself."

He looked at me wearily, and then drawing his hand across his eyes, as
if trying to clear his vision, he answered, with an uneasy laugh:

"It was nonsense, of course. I did not think I was so imaginative, but I
declare I fancied I saw, looking through the windows of that now utterly
dark room, a man lying dead on the floor."

"Did you hear a door shut?" I inquired.

"Distinctly," he answered; "and what is more, I saw a shadow flitting
through the other door leading out of the library, which we found, if
you remember, bolted on the inside."

"And what inference do you draw from all this?"

"Either that some one is, in a to me unintelligible way, playing a very
clever game at River Hall, or else that I am mad."

"You are no more mad than other people who have lived in this house,"
I answered.

"I don't know how you have done it, Patterson," he went on, unheeding my
remark. "I don't, upon my soul, know how you managed to stay on here. It
would have driven many a fellow out of his mind. I do not like leaving
you. I wish I had told my landlady I should not be back. I will, after
this time; but to-night I am afraid some patient may be wanting me."

"My dear fellow," I answered, "the affair is new to you, but it is not
new to me. I would rather sleep alone in the haunted house, than in a
mansion filled from basement to garret, with the unsolved mystery of
this place haunting me."

"I wish you had never heard of, nor seen, nor come near it," he
exclaimed, bitterly; "but, however, let matters turn out as they will, I
mean to stick to you, Patterson. There's my hand on it."

And he gave me his hand, which was cold as ice--cold as that of one
dead.

"I am going to have some punch, Ned," I remarked. "That is, if you will
stop and have some."

"All right," he answered. "Something 'hot and strong' will hurt neither
of us, but you ought to have yours in bed. May I give it to you there?"

"Nonsense!" I exclaimed, and we drew our chairs close to the fire, and,
under the influence of a decoction which Ned insisted upon making
himself, and at making which, indeed, he was much more of an adept than
I, we talked valiantly about ghosts and their doings, and about how our
credit and happiness were bound up in finding out the reason why the
Uninhabited House was haunted.

"Depend upon it, Hal," said Munro, putting on his coat and hat,
preparatory to taking his departure, "depend upon it that unfortunate
Robert Elmsdale must have been badly cheated by some one, and sorely
exercised in spirit, before he blew out his brains."

To this remark, which, remembering what he had said in the middle of the
day, showed the wonderful difference that exists between theory and
practice, I made no reply.

Unconsciously, almost, a theory had been forming in my own mind, but I
felt much corroboration of its possibility must be obtained before I
dare give it expression.

Nevertheless, it had taken such hold of me that I could not shake off
the impression, which was surely, though slowly, gaining ground, even
against the dictates of my better judgment.

"I will just read over the account of the inquest once again," I
decided, as I bolted and barred the chain after Munro's departure; and
so, by way of ending the night pleasantly, I took out the report, and
studied it till two, chiming from a neighbouring church, reminded me
that the fire was out, that I had a bad cold, and that I ought to have
been between the blankets and asleep hours previously.




13. LIGHT AT LAST


Now, whether it was owing to having gone out the evening before from a
very warm room into the night air, and, afterwards, into that chilly
library, or to having sat reading the report given about Mr.
Elmsdale's death till I grew chilled to my very marrow, I cannot say,
all I know is, that when I awoke next morning I felt very ill, and
welcomed, with rejoicing of spirit, Ned Munro, who arrived about
mid-day, and at once declared he had come to spend a fortnight with me
in the Uninhabited House.

"I have arranged it all. Got a friend to take charge of my patients;
stated that I am going to pay a visit in the country, and so forth. And
now, how are you?"

I told him, very truthfully, that I did not feel at all well.

"Then you will have to get well, or else we shall never be able to
fathom this business," he said. "The first thing, consequently, I shall
do, is to write a prescription, and get it made up. After that, I mean
to take a survey of the house and grounds."

"Do precisely what you like," I answered. "This is Liberty Hall to the
living as well as to the dead," and I laid my head on the back of the
easy-chair, and went off to sleep.

All that day Munro seemed to feel little need of my society. He examined
every room in the house, and every square inch about the premises. He
took short walks round the adjacent neighbourhood, and made, to his own
satisfaction, a map of River Hall and the country and town thereunto
adjoining. Then he had a great fire lighted in the library, and spent
the afternoon tapping the walls, trying the floors, and trying to obtain
enlightenment from the passage which led from the library direct to the
door opening into the lane.

After dinner, he asked me to lend him the shorthand report I had made of
the evidence given at the inquest. He made no comment upon it when he
finished reading, but sat, for a few minutes, with one hand shading his
eyes, and the other busily engaged in making some sort of a sketch on
the back of an old letter.

"What are you doing, Munro?" I asked, at last.

"You shall see presently," he answered, without looking up, or pausing
in his occupation.

At the expiration of a few minutes, he handed me over the paper, saying:

"Do you know anyone that resembles?"

I took the sketch, looked at it, and cried out incoherently in my
surprise.

"Well," he went on, "who is it?"

"The man who follows me! The man I saw in this lane!"

"And what is his name?"

"That is precisely what I desire to find out," I answered. "When did you
see him? How did you identify him? Why did--"

"I have something to tell you, if you will only be quiet, and let me
speak," he interrupted. "It was, as you know, late last night before I
left here, and for that reason, and also because I was perplexed and
troubled, I walked fast--faster than even is my wont. The road was very
lonely; I scarcely met a creature along the road, flooded with the
moonlight. I never was out on a lovelier night; I had never, even in the
country, felt I had it so entirely to myself.

"Every here and there I came within sight of the river, and it seemed,
on each occasion, as though a great mirror had been put up to make every
object on land--every house, every tree, bush, fern, more clearly
visible than it had been before. I am coming to my story, Hal, so don't
look so impatient.

"At last, as I came once again in view of the Thames, with the moon
reflected in the water, and the dark arches of the bridge looking black
and solemn contrasted against the silvery stream, I saw before me, a
long way before me, a man whose figure stood out in relief against the
white road--a man walking wearily and with evident difficulty--a man,
too, slightly deformed.

"I walked on rapidly, till within about a score yards of him, then I
slackened my speed, and taking care that my leisurely footsteps should
be heard, overtook him by degrees, and then, when I was quite abreast,
asked if he could oblige me with a light.

"He looked up in my face, and said, with a forced, painful smile and
studied courtesy of manner:

"'I am sorry, sir, to say that I do not smoke.'

"I do not know exactly what reply I made. I know his countenance struck
me so forcibly, it was with difficulty I could utter some commonplace
remark concerning the beauty of the night.

"'I do not like moonlight,' he said, and as he said it, something, a
connection of ideas, or a momentary speculation, came upon me so
suddenly, that once again I failed to reply coherently, but asked if he
could tell me the shortest way to the Brompton Road.

"'To which end?' he inquired.

"'That nearest Hyde Park Corner,' I answered.

"As it turned out, no question could have served my purpose better.

"'I am going part of the way there,' he said, 'and will show you the
nearest route--that is,' he added, 'if you can accommodate your pace to
mine,' and he pointed, as he spoke, to his right foot, which evidently
was causing him considerable pain.

"Now, that was something quite in my way, and by degrees I got him to
tell me about the accident which had caused his slight deformity. I told
him I was a doctor, and had been to see a patient, and so led him on to
talk about sickness and disease, till at length he touched upon diseases
of a morbid character; asking me if it were true that in some special
maladies the patient was haunted by an apparition which appeared at a
particular hour.

"I told him it was quite true, and that such cases were peculiarly
distressing, and generally proved most difficult to cure--mentioning
several well-authenticated instances, which I do not mean to detail to
you, Patterson, as I know you have an aversion to anything savouring of
medical shop.

"'You doctors do not believe in the actual existence of any such
apparitions, of course?' he remarked, after a pause.

"I told him we did not; that we knew they had their rise and origin
solely in the malady of the patient.

"'And yet,' he said, 'some ghost stories--I am not now speaking of those
associated with disease, are very extraordinary, unaccountable--'

"'Very extraordinary, no doubt,' I answered; 'but I should hesitate
before saying unaccountable. Now, there is that River Hall place up the
river. There must be some rational way of explaining the appearances in
that house, though no one has yet found any clue to that enigma.'

"'River Hall--where is that?' he asked; then suddenly added, 'Oh! I
remember now: you mean the Uninhabited House, as it is called. Yes,
there is a curious story, if you like. May I ask if you are interested
in any way in that matter?'

"'Not in any way, except that I have been spending the evening there
with a friend of mine.'

"'Has he seen anything of the reputed ghost?' asked my companion,
eagerly. 'Is he able to throw any light on the dark subject?'

"'I don't think he can,' I replied. 'He has seen the usual appearances
which I believe it is correct to see at River Hall; but so far, they
have added nothing to his previous knowledge.'

"'He has seen, you say?'

"'Yes; all the orthodox lions of that cheerful house.'

"'And still he is not daunted--he is not afraid?'

"'He is not afraid. Honestly, putting ghosts entirely on one side, I
should not care to be in his shoes, all alone in a lonely house.'

"'And you would be right, sir,' was the answer. 'A man must be mad to
run such a risk.'

"'So I told him,' I agreed.

"'Why, I would not stay in that house alone for any money which could be
offered to me,' he went on, eagerly.

"'I cannot go so far as that,' I said; 'but still it must be a very
large sum which could induce me to do so.'

"'It ought to be pulled down, sir,' he continued; 'the walls ought to be
razed to the ground.'

"'I suppose they will,' I answered, 'when Miss Elmsdale, the owner,
comes of age; unless, indeed, our modern Don Quixote runs the ghost to
earth before that time.'

"'Did you say the young man was ill?' asked my companion.

"'He has got a cold,' I answered.

"'And colds are nasty things to get rid of,' he commented, 'particularly
in those low-lying localities. That is a most unhealthy part; you ought
to order your patient a thorough change of air.'

"'I have, but he won't take advice,' was my reply. 'He has nailed his
colours to the mast, and means, I believe, to stay in River Hall till he
kills the ghost, or the ghost kills him.'

"'What a foolish youth!'

"'Undoubtedly; but, then, youth is generally foolish, and we have all
our crotchets.'

"We had reached the other side of the bridge by this time, and saying
his road lay in an opposite direction to mine, the gentleman I have
sketched told me the nearest way to take, and bade me a civil good
night, adding, 'I suppose I ought to say good morning.'"

"And is that all?" I asked, as Munro paused.

"Bide a wee, as the Scotch say, my son. I strode off along the road he
indicated, and then, instead of making the detour he had kindly sketched
out for my benefit, chose the first turning to my left, and, quite
convinced he would soon pass that way, took up my position in the
portico of a house which lay well in shadow. It stood a little back from
the side-path, and a poor little Arab sleeping on the stone step proved
to me the policeman was not over and above vigilant in that
neighbourhood.

"I waited, Heaven only knows how long, thinking all the time I must be
mistaken, and that his home did lie in the direction he took; but at
last, looking out between the pillars and the concealing shrubs, I saw
him. He was looking eagerly into the distance, with such a drawn, worn,
painful expression, that for a moment my heart relented, and I thought I
would let the poor devil go in peace.

"It was only for a moment, however; touching the sleeping boy, I bade
him awake, if he wanted to earn a shilling. 'Keep that gentleman in
sight, and get to know for me where he lives, and come back here, and I
will give you a shilling, and perhaps two, for your pains.'

"With his eyes still heavy with slumber, and his perceptions for the
moment dulled, he sped after the figure, limping wearily on. I saw him
ask my late companion for charity, and follow the gentleman for a few
steps, when the latter, threatening him with his stick, the boy dodged
to escape a blow, and then, by way of showing how lightly his bosom's
load sat upon him, began turning wheels down the middle of the street.
He passed the place where I stood, and spun a hundred feet further on,
then he gathered himself together, and seeing no one in sight,
stealthily crept back to his porch again.

"'You young rascal,' I said, 'I told you to follow him home. I want to
know his name and address particularly.'

"'Come along, then,' he answered, 'and I'll show you. Bless you, we all
knows him--better than we do the police, or anybody hereabouts. He's a
beak and a ward up at the church, whatever that is, and he has
building-yards as big, oh! as big as two workhouses, and--'"

"His name, Munro--his name?" I gasped.

"Harringford."

I expected it. I knew then that for days and weeks my suspicions had
been vaguely connecting Mr. Harringford with the mystery of the
Uninhabited House.

This was the hiding figure in my dream, the link hitherto wanting in my
reveries concerning River Hall. I had been looking for this--waiting for
it; I understood at last; and yet, when Munro mentioned the name of the
man who had thought it worth his while to watch my movements, I shrunk
from the conclusion which forced itself upon me.

"Must we go on to the end with this affair?" I asked, after a pause, and
my voice was so changed, it sounded like that of a stranger to me.

"We do not yet know what the end will prove," Munro answered; "but
whatever it may be, we must not turn back now."

"How ought we to act, do you think?" I inquired.

"We ought not to act at all," he answered. "We had better wait and see
what his next move will be. He is certain to take some step. He will try
to get you out of this house by hook or by crook. He has already striven
to effect his purpose through Miss Elmsdale, and failed. It will
therefore be necessary for him to attempt some other scheme. It is not
for me to decide on the course he is likely to pursue; but, if I were in
your place, I should stay within doors at night. I should not sit in the
dark near windows still unshuttered. I should not allow any strangers to
enter the house, and I should have a couple of good dogs running loose
about the premises. I have brought Brenda with me as a beginning, and I
think I know where to lay my hand on a good old collie, who will stay
near any house I am in, and let no one trespass about it with impunity."

"Good heavens! Munro, you don't mean to say you think the man would
_murder_ me!" I exclaimed.

"I don't know what he might, or might not do," he replied. "There is
something about this house he is afraid may be found out, and he is
afraid you will find it out. Unless I am greatly mistaken, a great deal
depends upon the secret being preserved intact. At present we can only
surmise its nature; but I mean, in the course of a few days, to know
more of Mr. Harringford's antecedents than he might be willing to
communicate to anyone. What is the matter with you, Hal? You look as
white as a corpse."

"I was only thinking," I answered, "of one evening last week, when I
fell asleep in the drawing-room, and woke in a fright, imagining I saw
that horrid light streaming out from the library, and a face pressed up
close to the glass of the window on my left hand peering into the room."

"I have no doubt the face was there," he said, gravely; "but I do not
think it will come again, so long as Brenda is alive. Nevertheless, I
should be careful. Desperate men are capable of desperate deeds."

The first post next morning brought me a letter from Mr. Craven, which
proved Mr. Harringford entertained for the present no intention of
proceeding to extremities with me.

He had been in Buckingham Street, so said my principal, and offered to
buy the freehold of River Hall for twelve hundred pounds.

Mr. Craven thought he might be induced to increase his bid to fifteen
hundred, and added: "Miss Blake has half consented to the arrangement,
and Miss Elmsdale is eager for the matter to be pushed on, so that the
transfer may take place directly she comes of age. I confess, now an
actual offer has been made, I feel reluctant to sacrifice the property
for such a sum, and doubt whether it might not be better to offer it for
sale by auction--that is, if you think there is no chance of your
discovering the reason why River Hall bears so bad a name. Have you
obtained any clue to the mystery?"

To this I replied in a note, which Munro himself conveyed to the office.

"I have obtained an important clue; but that is all I can say for the
present. Will you tell Mr. Harringford I am at River Hall, and that you
think, being on the spot and knowing all about the place, I could
negotiate the matter better than anyone else in the office? If he is
desirous of purchasing, he will not object to calling some evening and
discussing the matter with me. I have an idea that a large sum of money
might be made out of this property by an enterprising man like Mr.
Harringford; and it is just possible, after hearing what I have to say,
he may find himself able to make a much better offer for the Uninhabited
House than that mentioned in your note. At all events, the interview can
do no harm. I am still suffering so much from cold that it would be
imprudent for me to wait upon Mr. Harringford, which would otherwise be
only courteous on my part."

"Capital!" said Munro, reading over my shoulder. "That will bring my
gentleman to River Hall--. But what is wrong, Patterson? You are surely
not going to turn chickenhearted now?"

"No," I answered; "but I wish it was over. I dread something, and I do
not know what it is. Though nothing shall induce me to waver, I am
afraid, Munro. I am not ashamed to say it: I am afraid, as I was the
first night I stayed in this house. I am not a coward, but I am afraid."

He did not reply for a moment. He walked to the window and looked out
over the Thames; then he came back, and, wringing my hand, said, in
tones that tried unsuccessfully to be cheerful:

"I know what it is, old fellow. Do you think I have not had the feeling
myself, since I came here? But remember, it has to be done, and I will
stand by you. I will see you through it."

"It won't do for you to be in the room, though," I suggested.

"No; but I will stay within earshot," he answered.

We did not talk much more about the matter. Men rarely do talk much
about anything which seems to them very serious, and I may candidly say
that I had never felt anything in my life to be much more serious than
that impending interview with Mr. Harringford.

That he would come we never doubted for a moment, and we were right. As
soon as it was possible for him to appoint an interview, Mr.
Harringford did so.

"Nine o'clock on to-morrow (Thursday) evening," was the hour he named,
apologizing at the same time for being unable to call at an earlier
period of the day.

"Humph!" said Munro, turning the note over. "You will receive him in the
library, of course, Hal?"

I replied such was my intention.

"And that will be a move for which he is in no way prepared," commented
my friend.

From the night when Munro walked and talked with Mr. Harringford, no
person came spying round and about the Uninhabited House. Of this fact
we were satisfied, for Brenda, who gave tongue at the slightest murmur
wafted over the river from the barges lying waiting for the tide, never
barked as though she were on the track of living being; whilst the
collie--a tawny-black, unkempt, ill-conditioned, savage-natured, but yet
most true and faithful brute, which Munro insisted on keeping within
doors, never raised his voice from the day he arrived at River Hall,
till the night Mr. Harringford rang the visitor's-bell, when the animal,
who had been sleeping with his nose resting on his paws, lifted his head
and indulged in a prolonged howl.

Not a nice beginning to an interview which I dreaded.




14. A TERRIBLE INTERVIEW


I was in the library, waiting to receive Mr. Harringford. A bright fire
blazed on the hearth, the table was strewn with papers Munro had brought
to me from the office, the gas was all ablaze, and the room looked
bright and cheerful--as bright and as cheerful as if no ghost had been
ever heard of in connection with it.

At a few minutes past nine my visitor arrived. Mrs. Stott ushered him
into the library, and he entered the room evidently intending to shake
hands with me, which civility I affected not to notice.

After the first words of greeting were exchanged, I asked if he would
have tea, or coffee, or wine; and finding he rejected all offers of
refreshment, I rang the bell and told Mrs. Stott I could dispense with
her attendance for the night.

"Do you mean to tell me you stay in this house entirely alone?" asked
my visitor.

"Until Mrs. Stott came I was quite alone," I answered.

"I would not have done it for any consideration," he remarked.

"Possibly not," I replied. "People are differently constituted."

It was not long before we got to business. His offer of twelve hundred
pounds I pooh-poohed as ridiculous.

"Well," he said--by this time I knew I had a keen man of business to
deal with--"put the place up to auction, and see whether you will
get as much."

"There are two, or rather, three ways of dealing with the property,
which have occurred to me, Mr. Harringford," I explained. "One is
letting or selling this house for a reformatory, or school. Ghosts in
that case won't trouble the inmates, we may be quite certain; another is
utilizing the buildings for a manufactory; and the third is laying the
ground out for building purposes, thus--"

As I spoke, I laid before him a plan for a tri-sided square of building,
the south side being formed by the river. I had taken great pains with
the drawing of this plan: the future houses, the future square, the
future river-walk with seats at intervals, were all to be found in the
roll which I unfolded and laid before him, and the effect my sketch
produced surprised me.

"In Heaven's name, Mr. Patterson," he asked, "where did you get this?
You never drew it out of your own head!"

I hastened to assure him I had certainly not got it out of any other
person's head; but he smiled incredulously.

"Probably," he suggested, "Mr. Elmsdale left some such sketch behind
him--something, at all events, which suggested the idea to you."

"If he did, I never saw nor heard of it," I answered.

"You may have forgotten the circumstance," he persisted; "but I feel
confident you must have seen something like this before. Perhaps amongst
the papers in Mr. Craven's office."

"May I inquire why you have formed such an opinion?" I said, a
little stiffly.

"Simply because this tri-sided square was a favourite project of the
late owner of River Hall," he replied. "After the death of his wife,
the place grew distasteful to him, and I have often heard him say he
would convert the ground into one of the handsomest squares in the
neighbourhood of London. All he wanted was a piece of additional
land lying to the west, which piece is, I believe, now to be had at
a price--"

I sat like one stricken dumb. By no mental process, for which I could
ever account, had that idea been evolved. It sprang into life at a
bound. It came to me in my sleep, and I wakened at once with the whole
plan clear and distinct before my mind's eye, as it now lay clear and
distinct before Mr. Harringford.

"It is very extraordinary," I managed at last to stammer out; "for I can
honestly say I never heard even a suggestion of Mr. Elmsdale's design;
indeed, I did not know he had ever thought of building upon the ground."

"Such was the fact, however," replied my visitor. "He was a speculative
man in many ways. Yes, very speculative, and full of plans and projects.
However, Mr. Patterson," he proceeded, "all this only proves the truth
of the old remark, that 'great wits and little wits sometimes jump
together.'"

There was a ring of sarcasm in his voice, as in his words, but I did not
give much heed to it. The design, then, was not mine. It had come to me
in sleep, it had been forced upon me, it had been explained to me in a
word, and as I asked myself, By whom? I was unable to repress a shudder.

"You are not well, I fear," said Mr. Harringford; "this place seems to
have affected your health. Surely you have acted imprudently in risking
so much to gain so little."

"I do not agree with you," I replied. "However, time will show whether I
have been right or wrong in coming here. I have learned many things of
which I was previously in ignorance, and I think I hold a clue in my
hands which, properly followed, may lead me to the hidden mystery of
River Hall."

"Indeed!" he exclaimed. "May I ask the nature of that clue?"

"It would be premature for me to say more than this, that I am inclined
to doubt whether Mr. Elmsdale committed suicide."

"Do you think his death was the result of accident, then?" he inquired,
his face blanching to a ghastly whiteness.

"No, I do not," I answered, bluntly. "But my thoughts can have little
interest for anyone, at present. What we want to talk about is the sale
and purchase of this place. The offer you made to Mr. Craven, I consider
ridiculous. Let on building lease, the land alone would bring in a
handsome income, and the house ought to sell for about as much as you
offer for the whole property."

"Perhaps it might, if you could find a purchaser," he answered; "and the
land might return an income, if you could let it as you suggest; but, in
the meantime, while the grass grows, the steed starves; and while you
are waiting for your buyer and your speculative builder, Miss Blake and
Miss Elmsdale will have to walk barefoot, waiting for shoes you may
never be able to provide for them."

There was truth in this, but only a half-truth, I felt, so I said:

"When examined at the inquest, Mr. Harringford, you stated, I think,
that you were under considerable obligations to Mr. Elmsdale?"

"Did I?" he remarked. "Possibly, he had given me a helping-hand
once or twice, and probably I mentioned the fact. It is a long time
ago, though."

"Not so very long," I answered; "not long enough, I should imagine, to
enable you to forget any benefits you may have received from Mr.
Elmsdale."

"Mr. Patterson," he interrupted, "are we talking business or sentiment?
If the former, please understand I have my own interests to attend to,
and that I mean to attend to them. If the latter, I am willing, if you
say Miss Elmsdale has pressing need for the money, to send her my cheque
for fifty or a hundred pounds. Charity is one thing, trade another, and
I do not care to mix them. I should never have attained to my present
position, had I allowed fine feelings to interfere with the driving of a
bargain. I don't want River Hall. I would not give that," and he snapped
his fingers, "to have the title-deeds in my hands to-morrow; but as Miss
Elmsdale wishes to sell, and as no one else will buy, I offer what I
consider a fair price for the place. If you think you can do better,
well and good. If--"

He stopped suddenly in his sentence, then rising, he cried, "It is a
trick--a vile, infamous, disgraceful trick!" while his utterance grew
thick, and his face began to work like that of a person in convulsions.

"What do you mean?" I asked, rising also, and turning to look in the
direction he indicated with outstretched arm and dilated eyes.

Then I saw--no need for him to answer. Standing in the entrance to the
strong room was Robert Elmsdale himself, darkness for a background, the
light of the gas falling full upon his face.

Slowly, sternly, he came forward, step by step. With footfalls that
fell noiselessly, he advanced across the carpet, moving steadily
forward towards Mr. Harringford, who, beating the air with his hands,
screamed, "Keep him off! don't let him touch me!" and fell full length
on the floor.

Next instant, Munro was in the room. "Hullo, what is the matter?" he
asked. "What have you done to him--what has he been doing to you?"

I could not answer. Looking in my face, I think Munro understood we had
both seen that which no man can behold unappalled.

"Come, Hal," he said, "bestir yourself. Whatever has happened, don't
sink under it like a woman. Help me to lift him. Merciful Heaven!" he
added, as he raised the prostrate figure. "He is dead!"

To this hour, I do not know how we managed to carry him into the
drawing-room. I cannot imagine how our trembling hands bore that inert
body out of the library and across the hall. It seems like a dream to me
calling up Mrs. Stott, and then tearing away from the house in quest of
further medical help, haunted, every step I took, by the memory of that
awful presence, the mere sight of which had stricken down one of us in
the midst of his buying, and bargaining, and boasting.

I had done it--I had raised that ghost--I had brought the man to his
death; and as I fled through the night, innocent as I had been of the
thought of such a catastrophe, I understood what Cain must have felt
when he went out to live his life with the brand of murderer upon him.

But the man was not dead; though he lay for hours like one from whom
life had departed, he did not die then. We had all the genius, and
knowledge, and skill of London at his service. If doctors could have
saved him, he had lived. If nursing could have availed him, he had
recovered, for I never left him.

When the end came I was almost worn out myself.

And the end came very soon.

"No more doctors," whispered the sick man; "they cannot cure me. Send
for a clergyman, and a lawyer, Mr. Craven as well as any other. It is
all over now; and better so; life is but a long fever. Perhaps he will
sleep now, and let me sleep too. Yes, I killed him. Why, I will tell
you. Give me some wine.

"What I said at the inquest about owing my worldly prosperity to him was
true. I trace my pecuniary success to Mr. Elmsdale; but I trace also
hours, months, and years of anguish to his agency. My God! the nights
that man has made me spend when he was living, the nights I have spent
in consequence of his death--"

He stopped; he had mentally gone back over a long journey. He was
retracing the road he had travelled, from youth to old age. For he was
old, if not in years, in sorrow. Lying on his death-bed, he understood
for what a game he had burnt his candle to the socket; comprehended how
the agony, and the suspense, and the suffering, and the long, long fever
of life, which with him never knew a remittent moment, had robbed him of
that which every man has a right to expect, some pleasure in the course
of his existence.

"When I first met Elmsdale," he went on, "I was a young man, and an
ambitious one. I was a clerk in the City. I had been married a couple of
years to a wife I loved dearly. She was possessed of only a small dot;
and after furnishing our house, and paying for all the expenses incident
on the coming of a first child, we thought ourselves fortunate in
knowing there was still a deposit standing in our name at the
Joint-Stock Bank, for something over two hundred pounds.

"Nevertheless, I was anxious. So far, we had lived within our income;
but with an annual advance of salary only amounting to ten pounds, or
thereabouts, I did not see how we were to manage when more children
came, particularly as the cost of living increased day by day. It was a
dear year that of which I am speaking.

"I do not precisely remember on what occasion it was I first saw Mr.
Elmsdale; but I knew afterwards he picked me out as a person likely to
be useful to him.

"He was on good terms with my employers, and asked them to allow me to
bid for some houses he wanted to purchase at a sale.

"To this hour I do not know why he did not bid for them himself. He gave
me a five-pound note for my services; and that was the beginning of our
connection. Off and on, I did many things for him of one sort or
another, and made rather a nice addition to my salary out of doing them,
till the devil, or he, or both, put it into my head to start as builder
and speculator on my own account.

"I had two hundred pounds and my furniture: that was the whole of my
capital; but Elmsdale found me money. I thought my fortune was made, the
day he advanced me my first five hundred pounds. If I had known--if I
had known--"

"Don't talk any more," I entreated. "What can it avail to speak of such
matters now?"

He turned towards me impatiently.

"Not talk," he repeated, "when I have for years been as one dumb,
and at length the string of my tongue is loosened! Not talk, when,
if I keep silence now, he will haunt me in eternity, as he has
haunted me in time!"

I did not answer, I only moistened his parched lips, and bathed his
burning forehead as tenderly as my unaccustomed hands understood how to
perform such offices.

"Lift me up a little, please," he said; and I put the pillows in
position as deftly as I could.

"You are not a bad fellow," he remarked, "but I am not going to leave
you anything."

"God forbid!" I exclaimed, involuntarily.

"Are not you in want of money?" he asked.

"Not of yours," I answered.

"Mine," he said; "it is not mine, it is his. He thought a great deal of
money, and he has come back for it. He can't rest, and he won't let me
rest till I have paid him principal and interest--compound interest.
Yes--well, I am able to do even that."

We sat silent for a few minutes, then he spoke again.

"When I first went into business with my borrowed capital, nothing I
touched really succeeded. I found myself going back--back. Far better
was my position as clerk; then at least I slept sound at nights, and
relished my meals. But I had tasted of so-called independence, and I
could not go back to be at the beck and call of an employer. Ah! no
employer ever made me work so hard as Mr. Elmsdale; no beck and call
were ever so imperative as his.

"I pass over a long time of anxiety, struggle, and hardship. The world
thought me a prosperous man; probably no human being, save Mr. Elmsdale,
understood my real position, and he made my position almost unendurable.

"How I came first to bet on races, would be a long story, longer than I
have time to tell; but my betting began upon a very small scale, and I
always won--always in the beginning. I won so certainly and so
continuously, that finally I began to hope for deliverance from Mr.
Elmsdale's clutches.

"I don't know how"--the narrative was not recited straight on as I am
writing it, but by starts, as strength served him--"Mr. Elmsdale
ascertained I was devoting myself to the turf: all I can say is, he did
ascertain the fact, and followed me down to Ascot to make sure there was
no mistake in his information.

"At the previous Derby my luck had begun to turn. I had lost then--lost
heavily for me, and he taxed me with having done so.

"In equity, and at law, he had then the power of foreclosing on every
house and rood of ground I owned. I was in his power--in the power of
Robert Elmsdale. Think of it--. But you never knew him. Young man, you
ought to kneel down and thank God you were never so placed as to be in
the power of such a devil--

"If ever you should get into the power of a man like Robert Elmsdale,
don't offend him. It is bad enough to owe him money; but it is worse for
him to owe you a grudge. I had offended him. He was always worrying me
about his wife--lamenting her ill-health, extolling her beauty,
glorifying himself on having married a woman of birth and breeding; just
as if his were the only wife in the world, as if other men had not at
home women twice as good, if not as handsome as Miss Blake's sister.

"Under Miss Blake's insolence I had writhed; and once, when my usual
prudence deserted me, I told Mr. Elmsdale I had been in Ireland and seen
the paternal Blake's ancestral cabin, and ascertained none of the family
had ever mixed amongst the upper thousand, or whatever the number may be
which goes to make up society in the Isle of Saints.

"It was foolish, and it was wrong; but I could not help saying what I
did, and from that hour he was my enemy. Hitherto, he had merely been my
creditor. My own imprudent speech transformed him into a man lying in
wait to ruin me.

"He bided his time. He was a man who could wait for years before he
struck, but who would never strike till he could make sure of inflicting
a mortal wound. He drew me into his power more and more, and then he
told me he did not intend to continue trusting anyone who betted--that
he must have his money. If he had not it by a certain date, which he
named, he would foreclose.

"That meant he would beggar me, and I with an ailing wife and a
large family!

"I appealed to him. I don't remember now what I said, but I do recollect
I might as well have talked to stone.

"What I endured during the time which followed, I could not describe,
were I to talk for ever. Till a man in extremity tries to raise money,
he never understands the difficulty of doing so. I had been short of
money every hour since I first engaged in business, and yet I never
comprehended the meaning of a dead-lock till then.

"One day, in the City, when I was almost mad with anxiety, I met
Mr. Elmsdale.

"'Shall you be ready for me, Harringford?' he asked.

"'I do not know--I hope so,' I answered.

"'Well, remember, if you are not prepared with the money, I shall be
prepared to act,' he said, with an evil smile.

"As I walked home that evening, an idea flashed into my mind. I had
tried all honest means of raising the money; I would try dishonest. My
credit was good. I had large transactions with first-rate houses. I was
in the habit of discounting largely, and I--well, I signed names to
paper that I ought not to have done. I had the bills put through. I had
four months and three days in which to turn round, and I might, by that
time, be able to raise sufficient to retire the acceptances.

"In the meantime, I could face Mr. Elmsdale, and so I wrote, appointing
an evening when I would call with the money, and take his release for
all claims upon me.

"When I arrived at River Hall he had all the necessary documents ready,
but refused to give them up in exchange for my cheque.

"He could not trust me, he said, and he had, moreover, no banking
account. If I liked to bring the amount in notes, well and good; if not,
he would instruct his solicitors.

"The next day I had important business to attend to, so a stormy
interview ended in my writing 'pay cash' on the cheque, and his
consenting to take it to my bankers himself.

"My business on the following day, which happened to be out of town,
detained me much longer than I anticipated, and it was late before I
could reach River Hall. Late though it was, however, I determined to go
after my papers. I held Mr. Elmsdale's receipt for the cheque,
certainly; but I knew I had not an hour to lose in putting matters in
train for another loan, if I was to retire the forged acceptances. By
experience, I knew how the months slipped away when money had to be
provided at the end of them, and I was feverishly anxious to hold my
leases and title-deeds once more.

"I arrived at the door leading to the library. Mr. Elmsdale opened it as
wide as the chain would permit, and asked who was there. I told him,
and, grumbling a little at the unconscionable hour at which I had
elected to pay my visit, he admitted me.

"He was out of temper. He had hoped and expected, I knew, to find
payment of the cheque refused, and he could not submit with equanimity
to seeing me slip out of his hands.

"Evidently, he did not expect me to come that night, for his table was
strewed with deeds and notes, which he had been reckoning up, no doubt,
as a miser counts his gold.

"A pair of pistols lay beside his desk--close to my hand, as I took the
seat he indicated.

"We talked long and bitterly. It does not matter now what he said or I
said. We fenced round and about a quarrel during the whole interview. I
was meek, because I wanted him to let me have part of the money at all
events on loan again; and he was blatant and insolent because he fancied
I cringed to him--and I did cringe.

"I prayed for help that night from Man as I have never since prayed for
help from God.

"You are still young, Mr. Patterson, and life, as yet, is new to you, or
else I would ask whether, in going into an entirely strange office, you
have not, if agitated in mind, picked up from the table a letter or
card, and kept twisting it about, utterly unconscious for the time being
of the social solecism you were committing.

"In precisely the same spirit--God is my witness, as I am a dying man,
with no object to serve in speaking falsehoods--while we talked, I took
up one of the pistols and commenced handling it.

"'Take care,' he said; 'that is loaded'; hearing which I laid it
down again.

"For a time we went on talking; he trying to ascertain how I had
obtained the money, I striving to mislead him.

"'Come, Mr. Elmsdale,' I remarked at last, 'you see I have been able to
raise the money; now be friendly, and consent to advance me a few
thousands, at a fair rate, on a property I am negotiating for. There is
no occasion, surely, for us to quarrel, after all the years we have done
business together. Say you will give me a helping-hand once more, and--'

"Then he interrupted me, and swore, with a great oath, he would never
have another transaction with me.

"'Though you have paid _me_,' he said, 'I know you are hopelessly
insolvent. I cannot tell where or how you have managed to raise that
money, but certain am I it has been by deceiving some one; and so sure
as I stand here I will know all about the transaction within a month.'

"While we talked, he had been, at intervals, passing to and from his
strong room, putting away the notes and papers previously lying about on
the table; and, as he made this last observation, he was standing just
within the door, placing something on the shelf.

"'It is of no use talking to me any more,' he went on. 'If you talked
from now to eternity you could not alter my decision. There are your
deeds; take them, and never let me see you in my house again.'

"He came out of the darkness into the light at that moment, looking
burly, and insolent, and braggart, as was his wont.

"Something in his face, in the tone of his voice, in the vulgar
assumption of his manner, maddened me. I do not know, I have never been
able to tell, what made me long at that moment to kill him--but I did
long. With an impulse I could not resist, I rose as he returned towards
the table, and snatching a pistol from the table--fired.

"Before he could realize my intention, the bullet was in his brain. He
was dead, and I a murderer.

"You can understand pretty well what followed. I ran into the passage
and opened the door; then, finding no one seemed to have heard the
report of the pistol, my senses came back to me. I was not sorry for
what I had done. All I cared for was to avert suspicion from myself, and
to secure some advantage from his death.

"Stealing back into the room, I took all the money I could find, as well
as deeds and other securities. These last I destroyed next day, and in
doing so I felt a savage satisfaction.

"He would have served them the same as me,' I thought. All the rest you
know pretty well.

"From the hour I left him lying dead in the library every worldly plan
prospered with me. If I invested in land, it trebled in value. Did I
speculate in houses, they were sought after as investments. I grew rich,
respected, a man of standing. I had sold my soul to the devil, and he
paid me even higher wages than those for which I engaged--but there was
a balance.

"One after another, wife and children died; and while my heart was
breaking by reason of my home left desolate, there came to me the first
rumour of this place being haunted.

"I would not believe it--I did not--I fought against the truth as men
fight with despair.

"I used to come here at night and wander as near to the house as I
safely could. The place dogged me, sleeping and waking. That library was
an ever-present memory. I have sat in my lonely rooms till I could
endure the horrors of imagination no longer, and been forced to come
from London that I might look at this terrible house, with the silent
river flowing sullenly past its desolate gardens.

"Life seemed ebbing away from me. I saw that day by day the blood left
my cheeks. I looked at my hands, and beheld they were becoming like
those of some one very aged. My lameness grew perceptible to others as
well as to me, and I could distinguish, as I walked in the sunshine, the
shadow my figure threw was that of one deformed. I grew weak, and worn,
and tired, yet I never thoroughly lost heart till I knew you had come
here to unravel the secret.

"'And it will be revealed to him,' I thought, 'if I do not kill him
too.'

"You have been within an ace of death often and often since you set
yourself this task, but at the last instant my heart always failed me.

"Well, you are to live, and I to die. It was to be so, I suppose; but
you will never be nearer your last moment, till you lie a corpse, than
you have been twice, at any rate."

Then I understood how accurately Munro had judged when he warned me to
be on my guard against this man--now harmless and dying, but so recently
desperate and all-powerful for evil; and as I recalled the nights I had
spent in that desolate house, I shivered.

Even now, though the years have come and the years have gone since I
kept my lonely watch in River Hall, I start sometimes from sleep with a
great horror of darkness upon me, and a feeling that stealthily some one
is creeping through the silence to take my life!




15. CONCLUSION


I can remember the day and the hour as if it had all happened yesterday.
I can recall the view from the windows distinctly, as though time had
stood still ever since. There are no gardens under our windows in
Buckingham Street. Buckingham Gate stands the entrance to a desert of
mud, on which the young Arabs--shoeless, stockingless--are disporting
themselves. It is low water, and the river steamers keep towards the
middle arches of Waterloo. Up aloft the Hungerford Suspension rears
itself in mid air, and that spick-and-span new bridge, across which
trains run now ceaselessly, has not yet been projected. It is a bright
spring day. The sunshine falls upon the buildings on the Surrey side,
and lights them with a picturesque beauty to which they have not the
slightest title. A barge, laden with hay, is lying almost motionless in
the middle of the Thames.

There is, even in London, a great promise and hope about that pleasant
spring day, but for me life has held no promise, and the future no hope,
since that night when the mystery of River Hall was solved in my
presence, and out of his own mouth the murderer uttered his
condemnation.

How the weeks and the months had passed with me is soon told. Ill when I
left River Hall, shortly after my return home I fell sick unto death,
and lay like one who had already entered the Valley of the Shadow.

I was too weak to move; I was too faint to think; and when at length I
was brought slowly back to the recollection of life and its cares, of
all I had experienced and suffered in the Uninhabited House, the time
spent in it seemed to me like the memory of some frightful dream.

I had lost my health there, and my love too. Helena was now further
removed from me than ever. She was a great heiress. Mr. Harringford had
left her all his money absolutely, and already Miss Blake was
considering which of the suitors, who now came rushing to woo, it would
be best for her niece to wed.

As for me, Taylor repeated, by way of a good joke, that her aunt
referred to me as a "decent sort of young man" who "seemed to be but
weakly," and, ignoring the fact of ever having stated "she would not
mind giving fifty pounds," remarked to Mr. Craven, that, if I was in
poor circumstances, he might pay me five or ten sovereigns, and charge
the amount to her account.

Of all this Mr. Craven said nothing to me. He only came perpetually to
my sick-bed, and told my mother that whenever I was able to leave town I
must get away, drawing upon him for whatever sums I might require. I did
not need to encroach on his kindness, however, for my uncle, hearing of
my illness, sent me a cordial invitation to spend some time with him.

In his cottage, far away from London, strength at last returned to me,
and by the autumn my old place in Mr. Craven's office was no longer
vacant. I sat in my accustomed corner, pursuing former avocations, a
changed man.

I was hard-working as ever, but hope lightened my road no longer.

To a penny I knew the amount of my lady's fortune, and understood Mr.
Harringford's bequest had set her as far above me as the stars are above
the earth.

I had the conduct of most of Miss Elmsdale's business. As a compliment,
perhaps, Mr. Craven entrusted all the work connected with Mr.
Harringford's estate to me, and I accepted that trust as I should have
done any other which he might choose to place in my hands.

But I could have dispensed with his well-meant kindness. Every visit I
paid to Miss Blake filled my soul with bitterness. Had I been a porter,
a crossing-sweeper, or a potman, she might, I suppose, have treated me
with some sort of courtesy; but, as matters stood, her every tone, word,
and look, said, plainly as possible, "If you do not know your station, I
will teach it to you."

As for Helena, she was always the same--sweet, and kind, and grateful,
and gracious; but she had her friends about her: new lovers waiting for
her smiles. And, after a time, the shadow cast across her youth would,
I understood, be altogether removed, and leave her free to begin a new
and beautiful life, unalloyed by that hideous, haunting memory of
suicide, which had changed into melancholy the gay cheerfulness of her
lovely girlhood.

Yes; it was the old story of the streamlet and the snow, of the rose and
the wind. To others my love might not have seemed hopeless, but to me it
was dead as the flowers I had seen blooming a year before.

Not for any earthly consideration would I have made a claim upon her
affection.

What I had done had been done freely and loyally. I gave it all to her
as utterly as I had previously given my heart, and now I could make no
bargain with my dear. I never for a moment thought she owed me anything
for my pains and trouble. Her kindly glances, her sweet words, her
little, thoughtful turns of manner, were free gifts of her goodness, but
in no sense payment for my services.

She understood I could not presume upon them, and was, perhaps, better
satisfied it should be so.

But nothing satisfied Miss Blake, and at length between her and Mr.
Craven there ensued a serious disagreement. She insisted he should not
"send that clerk of his" to the house again, and suggested if Mr. Craven
were too high and mighty to attend to the concerns of Miss Elmsdale
himself, Miss Blake must look out for another solicitor.

"The sooner the better, madam," said Mr. Craven, with great state; and
Miss Blake left in a huff, and actually did go off to a rival attorney,
who, however, firmly declined to undertake her business.

Then Helena came as peacemaker. She smoothed down Mr. Craven's
ruffled feathers and talked him into a good temper, and effected
a reconciliation with her aunt, and then nearly spoilt everything
by adding:

"But indeed I think Mr. Patterson had better not come to see us for the
present, at all events."

"You ungrateful girl!" exclaimed Mr. Craven; but she answered, with a
little sob, that she was not ungrateful, only--only she thought it would
be better if I stayed away.

And so Taylor took my duties on him, and, as a natural consequence, some
very pretty disputes between him and Miss Blake had to be arranged by
Mr. Craven.

Thus the winter passed, and it was spring again--that spring day of
which I have spoken. Mr. Craven and I were alone in the office. He had
come late into town and was reading his letters; whilst I, seated by a
window overlooking the Thames, gave about equal attention to the river
outside and a tedious document lying on my table.

We had not spoken a word, I think, for ten minutes, when a slip of paper
was brought in, on which was written a name.

"Ask her to walk in," said Mr. Craven, and, going to the door, he
greeted the visitor, and led Miss Elmsdale into the room.

I rose, irresolute; but she came forward, and, with a charming
blush, held out her hand, and asked me some commonplace question
about my health.

Then I was going, but she entreated me not to leave the room on
her account.

"This is my birthday, Mr. Craven," she went on, "and I have come to ask
you to wish me many happy returns of the day, and to do something for
me--will you?"

"I wish you every happiness, my dear," he answered, with a tenderness
born, perhaps, of olden memories and of loving-kindness towards one so
sweet, and beautiful, and lonely. "And if there is anything I can do for
you on your birthday, why, it is done, that is all I can say."

She clasped her dear hands round his arm, and led him towards a further
window. I could see her downcast eyes--the long lashes lying on her
cheeks, the soft colour flitting and coming, making her alternately pale
and rosy, and I was jealous. Heaven forgive me! If she had hung so
trustfully about one of the patriarchs, I should have been jealous,
though he reckoned his years by centuries.

What she had to say was said quickly. She spoke in a whisper, bringing
her lips close to his ear, and lifting her eyes imploringly to his when
she had finished.

"Upon my word, miss," he exclaimed, aloud, and he held her from him and
looked at her till the colour rushed in beautiful blushes even to her
temples, and her lashes were wet with tears, and her cheeks dimpled with
smiles. "Upon my word--and you make such a request to me--to me, who
have a character to maintain, and who have daughters of my own to whom I
am bound to set a good example! Patterson, come here. Can you imagine
what this young lady wants me to do for her now? She is twenty-one
to-day, she tells me, and she wants me to ask you to marry her. She says
she will never marry anyone else." Then, as I hung back a little, dazed,
fearful, and unable to credit the evidence of my senses, he added:

"Take her; she means it every word, and you deserve to have her. If she
had chosen anybody else I would never have drawn out her settlements."

But I would not take her, not then. Standing there with the spring
landscape blurred for the moment before me, I tried to tell them both
what I felt. At first, my words were low and broken, for the change from
misery to happiness affected me almost as though I had been suddenly
plunged from happiness into despair. But by degrees I recovered my
senses, and told my darling and Mr. Craven it was not fit she should,
out of very generosity, give herself to me--a man utterly destitute of
fortune--a man who, though he loved her better than life, was only a
clerk at a clerk's salary.

"If I were a duke," I went on, breaking ground at last, "with a duke's
revenue and a duke's rank, I should only value what I had for her sake.
I would carry my money, and my birth, and my position to her, and ask
her to take all, if she would only take me with them; but, as matters
stand, Mr. Craven--"

"I owe everything worth having in life to you," she said, impetuously,
taking my hand in hers. "I should not like you at all if you were a
duke, and had a ducal revenue."

"I think you are too strait-laced, Patterson," agreed Mr. Craven. "She
does owe everything she has to your determination, remember."

"But I undertook to solve the mystery for fifty pounds," I remarked,
smiling in spite of myself.

"Which has never been paid," remarked my employer. "But," he went on,
"you young people come here and sit down, and let us talk the affair
over all together." And so he put us in chairs as if we had been
clients, while he took his professional seat, and, after a pause, began:

"My dear Helena, I think the young man has reason. A woman should marry
her equal. He will, in a worldly sense, be more than your equal some
day; but that is nothing. A man should be head of the household.

"It is good, and nice, and loving of you, my child, to wish to endow
your husband with all your worldly goods; but your husband ought, before
he takes you, to have goods of his own wherewith to endow you. Now, now,
now, don't purse up your pretty mouth, and try to controvert a lawyer's
wisdom. You are both young: you have plenty of time before you.

"He ought to be given an opportunity of showing what he can do, and
you ought to mix in society and see whether you meet anyone you
think you can like better. There is no worse time for finding out a
mistake of that sort, than after marriage." And so the kind soul
prosed on, and would, possibly, have gone on prosing for a few hours
more, had I not interrupted one of his sentences by saying I would
not have Miss Elmsdale bound by any engagement, or consider herself
other than free as air.

"Well, well," he answered, testily, "we understand that thoroughly. But
I suppose you do not intend to cast the young lady's affections from you
as if they were of no value?"

At this juncture her eyes and mine met. She smiled, and I could not help
smiling too.

"Suppose we leave it in this way," Mr. Craven said, addressing
apparently some independent stranger. "If, at the end of a year, Miss
Elmsdale is of the same mind, let her write to me and say so. That
course will leave her free enough, and it will give us twelve months in
which to turn round, and see what we can do in the way of making his
fortune. I do not imagine he will ever be able to count down guineas
against her guineas, or that he wants to do anything so absurd. But he
is right in saying an heiress should not marry a struggling clerk. He
ought to be earning a good income before he is much older, and he shall,
or my name is not William Craven."

I got up and shook his hand, and Helena kissed him.

"Tut, tut! fie, fie! what's all this?" he exclaimed, searching
sedulously for his double eyeglass--which all the while he held between
his finger and thumb. "Now, young people, you must not occupy my time
any longer. Harry, see this self-willed little lady into a cab; and you
need not return until the afternoon. If you are in time to find me
before I leave, that will do quite well. Good-bye, Miss Helena."

I did not take his hint, though. Failing to find a cab--perhaps for want
of looking for one--I ventured to walk with my beautiful companion up
Regent Street as far as Oxford Circus.

Through what enchanted ground we passed in that short distance, how
can I ever hope to tell! It was all like a story of fairyland, with
Helena for Queen of Unreality. But it was real enough. Ah! my dear,
you knew your own mind, as I, after years and years of wedded
happiness, can testify.

Next day, Mr. Craven started off to the west of England. He did not tell
me where he was going; indeed, I never knew he had been to see my uncle
until long afterwards.

What he told that gentleman, what he said of me and Helena, of my poor
talents and her beauty, may be gathered from the fact that the old
admiral agreed first to buy me a partnership in some established firm,
and then swore a mighty oath, that if the heiress was, at the end of
twelve months, willing to marry his nephew, he would make him his heir.

"I should like to have you with me, Patterson," said Mr. Craven, when we
were discussing my uncle's proposal, which a few weeks after took me
greatly by surprise; "but, if you remain here, Miss Blake will always
regard you as a clerk. I know of a good opening; trust me to arrange
everything satisfactorily for you."

Whether Miss Blake, even with my altered fortunes, would ever have
become reconciled to the match, is extremely doubtful, had the _beau
monde_ not turned a very decided cold-shoulder to the Irish patriot.

Helena, of course, everyone wanted, but Miss Blake no one wanted; and
the fact was made very patent to that lady.

"They'll be for parting you and me, my dear," said the poor creature one
day, when society had proved more than usually cruel. "If ever I am let
see you after your marriage, I suppose I shall have to creep in at the
area-door, and make believe I am some faithful old nurse wanting to have
a look at my dear child's sweet face."

"No one shall ever separate me from you, dear, silly aunt," said my
charmer, kissing first one of her relative's high cheek-bones, and then
the other.

"We'll have to jog on, two old spinsters together, then, I am thinking,"
replied Miss Blake.

"No," was the answer, very distinctly spoken. "I am going to marry Mr.
Henry Patterson, and he will not ask me to part from my ridiculous,
foolish aunt."

"Patterson! that conceited clerk of William Craven's? Why, he has not
darkened our doors for fifteen months and more."

"Quite true," agreed her niece; "but, nevertheless, I am going to marry
him. I asked him to marry me a year ago."

"You don't mane that, Helena!" said poor Miss Blake. "You should not
talk like an infant in arms."

"We are only waiting for your consent," went on my lady fair.

"Then that you will never have. While I retain my powers of speech
you shall not marry a pauper who has only asked you for the sake of
your money."

"He did not ask me; I asked him," said Helena, mischievously; "and he is
not a beggar. His uncle has bought him a partnership, and is going to
leave him his money; and he will be here himself to-morrow, to tell you
all about his prospects."

At first, Miss Blake refused to see me; but after a time she relented,
and, thankful, perhaps, to have once again anyone over whom she could
tyrannise, treated her niece's future husband--as Helena declared--most
shamefully.

"But you two must learn to agree, for there shall be no quarrelling in
our house," added the pretty autocrat.

"You needn't trouble yourself about that, Helena," said her aunt.

"He'll be just like all the rest. If he's civil to me before marriage,
he won't be after. He will soon find out there is no place in the house,
or, for that matter, in the world, for Susan Blake"; and my enemy, for
the first time in my memory, fairly broke down and began to whimper.

"Miss Blake," I said, "how can I convince you that I never dreamt, never
could dream of asking you and Helena to separate?"

"See that, now, and he calls you Helena already," said the lady,
reproachfully.

"Well, he must begin sometime. And that reminds me the sooner he begins
to call you aunt, the better."

I did not begin to do so then, of that the reader may be quite certain;
but there came a day when the word fell quite naturally from my lips.

For a long period ours was a hollow truce, but, as time passed on, and I
resolutely refused to quarrel with Miss Blake, she gradually ceased
trying to pick quarrels with me.

Our home is very dear to her. All the household management Helena from
the first hour took into her own hands; but in the nursery Miss Blake
reigns supreme.

She has always a grievance, but she is thoroughly happy. She dresses now
like other people, and wears over her gray hair caps of Helena's
selection.

Time has softened some of her prejudices, and age renders her
eccentricities less noticeable; but she is still, after her fashion,
unique, and we feel in our home, as we used to feel in the office--that
we could better spare a better man.

The old house was pulled down, and not a square, but a fine terrace
occupied its site. Munro lives in one of those desirable tenements, and
is growing rich and famous day by day. Mr. Craven has retired from
practice, and taken a place in the country, where he is bored to death
though he professes himself charmed with the quiet.

Helena and I have always been town-dwellers. Though the Uninhabited
House is never mentioned by either of us, she knows I have still a
shuddering horror of lonely places.

My experiences in the Uninhabited House have made me somewhat nervous.
Why, it was only the other night--

"What are you doing, making all that spluttering on your paper?" says an
interrupting voice at this juncture, and, looking up, I see Miss Blake
seated by the window, clothed and in her right mind.

"You had better put by that writing," she proceeds, with the manner of
one having authority, and I am so amazed, when I contrast Miss Blake as
she is, with what she was, that I at once obey!










End of Project Gutenberg's The Uninhabited House, by Mrs. J. H. Riddell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNINHABITED HOUSE ***

***** This file should be named 8602.txt or 8602.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/6/0/8602/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Martin Agren, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version
by Al Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
