The Project Gutenberg EBook of East O' the Sun and West O' the Moon, by 
Gudrun Thorne-Thomsen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: East O' the Sun and West O' the Moon

Author: Gudrun Thorne-Thomsen

Illustrator: Frederick Richardson

Posting Date: February 5, 2015 [EBook #8653]
Release Date: August, 2005
First Posted: July 30, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EAST O' THE SUN AND WEST O' THE MOON ***




Produced by David Garcia, Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.










EAST O' THE SUN AND WEST O' THE MOON
with
OTHER NORWEGIAN FOLK TALES


Retold by Gudrun Thorne-Thomsen

Illustrated by Frederick Richardson




FOREWORD


In recent years there has been a wholesome revival of the ancient art
of story-telling. The most thoughtful, progressive educators have come
to recognize the culture value of folk and fairy stories, fables and
legends, not only as means of fostering and directing the power of the
child's imagination, but as a basis for literary interpretation and
appreciation throughout life.

This condition has given rise to a demand for the best material in each
of these several lines. Some editors have gleaned from one field; some
from several. It is the aim of this little book to bring together only
the very best from the rich stores of Norwegian folk-lore. All these
stories have been told many times by the editor to varied audiences of
children and to those who are "older grown." Each has proved its power
to make the universal appeal.

In preparing the stories for publication, the aim has been to preserve,
as much as possible, in vocabulary and idiom, the original folk-lore
language, and to retain the conversational style of the teller of tales,
in order that the sympathetic young reader may, in greater or less
degree, be translated into the atmosphere of the old-time story-hour.

GUDRUN THORNE-THOMSEN.




CONTENTS


East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon

The Three Billy Goats Gruff

Taper Tom

Why the Bear is Stumpy-Tailed

Reynard and the Cock

Bruin and Reynard Partners

Boots and His Brothers

The Lad Who Went to the North Wind

The Giant Who Had No Heart in His Body

The Sheep and the Pig Who Set Up Housekeeping

The Parson and the Clerk

Father Bruin

The Pancake

Why the Sea is Salt

The Squire's Bride

Peik

The Princess Who Could Not Be Silenced

The Twelve Wild Ducks

Gudbrand-on-the-Hillside

The Princess on the Glass Hill

The Husband Who Was to Mind the House

Little Freddy with His Fiddle




[Illustration: "Are you afraid?"]




EAST O' THE SUN AND WEST O' THE MOON


Once on a time there was a poor woodcutter who had so many children that
he had not much of either food or clothing to give them. Pretty children
they all were, but the prettiest was the youngest daughter, who was so
lovely there was no end to her loveliness.

It was on a Thursday evening late in the fall of the year. The weather
was wild and rough outside, and it was cruelly dark. The rain fell and
the wind blew till the walls of the cottage shook. There they all sat
round the fire busy with this thing and that. Just then, all at once,
something gave three taps at the window pane. Then the father went out
to see what was the matter, and, when he got out of doors, what should
he see but a great White Bear.

"Good evening to you!" said the White Bear.

"The same to you," said the man.

"Will you give me your youngest daughter? If you will, I'll make you as
rich as you are now poor," said the Bear.

Well, the man would not be at all sorry to be so rich;--but give him his
prettiest lassie, no, that he couldn't do, so he said "No" outright and
closed the door both tight and well. But the Bear called out, "I'll give
you time to think; next Thursday night I'll come for your answer."

Now, the lassie had heard every word that the Bear had said, and before
the next Thursday evening came, she had washed and mended her rags, made
herself as neat as she could, and was ready to start. I can't say her
packing gave her much trouble.

Next Thursday evening came the White Bear to fetch her, and she got upon
his back with her bundle, and off they went. So when they had gone a bit
of the way, the White Bear said, "Are you afraid?"

"No, not at all," said the lassie.

"Well! mind and hold tight by my shaggy coat, and then there's nothing
to fear," added the Bear.

So she rode a long, long way, till they came to a great steep hill.
There on the face of it the White Bear gave a knock, and a door opened,
and they came into a castle, where there were many rooms all lit up,
gleaming with silver and gold, and there too was a table ready laid, and
it was all as grand as grand could be. Then the White Bear gave her a
silver bell. When she wanted anything she had only to ring it, and she
would get what she wanted at once.

Well, when she had had supper and evening wore on, she became sleepy
because of her journey. She thought she would like to go to bed, so she
rang the bell. She had scarce taken hold of it before she came into a
chamber where there were two beds as fair and white as any one would
wish to sleep in. But when she had put out the light and gone to bed
some one came into the room and lay down in the other bed. Now this
happened every night, but she never saw who it was, for he always came
after she had put out the light; and, before the day dawned, he was up
and off again.

So things went on for a while, the lassie having everything she wanted.
But you must know, that no human being did she see from morning till
night, only the White Bear could she talk to, and she did not know what
man or monster it might be who came to sleep in her room by night. At
last she began to be silent and sorrowful and would neither eat nor
drink.

One day the White Bear came to her and said: "Lassie, why are you so
sorrowful? This castle and all that is in it are yours, the silver bell
will give you anything that you wish. I only beg one thing of you--ask
no questions, trust me and nothing shall harm you. So now be happy
again." But still the lassie had no peace of mind, for one thing she
wished to know: Who it was who came in the night and slept in her room?
All day long and all night long she wondered and longed to know, and she
fretted and pined away.

So one night, when she could not stand it any longer and she heard that
he slept, she got up, lit a bit of a candle, and let the light shine on
him. Then she saw that he was the loveliest Prince one ever set eyes on,
and she bent over and kissed him. But, as she kissed him, she dropped
three drops of hot tallow on his shirt, and he woke up.

"What have you done?" he cried; "now you have made us both unlucky, for
had you held out only this one year, I had been freed. For I am the
White Bear by day and a man by night. It is a wicked witch who has
bewitched me; and now I must set off from you to her. She lives in a
castle which stands East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon, and there are
many trolls and witches there and one of those is the wife I must now
have."

She wept, but there was no help for it; go he must.

Then she asked if she mightn't go with him?

No, she mightn't.

"Tell me the way then," she said, "and I'll search you out; that,
surely, I may get leave to do."

"Yes, you may do that," he said, "but there is no way to that place. It
lies East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon and thither you can never find
your way." And at that very moment both Prince and castle were gone, and
she lay on a little green patch in the midst of the gloomy thick wood,
and by her side lay the same bundle of rags she had brought with her
from home.

Then she wept and wept till she was tired, and all the while she thought
of the lovely Prince and how she should find him.

So at last she set out on her way and walked many, many days and
whomever she met she asked: "Can you tell me the way to the castle that
lies East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon?" But no one could tell her.

And on she went a weary time. Both hungry and tired was she when she got
to the East Wind's house one morning. There she asked the East Wind if
he could tell her the way to the Prince who dwelt East o' the Sun and
West o' the Moon. Yes, the East Wind had often heard tell of it, the
Prince, and the castle, but he couldn't tell the way, for he had never
blown so far.

"But, if you will, I'll go with you to my brother the West Wind. Maybe
he knows, for he's much stronger. So, if you will just get on my back,
I'll carry you thither."

Yes, she got on his back, and I can tell you they went briskly along.

So when they got there, they went into the West Wind's house, and the
East Wind said that the lassie he had brought was the one who ought to
marry the Prince who lived in the castle East o' the Sun and West o' the
Moon; and that she had set out to seek him, and would be glad to know if
the West Wind knew how to get to the castle.

"Nay," said the West Wind, "so far I've never blown; but if you will,
I'll go with you to our brother the South Wind, for he is much stronger
than either of us, and he has flapped his wings far and wide. Maybe
he'll tell you. You can get on my back and I'll carry you to him."

Yes, she got on his back, and so they travelled to the South Wind, and
were not long on the way, either.

When they got there, the West Wind asked him if he could tell her the
way to the castle that lay East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon, for it
was she who ought to marry the Prince who lived there.

"You don't say so. That's she, is it?" said the South Wind.

"Well, I have blustered about in most places in my time, but that far I
have never blown; however, if you will, I'll take you to my brother the
North Wind; he is the oldest and strongest of all of us, and if he
doesn't know where it is, you'll never find anyone in the world to tell
you. You can get on my back and I'll carry you thither."

Yes, she got on his back, and away he went from his house at a fine
rate. And this time, too, she was not long on the way. When they got
near the North Wind's house he was so wild and cross that cold puffs
came from him.

"Heigh, there, what do you want?" he bawled out to them ever so far off,
so that it struck them with an icy shiver.

"Well," said the South Wind, "you needn't be so put out, for here I am
your brother, the South Wind, and here is the lassie who ought to marry
the Prince who dwells in the castle that lies East o' the Sun and West
o' the Moon. She wants to ask you, if you ever were there, and can tell
her the way, for she would be so glad to find him again."

"Yes, I know well enough where it is," said the North Wind. "Once in my
life I blew an aspen leaf thither, but I was so tired I couldn't blow a
puff for ever so many days after it. But if you really wish to go
thither, and aren't afraid to come along with me, I'll take you on my
back and see if I can blow you there."

"Yes! and thank you," she said, for she must and would get thither if it
were possible in any way; and as for fear, however madly he went, she
wouldn't be at all afraid.

"Very well then," said the North Wind, "but you must sleep here
to-night, for we must have the whole day before us if we're to get
thither at all."

Early next morning the North Wind woke her, and puffed himself up, and
blew himself out, and made himself so stout and big, it was gruesome to
look at him. And so off she went, high on the back of the North Wind up
through the air, as if they would never stop till they got to the
world's end.

Down here below there was a terrible storm; it threw down long tracts of
woodland and many houses, and when it swept over the great sea ships
foundered by hundreds.

So they tore on and on,--no one can believe how far they went,--and all
the while they still went over the sea, and the North Wind got more and
more weary, and so out of breath he could scarce bring out a puff, and
his wings drooped and drooped, till at last he sunk so low that the
crests of the waves lashed over her heels.

"Are you afraid?" said the North Wind.

She wasn't.

But they were not very far from land; and the North Wind had still so
much strength left in him that he managed to throw her up on shore close
by the castle which lay East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon; but then
he was so weak and worn out, that he had to stay there and rest many
days before he could get home again.

And now the lassie began to look about her and to think of how she might
free the Prince, but nowhere did she see a sign of life.

Then she sat herself down right under the castle windows, and as soon as
the sun went down, out they came, trolls and witches, red-eyed,
long-nosed, hunch-backed hags, tumbling over each other, scolding,
hurrying and scurrying hither and thither.

At first they almost frightened the life out of her, but when she had
watched them awhile and they had not noticed her, she took courage and
walked up to one of them and said: "Pray tell me what goes on here
to-night that you are all so busy, and could I perhaps get something to
do for a night's lodging and a bit of food?"

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed the horrid witch, "and where do you come from that
you do not know that it is to-night that the Prince chooses his bride.
When the moon stands high over the tree tops yonder we meet in the
clearing by the old oak. There the caldrons are ready with boiling lye,
for don't you know?--he's going to choose for his bride the one who can
wash three spots of tallow from his shirt, Ha, ha, ha!"

And the wicked witch hurried off again, laughing such a horrible laugh
that it made the lassie's blood run cold.

But now the trolls and witches came trooping out of the very earth, it
seemed, and all turned their steps toward the clearing in the woods.

So the lassie went too, and found a place among the rest. Now the moon
stood high above the tree tops, and there was the caldron in the middle
and round about sat the trolls and witches;--such gruesome company I'm
sure you were never in. Then came the Prince; he looked about from one
to the other, and he saw the lassie, and his face grew white, but he
said nothing.

"Now, let's begin," said a witch with a nose three ells long. She was
sure she was going to have the Prince, and she began to wash away as
hard as she could, but the more she rubbed and scrubbed, the bigger the
spots grew.

"Ah!" said an old hag, "you can't wash, let me try."

But she hadn't long taken the shirt in hand, before it was far worse
than ever, and with all her rubbing and scrubbing and wringing, the
spots grew bigger and blacker, and the darker and uglier was the shirt.

Then all the other trolls began to wash, but the longer it lasted, the
blacker and uglier the shirt grew, till at last it was as black all over
as if it had been up the chimney.

"Ah!" said the Prince, "you're none of you worth a straw, you can't
wash. Why there sits a beggar lassie, I'll be bound she knows how to
wash better than the whole lot of you. Come here, lassie," he shouted.

"Can you wash the shirt clean, lassie?" said he.

"I don't know," she said, "but I think I can."

And almost before she had taken it and dipped it in the water, it was as
white as snow, and whiter still.

"Yes; you are the lassie for me," said the Prince.

At that moment the sun rose and the whole pack of trolls turned to
stone.

There you may see them to this very day sitting around in a circle, big
ones and little ones, all hard, cold stone.

But the Prince took the lassie by the hand and they flitted away as far
as they could from the castle that lay East o' the Sun and West o' the
Moon.




THE THREE BILLY GOATS GRUFF


Once on a time there were three Billy Goats, who were to go up to the
hillside to make themselves fat, and the family name of the goats was
"Gruff."

On the way up was a bridge, over a river which they had to cross, and
under the bridge lived a great ugly Troll with eyes as big as saucers,
and a nose as long as a poker.

First of all came the youngest Billy Goat Gruff to cross the bridge.
"Trip, trap; trip, trap!" went the bridge.

"_Who's that tripping over my bridge?_" roared the Troll.

"Oh, it is only I, the tiniest Billy Goat Gruff, and I'm going up to the
hillside to make myself fat," said the Billy Goat, with such a small
voice.

"Now, I'm coming to gobble you up," said the Troll.

"Oh, no! pray do not take me, I'm too little, that I am," said the Billy
Goat; "wait a bit till the second Billy Goat Gruff comes, he's much
bigger."

"Well! be off with you," said the Troll.

A little while after came the second Billy Goat Gruff across the bridge.

"Trip, trap! trip, trap! trip, trap!" went the bridge.

"_Who is that tripping over my bridge_?" roared the Troll.

"Oh, it's the second Billy Goat Gruff, and I'm going up to the hillside
to make myself fat," said the Billy Goat. Nor had he such a small voice,
either.

"Now, I'm coming to gobble you up!" said the Troll.

"Oh, no! don't take me, wait a little till the big Billy Goat comes,
he's much bigger."

"Very well! be off with you," said the Troll.

But just then up came the big Billy Goat Gruff.

"Trip, trap! trip, trap! trip, trap!" went the bridge, for the Billy
Goat was so heavy that the bridge creaked and groaned under him.

"_Who's that tramping on my bridge?_" roared the Troll.

"It's I! the big Billy Goat Gruff," said the Billy Goat, and he had a
big hoarse voice.

"Now, I'm coming to gobble you up!" roared the troll.

  "_Well come! I have two spears so stout,
   With them I'll thrust your eyeballs out;
   I have besides two great big stones,
   With them I'll crush you body and bones!_"

That was what the big Billy Goat said; so he flew at the Troll, and
thrust him with his horns, and crushed him to bits, body and bones, and
tossed him out into the river, and after that he went up to the
hillside.

There the Billy Goats got so fat that they were scarcely able to walk
home again, and if they haven't grown thinner, why they're still fat;
and so,--

  "Snip, snap, stout.
   This tale's told out."




TAPER TOM


Once on a time there was a King who had a daughter, and she was so
lovely that her good looks were well known far and near. But she was so
sad and serious she could never be got to laugh, and besides, she was so
high and mighty that she said "No" to all who came to woo her. She would
have none of them, were they ever so grand--lords or princes,--it was
all the same.

The King had long ago become tired of this, for he thought she might
just as well marry; she, too, like all other people. There was no use in
waiting; she was quite old enough, nor would she be any richer, for she
was to have half the kingdom,--that came to her as her mother's heir.

So he had word sent throughout the kingdom, that anyone who could get
his daughter to laugh should have her for his wife and half the kingdom
besides. But, if there was anyone who tried and could not, he was to
have a sound thrashing. And sure it was that there were many sore backs
in that kingdom, for lovers and wooers came from north and south, and
east and west, thinking it nothing at all to make a King's daughter
laugh. And gay fellows they were, some of them too, but for all their
tricks and capers there sat the Princess, just as sad and serious as she
had been before.

Now, not far from the palace lived a man who had three sons, and they,
too, had heard how the King had given it out that the man who could make
the Princess laugh was to have her to wife and half the kingdom.

The eldest was for setting off first. So he strode off, and when he came
to the King's grange, he told the King he would be glad to try to make
the Princess laugh.

"All very well, my man," said the King, "but it's sure to be of no use,
for so many have been here and tried. My daughter is so sorrowful it's
no use trying, and it's not my wish that anyone should come to grief."

But the lad thought he would like to try. It couldn't be such a very
hard thing for him to get the Princess to laugh, for so many had laughed
at him, both gentle and simple, when he enlisted for a soldier and was
drilled by Corporal Jack.

So he went off to the courtyard, under the Princess's window, and began
to go through his drill as Corporal Jack had taught him. But it was no
good, the Princess was just as sad and serious and did not so much as
smile at him once. So they took him and thrashed him well, and sent him
home again.

Well, he had hardly got home before his second brother wanted to set
off. He was a schoolmaster, and the funniest figure one ever laid eyes
upon; he was lopsided, for he had one leg shorter than the other, and
one moment he was as little as a boy, and in another, when he stood on
his long leg, he was as tall and long as a Troll. Besides this he was a
powerful preacher.

So when he came to the king's palace, and said he wished to make the
Princess laugh, the King thought it might not be so unlikely after all.
"But mercy on you," he said, "if you don't make her laugh. We are for
laying it on harder and harder for every one that fails."

Then the schoolmaster strode off to the courtyard, and put himself
before the Princess's window, and read and preached like seven parsons,
and sang and chanted like seven clerks, as loud as all the parsons and
clerks in the country round.

The King laughed loud at him, and the Princess almost smiled a little,
but then became as sad and serious as ever, and so it fared no better
with Paul, the schoolmaster, than with Peter the soldier--for you must
know one was called Peter and the other Paul. So they took him and
flogged him well, and then they sent him home again.

Then the youngest, whose name was Taper Tom, was all for setting out.
But his brothers laughed and jeered at him, and showed him their sore
backs, and his father said it was no use for him to go for he had no
sense. Was it not true that he neither knew anything nor could do
anything? There he sat in the hearth, like a cat, and grubbed in the
ashes and split tapers. That was why they called him "Taper Tom." But
Taper Tom would not give in, and so they got tired of his growling; and
at last he, too, got leave to go to the king's palace to try his luck.

When he got there he did not say that he wished to try to make the
Princess laugh, but asked if he could get work there. No, they had no
place for him, but for all that Taper Tom would not give up. In such a
big palace they must want someone to carry wood and water for the
kitchen maid,--that was what he said. And the king thought it might very
well be, for he, too, got tired of his teasing. In the end Taper Tom
stayed there to carry wood and water for the kitchen maid.

So one day, when he was going to fetch water from the brook, he set eyes
upon a big fish which lay under an old fir stump, where the water had
eaten into the bank, and he put his bucket softly under the fish and
caught it. But as he was gong home to the grange he met an old woman who
led a golden goose by a string.

"Good-day, godmother," said Taper Tom, "that's a pretty bird you have,
and what fine feathers! If one only had such feathers one might leave
off splitting fir tapers."

The goody was just as pleased with the fish Tom had in his bucket and
said, if he would give her the fish, he might have the golden goose. And
it was such a curious goose. When any one touched it he stuck fast to
it, if Tom only said, "If you want to come along, hang on." Of course,
Taper Tom was willing enough to make the exchange. "A bird is as good as
a fish any day," he said to himself, "and, if it's such a bird as you
say, I can use it as a fish hook." That was what he said to the goody,
and he was much pleased with the goose.

Now, he had not gone far before he met another old woman. As soon as she
saw the lovely golden goose she spoke prettily, and coaxed and begged
Tom to give her leave to stroke his lovely golden goose.

"With all my heart," said Taper Tom, and just as she stroked the goose
he said, "If you want to come along, hang on."

The goody pulled and tore, but she was forced to hang on whether she
would or not, and Taper Tom went on as though he alone were with the
golden goose.

When he had gone a bit farther, he met a man who had had a quarrel with
the old woman for a trick she had played him. So, when he saw how hard
she struggled and strove to get free, and how fast she stuck, he thought
he would just pay her off the old grudge, and so he gave her a kick with
his foot.

"If you want to come along, hang on!" called out Tom, and then the old
man had to hop along on one leg, whether he would or not. When he tore
and tugged and tried to get loose--it was still worse for him, for he
all but fell flat on his back every step he took.

In this way they went on a good bit till they had nearly reached the
King's palace.

There they met the King's smith, who was going to the smithy, and had a
great pair of tongs in his hand. Now you must know this smith was a
merry fellow, full of both tricks and pranks, and when he saw this
string come hobbling and limping along, he laughed so that he was almost
bent double. Then he bawled out, "Surely this is a new flock of geese
the Princess is going to have--Ah, here is the gander that toddles in
front. Goosey! goosey! goosey!" he called, and with that he threw his
hands about as though he were scattering corn for the geese.

But the flock never stopped--on it went and all that the goody and the
man did was to look daggers at the smith for making fun of them. Then
the smith went on:

"It would be fine fun to see if I could hold the whole flock, so many as
they are," for he was a stout strong fellow. So he took hold with his
big tongs by the old man's coat tail, and the man all the while
screeched and wriggled. But Taper Tom only said:

"If you want to come along, hang on!" So the smith had to go along too.
He bent his back and stuck his heels into the ground and tried to get
loose, but it was all no good. He stuck fast, as though he had been
screwed tight with his own vise, and whether he would or not, he had to
dance along with the rest.

So, when they came near to the King's palace, the dog ran out and began
to bark as though they were wolves and beggars. And when the Princess,
looking out of the window to see what was the matter, set eyes on this
strange pack, she laughed softly to herself. But Taper Tom was not
content with that:

"Bide a bit," he said, "she will soon have to make a noise." And as he
said that he turned off with his band to the back of the palace.

When they passed by the kitchen the door stood open, and the cook was
just stirring the porridge. But when she saw Taper Tom and his pack she
came running out at the door, with her broom in one hand and a ladle
full of smoking porridge in the other, and she laughed as though her
sides would split. And when she saw the smith there too, she bent double
and went off again in a loud peal of laughter. But when she had had her
laugh out, she too thought the golden goose so lovely she must just
stroke it.

"Taper Tom! Taper Tom!" she called out, and came running out with the
ladle of porridge in her fist, "Give me leave to pet that pretty bird of
yours'?"

"Better come and pet me," said the smith. But when the cook heard that
she got angry.

"What is that you say?" she cried and gave the smith a box on his ears
with the ladle.

"If you want to come along, hang on," said Taper Tom. So she stuck fast
too, and for all her kicks and plunges, and all her scolding and
screaming, and all her riving and striving, she too had to limp along
with them.

[Illustration: She opened her mouth wide and laughed]

Soon the whole company came under the Princess's window. There she stood
waiting for them. And when she saw they had taken the cook too, with her
ladle and broom, she opened her mouth wide, and laughed so loud that the
King had to hold her upright.

So Taper Tom got the Princess and half the kingdom, and they say he kept
her in high spirits with his tricks and pranks till the end of her days.




WHY THE BEAR IS STUMPY-TAILED


One day the Bear met the Fox, who came slinking along with a string of
fish he had stolen.

"Where did you get those?" asked the Bear.

"Oh! my Lord Bruin, I've been out fishing and caught them," said the
Fox.

So the Bear had a mind to learn to fish too, and bade the Fox tell him
how he was to set about it.

"Oh! it is an easy craft for you," answered the Fox, "and soon learned.
You've only to go upon the ice, cut a hole, stick your tail down into
it, and hold it there as long as you can. You're not to mind if your
tail smarts a little; that's when the fish bite. The longer you hold it
there the more fish you'll get; and then all at once out with it, with a
cross pull sideways, and with a strong pull too."

Yes, the Bear did as the Fox had said, and held his tail a long, long
time down in the hole, till it was frozen in fast. Then he pulled it out
with a cross pull, and it snapped short off. That's why Bruin goes about
with a stumpy tail to this very day.




REYNARD AND THE COCK


Once on a time there was a cock who stood on the barnyard fence and
crowed and flapped his wings. Then the fox came by.

"Good-day," said Reynard. "I have heard you crowing so nicely, but can
you stand on one leg and crow, and wink your eyes?"

"Oh, yes," said the cock, "I can do that very well." So he stood on one
leg and crowed, but he winked only with one eye, and when he had done
that he made himself big and flapped his wings, as though he had done a
great thing.

"Very pretty, to be sure," said Reynard. "Almost as pretty as when the
parson preaches in church, but can you stand on one leg and wink both
your eyes at once? I hardly think you can."

"Can't I though!" said the cock, and stood on one leg, and winked both
his eyes and crowed. But Reynard caught hold of him, took him by the
throat, and threw him on his back, so that he was off to the wood before
he had crowed his crow out, as fast as Reynard could lay legs to the
ground.

When they had come under an old spruce fir, Reynard threw the cock on
the ground, and set his paw on his breast, and was going to take a bite:
"You are a heathen, Reynard!" said the cock. "Good Christians say grace
before they eat."

But Reynard would be no heathen, no indeed. So he let go his hold, and
was about to fold his paws over his breast, and say grace--but pop! up
flew the cock into a tree.

"You shan't get off for all that," said Reynard to himself. So he went
away, and came again with a few chips which the woodcutters had left.
The cock peeped and peered to see what they could be.

"What is that you have there?" he asked.

"These are letters I have just got," said Reynard, "won't you help me to
read them, for I don't know how to read writing."

"I'd be so happy, but I dare not read them now," said the cock, "for
here comes a hunter--I see him, I see him with his pouch and gun."

When Reynard heard the cock chattering about a hunter, he took to his
heels as fast as he could.




BRUIN AND REYNARD PARTNERS


Once on a time Bruin and Reynard owned a field in common. They had
a little clearing up in the wood, and the first year they sowed rye.

"Now we must share the crop as is fair and right," said Reynard.
"If you like to have the root, I'll take the top."

Yes, Bruin was ready to do that; but when they had threshed out the
crop, Reynard got all the corn, but Bruin got nothing but roots and
rubbish. He did not like that at all; but Reynard said that was how
they had agreed to share it.

"This year I have the gain," said Reynard, "next year it will be your
turn. Then you shall have the top, and I shall have to put up with the
root."

But when spring came, and it was time to sow, Reynard asked Bruin what
he thought of turnips.

"Aye, aye!" said Bruin, "that's better food than rye," and so Reynard
thought also. But when harvest time came Reynard got the roots, while
Bruin got the turnip-tops. And then Bruin was so angry with Reynard
that he put an end at once to his partnership with him.




BOOTS AND HIS BROTHERS


Once on a time there was a man who had three sons, Peter, Paul and
Espen. Espen was Boots, of course, because he was the youngest. I can't
say the man had anything except these three sons, for he did not possess
one penny to rub against another; and so he told his sons over and over
again they must go out into the world to seek their fortune, for at home
there was nothing to be expected but to starve to death.

Now, a short way from the man's cottage was the King's palace, and you
must know, just against the King's windows a great oak had sprung up,
which was so stout and big that it took away all the light from the
king's palace. The King had said he would give much gold to any man who
could fell the oak, but no one was man enough to do it, for as soon as
one chip of the oak's trunk flew off, two grew in its stead. The King
wished also to have a well dug which was to hold water for the whole
year. All his neighbors had wells, but he had none, and he thought that
a shame.

So the King said he would give to any one who could dig him such a well
as would hold water for the whole year round, both money and goods, but
no one could do it, for the King's palace lay high, high up on a hill,
and they could dig but a few inches before they would come upon rock.

But as the King had set his heart on having these two things done, he
had it given out in all the churches of his kingdom far and wide, that
he who could fell the big oak in the King's courtyard, and dig him a
well that would hold water the whole year round, should have the
Princess and half the kingdom. Well! you may easily know there was many
a man who came to try his luck; but all their hacking and hewing, and
all their digging and delving were useless. The oak got bigger and
stouter at every stroke, and the rock grew no softer either.

One day the three brothers thought they, too, would set off and try it.
Their father had not a word to say against it; for even if they did not
get the Princess and half the kingdom, it might happen they would get a
place somewhere with a good master and that was all he wanted. So when
the brothers asked his permission, he consented at once, and Peter, Paul
and Espen set forth.

Well, they had not gone far before they came to a fir wood where at one
side there rose a steep hill, and as they went along they heard
something hewing and hacking away up on the hill among the trees.

"I wonder now what it is that is hewing away up yonder," said Boots.

"You're always so clever with your wondering," laughed Peter and Paul
both at once. "What wonder is it, pray, that a wood cutter should stand
and hack up on a hillside?"

"Still, I'd like to see what it is, after all," said Boots, and up he
went.

"Oh, if you're such a child, 'twill do you good to go and take a
lesson," called out his brothers after him.

But Boots didn't care for what they said; he climbed the steep hillside
towards the spot whence the noise came, and when he reached the place,
what do you think he saw? Why, an axe that stood there hacking and
hewing, all of itself, at the trunk of a fir tree.

"Good-day," said Boots. "So you stand here all alone and hew, do you?"

"Yes, here I've stood and hewed and hacked for hundreds of years,
waiting for you," said the axe.

"Well, here I am at last," said Boots, as he took the axe, pulled it off
its haft, and stuffed both head and haft into his wallet.

When he got down again to his brothers, they began to jeer and laugh at
him.

"And now, what strange thing was it you saw up yonder on the hillside?"
they asked.

"Oh, it was only an axe we heard," said Boots.

When they had gone on a bit farther, their road passed under a steep
spur of rock, where they heard something digging and shovelling.

[Illustration: A spade that stood digging and delving]

"I wonder now," said Boots, "what is digging and shovelling up yonder at
the top of the rock."

"Ah, you're always so clever with your wondering," laughed Peter and
Paul again, "as if you'd never heard a woodpecker hacking and pecking at
a hollow tree."

"Well, well," said Boots, "I just think it would be fun to see what it
really is."

And so off he set to climb the rock, while the others laughed and made
fun of him. But he did not care a bit for that; up he climbed, and when
he got near the top, what do you think he saw? Why, a spade that stood
there digging and delving.

"Good-day!" said Boots. "So you stand here all alone, and dig and delve,
do you?"

"Yes, that's what I do," said the spade, "and that's what I've done
these hundreds of years, waiting for you, Boots."

"Well, here I am," said Boots again, as he took the spade and knocked it
off the handle, and put it into his wallet,--and then returned to his
brothers.

"Well, what was it, so rare and strange," said Peter and Paul, "that you
saw up there at the top of the rock?"

"Oh," said Boots, "nothing more than a spade; that was what we heard."

So they went on again a good bit until they came to a brook. They were
thirsty, all three, after their long walk, and so they lay down beside
the brook to have a drink.

"I wonder now," said Boots, "where all this water comes from."

"I wonder if you've lost the little sense you had," said Peter and Paul
in one breath. "Where the brook comes from indeed! Have you never heard
how water rises from a spring in the earth?"

"Yes! but still I've a great fancy to see where this brook comes from,"
said Boots.

So along beside the brook he went, in spite of all that his brothers
cried after him. Nothing could stop him. On he went, up and up, and the
brook got smaller and smaller, and at last, a little way farther on,
what do you think he saw? Why, a great walnut, and out of that the water
trickled.

"Good-day!" said Boots again. "So you lie here, and trickle and run down
all alone?"

"Yes, I do," said the walnut, "and here have I trickled and run these
hundreds of years, waiting for you, Boots."

"Well, here I am," said Boots, as he took up a lump of moss, and plugged
up the hole, that the water might not run out. Then he put the walnut
into his wallet, and ran down to his brothers.

"Well, now," said Peter and Paul, "have you found out where the water
comes from? A rare sight it must have been!"

"Oh, after all, it was only a hole it ran out of," said Boots; and so
the others laughed and made fun of him again, but Boots didn't mind that
a bit.

"After all, I had the fun of seeing it," said he.

So when they had gone a bit farther, they came to the King's palace; but
as every one in the kingdom had heard how he might win the Princess and
half the realm, if he could only fell the big oak and dig the King's
well, so many had come to try their luck that the oak was now twice as
stout and big as it had been at first; for two chips grew for every one
they hewed out with their axes, as I dare say you remember I told you.
So the King had now laid down as a punishment, that if any one tried and
could not fell the oak, he should be put on a barren island, much like a
prison.

The two brothers did not let themselves be scared by that, however, for
they were quite sure they could fell the oak, and Peter, as he was the
eldest, was to try his hand first. But it went with him as with all the
rest who had hewn at the oak. For every chip he had cut out, two grew in
its place. So the King's men seized him, bound him hand and foot, and
put him out on the island.

Now, Paul was to try his luck, but he fared just the same; when he had
hewn two or three strokes, they began to see the oak grow, and so the
King's men seized him too, bound him hand and foot, and put him out on
the island.

And now Boots was to try.

"You can save yourself the trouble, we'll bind you and send you off
after your brothers just as well first as last," laughed the King's men.

"Well, I'd just like to try first," said Boots, and so he got leave.
Then he took his axe out of his wallet and fitted it to its haft.

"Hew away!" said he to his axe; and away it hewed, making the chips fly,
so that it wasn't long before down came the oak.

When that was done Boots pulled out his spade and fitted it to its
handle.

"Dig away!" said he to the spade; and the spade began to dig and delve
till the earth and rock flew out in splinters, and he had the well soon
dug out, as you may believe.

And when he had got it as big and deep as he chose, Boots took out his
walnut and laid it in one corner of the well, and pulled the plug of
moss out.

"Trickle and run," said Boots; and so the water trickled and ran, till
it gushed out of the hole in a stream, and in a short time the well was
brimful.

Then Boots had felled the oak which shaded the King's palace, and dug a
well that held water all the year around, and so he got the princess and
half the kingdom, as the King had said. And it was lucky for Peter and
Paul that they were on the barren island, else they had heard each day
and hour how every one said: "Well, after all, Boots did not wonder
about things for nothing."




THE LAD WHO WENT TO THE NORTH WIND


Once on a time there was an old widow who had one son, and as she was
feeble and weak, she asked her son to go out to the storehouse and fetch
meal for cooking. But when he got outside the storehouse, and was just
going down the steps, there came the North Wind, puffing and blowing,
caught up the meal, and away with it through the air. Then the lad went
back into the storehouse for more; but when he came out again on the
steps, the North Wind came again and carried off the meal with a puff;
and more than that, he did it the third time. At this the lad got very
angry; and as it seemed hard that the North Wind should behave so, he
thought he would go in search of him and ask him to give up his meal.

So off he went, but the way was long, and he walked and walked. At last
he came to the North Wind's house.

"Good-day!" said the lad, "and thank you for coming to see us."

"Good-day," answered the North Wind, and his voice was loud and gruff,
"and thanks for coming to see me. What do you want?"

"Oh," answered the lad, "I only wished to ask you to be so good as to
let me have back the meal you took from me on the storehouse steps, for
we haven't much to live on; and if you're to go on snapping up the
morsel we have, there'll be nothing for it but to starve."

"I haven't your meal," said the North Wind; "but since you are in such
need, I'll give you a table cloth which will get you everything you
want. You need only say, 'Cloth, spread yourself, and serve up all kinds
of good dishes!'"

With this the lad was well content. But, as the way was long he could
not get home in one day, so he turned into an inn on the way; and when
they were going to sit down to supper he laid the cloth on the table
which stood in the corner, and said,--

"Cloth, spread yourself, and serve up all kinds of good dishes."

He had scarcely said this before the cloth did as it was bid, and all
who stood by thought it a fine thing, but most of all the landlord. So,
when all were fast asleep, at dead of night, he took the lad's cloth,
and put another like it in its stead. But this could not so much as
serve up a bit of dry bread.

When the lad woke he took the cloth and went off with it, and that day
he got home to his mother.

"Now," said he, "I've been to the North Wind's house, and a good fellow
he is, for he gave me this cloth and when I only say to it, 'Cloth,
spread yourself, and serve up all kinds of good dishes,' I get every
sort of food I please."

"All very true, I dare say," said the mother, "but seeing is believing."

So the lad made haste, drew out a table, laid the cloth on it, and
said,--

"Cloth, spread yourself, and serve up all kinds of good dishes."

But not even a bit of dry bread did the cloth serve up.

"Well!" said the lad, "there's no help for it but to go to the North
Wind again," and away he went.

So, late in the afternoon, he came to where the North Wind lived.

"Good evening!" said the lad.

"Good evening!" said the North Wind.

"I want my rights for that meal of ours which you took," said the lad,
"for, as for that cloth I got, it isn't worth a penny."

"I have no meal," said the North Wind; "but you may have the ram yonder
which will coin gold ducats when you say to it,--

"Ram, ram! make money!"

The lad thought this a fine thing; but as it was too far to get home
that day, he turned in for the night to the same inn where he had slept
the first time.

Before he called for anything, he tried what the North Wind had said of
the ram, and found it all true. When the landlord saw this, he thought
it a fine ram, and when the lad had fallen asleep, he took another which
could not coin even a penny, and exchanged the two.

Next morning off went the lad, and when he got home to his mother, he
said,--

"After all, the North Wind is a jolly fellow, for now he has given me a
ram, which will coin golden ducats if I only say, 'Ram, ram! make
money!'"

"All very true, I dare say," said his mother, "but I shan't believe it
until I see the ducats made."

"Ram, ram! make money!" said the lad; but not even a penny did the ram
coin.

So the lad went back to the North Wind and scolded him, and said the ram
was worth nothing, and he must have his rights for the meal.

"Well!" said the North Wind, "I've nothing else to give you but that old
stick in the corner yonder; but it's a stick of such a kind that if you
say, 'Stick, stick! lay on! it lays on till you say,--'Stick, stick! now
stop!'"

So the lad thanked the North Wind and went his way, and as the road was
long, he turned in this night also to the landlord; but as he could
guess pretty well how things stood as to the cloth and the ram, he lay
down at once on the bench and began to snore, as if he were asleep. Now
the landlord who thought surely the stick must be worth something,
hunted up one which was like it, and when he heard the lad snore he was
going to exchange the two; but, just as the landlord was about to take
it, the lad called out,--

"Stick, stick! lay on!"

So the stick began to beat the landlord, till he jumped over chairs and
tables and benches, and yelled and roared,--

"Oh my, oh my! bid the stick be still, else it will beat me to death.
You shall have back both your cloth and your ram."

When the lad thought the landlord had had enough, he said, "Stick,
stick! now stop!"

Then he took the cloth and put it into his pocket, and went home with
his stick in his hand, leading the ram by a cord tied around its horns;
and so he got his rights for the meal he had lost.




THE GIANT WHO HAD NO HEART IN HIS BODY


Once on a time there was a King who had seven sons. Six of them were
stout, brave lads, but the youngest was the cinderlad, you must know;
and he went about by himself neither saying nor doing much. Best of all
he liked to sit by the hearth and watch the glowing cinders, so they
called him Boots, and thought little of him.

Now, when the Princes were grown up, the six were to set off to fetch
brides for themselves. As for Boots, they would not be seen with him, so
he was to stay at home; but the others were to bring back a bride for
him, if any could be found willing to marry such a one. The King gave
the six the finest clothes you ever set eyes upon, so fine that the
light gleamed from them a long way off; and each had his horse, which
cost many, many hundred dollars, and so they set off. Now, when they had
been to many palaces, and seen many princesses, they came to a king who
had six daughters. Such lovely king's daughters they had never seen, and
so they asked them to be their brides, and when they had got them, they
set off home again. But they quite forgot that they were to bring back a
bride for Boots, their brother, who was staying at home.

When they had gone a good bit on their way, they passed close by a steep
hillside, like a wall, where was a giant's house. Out came the giant and
set his eyes upon them, and turned them all into stone, princes,
princesses and all. Now, the king waited and waited for his six sons,
but so long as he waited so long they stayed away; so he fell into great
grief, and said he would never know what it was to be happy again.

One day Boots said to the King,--

"I've been thinking to ask your leave to set out and find my brothers."

"Nay, nay!" said his father, "that would be of no use, for you are not
clever enough. Better stay and dig in the ashes all your life."

But Boots had set his heart upon it. Go he would; and he begged and
pleaded so long that the King was forced to let him go. He gave Boots an
old broken-down nag; but Boots did not care a pin for that, he sprang up
on his sorry old steed.

"Farewell, Father," he said, "I'll come back, never fear, and likely
enough I shall bring my six brothers back with me," and with that he
rode off.

When he had ridden a while he came to a raven, which lay in the road and
flapped its wings, and was not able to get out of the way, it was so
starved.

"Oh, dear friend," said the raven, "give me a little food, and I'll help
you again at your utmost need."

"I haven't much food," said the Prince, "and I don't see how you'll ever
be able to help me; but still I can spare you a little. I see you need
it."

So he gave the raven some of the food he had brought with him.

Now, when he had gone a little farther, he came to a brook, and in the
brook lay a great salmon which had got upon a dry place and dashed
itself about, and could not get into the water again.

"Oh, dear friend," said the salmon to the Prince; "help me out into the
water again, and I'll help you at your utmost need."

"Well!" said the Prince, "the help you'll give me will not be great, I
daresay, but it's a pity you should be there and choke;" and with that
he shot the fish out into the stream again.

After that he went on a long, long way, and there met him a wolf, which
was so famished that it lay and crawled along the road.

"Dear friend, do let me have some food," said the wolf, "I'm so hungry
that the wind whistles through my ribs. I've had nothing to eat these
two years. When I have eaten, you can ride upon my back, and I'll help
you again in your utmost need."

"Well, the help I shall get from you will not be great, I'll be bound,"
said the Prince; "but you may take all I have, since you are in such
great need."

[Illustration: Never had the prince had such a ride in his life]

So when the wolf had eaten the food. Boots took the bit and put it
between the wolf's jaws, and laid the saddle on his back; and away they
went like the wind. Never had the Prince had such a ride before.

"When we have gone still farther," said Graylegs, "I'll show you the
Giant's house."

And after a while they came to it.

"See, here is the Giant's house," said the Wolf; "and see, here are your
six brothers whom the Giant has turned to stone; and see, here are their
six brides. Yonder is the door, and in at that door you must go. When
you get in you'll find a princess, and she'll tell you what to do to
make an end of the Giant. Only mind you do as she bids you."

Well! Boots went in, but, truth to say, he was very much afraid. The
Giant was away, but in one of the rooms sat the Princess, just as the
wolf had said, and so lovely a princess Boots had never set eyes upon.

"Oh, heaven help you! whence have you come?" said the Princess, as she
saw him; "it will surely be your death. No one can make an end of the
Giant who lives here. He is a most cruel monster, and he has no heart in
his body."

"Well! well!" said Boots; "but now that I am here, I may as well try
what I can do with him, and I will see if I can't free my brothers, who
have been turned to stone; and you, too, I will try to save, that I
will."

"Well, if you must, you must," said the Princess; "so let us see if we
can't hit upon a plan. Just creep under the bed yonder, and mind you
listen to what he and I talk about. But, pray, do lie as still as a
mouse."

So he crept under the bed, and he had scarce got well underneath, before
the Giant came.

"Ha!" roared the Giant, "what a smell of Christian blood there is in the
house."

"Yes, I know there is," said the Princess, "for there came a crow flying
with a man's bone, and let it fall down the chimney. I made all the
haste I could to get it out, but all one can do the smell doesn't go so
soon."

So the Giant said no more about it, and when night came they went to
bed. After they had lain a while the Princess said, "There is one thing
I'd be glad to ask you about, if I only dared."

"What thing is that?" asked the Giant.

"Only this, where do you keep your heart, since you don't carry it about
you," said the Princess.

"Ah! that's a thing you've no business to ask about: but if you must
know, it lies under the door sill." said the Giant.

"Ho, ho!" said Boots to himself under the bed. "Then we'll soon see if
we can't find it."

Next morning the Giant got up very early, and strode off to the wood;
but he was hardly out of the house before Boots and the Princess set to
work to look under the door sill for this heart; but the more they dug
and the more they hunted the more they couldn't find it.

"He has balked us this time," said the Princess, "but we'll try him once
more."

So she picked all the prettiest flowers she could find, and strewed them
over the door sill, which they had laid in its right place again; and
when the time came for the Giant to come home, Boots crept under the
bed. Just as he was well under back came the Giant.

Snuff-snuff went the Giant's nose. "My eyes and limbs, what a smell of
Christian blood there is in here," said he.

"I know there is," said the Princess, "for there came a crow flying with
a man's bone in his bill, and let it fall down the chimney. I made as
much haste as I could to get it out, but I dare say it's that you
smell."

So the Giant held his peace and said no more about it. A little while
after, he asked who it was that had strewed flowers about the door sill.

"Oh, I, of course," said the Princess.

"And, pray, what is the meaning of all this? said the Giant.

"Ah!" said the Princess, "I strewed them there when I knew your heart
lay under there."

"You don't say so," said the Giant; "but after all it doesn't lie there
at all."

So when they went to bed in the evening, the Princess asked the Giant
again where his heart was, for she said she would so much like to know.

"Well," said the Giant, "if you must know, it lies away yonder in the
cupboard against the wall."

"So, so!" thought Boots and the Princess; "then we will soon find it."

Next morning the Giant was away early, and strode off to the wood. As
soon as he was gone, Boots and the Princess were in the cupboard hunting
for the heart, but the more they looked for it the less they found it.

"Well," said the Princess, "we'll just try him once more."

So she decked the cupboard with flowers and garlands, and when the time
came for the Giant to come home, Boots crept under the bed again.

Then back came the Giant.

Snuff-snuff! "My eyes and limbs, what a smell of Christian blood there
is in here!"

"I know there is," said the Princess, "for a little while since there
came a crow flying with a man's bone in his bill, and let it fall down
the chimney. I made all the haste I could to get it out of the house;
but after all my pains I dare say it's that you smell."

When the Giant heard that he said no more about it, but after a while he
saw how the cupboard was all decked about with flowers and garlands; and
he asked who it was that had done that. Who could it be but the
Princess?

"And, pray what's the meaning of all this foolishness?" asked the Giant.

"Oh, I couldn't help doing it when I knew your heart lay there," said
the Princess.

"How can you be so silly as to believe any such thing?" said the Giant.

"How can I help believing it, when you say it?" said the Princess.

"You're a goose," said the Giant; "where my heart is, you will never
come."

"Yet for all that," said the Princess, "it would be such a pleasure to
know where it really lies."

Then the poor Giant could hold out no longer, but said,--

"Far, far away in a lake lies an island; on that island stands a church;
in that church is a well; in that well swims a duck; in that duck there
is an egg, and in that egg there lies my heart."

In the morning early, while it was still gray dawn, the Giant strode off
to the wood.

"Now I must set off too," said Boots; "if I only knew how to find the
way." He took a long farewell of the Princess, and when he slipped out
of the Giant's door, there stood the Wolf waiting for him. Boots told
him all that had happened, and said now he wished to ride to the well
inside the church, if only he knew the way. The Wolf bade him jump on
his back, and away they went, over hill and dale, over hedge and field,
till the wind whistled after them. After they had travelled many, many
days, they came at last to the lake. Then the Prince did not know how to
get across, but the Wolf bade him not to be afraid, but to hold fast. So
he jumped into the lake with the Prince on his back, and swam over to
the island. When they came to the church, the church keys hung high,
high up on the top of the tower, and the Prince knew not how to get them
down.

"Call upon the raven," said the Wolf.

So the Prince called upon the raven, and immediately the raven came, and
flew up and fetched the keys, and so the Prince got into the church.
When he came to the well, there was the duck, which swam about forward
and backward, just as the Giant had said. So the Prince stood and coaxed
it and coaxed it, till finally it came to him, and he grasped it in his
hand; but just as he lifted it up from the water the duck dropped the
egg in the well, and then Boots was beside himself to know how to get it
out again.

"Now call upon the salmon," said the Wolf, and Boots called upon the
salmon, and the salmon came and fetched up the egg from the bottom of
the well.

Then the Wolf told him to squeeze the egg, and as soon as he squeezed
the egg, the Giant screamed and begged and prayed to be spared, saying
he would do all that the Prince wished if he would only not squeeze his
heart in two.

"Tell him to restore to life again your six brothers and their brides,
whom he has turned to stone," said the Wolf. Yes, the Giant was ready to
do that, and he turned the six brothers into king's sons again, and
their brides into king's daughters.

Then Boots left the Giant's heart on the altar of the church. That took
all the evil power from the cruel Giant, and I have never heard of him
since.

And now, Boots rode back again on the Wolf to the Giant's house, and
there stood all his six brothers alive and merry with their brides. Then
Boots went into the hillside after his bride, and they all set off home
again to their father's house. And you may fancy how glad the old King
was when he saw his seven sons come back, each with his bride;--"But the
loveliest bride is the bride of Boots, after all," said the King, "and
he shall sit highest at the table, with her by his side."

So they had a great wedding feast, and the mirth was both loud and long,
and if they have not done feasting, why they are at it still.




THE SHEEP AND THE PIG WHO SET UP HOUSEKEEPING


Once on a time there was a sheep who stood in the pen to be fattened.

So he lived well and was stuffed and crammed with everything that was
good, till one day the dairymaid came to give him still more food. Then
she said, "Eat away, sheep, you won't be here much longer, we are going
to kill you to-morrow."

The sheep thought over this for a while, and then he ate till he was
ready to burst; and when he was crammed full, he butted out the door of
the pen, and took his way to the neighboring farm. There he went to see
a pig whom he had known out on the common, and with whom he had always
been very friendly.

"Good-day," said the sheep, "do you know why it is you are so well off,
and why it is they fatten you and take such pains with you?"

"No, I don't," said the pig.

"Well, I know; they are going to kill and eat you," said the sheep.

"Are they?" said the pig, "and what is there to be done about it?"

"If you will do as I do," said the sheep, "we'll go off to the wood,
build us a house, and set up for ourselves."

Yes, the pig was willing enough. "Good company is such a comfort," he
said, and so the two set off.

When they had gone a bit they met a goose.

"Good-day, good sirs, and whither away so fast to-day?" said the goose.

"Good-day, good-day," said the sheep, "we are going to set up for
ourselves in the wood, for you know every man's house is his castle."

"Well," said the goose, "I should so much like a home of my own, too.
May I go with you?"

"With gossip and gabble is built neither house nor stable," said the
pig, "let us know what you can do."

"I can pluck moss and stuff it into the seams between the planks, and
the house will be tight and warm."

Yes, they would give him leave, for, above all things, piggy wished to
be warm and comfortable.

So, when they had gone a bit farther--the goose had hard work to walk so
fast--they met a hare, who came frisking out of the wood.

"Good-day, good sirs," she said, "how far are you trotting to-day?"

"Good-day, good-day," said the sheep, "we're going to the wood to build
us a house and set up for ourselves, for, you know, try all the world
around, there's nothing like home."

"As for that," said the hare, "I have a house in every bush, but yet, I
have often said in winter, 'If I only live till summer I'll build me a
house,' and so I have half a mind to go with you and build one, after
all."

"Yes," said the pig, "if we ever get into trouble we might use you to
scare away the dogs, for I don't fancy you could help us in
house-building."

"Don't make fun of me. I have teeth to gnaw pegs and paws to drive them
into the wall, so I can very well set up to be carpenter," said the
hare.

So he too got leave to go with them and help to build their house, and
there was nothing more to be said about it.

When they had gone a bit farther they met a cock.

"Good-day, good sirs," said the cock, "whither are you going to-day,
gentlemen?"

"Good-day, good-day," said the sheep, "we are going off to the wood to
build a house and set up for ourselves, for you know, ''Tis good to
travel east and west, but after all a home is best.'"

"Well," said the cock, "if I might have leave to join such a gallant
company, I also would like to go to the wood and build a house."

"Ay, ay!" said the pig, "but how can you help us build a house?"

"Oh," said the cock, "what would you do without a cock? I am up early,
and I wake every one."

"Very true," said the pig, "let him come with us. Sleep is the biggest
thief," he said, "he thinks nothing of stealing half one's life."

So they all set off to the wood together, and built a house.

The pig hewed the timber, and the sheep drew it home; the hare was
carpenter, and gnawed pegs and bolts and hammered them into the walls
and roof; the goose plucked moss and stuffed it into the seams; the cock
crew, and looked out that they did not oversleep themselves in the
morning; and when the house was ready, and the roof lined with birch
bark and thatched with turf, there they lived by themselves and were
merry and well.

But you must know that a bit farther on in the wood was a wolf's den,
and there lived two graylegs. When they saw that a new house had been
built near by, they wanted to become acquainted with their neighbors.
One of them made up an errand and went into the new house and asked for
a light for his pipe. But as soon as he got inside the door the sheep
gave him such a butt that he fell head foremost into the hearth. Then
the pig began to bite him, and the goose to nip and peck him, and the
cock upon the roost to crow and chatter, and as for the hare, he was so
frightened that he ran about aloft and on the floor and scratched and
scrambled in every corner of the house.

So after a time the wolf came out.

"Well," said the one who waited for him outside, "you must have been
well received since you stayed so long. But what became of the light?
You have neither pipe nor smoke."

"Yes, yes," said the other, "a pleasant company indeed. As soon as I got
inside the door, the shoemaker began to beat me with his last, so that I
fell head foremost into the open fire, and there sat two smiths who blew
the bellows, and made the sparks fly, and struck and punched me with
red-hot tongs and pincers. As for the hunter, he went scrambling about
looking for his gun, and it was good luck he did not find it. And all
the while there was another who sat up under the roof and slapped his
arms and cried out, 'Drag him hither, drag him hither!' That was what he
screamed, and if he had only got hold of me, I should never have come
out alive."

The wolves never went calling on their neighbors any more.




THE PARSON AND THE CLERK


There was once a parson who was such a bully that whenever he met anyone
driving on the king's highway, he called out, ever so far off--"Out of
the way! Out of the way! Here comes the parson!"

One day when he was driving along and behaving so, he met the king. "Out
of the way! Out of the way!" he bawled a long way off. But the king
drove on and held his own; so it was the parson who had to turn his
horse aside that time, and when the king came up beside him, he said,
"To-morrow you shall come to me at the palace, and if you can't answer
three questions which I shall ask you, you shall lose your office for
your pride's sake."

This was something quite different from what the parson was wont to
hear. He could bawl and bully, shout and scold. All that he could do,
but question and answer were not in his line. So he set off to the
clerk, who was said to be worth more than the parson, and told him he
had no mind to go to the king. "For one fool can ask more than ten wise
men can answer;" and the end was, he got the clerk to go in his place.

Yes, the clerk set off and came to the palace in the parson's clothes.
There the king met him out on the porch with crown and sceptre, and he
was so grand he fairly glittered and gleamed. "Well, are you there?"
said the king.

"Tell me first," said the king, "how far the east is from the west?"

"Just a day's journey," said the clerk.

"How is that?" asked the king.

"Don't you know," said the clerk, "that the sun rises in the east and
sets in the west, and he does it just nicely in a day?"

"Very well!" said the king, "but tell me now what you think I am worth,
as you see me stand here?"

"Well," said the clerk, "our Lord was valued at thirty pieces of silver,
so I don't think I can set your price higher than twenty-nine."

"All very fine!" said the king, "but, as you are so wise, perhaps you
can tell me what I am thinking about now?"

"Oh!" said the clerk, "you are thinking it's the parson who stands
before you, but there's where you are mistaken, for I am the clerk."

"Be off home with you," said the king, "and be you parson, and let him
be clerk." And so it was.




FATHER BRUIN


Once on a time there was a man who lived far, far away in the wood. He
had many, many goats and sheep, but never a one could he keep because of
Greylegs, the wolf.

At last he said, "I'll soon trap Greyboots," and so he set to work to
dig a pitfall. When he had dug it deep enough, he put a pole down in the
midst of the pit, and on the top of the pole he set a board, and on the
board he put a little dog. Over the pit itself he spread boughs and
branches and leaves, and other rubbish, and a-top of all he strewed
snow, so that Greylegs might not see that there was a pit underneath.

So when night came on, the little dog grew weary of sitting there:
"Bow-wow, bow-wow," he said, and bayed at the moon. Just then up came a
fox, prowling and sneaking, and thought here was a fine time for
marketing, and with that gave a jump,--head over heels down into the
pitfall.

And when it got a little farther on in the night, the little dog grew so
weary and so hungry, and it fell to yelping and howling: "Bow-wow,
bow-wow," he cried out. Just at that very moment up came Greylegs,
trotting and trotting. He, too, thought he should get a fat steak, and
he, too, made a spring--head over heels down into the pitfall.

When it was getting on towards grey dawn in the morning, down fell the
snow, with a north wind, and it grew so cold that the little dog stood
and shivered and shook, he was so weary and hungry, "Bow-wow, bow-wow,
bow-wow," he called out, and barked and yelped and howled. Then up came
a bear, tramping and tramping along, and thought to himself how he could
get a morsel for breakfast at the very top of the morning, and so he
thought and thought among the boughs and branches, till he, too, went
bump--head over heels down into the pitfall.

So when it got a little farther on in the morning, an old beggar wife
came walking by, who toddled from farm to farm with a bag on her back.
When she set eyes on the little dog that stood there and howled, she
could not help going near to look and see if any wild beasts had fallen
into the pit during the night. So she crawled up on her knees and peeped
down into it.

"Art thou come into the pit at last, Reynard?" she said to the fox, for
he was the first she saw; "a very good place, too, for such a hen-roost
robber as thou; and thou, too, Grey-paw," she said to the wolf; "many a
goat and sheep hast thou torn and rent, and now thou shalt be plagued
and punished to death. Bless my heart! Thou, too, Bruin! Art thou, too,
sitting in this room, thou horse killer? Thee, too, will we strip, and
thee shall we flay, and thy skull shall be nailed up on the wall." All
this the old lass screeched out as she bent over towards the bear. But
just then her bag fell over her ears and dragged her down, and slap!
down went the old woman--head over heels into the pitfall.

So there they all four sat and glared at one another, each in a
corner--Reynard in one, Greylegs in another, Bruin in a third, and the
old woman in a fourth.

But as soon as it was broad daylight, Reynard began to peep and peer,
and to twist and turn about, for he thought he might as well try to get
out.

But the old lass cried out, "Canst thou not sit still, thou whirligig
thief, and not go twisting and turning? Only look at Father Bruin
himself in the corner, how he sits as grave as a judge," for now she
thought she might as well make friends with the bear.

But just then up came the man who owned the pitfall.

First he drew up the old woman, and after that he slew all the beasts,
and neither spared Father Bruin himself in the corner, nor Grey-legs,
nor Reynard the whirligig thief. That night, at least, he thought he had
made a good haul.




THE PANCAKE


Once on a time there was a woman who had seven hungry children, and she
was frying a pancake for them. It was a sweet milk pancake, and there it
lay in the pan, bubbling and frizzling so thick and good, it was a
delight to look at it. And the children stood round about, and the old
father sat by and looked on.

"Oh, give me a bit of pancake, mother, dear, I am so hungry," said one
child.

"Oh, darling mother," said the second.

"Oh, darling, good mother," said the third.

"Oh, darling, good, sweet mother," said the fourth.

"Oh, darling, pretty, good, sweet mother," said the fifth.

"Oh, darling, pretty, good, sweet, clever mother," said the sixth.

"Oh, darling, pretty, good, sweet, clever, kindest little mother," said
the seventh.

So they begged for the pancake all around, the one more prettily than
the other, for they were so hungry and so good.

"Yes, yes, children, only bide a bit till it turns itself"--she ought to
have said, 'till I can get it turned,'--"and then you shall have some
lovely sweet milk pancake. Only look how fat and happy it lies there."

When the pancake heard all this it became afraid, and in a trice it
turned itself and tried to jump out of the pan, but it fell back into it
again, the other side up. When it had been fried a little on the other
side too, till it got firm and stiff, it jumped out of the pan to the
floor and rolled off like a wheel through the door and down the hill.

"Holloa! Stop, pancake!" and away ran the mother after it, with the
frying pan in one hand and the ladle in the other, as fast as she could,
and all the children behind her, while the old father on crutches limped
after them last of all.

"Hi! Won't you stop? Catch it! Stop, pancake!" they all screamed out,
one after another, and tried to catch it on the run and hold it. But the
pancake rolled on and on, and in a twinkling of an eye it was so far
ahead that they couldn't see it.

So when it had rolled awhile it met a man.

"Good-day, pancake," said the man.

"Good-day, Manny Panny!" said the pancake.

"Dear pancake," said the man, "don't roll so fast; stop a little and let
me eat you."

"No, no; I have run away from the mother, and the father, and seven
hungry children. I'll run away from you, Manny Panny," said the pancake,
and it rolled and rolled till it met a hen.

"Good-day, pancake," said the hen.

"The same to you, Henny Penny," said the pancake.

"Pancake, dear, don't roll so fast. Bide a bit and let me eat you up,"
said the hen.

"No, no; I have run away from the mother, and the father, and seven
hungry children, and Manny Panny. I'll run away from you, too, Henny
Penny," said the pancake, and it rolled on like a wheel down the road.

Just then it met a cock.

"Good-day, pancake," said the cock.

"The same to you, Cocky Locky," said the pancake.

"Pancake, dear, don't roll so fast, but bide a bit and let me eat you
up."

"No, no; I have run away from the mother, and the father, seven hungry
children, Manny Panny, and Henny Penny. I'll run away from you too,
Cocky Locky," said the pancake, and it rolled and rolled as fast as it
could. Bye and bye it met a duck.

"Good-day, pancake," said the duck.

"The same to you, Ducky Lucky."

"Pancake, dear, don't roll away so fast; bide a bit and let me eat you
up."

"No, no; I have run away from the mother, and the father, and seven
hungry children, Manny Panny, Henny Penny, and Cocky Locky. I'll run
away from you, too, Ducky Lucky," said the pancake, and with that it
took to rolling and rolling faster than ever; and when it had rolled a
long, long while, it met a goose.

"Good-day, pancake," said the goose.

"The same to you, Goosey Poosey."

"Pancake, dear, don't roll so fast; bide a bit and let me eat you up."

"No, no; I have run away from the mother, the father, seven hungry
children, Manny Panny, Henny Penny, Cocky Locky, and Ducky Lucky. I'll
run away from you, too, Goosey Poosey," said the pancake, and off it
rolled.

So when it had rolled a long way off, it met a gander.

"Good-day, pancake," said the gander.

"The same to you, Gander Pander," said the pancake.

"Pancake, dear, don't roll so fast; bide a bit and let me have a bite."

"No, no; I've run away from the mother, the father, seven hungry
children, Manny Panny, Henny Penny, Cocky Locky, Ducky Lucky, and Goosey
Poosey. I'll run away from you, too, Gander Pander," said the pancake,
and it rolled and rolled as fast as ever.

So when it had rolled a long, long time, it met a pig.

"Good-day, pancake," said the pig.

"The same to you, Piggy Wiggy," said the pancake, and without a word
more it began to roll and roll for dear life.

"Nay, nay," said the pig, "you needn't be in such a hurry; we two can go
side by side through the wood; they say it is not too safe in there."

The pancake thought there might be something in that, and so they kept
company. But when they had gone a while, they came to a brook. As for
Piggy, he was so fat he could swim across. It was nothing for him, but
the poor pancake could not get over.

"Seat yourself on my snout," said the pig, "and I'll carry you over."

So the pancake did that.

"Ouf, ouf," said the pig, and swallowed the pancake at one gulp, and
then, as the poor pancake could go no farther, why--this story can go no
farther either.




WHY THE SEA IS SALT


Once on a time, but it was a long, long time ago, there were two
brothers, one rich and one poor.

Now, one Christmas eve, the poor one had not so much as a crumb in the
house, either of meat or bread, so he went to his brother to ask him for
something with which to keep Christmas. It was not the first time his
brother had been forced to help him, and, as he was always stingy, he
was not very glad to see him this time, but he said, "I'll give you a
whole piece of bacon, two loaves of bread, and candles into the bargain,
if you'll never bother me again--but mind you don't set foot in my house
from this day on."

The poor brother said he wouldn't, thanked his brother for the help he
had given him, and started on his way home.

He hadn't gone far before he met an old, old man with a white beard, who
looked so thin and worn and hungry that it was pitiful to see him.

"In heaven's name give a poor man a morsel to eat," said the old man.

"Now, indeed, I have been begging myself," said the poor brother, "but
I'm not so poor that I can't give you something on the blessed Christmas
eve." And with that he handed the old man a candle, a loaf of bread, and
he was just going to cut off a slice of bacon, when the old man stopped
him--"That is enough and to spare," said he. "And now, I'll tell you
something. Not far from here is the entrance to the home of the
underground folks. They have a mill there which can grind out anything
they wish for except bacon; now mind you go there. When you get inside
they will all want to buy your bacon, but don't sell it unless you get
in return the mill which stands behind the door. When you come out I'll
teach you how to handle the mill."

So the man with the bacon thanked the other for his good advice and
followed the directions which the old man had given him, and soon he
stood outside the door of the hillfolk's home.

When he got in, everything went just as the old man had said. All the
hillfolk, great and small, came swarming up to him, like ants around an
ant-hill, and each tried to outbid the other for the bacon.

"Well!" said the man, "by rights, my old dame and I ought to have this
bacon for our Christmas dinner; but, since you have all set your hearts
on it, I suppose I must give it up to you. Now, if I sell it at all,
I'll have for it that mill behind the door yonder."

At first the hillfolk wouldn't hear of such a bargain and higgled and
haggled with the man, but he stuck to what he said, and at last they
gave up the mill for the bacon.

When the man got out of the cave and into the woods again, he met the
same old beggar and asked him how to handle the mill. After he had
learned how to use it, he thanked the old man and went off home as fast
as he could; but still the clock had struck twelve on Christmas eve
before he reached his own door.

"Wherever in the world have you been?" said his old dame. "Here have I
sat hour after hour, waiting and watching, without so much as two sticks
to lay together under the Christmas porridge."

"Oh!" said the man, "I could not get back before, for I had to go a long
way first for one thing and then for another; but now you shall see what
you shall see."

So he put the mill on the table, and bade it first of all grind lights,
then a tablecloth, then meat, then ale, and so on till they had
everything that was nice for Christmas fare. He had only to speak the
word and the mill ground out whatever he wanted. The old dame stood by
blessing her stars, and kept on asking where he had got this wonderful
mill, but he wouldn't tell her.

"It's all the same where I got it. You see the mill is a good one, and
the mill stream never freezes. That's enough."

So he ground meat and drink and all good things to last out the whole of
Christmas holidays, and on the third day he asked all his friends and
kin to his house and gave them a great feast. Now, when his rich brother
saw all that was on the table and all that was in the cupboards, he grew
quite wild with anger, for he could not bear that his brother should
have anything.

"'Twas only on Christmas eve," he said to the rest, "he was so poorly
off that he came and begged for a morsel of food, and now he gives a
feast as if he were count or a king." and he turned to his brother and
said, "But where in the world did you get all this wealth?"

"From behind the door," answered the owner of the mill, for he did not
care to tell his brother much about it. But later in the evening, when
he had gotten a little too merry, he could keep his secret no longer,
and he brought out the mill and said:

"There you see what has gotten me all this wealth," and so he made the
mill grind all kinds of things.

When his brother saw it, he set his heart on having the mill, and, after
some talk, it was agreed that the rich brother was to get it at
hay-harvest time, when he was to pay three hundred dollars for it. Now,
you may fancy the mill did not grow rusty for want of work, for while he
had it the poor brother made it grind meat and drink that would last for
years. When hay-harvest came, the rich brother got it, but he was in
such a hurry to make it grind that he forgot to learn how to handle it.

It was evening when the rich brother got the mill home, and next morning
he told his wife to go out into the hayfield and toss hay while the
mowers cut the grass, and he would stay at home and get the dinner
ready. So, when dinner time drew near, he put the mill on the kitchen
table and said:

"Grind herrings and broth, and grind them good and fast."

And the mill began to grind herrings and broth; first of all the dishes
full, then all the tubs full, and so on till the kitchen floor was quite
covered. The man twisted and twirled at the mill to get it to stop, but
for all his fiddling and fumbling the mill went on grinding, and in a
little while the broth rose so high that the man was nearly drowning. So
he threw open the kitchen door and ran into the parlor, but it was not
long before the mill had ground the parlor full too, and it was only at
the risk of his life that the man could get hold of the latch of the
house door through the stream of broth. When he got the door open, he
ran out and set off down the road, with the stream of herrings and broth
at his heels, roaring like a waterfall over the whole farm.

Now, his old dame, who was in the field tossing hay, thought it a long
time to dinner, and at last she said:

"Well! though the master doesn't call us home, we may as well go. Maybe
he finds it hard work to boil the broth, and will be glad of my help."

The men were willing enough, so they sauntered homewards. But just as
they had got a little way up the hill, what should they meet but
herrings and broth, all running and dashing and splashing together in a
stream, and the master himself running before them for his life, and as
he passed them he called out: "Eat, drink! eat, drink! but take care
you're not drowned in the broth."

Away he ran as fast as his legs would carry him to his brother's house,
and begged him in heaven's name to take back the mill, and that at once,
for, said he, "If it grinds only one hour more, the whole parish will be
swallowed up by herrings and broth."

So the poor brother took back the mill, and it wasn't long before it
stopped grinding herrings and broth.

[Illustration: With the herrings and broth at his heels]

And now he set up a farmhouse far finer than the one in which his
brother lived, and with the mill he ground so much gold that he covered
it with plates of gold. And, as the farm lay by the seaside, the golden
house gleamed and glistened far away over the sea. All who sailed by put
ashore to see the rich man in the golden house, and to see the wonderful
mill the fame of which spread far and wide, till there was nobody who
hadn't heard of it.

So one day there came a skipper who wanted to see the mill, and the
first thing he asked was if it could grind salt.

"Grind salt!" said the owner, "I should just think it could. It can
grind anything."

When the skipper heard that, he said he must have the mill, for if he
only had it, he thought, he need not take his long voyages across stormy
seas for a lading of salt. He much preferred sitting at home with a pipe
and a glass. Well, the man let him have it, but the skipper was in such
a hurry to get away with it that he had no time to ask how to handle the
mill. He got on board his ship as fast as he could and set sail. When he
had sailed a good way off, he brought the mill on deck and said, "Grind
salt, and grind both good and fast."

And the mill began to grind salt so that it poured out like water, and
when the skipper had got the ship full he wished to stop the mill, but
whichever way he turned it, and however much he tried, it did no good;
the mill kept on grinding, and the heap of salt grew higher and higher,
and at last down sank the ship.

There lies the mill at the bottom of the sea, and grinds away to this
very day, and that is the reason why the sea is salt--so some folks say.




THE SQUIRE'S BRIDE


There was once a very rich squire who owned a large farm, had plenty of
silver at the bottom of his chest, and money in the bank besides; but
there was something he had not, and that was a wife.

One day a neighbor's daughter was working for him in the hayfield. The
squire liked her very much and, as she was a poor man's daughter, he
thought that if he only mentioned marriage she would be more than glad
to take him at once. So he said to her, "I've been thinking I want to
marry."

"Well, one may think of many things," said the lassie, as she stood
there and smiled slyly. She really thought the old fellow ought to be
thinking of something that behooved him better than getting married at
his time of life.

"Now, you see," he said, "I was thinking that you should be my wife!"

"No, thank you," said she, "and much obliged for the honor."

The squire was not used to being gainsaid, and the more she refused him
the more he wanted her. But the lassie would not listen to him at all.
So the old man sent for her father and told him that, if he could talk
his daughter over and arrange the whole matter for him, he would forgive
him the money he had lent him, and would give him the piece of land
which lay close to his meadow into the bargain.

"Yes, yes, be sure I'll bring the lass to her senses," said the father.
"She is only a child and does not know what is best for her."

But all his coaxing, all his threats and all his talking, went for
naught. She would not have the old miser, if he sat buried in gold up to
his ears, she said.

The squire waited and waited, but at last he got angry and told the
father that he had to settle the matter at once if he expected him to
stand by his bargain, for now he would wait no longer.

The man knew no other way out of it, but to let the squire get
everything ready for the wedding; then, when the parson and the wedding
guests had arrived, the squire would send for the lassie as if she were
wanted for some work on the farm. When she got there they would marry
her right away, in such a hurry that she would have no time to think it
over.

When the guests had arrived the squire called one of his farm lads, told
him to run down to his neighbor and ask him to send up immediately what
he had promised.

"But if you are not back with her in a twinkling," he said, shaking his
fist at him, "I'll----"

He did not finish, for the lad ran off as if he had been shot at.

"My master has sent me to ask for that which you promised him," said the
lad, when he got to the neighbor, "but, pray, lose no time, for master
is terribly busy to-day."

"Yes, yes! Run down in the meadow and take her with you--there she
goes," answered the neighbor.

The lad ran off and when he came to the meadow he found the daughter
there raking the hay.

"I am to fetch what your father has promised my master," said the lad.

"Ah, ha!" thought she, "is that what they are up to?" And with a wicked
twinkle of the eye, she said, "Oh, yes, it's that little bay mare of
ours, I suppose. You had better go and take her. She stands tethered on
the other side of the pea field."

The boy jumped on the back of the bay mare and rode home at full gallop.

"Have you got her with you?" asked the squire.

"She is down at the door," said the lad.

"Take her up to the room my mother had," said the squire.

"But, master, how can I?" said the lad.

"Do as I tell you," said the squire. "And if you can't manage her alone,
get the men to help you," for he thought the lassie might be stubborn.

When the lad saw his master's face he knew it would be no use to argue.
So he went and got all the farm hands together to help him. Some pulled
at the head and the forelegs of the mare and others pushed from behind,
and at last they got her upstairs and into the room. There lay all the
wedding finery ready.

"Well, that's done, master!" said the lad, while he wiped his wet brow,
"but it was the worst job I have ever had here on the farm."

"Never mind, never mind, you shall not have done it for nothing," said
his master, and he pulled a bright silver coin out of his pocket and
gave it to the lad. "Now send the women up to dress her."

"But, I say--master!--"

"None of your talk!" cried the squire. "Tell them to hold her while they
dress her, and mind not to forget either wreath or crown."

The lad ran into the kitchen:

"Listen, here, lasses," he called out, "you are to go upstairs and dress
up the bay mare as a bride--I suppose master wants to play a joke on his
guests."

The women laughed and laughed, but ran upstairs and dressed the bay mare
in everything that was there. And then the lad went and told his master
that now she was all ready, with wreath and crown and all.

"Very well, bring her down. I will receive her at the door myself," said
the squire.

There was a clatter and a thumping on the stairs, for that bride, you
know, had no silken slippers on.

When the door was opened and the squire's bride entered the room, you
can imagine there was laughing and tittering and grinning enough.

And as for the squire, they say he never went courting again.




PEIK


Once on a time there was a man, and he had a wife. They had a son and a
daughter who were twins, and these were so alike that no one could tell
one from the other except by their clothing. The boy they called Peik.
He was of little use while his father and mother lived, for he cared to
do naught else than to befool folk, and he was so full of tricks and
pranks that no one was left in peace. When the parents died, matters
grew still worse and worse. He would not turn his hand to anything. All
he would do was to squander what they left behind them.

His sister toiled and moiled all she could, but it helped little; so at
last she told him how silly it was to do naught for the house.

"What shall we have to live on when you have wasted everything?"
she said.

"Oh, I'll go out and befool somebody," said Peik.

"Yes, Peik, I'll be bound you'll do that soon enough," said the sister.

"Well, I'll try," said Peik.

At last they had indeed nothing more. There was an end of everything;
and Peik started off, and walked and walked till he came to the King's
palace.

Now, I must tell you, this King and his queen and eldest daughter were
little better than trolls,--mean and hateful and very foolish,--so there
was no love lost between them and the people.

When Peik came to the King's palace, there stood the King in the porch,
and as soon as he set eyes on the lad he said,

"Whither away, to-day, Peik?"

"Oh, I was going out to see if I could befool anybody," said Peik.

"Can't you befool me now?" said the King.

"No, I'm sure I can't," said Peik, "for I've forgotten my fooling rods."

"Can't you go home and fetch them?" said the King, "I should be very
glad to see if you are such a trickster as folks say."

"I've no strength to walk," said Peik.

"I'll lend you a horse and saddle," said the King

"But I can't ride either," said Peik.

"We'll lift you up," said the King, "then you'll be able to stick on."

Well, Peik stood and scratched his head as though he would pull the hair
off, and he let them lift him up into the saddle. There he sat, swinging
this side and that, so long as the King could see him, and the King
laughed till the tears came into his eyes, for such a tailor on
horseback he had never seen. But when Peik was come well into the wood
behind the hill, so that he was out of the King's sight, he sat as
though he were tied to the horse, and off he rode as fast as the horse
could carry him. But when he got to the town he sold both horse and
saddle.

All the while the King walked up and down, and loitered, and waited for
Peik to come tottering back again with his fooling rods. And every now
and then he laughed when he called to mind how wretched the lad looked
as he sat swinging about on the horse like a sack of corn, not knowing
on which side to fall off. This lasted for seven lengths and seven
breaths, but no Peik came, and so at last the King saw that he was
fooled and cheated out of his horse and saddle, even though Peik had not
had his fooling rods with him. Then there was another story, for the
King got wroth, and was all for setting off to kill Peik.

But Peik had found out the day he was coming, and told his sister she
must put on the big boiling-pot with a little water in it. Just as the
King came in, Peik dragged the pot off the fire and ran off with it to
the chopping-block, and so boiled the porridge on the block.

The King wondered at that, and wondered on and on, so much that he quite
forgot what brought him there.

"What do you want for that pot?" said he.

"I can't spare it," said Peik.

"Why not?" said the King; "I'll pay what you ask."

"No, no!" said Peik. "It saves me time and money, wood hire and chopping
hire, carting and carrying."

"Never mind," said the King, "I'll give you a hundred dollars. It's true
you've fooled me out of a horse and saddle, and bridle besides, but all
that shall go for nothing if I can only get the pot."

"Well, if you must have it, you must," said Peik.

When the King got home he asked guests and made a feast, but the meat
was to be boiled in the new pot, and so he took it up and set it in the
middle of the floor. The guests thought the King had lost his wits, and
went about elbowing one another, and laughing at him. But he walked
round and round the pot and cackled and chattered, saying all in a
breath--

"Well, well! bide a bit, bide a bit! 'Twill boil in a minute."

But there was no boiling. So he saw that Peik had been out with his
fooling rods and had cheated him again, and now he would set off at once
and slay him.

When the King came, Peik stood out by the barn door. "Wouldn't it boil?"
he asked.

"No, it would not, and you shall smart for it," said the King, about to
unsheath his knife.

"I can well believe that," said Peik, "for you did not take the block,
too."

"I wish I thought," said the King, "you weren't telling me a pack of
lies."

"I tell you it's because of the block it stands on; it won't boil
without it," said Peik.

"Well, what do you want for it?"

It was well worth three hundred dollars; but for the King's sake it
should go for two. So the King got the block and traveled home with it.
He bade guests again, made a feast, and set the pot on the
chopping-block in the middle of the room. The guests thought he was both
daft and mad, and they went about making game of him, while he cackled
and chattered around the pot, calling out, "Bide a bit! Now it boils,
now it boils in a trice."

But it wouldn't boil a bit more on the block than on the bare floor. So
he saw that Peik had been out with his fooling rods this time, too. Then
he fell a-tearing his hair, and said he would set off at once and slay
the lad. He wouldn't spare him this time, whether or no.

But Peik was ready for him. He had filled a leather bag with blood and
stuffed it into his sister's bosom, and told her what to say and do.

"Where's Peik?" screamed out the King. He was in such a rage that he
stuttered and stammered.

"He is so poorly that he can't stir hand or foot," she said, "and now
he's trying to get a nap."

"Wake him up!" said the King.

"Nay, I daren't, he will be so angry," said the sister.

"Well, I am angrier still," said the King, "and if you don't wake him, I
will," and with that he tapped his side where his knife hung.

"Well, she would go and wake him," but Peik turned hastily in his bed,
drew out a knife and ripped open the leather bag in her bosom, so that
the blood gushed out, and down she fell on the floor as though she were
dead.

"What an awful fellow you are, Peik," said the King; "you have killed
your sister right before my eyes!"

"Oh, there's no trouble with her so long as there's breath in my
nostrils," said Peik, and with that he pulled out a ram's horn and began
to toot on it.

"Toot-e-too-too," he blew, with one end of the horn to her body, and up
she rose as though there was nothing the matter with her.

"Dear me, Peik! Can you kill folk and blow life into them again? Can you
do that?" said the King.

"Why!" said Peik, "how could I get on at all if I couldn't? I am always
killing every one I come near; don't you know I have a terrible temper?"

"I am hot-tempered, too," said the King, "and that horn I must have.
I'll give you a hundred dollars for it, and besides I'll forgive you for
cheating me out of my horse and for fooling me about the pot and the
block, and all else."

Peik was loth to part with it, but for his sake he would let him have
it. And so the King went off home with it, and he hardly got back before
he must try it.

So he fell a-wrangling and quarreling with the queen and his eldest
daughter, and they paid him back in the same coin; but before they knew
what was happening he had whipped out his knife and cut their throats.
They fell down stone dead and the other two daughters ran from the
house, they were so afraid.

The King walked about the floor for a while and kept chattering that
there was no harm done so long as there was breath in him, and then he
pulled out the horn and began to blow "Toot-e-too-too! Toot-e-too-too!"
but, though he blew and tooted as hard as he could all that day and the
next, too, he could not blow life into them again. Dead they were, and
dead they stayed. But the people in the kingdom were only glad to get
rid of such troll-folk, and were wishing some one might make an end of
the King, too, so that they might have a good King in his place.

But the King was now angrier than ever, and must go right off to kill
Peik.

But Peik knew that he was coming and then he said to his sister--

"Now, you must change clothes with me and set off. If you will do that,
you may have all we own."

So, she changed clothes with him, packed up and started off as fast as
she could; but Peik sat all alone in his sister's clothes.

"Where is that Peik?" roared the King, as as he came, in a towering
rage, through the door.

"He has run away," said Peik. "He knew that your Majesty was coming, so
he left me all alone without a morsel of bread or a penny in my purse,"
and he made himself as gentle and sweet as a young lady.

"Come along, then, to the King's palace, and you shall have enough to
live on. There's no good sitting here and starving in this cabin by
yourself," said the King.

So Peik went home with the King, and there he was treated as the King's
own daughter, for Miss Peik sewed and stitched and sang and played with
the others, and was with them early and late.

But one day a man came to the King and told him that Peik's sister was
at a farm in the neighborhood, and that it was Peik he had brought up in
his own house. Now, Peik had heard all that the man told the King, so he
ran away from the King's palace, out into the wide world.

The King got into a terrible rage then, and called for Peik, but he was
nowhere to be found. Then he mounted his horse to go out to look for
Peik.

He had not gone far before he came to a ploughed field and there sat
Peik on a stone, playing on a mouth organ.

"What! Are you sitting there, Peik?" said the King.

"Here I sit, sure enough," said Peik; "where else should I sit?"

"You have cheated me foully time after time," said the King, "but now
you must come along home with me, and I'll kill you."

"Well, well," said Peik, "if it can't be helped, it can't; I suppose I
must go along with you."

When they got home to the King's palace they got ready a barrel which
Peik was to be put in, and when it was ready they carted it up a high
mountain. There he was to lie three days, thinking on all the evil he
had done, then they were to roll him down the mountain into the sea.

The third day a rich man passed by and when he heard Peik's story he was
ready to help him out of his trouble.

They made a stuffed man and put him with some stones into the
barrel--but the rich man gave Peik horses and cows, sheep and swine, and
money beside.

Now, the King came to roll Peik down the mountain. "A happy journey!"
said the King, "and now it is all over with you and your fooling rods."

Before the barrel was halfway down the mountain there was not a whole
stave of it left, nor would there have been a whole limb on Peik, had he
been there. But when the King came back to the palace, Peik was there
before him, and sat in the court-yard playing on his mouth organ.

"What! You sitting here, you, Peik?"

"Yes! Here I sit, sure enough. Where else should I sit?" said Peik.
"Maybe I can get room here for all my horses and sheep and money."

"But whither was it that I rolled you that you got all this wealth?"
asked the King.

"Oh, you rolled me into the sea," said Peik, "and when I got to the
bottom there was more than enough and to spare, both of horses and
sheep, and of gold and silver. The cattle went about in great flocks,
and the gold and silver lay in large heaps as big as houses."

"What will you take to roll me down the same way?" asked the King.

"Oh," said Peik, "it costs little or nothing to do it. Besides, you took
nothing from me, and so I'll take nothing from you either."

So he stuffed the King into a barrel and rolled him over, and when he
had given him a ride down to the sea for nothing, he went home to the
King's palace.

[Illustration: So he stuffed the King into the barrel and rolled him over]

Then he began to hold his bridal feast with the youngest princess, and
afterwards he ruled the land both well and long. But he kept his fooling
rods to himself, and kept them so well that nothing was ever heard of
Peik and his tricks, but only of "Ourself the King."




THE PRINCESS WHO COULD NOT BE SILENCED


There was once a King, and he had a daughter who was so cross and
crooked in her words that no one could silence her, and so he gave it
out that he who could do it should marry the princess and have half the
kingdom, too. There were plenty of those who wanted to try it, I can
tell you, for it is not every day that you can get a princess and half a
kingdom. The gate to the King's palace did not stand still a minute.
They came in great crowds from the East and the West, both riding and
walking. But there was not one of them who could silence the princess.

At last the king had it given out that those who tried, and failed,
should have both ears marked with the big redhot iron with which he
marked his sheep. He was not going to have all that flurry and worry for
nothing.

Well, there were three brothers, who had heard about the princess, and,
as they did not fare very well at home, they thought they had better set
out to try their luck and see if they could not win the princess and
half the kingdom. They were friends and good fellows, all three of them,
and they set off together.

When they had walked a bit of the way, Boots picked up something.

"I've found--I've found something!" he cried.

"What did you find!" asked the brothers.

"I found a dead crow," said he.

"Ugh! Throw it away! What would you do with that?" said the brothers,
who always thought they knew a great deal.

"Oh, I haven't much to carry, I might as well carry this," said Boots.

So when they had walked on a bit, Boots again picked up something.

"I've found--I've found something!" he cried.

"What have you found now?" said the brothers.

"I found a willow twig," said he.

"Dear, what do you want with that? Throw it away!" said they.

"Oh, I haven't much to carry, I might as well carry that," said Boots.

So when they had walked a bit, Boots picked up something again. "Oh,
lads, I've found--I've found something!" he cried.

"Well, well, what did you find this time?" asked the brothers.

"A piece of a broken saucer," said he.

"Oh, what is the use of that? Throw it away!" said they.

"Oh, I haven't much to carry, I might as well carry that," said Boots.

And when they had walked a bit further, Boots stooped down again and
picked up something else.

"I've found--I've found something, lads!" he cried.

"And what is it now?" said they.

"Two goat horns," said Boots.

"Oh! Throw them away. What could you do with them?" said they.

"Oh, I haven't much to carry, I might as well carry them," said Boots.

In a little while he found something again.

"Oh, lads, see, I've found--I've found something," he cried.

"Dear, dear, what wonderful things you do find! What is it now?" said
the brothers.

"I've found a wedge," said he.

"Oh, throw it away. What do you want with that?" said they.

"Oh, I haven't much to carry, I might as well carry that," said Boots.

And now, as they walked over the fields close up to the King's palace,
Boots bent down again and held something in his fingers.

"Oh, lads, lads, see what I've found!" he cried.

"If you only found a little common sense, it would be good for you,"
said they. "Well, let's see what it is now."

"A worn-out shoe sole," said he.

"Pshaw! Well, that was something to pick up! Throw it away! What do you
want with that?" said the brothers.

"Oh, I haven't much to carry, I might as well carry that, if I am to win
the princess and half the kingdom," said Boots.

"Yes, you are likely to do that--you," said they.

And now they came to the King's palace. The eldest one went in first.

"Good-day," said he.

"Good-day to you," said the princess, and she twisted and turned.

"It's awfully hot here," said he.

"It is hotter over there in the hearth," said the princess. There lay
the red-hot iron ready awaiting. When he saw that he forgot every word
he was going to say, and so it was all over with him.

And now came the next oldest one.

"Good-day," said he.

"Good-day to you," said she, and she turned and twisted herself.

"It's awfully hot here," said he.

"It's hotter over there in the hearth," said she. And when he looked at
the red-hot iron he, too, couldn't get a word out, and so they marked
his ears and sent him home again.

Then it was Boots' turn.

"Good-day," said he.

"Good-day to you," said she, and she twisted and turned again.

"It's nice and warm in here," said Boots.

"It's hotter in the hearth," said she, and she was no sweeter, now the
third one had come.

"That's good, I may bake my crow there, then?" asked he.

"I'm afraid she'll burst," said the princess.

"There's no danger; I'll wind this willow twig around," said the lad.

"It's too loose," said she.

"I'll stick this wedge in," said the lad, and took out the wedge.

"The fat will drop off," said the princess.

"I'll hold this under," said the lad, and pulled out the broken bit of
the saucer.

"You are crooked in your words, that you are," said the princess.

"No, I'm not crooked, but this is crooked," said the lad, and he showed
her the goat's horn.

"Well, I never saw the equal to that!" cried the princess.

"Oh, here is the equal to it," said he, and pulled out the other.

"Now, you think you'll wear out my soul, don't you?" said she.

"No, I won't wear out your soul, for I have a sole that's worn out
already," said the lad, and pulled out the shoe sole.

Then the princess hadn't a word to say.

"Now, you're mine," said Boots.

And so she was.




THE TWELVE WILD DUCKS


Once on a time there was a Queen who had twelve sons but no daughter.

One day she was out driving in the woods and met the prettiest little
lassie one ever did see, and so the Queen stopped her horses, lifted the
child up in her arms, kissed her on both cheeks, all the while thinking:

"I wish I had a little girl of my own, oh, how long I've waited and
wished for one."

Just then an old witch of the trolls came up to her, but you wouldn't
have known it was a witch at all, she looked so kind and good.

"A daughter you shall have," she said, "and she shall be the prettiest
child in twelve kingdoms, if you will give to me what ever comes to meet
you at the bridge."

Now the Queen had a little snow white dog of which she was very fond,
and it always ran to meet her when she had been away. She thought, of
course, it was the dog the old dame wanted, so the Queen said, "Yes, you
may have what comes to meet me on the bridge." With that she hurried
home as fast as she could.

But, who should come to meet her on the bridge but her twelve sons; and
before the mother could cry out to them the wicked witch threw her spell
upon them and turned them into twelve ducks which flapped their wings
and flew away. Away they went and away they stayed.

But the Queen had a daughter, and she was the loveliest child one ever
set eyes upon. The Princess grew up, and she was both tall and fair, but
she was often quiet and sorrowful, and no one could understand what it
was that ailed her. The Queen, too, was often sorrowful, as you may
believe, for she had many strange fears when she thought of her sons.
And one day she said to her daughter, "Why are you so sorrowful, lassie
mine? Is there anything you want? If so, only say the word, and you
shall have it."

"Oh, it seems so dull and lonely here," said the daughter, "every one
else has brothers and sisters, but I am all alone; I have none. That's
why I'm so sorrowful."

"But you had brothers, my daughter," said the Queen; "I had twelve sons,
stout, brave lads, but I lost them all when you came;" and so she told
her the whole story.

When the Princess heard that she had no rest; for she thought it was all
her fault, and in spite of all the Queen could say or do, though she
wept and prayed, the lassie would set off to seek her brothers. On and
on she walked into the wide world, so far you would never have thought
her small feet could have had strength to carry her so far.

Finally, one day, when she was walking through a great, great wood, she
felt tired, and sat down on a mossy tuft and fell asleep. Then she
dreamt that she went deeper and deeper into the wood, till she came to a
little wooden hut, and there she found her brothers. Just then she
awoke, and straight before her she saw a worn path in the green moss.
This path went deeper into the wood, so she followed it, and after a
long time she came to just such a little wooden house as that she had
seen in her dream.

Now, when she went into the room there was no one at home, but there
were twelve beds, and twelve chairs, and twelve spoons,--in short, a
dozen of everything. When she saw that she was very glad; she had not
been so glad for many a long year, for she could guess at once that her
brothers lived there, and that they owned the beds and chairs and
spoons. So she began to make up the fire, and sweep the room and make
the beds and cook the dinner, and to make the house as tidy as she
could.

And when she had done all the work and the dinner was on the table she
suddenly heard something flapping and whirling in the air, and she
slipped behind the door. Then all the twelve ducks came sweeping in; but
as soon as ever they crossed the threshold they became Princes.

"Oh, how nice and warm it is here," they said, "Heaven bless him who
made up the fire and cooked such a nice dinner for us."

"But who can it be?" said the youngest Prince, and they all hunted both
high and low until they found the lassie behind the door. And she threw
her arms around their necks and said, "I'm your sister; I've gone about
seeking you these three years, and if I could set you free, I'd
willingly give my life."

Then all the brothers looked sorrowfully, one at the other, and they
shook their heads.

"No, it's too hard," said the eldest Prince, looking at the pretty young
Princess, "it's too hard," and again they sighed and shook their heads.

"Oh, tell me, only tell me," said the Princess, "how can it be done, and
I'll do it, whatever it be." And as she begged and pleaded for them to
tell her, the youngest brother said at last, "You must pick thistledown,
and you must card it, and spin it, and weave it. After you have done
that, you must cut out and make twelve shirts, one for each of us, and
while you do that, you must neither talk, nor laugh, nor weep. If you
can do that we are free."

"But where shall I ever get thistledown enough for so many shirts?"
asked the sister.

"Well, that is the hardest thing of all," said the eldest brother. "You
must go to the witches' moor at midnight and gather it there," and big
tears stood in his eyes, "and you must go alone, all alone."

But the sister smiled and nodded her head, and when midnight came, and
the moon was high in the sky she said good-bye to her brothers, and went
to the great, wide moor, where the witches lived. There stood a great
crop of thistles, all nodding and nodding in the breeze, while the down
floated and glistened like gossamer through the air in the moonbeams.
The Princess began to pluck and gather it as fast as she could, but she
saw long skinny arms outstretched toward her, and, among the thistles,
she saw a host of wicked faces all looking at her. Her heart stood still
then and she grew icy cold, but never a sound did she utter, only
plucked and gathered until her bag was full; and when she got home at
break of day she set to work carding and spinning yarn from the down.

[Illustration: The Princess began to pluck and gather as fast as she
could]

So she went on a long, long time picking down on the witches' moor,
carding and spinning, and all the while keeping the house of the
Princes, cooking, and making their beds. But she never talked, nor
laughed, nor wept.

At evening home the brothers came, flapping and whirring like wild
ducks, and all night they were Princes, but in the morning off they flew
again, and were wild ducks the whole day.

But, it happened one night when she was out on the moor picking
thistledown, that the young King who ruled that land was out hunting,
and had lost his way. He had become separated from his companions, and
now, as he came riding across the moor, he saw her. He stopped and
wondered who the lovely lady could be that walked alone on the moor
picking thistledown in the dead of the night; and he asked her name.
Getting no answer, he was still more astonished, but he liked her so
much, that at last nothing would do but he must take her home to his
castle and marry her. So he took her and put her upon his horse. The
Princess wrung her hands, and made signs to him, and pointed to the bags
in which her work was, and when the King saw she wished to have them
with her he took the bags and placed them behind them.

When that was done the Princess, little by little, came to herself, for
the King was both a wise man and a handsome man, and he was as gentle
and kind to her as a mother. But when they reached the palace an old
woman met them. She was the King's guardian, and when she set eyes on
the Princess she became so cross and jealous of her, because she was so
lovely, that she said to the King:

"Can't you see now, that this thing whom you have picked up, and whom
you are going to marry, is a witch? Why, she can neither talk nor laugh
nor weep!"

But the King did not care a straw for what she said. He held to the
wedding and married the Princess, and they lived in great joy and glory.
But the Princess didn't forget to go on working on her shirts, and she
neither talked nor laughed nor wept. However, when she had spun and
woven and cut, she found that she still had not enough cloth for the
twelve shirts, and she needs must go to the witches' moor again.

So that night while all the palace slept she quietly slipped out and
walked off to pick her thistledown, but the old woman who was the King's
guardian saw her, and she knew well where the young Queen was going, for
I must tell you she was the same wicked witch who had changed the twelve
Princes into wild ducks. She hurried to the King's chamber, woke him and
said, "Now, come with me and I'll prove to you that your lovely Queen is
a witch, who joins the wicked company on the moor at midnight." The King
would not listen to her at first, but when he saw that the Queen's bed
was empty, he got up and went with the old woman.

And there upon the edge of the moor they stopped, but in the clear
moonlight they could see the Queen among the horrid hags and trolls. The
King turned away sadly and said not a word, for he loved his quiet Queen
very much.

But the wicked old woman began to whisper and tell abroad about the
Queen's nightly visit to the moor, and at last the King's best men came
to him and said, "We will not have a Queen who is a witch; the people
demand of you that she be burnt alive."

Then the King was so sad that there was no end to his sadness, for now
he saw that he could not save her. He was obliged to order her to be
burnt alive on a pile of wood. When the pile was all ablaze, and they
were about to put her on it, she made signs to them to take twelve
boards and lay them around the pile.

On these she laid the shirts for her brothers all completed but that for
the youngest, which lacked its left sleeve; she had not had time to
finish it. And as soon as ever she had done that, they heard a flapping
and whirring in the air, and down came twelve wild ducks from over the
forest, and each snapped up his shirt in his bill and flew off with it.

"See now!" said the old woman to the King, "wasn't I right when I told
you she was a witch! Make haste and burn her before the pile burns low."

"Oh!" said the King, "we've wood enough and to spare, and so I'll wait a
bit, for I have a mind to see what the end of this will be."

As he spoke up came the twelve Princes riding along, as handsome
well-grown lads as you'd wish to see; but the youngest Prince had a wild
duck's wing instead of his left arm. "What's all this about?" asked the
Princes.

"My Queen is to be burnt," said the King, "because she is a witch, so
the people say, and I can't save her."

"Speak now, sister," said the Princes, "you have set us free and saved
us, now save yourself."

Then the young Queen spoke and told the whole story, and the King and
all the people listened with wonder and joy. Only the wicked old woman
stood trembling with fear. And when the Queen had finished her story,
the people took the old witch and bound her and burned her on the pile.

But the King took his wife and the twelve Princes and went home with
them to their father and mother, and told all that had befallen them.
Then there was joy and gladness over the whole kingdom, because the
wicked witch was dead and the Princes saved and set free, and because
the lovely Princess had set free her twelve brothers.




GUDBRAND-ON-THE-HILLSIDE


Once upon a time there was a man whose name was Gudbrand. He had a farm
which lay far, far away upon a hillside, and so they called him
Gudbrand-on-the-Hillside.

Now, you must know this man and his good wife lived so happily together,
and understood one another so well, that all the husband did the wife
thought so well done there was nothing like it in the world, and she was
always pleased at whatever he turned his hand to. The farm was their own
land, and they had a hundred dollars lying at the bottom of their chest
and two cows tethered up in a stall in their farmyard.

So one day his wife said to Gudbrand, "Do you know, dear, I think we
ought to take one of our cows into town and sell it; that's what I
think; for then we shall have some money in hand, and such well-to-do
people as we ought to have ready money as other folks have. As for the
hundred dollars in the chest yonder, we can't make a hole in our
savings, and I'm sure I don't know what we want with more than one cow.

"Besides, we shall gain a little in another way, for then I shall get
off with only looking after one cow, instead of having, as now, to feed
and litter and water two."

Well, Gudbrand thought his wife talked right good sense, so he set off
at once with the cow on the way to town to sell her; but when he got to
the town, there was no one who would buy his cow.

"Well, well, never mind," said Gudbrand, "at the worst, I can only go
back home with my cow. I've both stable and tether for her, and the road
is no farther out than in." And with that he began to toddle home with
his cow.

But when he had gone a bit of the way, a man met him who had a horse to
sell. Gudbrand thought 'twas better to have a horse than a cow, so he
traded with the man. A little farther on he met a man walking along and
driving a fat pig before him, and he thought it better to have a fat pig
than a horse, so he traded with the man. After that he went a little
farther, and a man met him with a goat, so he thought it better to have
a goat than a pig, and he traded with the man who owned the goat. Then
he went on a good bit till he met a man who had a sheep, and he traded
with him too, for he thought it always better to have a sheep than a
goat. After a while he met a man with a goose, and he traded away the
sheep for the goose; and when he had walked a long, long time, he met a
man with a cock, and he traded with him, for he thought in this wise,
"Tis surely better to have a cock than a goose."

Then he went on till the day was far spent, and he began to get very
hungry, so he sold the cock for a shilling, and bought food with the
money, for, thought Gudbrand-on-the-Hillside, "Tis always better to save
one's life than to have a cock."

After that he went on homeward till he reached his nearest neighbor's
house, where he turned in.

"Well," said the owner of the house, "how did things go with you in
town?"

"Rather so-so," said Gudbrand, "I can't praise my luck, nor do I blame
it either," and with that he told the whole story from first to last.

"Ah!" said his friend, "you'll get nicely hauled over the coals, when
you go home to your wife. Heaven help you, I wouldn't stand in your
shoes for anything."

"Well," said Gudbrand-on-the-Hillside, "I think things might have gone
much worse with me; but now, whether I have done wrong or not, I have so
kind a good wife she never has a word to say against anything that I
do."

"Oh!" answered his neighbor, "I hear what you say, but I don't believe
it for all that."

"And so you doubt it?" asked Gudbrand-on-the-Hillside.

"Yes," said the friend, "I have a hundred crowns, at the bottom of my
chest at home, I will give you if you can prove what you say."

So Gudbrand stayed there till evening, when it began to get dark, and
then they went together to his house, and the neighbor was to stand
outside the door and listen, while the man went in to his wife.

"Good evening!" said Gudbrand-on-the Hillside.

"Good evening!" said the good wife. "Oh! is that you? Now, I am happy."

Then the wife asked how things had gone with him in town.

"Oh, only so-so," answered Gudbrand; "not much to brag of. When I got to
town there was no one who would buy the cow, so you must know I traded
it away for a horse."

"For a horse," said his wife; "well that is good of you; thanks with all
my heart. We are so well to do that we may drive to church, just as well
as other people, and if we choose to keep a horse we have a right to get
one, I should think." So, turning to her child she said, "Run out,
deary, and put up the horse."

"Ah!" said Gudbrand, "but you see I have not the horse after all, for
when I got a bit farther on the road, I traded it for a pig."

"Think of that, now!" said the wife. "You did just as I should have done
myself; a thousand thanks! Now I can have a bit of bacon in the house to
set before people when they come to see me, that I can. What do we want
with a horse? People would only say we had got so proud that we couldn't
walk to church. Go out, child, and put up the pig in the sty."

"But I have not the pig either," said Gudbrand, "for when I got a little
farther on, I traded it for a goat."

"Dear me!" cried the wife, "how well you manage everything! Now I think
it over, what should I do with a pig? People would only point at us and
say 'Yonder they eat up all they have.' No, now I have a goat, and I
shall have milk and cheese, and keep the goat too. Run out, child, and
put up the goat."

"Nay, but I haven't the goat either," said Gudbrand, "for a little
farther on I traded it away and got a fine sheep instead!"

"You don't say so!" cried his wife, "why, you do everything to please
me, just as if I had been with you. What do we want with a goat? If I
had it I should lose half my time in climbing up the hills to get it
down. No, if I have a sheep, I shall have both wool and clothing, and
fresh meat in the house. Run out, child, and put up the sheep."

"But I haven't the sheep any more than the rest," said Gudbrand, "for
when I got a bit farther, I traded it away for a goose."

"Thank you, thank you, with all my heart," cried his wife, "what should
I do with a sheep? I have no spinning wheel or carding comb, nor should
I care to worry myself with cutting, and shaping, and sewing clothes. We
can buy clothes now as we have always done; and now I shall have roast
goose, which I have longed for so often; and, besides, down with which
to stuff my little pillow. Run out, child, and put up the goose.

"Well!" said Gudbrand, "I haven't the goose either; for when I had gone
a bit farther I traded it for a cock."

"Dear me!" cried his wife, "how you think of everything! just as I
should have done myself. A cock! think of that! Why it's as good as an
eight day clock, for every day the cock crows at four o'clock, and we
shall be able to stir our stiff legs in good time. What should we do
with a goose? I don't know how to cook it; and as for my pillow, I can
stuff it with cotton grass. Run out, child, and put up the cock."

"But after all, I haven't the cock either," said Gudbrand, "for when I
had gone a bit farther, I became as hungry as a hunter, so I was forced
to sell the cock for a shilling, for fear I should starve."

"Now, God be praised that you did so!" cried his wife, "whatever you do,
you do it always just after my own heart. What should we do with the
cock? We are our own masters, I should think, and can lie abed in the
morning as long as we like. Heaven be thanked that I have you safe back
again; you who do everything so well, that I want neither cock nor
goose; neither pigs nor kine."

Then Gudbrand opened the door and said,--

"Well, what do you say now? Have I won the hundred crowns?" and his
neighbor was forced to admit that he had.




THE PRINCESS ON THE GLASS HILL


Once on a time, there was a man who had a meadow, which lay high upon
the hillside, and in the meadow was a barn, which he had built to keep
his hay in. Now, I must tell you there hadn't been much in the barn for
the last year or two, for every St. John's night, when the grass stood
greenest and deepest, the meadow was eaten down to the very ground the
next morning, just as if a whole drove of sheep had been there feeding
on it over night. This happened once, and it happened twice; so at last
the man grew weary of losing his crop of hay, and said to his sons--for
he had three of them, and the youngest was nicknamed Boots, of
course--that now one of them must just go and sleep in the barn in the
outlying field when St. John's night came, for it was no joke that his
grass should be eaten, root and blade, this year, as it had been the
last two years. So whichever of them went must keep a sharp look-out;
that was what their father said.

Well, the eldest son was ready to go and watch the meadow; trust him for
looking after the grass. So, when evening came, he set off to the barn,
and lay down to sleep. But a little on in the night came such a clatter,
and such an earthquake, that walls and roof shook, and groaned, and
creaked. Then up jumped the lad, and took to his heels as fast as ever
he could; nor dared he once look around until he reached home; and as
for the hay, why it was eaten up this year just as it had been twice
before.

The next St. John's night, the man said again it would never do to lose
all the grass in the outlying field year after year in this way, so one
of his sons must just trudge off to watch it, and watch it well too.
Well, the next oldest son was ready to try his luck, so he set off and
sat down to watch in the barn as his brother had done before him. But as
the night wore on, there came on a rumbling and quaking of the earth,
worse even than on the last St. John's night, and when the lad heard it,
he got frightened, and took to his heels as though he were running a
race.

Next year the turn came to Boots; but when he made ready to go the other
two began to laugh and to make game of him, saying,--

"You're just the man to watch the hay, that you are; you, who have done
nothing all your life but sit in the ashes and toast yourself by the
fire."

But Boots did not care a pin for their chattering, and as evening drew
on, he walked up the hillside to the outlying field. There he went
inside the barn and sat down; but in about an hour's time the barn began
to groan and creak, so that it was dreadful to hear.

"Well," said Boots to himself, "if it isn't worse than this, I can stand
it well enough."

A little while after came another creak and an earthquake, so that the
litter in the barn flew about the lad's ears.

"Oh!" said Boots to himself, "if it isn't worse than this, I daresay I
can stand it out."

But just then came a third rumbling and a third earthquake, so that the
lad thought walls and roof were coming down on his head; but it passed
off, and all was still as death about him.

"It'll come again, I'll be bound," thought Boots; but no, it didn't come
again; still it was, and still it stayed. But after he had sat a little
while, he heard a noise as if a horse were standing just outside the
barn door, and feeding on the grass. He stole to the door, and peeped
through a chink, and there stood a horse feeding away. So big, and fat,
and grand a horse, Boots had never set eyes on. By his side on the grass
lay a saddle and bridle, and a full set of armor for a knight, all of
brass, so bright that the light gleamed from it.

"Ho, ho!" thought the lad; "it's you, is it, that eats up our hay?"

So he lost no time, but took the steel out of his tinder box and threw
it over the horse; then it had no power to stir from the spot, and
became so tame that the lad could do what he liked with it. Then he got
on its back, and rode off with it to a place which no one knew of, and
there he put up the horse. When he got home, his brothers laughed, and
asked how he had fared.

"You didn't sit long in the barn, even if you had the heart to go as far
as the field."

"Well," said Boots, "all I can say is, I sat in the barn till the sun
rose."

"A pretty story," said his brothers; "but we'll soon see how you have
watched the meadow;" so they set off; but when they reached it, there
stood the grass as deep and thick as it had been over night.

Well, the next St. John's eve it was the same story over again; neither
of the elder brothers dared to go out to the outlying field to watch the
crop; but Boots, he had the heart to go, and everything happened just as
it had the year before. First a clatter and an earthquake, then a
greater clatter and another earthquake, and so on a third time; only
this year the earthquakes were far worse than the year before. Then all
at once everything was still as death, and the lad heard how something
was cropping the grass outside the barn door, so he stole to the door,
and peeped through a chink; and what do you think he saw? Why, another
horse standing right up against the wall, and chewing and champing with
might and main. It was far larger and finer than that which came the
year before, and it had a saddle on its back, and a bridle on its head,
and a full suit of mail for a knight lay by its side, all of silver, and
as splendid as you would wish to see.

"Ho, ho!" said Boots to himself; "it's you that gobbles up our hay, is
it?" And with that he took the steel out of his tinder box, and threw it
over the horse's crest; then it stood as still as a lamb. Well, the lad
rode this horse, too, to the hiding place where he kept the other one,
and after that, he went home.

"I suppose you'll tell us," said one of his brothers, "there's a fine
crop this year too, up in the hay field."

"Well, so there is," said Boots; and off ran the others to see, and
there stood the grass thick and deep, as it was the year before; but
they didn't give Boots softer words for all that.

Now, when the third St. John's eve came, the two elder still hadn't the
heart to sit out in the barn and watch the grass, for they had got so
scared at heart the night they sat there before, that they couldn't get
over the fright. But Boots dared to go; and the very same thing happened
this time that had happened twice before. Three earthquakes came, one
after the other, each worse than the one which went before, and when the
last came, the lad danced about with the shock from one barn wall to the
other; and after that, all at once, it was still as death. Now, when he
had sat a little while, he heard something cropping away at the grass
outside the barn, so he stole again to the door chink, and peeped out,
and there stood a horse outside--far, far bigger and more beautiful than
the two he had taken before. It had a saddle on its back, a bridle on
its head, and a full suit of mail for a knight lay by its side--all of
gold, all more splendid than anything you ever saw.

[Illustration: So he caught up the steel and threw it over the horse]

"Ho, ho!" said the lad to himself, "it's you, is it, that comes here
eating up our hay? I'll soon stop that." So he caught up his steel, and
threw it over the horse's neck, and in a trice it stood as if it were
nailed to the ground, and Boots could do as he pleased with it. Then he
rode off with it to the hiding place, where he kept the other two, and
then went home. When he got home, his two brothers made game of him as
they had done before, saying, they could see he had watched the grass
well, for he looked for all the world as if he were walking in his
sleep, and many other spiteful things they said, but Boots gave no heed
to them, only asking them to go and see for themselves; and when they
went, there stood the grass as fine and deep this time as it had been
twice before.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now you must know that the king of the country where Boots lived had a
daughter, whom he would only give to the man who could ride up over the
hill of glass, for there was a high, high hill, all of glass, as smooth
and slippery as ice, close by the king's palace. Upon the tip top of the
hill the king's daughter was to sit, with three golden apples in her
lap, and the man who could ride up and carry off the three golden apples
was to have half the kingdom, and the Princess to wife. This offer the
king had posted on all the church doors in his realm; and had given it
out in many other kingdoms besides. Now, this Princess was so lovely,
that all who set eyes on her loved her. So I needn't tell you how all
the princes and knights who heard of her were eager to win her to wife,
and half the kingdom besides; and how they came riding from all parts of
the world on high prancing horses, and clad in the grandest clothes, for
there wasn't one of them who hadn't made up his mind that he, and he
alone, was to win the Princess.

So when the day of trial came, which the king had fixed, there was such
a crowd of princes and knights under the glass hill, that it made one's
head whirl to look at them; and every one in the country who could even
crawl along was off to the hill, for they all were eager to see the man
who was to win the Princess. Thus the two elder brothers set off with
the rest; but as for Boots, they said outright he shouldn't go with
them, for if they were seen with such a dirty fellow, all begrimed with
smut from cleaning their shoes, and sifting cinders in the dust-hole,
they said folk would make game of them.

"Very well," said Boots; "it's all one to me. I can go alone."

Now, when the two brothers came to the hill of glass, the knights and
princes were all hard at it, riding their horses till they were all in a
foam; but it was no good; for as soon as ever the horses set foot on the
hill, down they slipped, and there wasn't one who could get a yard or
two up; and no wonder, for the hill was as smooth as a sheet of glass,
and as steep as a house-wall. But all were eager to have the Princess
and half the kingdom. So they rode and slipped, and slipped and rode,
and still it was the same story over again. At last all their horses
were so weary that they could scarce lift a leg, and so the knights had
to give up trying any more.

The king was just thinking that he would proclaim a new trial for the
next day, to see if they would have better luck, when all at once a
knight came riding up on so brave a steed, that no one had ever seen the
like of it in his born days, and the knight had a mail of brass, and the
horse a brass bit in his mouth, so bright that the sunbeams shone from
it. Then all the others called out to him that he might just as well
spare himself the trouble of riding at the hill, for it would lead to no
good; but he gave no heed to them, and put his horse at the hill, and
went up it for a good way, about a third of the height; and when he had
got so far, he turned his horse round and rode down again. So lovely a
knight the Princess thought she had never yet seen; and while he was
riding, she sat and thought to herself,--

"Ah, how I wish that he might come up and go down the other side."

And when she saw him turning back, she threw down one of the golden
apples after him, and it rolled down into his shoe. But when he got to
the bottom of the hill he rode off so fast that no one could tell what
had become of him. That evening all the knights and princes were to go
before the king, that he who had ridden so far up the hill might show
the apple which the Princess had thrown, but there was no one who had
anything to show. One after the other they all came, but not a man of
them could show the apple.

The next day, all the princes and knights began to ride again, and you
may fancy they had taken care to shoe their horses well; but it was no
use,--they rode and slipped, and slipped and rode, just as they had done
the day before; and there was not one who could get so far as a yard up
the hill. And when they had worn out their horses, so that they could
not stir a leg, they were all forced to give it up. So the king thought
he might as well proclaim that the riding should take place the day
after for the last time, just to give them one chance more; but all at
once it came across his mind that he might as well wait a little longer,
to see if the knight in brass mail would come this day too. Well! they
saw nothing of him; but all at once came one riding on a steed, far, far
braver and finer than that on which the knight in brass had ridden, and
he had silver mail, and a silver saddle and bridle, all so bright that
the sunbeams gleamed and glanced from them far away. Then the others
shouted out to him again, saying he might as well stop, and not try to
ride up the hill, for all his trouble would be thrown away. But the
knight paid no heed to them, and rode straight at the hill, and right up
it, till he had gone two-thirds of the way, and then he wheeled his
horse around and rode down again. To tell the truth, the Princess liked
him still better than the knight in brass, and she sat and wished he
might be able to come right up to the top, and down the other side; but
when she saw him turning back, she threw the second apple after him, and
it rolled down and fell into his shoe. But as soon as ever he had come
down the hill of glass, he rode off so fast that no one could see what
became of him.

At even, all were to go in before the king and the Princess, that he who
had the golden apple might show it. In they went, one after the other,
but there was no one who had any apple to show.

The third day everything happened as it had happened the two days
before. There was no one who could get so much as a yard up the hill;
and now all waited for the knight in silver mail, but they neither saw
nor heard of him. At last came one riding on a steed, so brave that no
one had ever seen his match; and the knight had a suit of golden mail,
and a golden saddle and bridle, so wondrous bright that the sunbeams
gleamed from them a mile off. The other knights and princes could not
find time to call out to him not to try his luck, for they were amazed
to see how grand he was. So he rode at the hill, and tore up it like
nothing, so that the Princess hadn't even time to wish that he might get
up the whole way. As soon as ever he reached the top, he took the third
golden apple from the Princess's lap, and then turned his horse and rode
down again. As soon as he got down he rode off at full speed, and was
out of sight in no time.

Now, when the two brothers got home at even, you may fancy what long
stories they told, how the riding had gone off that day; and amongst
other things, they had a deal to say about the knight in golden mail.

"He just was a chap to ride," they said; "so grand a knight isn't to be
found in this wide world."

Next day all the knights and princes were to pass before the king and
the Princess--that he who had the gold apple might bring it forth; but
one came after another, first the princes, then the knights, and still
no one could show the gold apple.

"Well," said the king, "some one must have it, for it was something that
we all saw with our own eyes, how a man came and rode up and bore it
off."

So he commanded that everyone who was in the kingdom should come up to
the palace and see if he could show the apple. Well, they all came one
after another, but no one had the golden apple, and after a long time
the two brothers of Boots came. They were the last of all, so the king
asked them if there was no one else in the kingdom who hadn't come.

"Oh, yes," said they; "we have a brother, but he never carried off the
golden apple. He hasn't stirred out of the dust-hole on any of the three
days."

"Never mind that," said the king; "he may as well come up to the palace
like the rest." So he came.

"How, now," said the king; "have you the golden apple? Speak out."

"Yes, I have," said Boots; "here is the first, and here is the second,
and here is the third, too;" and with that he pulled all three golden
apples out of his pocket, and at the same time threw off his sooty rags,
and stood before them in his gleaming golden mail.

"Yes," said the king; "you shall have my daughter, and half my kingdom,
for you well deserve both her and it."

So they got ready for the wedding, and Boots got the Princess to wife,
and there was great merry-making at the bridal-feast, you may fancy, for
they could all be merry though they couldn't ride up the hill of glass;
and all I can say is, if they haven't left off their merry-making yet,
why, they're still at it.




THE HUSBAND WHO WAS TO MIND THE HOUSE


Once on a time there was a man so mean and cross that he never thought
his wife did anything right in the house. So one evening in hay-making
time he came home scolding and tearing, and showing his teeth and making
a fuss.

"Dear love, don't be so angry; there's a good man," said his goody;
"to-morrow let's change our work. I'll go out with the mowers and mow,
and you shall mind the house at home."

The husband thought that would do very well. He was quite willing, he
said.

So, early next morning his goody took a scythe on her shoulders, and
went out into the hayfield with the mowers, and began to mow; but the
man was to mind the house and do the work at home.

First of all he wanted to churn the butter; but when he had churned a
while, he grew thirsty and went down to the cellar to tap a barrel of
ale. So, just when he was putting the tap into the cask, he heard
overhead the pig come into the kitchen. Then off he ran up the cellar
steps, with the tap in his hand, as fast as he could to look after the
pig, lest it should upset the churn. But when he got up, and saw the pig
had already knocked the churn over and stood there grunting and rooting
in the cream which was running all over the floor, he became so wild
with rage, that he quite forgot the ale barrel, and ran at the pig as
hard as he could.

He caught it, too, just as it ran out of doors, and gave it such a kick
that piggy died on the spot. Then all at once he remembered he had the
tap in his hand; but when he got down to the cellar, every drop of ale
had run out of the cask.

Then he went into the dairy and found enough cream left to fill the
churn again, and so he began to churn, for butter they must have at
dinner. When he had churned a bit, he remembered that their milking cow
was still shut up in its stall, and had not had a mouthful to eat or a
drop to drink all the morning, though the sun was high. Then he thought
it was too far to take her down to the meadow, so he'd just get her up
on the house top, for the house, you must know, was thatched with sods,
and a fine crop of grass was growing there. Now their house lay close up
against a steep rock, and he thought if he laid a plank across to the
roof at the back, he'd easily get the cow up.

But still he could not leave the churn, for there was their little babe
crawling about the floor, and, "If I leave it," he thought, "the child
is sure to upset it."

So he took the churn on his back and went out with it. Then he thought
he'd better water the cow before he turned her out on the thatch, and he
took up a bucket to draw water out of the well. But, as he stooped down
at the brink of the well, all the cream ran out of the churn over his
shoulders, about his neck, and down into the well.

Now it was near dinner time, and he had not even got butter yet. So he
thought he'd best boil the porridge, and he filled the pot with water,
and hung it over the fire. When he had done that, he thought the cow
might perhaps fall off the thatch and break her legs or her neck. So he
got up on the house to tie her up. One end of the rope he made fast to
the cow's neck, and the other he slipped down the chimney and tied round
his own waist. He had to make haste, for the water now began to boil in
the pot, and he had still to grind the oatmeal.

So he began to grind away; but while he was hard at it, down fell the
cow off the housetop after all, and as she fell she dragged the man up
the chimney by the rope. There he stuck fast. And as for the cow, she
hung halfway down the wall, swinging between heaven and earth, for she
could neither get down nor up.

And now the goody had waited seven lengths and seven breadths for her
husband to come and call them home to dinner, but never a call they had.
At last she thought she'd waited long enough and went home.

When she got there and saw the cow hanging in such an ugly place, she
ran up and cut the rope in two with her scythe. But as she did this,
down came her husband out of the chimney, and so when his old dame came
inside the kitchen, there she found him standing on his head in the
porridge pot.




LITTLE FREDDY WITH HIS FIDDLE


Once there was a farmer who had an only son. The lad had had very poor
health so he could not go out to work in the field.

His name was Freddy, but, since he remained such a wee bit of a fellow,
they called him Little Freddy. At home there was but little to eat and
nothing at all to burn, so his father went about the country trying to
get the boy a place as cowherd or errand boy; but there was no one who
would take the weakly little lad till they came to the sheriff. He was
ready to take him, for he had just sent off his errand boy, and there
was no one who would fill his place, for everybody knew the sheriff was
a great miser.

But the farmer thought it was better there than nowhere; he would get
his food, for all the pay he was to get was his board--there was nothing
said about wages or clothes. When the lad had served three years he
wanted to leave, and the sheriff gave him all his wages at one time. He
was to have a penny a year. "It couldn't well be less," said the
sheriff. And so he got three pence in all.

As for Little Freddy, he thought it was a great sum, for he had never
owned so much; but, for all that, he asked if he wasn't to have anything
for clothes, for those he had on were worn to rags. He had not had any
new ones since he came to the sheriff's three years ago.

"You have what we agreed on," said the sheriff, "and three whole pennies
besides. I have nothing more to do with you. Be off!"

So Little Freddy went into the kitchen and got a little food in his
knapsack, and after that he set off on the road to buy himself more
clothes. He was both merry and glad, for he had never seen a penny
before, and every now and then he felt in his pockets as he went along
to see if he had them all three. So, when he had gone far and farther
than far, he got up on top of the mountains. He was not strong on his
legs, and had to rest every now and then, and then he counted and
counted how many pennies he had. And now he came to a great plain
overgrown with moss. There he sat down and began to see if his money was
all right. Suddenly a beggarman appeared before him, so tall and big
that when he got a good look at him and saw his height and length, the
lad began to scream and screech.

"Don't you be afraid," said the beggarman, "I'll do you no harm, I came
only to beg you for a penny."

"Dear me!" said the lad, "I have only three pennies, and with them I was
going to town to buy clothes."

"It is worse for me than for you," said the beggarman, "I have not one
penny, and I am still more ragged than you."

"Well, that is so; you shall have it," said the lad.

When he had walked on a while, he grew weary again, and sat down to
rest. Suddenly another beggarman stood before him, and this one was
still taller and uglier than the first. When the lad saw how very tall
and ugly and long he was, he began to scream again.

"Now, don't you be afraid of me," said the beggar, "I'll do you no harm.
I came only to beg for a penny."

"Oh dear, oh dear!" said the lad. "I have only two pennies, and with
them I was going to the town to buy clothes. If I had only met you
sooner, then--"

"It's worse for me than for you," said the beggarman. "I have no penny,
and a bigger body and less clothing."

"Well, you may have it," said the lad. So he went away farther, till he
got weary, and then he sat down to rest; but he had scarcely sat down
when a third beggarman came to him. This one was so tall and ugly and
long that the lad had to look up and up, right up to the sky. And when
he took him all in with his eyes, and saw how very, very tall and ugly
and ragged he was, he fell a-screeching and screaming again.

[Illustration: The lad had to look up, right up into the sky]

"Now, don't you be afraid of me, my lad," said the beggarman, "I'll do
you no harm, for I am only a beggarman, who begs you for a penny."

"Oh dear, oh dear!" said the lad. "I have only one penny left, and with
it I was going to the town to buy clothes. If I had only met you sooner,
then--"

"As for that," said the beggarman, "I have no penny at all, that I
haven't, and a bigger body and less clothes, so it is worse for me than
for you."

"Yes," said Little Freddy, "he must have the penny then--there was no
help for it; for so each beggarman would have one penny, and he would
have nothing."

"Well," said the beggarman, "since you have such a good heart that you
gave away all that you had in the world, I will give you a wish for each
penny." For you must know it was the same beggarman who had got them all
three; he had only changed his shape each time, that the lad might not
know him again.

"I have always had such a longing to hear a fiddle go, and see folk so
merry and glad that they couldn't help dancing," said the lad; "and so
if I may wish what I choose, I will wish myself such a fiddle, that
everything that has life must dance to its tune."

"That you may have," said the beggarman, "but it is a sorry wish. You
must wish something better for the other two pennies."

"I have always had such a love for hunting and shooting," said Little
Freddy; "so if I may wish what I choose, I will wish myself such a gun
that I shall hit everything I aim at, were it ever so far off."

"That you may have," said the beggarman, "but it is a sorry wish too.
You must wish better for the last penny."

"I have always had a longing to be in company with folks who were kind
and good," said Little Freddy; "and so, if I could get what I wish, I
would wish it to be so that no one can say 'Nay' to the first thing I
ask."

"That wish is not so sorry," said the beggarman; and off he strode
between the hills, and Freddy saw him no more.

So the lad lay down to sleep, and the next day he came down from the
mountain with his fiddle and his gun. First he went to the storekeeper
and asked for clothes. Next at a farm he asked for a horse, and at a
second for a sleigh; and at another place he asked for a fur coat. No
one said him "Nay"--even the stingiest folk were all forced to give him
what he asked for. At last he went through the country as a fine
gentleman, and had his horse and his sleigh. When he had gone a bit he
met the sheriff whose servant he had been.

"Good day, master," said Little Freddy, as he pulled up and took off his
hat.

"Good day," said the sheriff, "but when was I ever your master?"

"Oh yes," said Little Freddy, "don't you remember how I served you three
years for three pence?"

"My goodness, now!" said the sheriff, "you have grown rich in a hurry,
and pray, how was it that you got to be such a fine gentleman?"

"Oh, that is a long story," said Little Freddy.

"And are you so full of fun that you carry a fiddle about with you?"
asked the sheriff.

"Yes, yes," said Freddy. "I have always had such a longing to get folk
to dance. But the funniest thing of all is this gun, for it brings down
almost anything that I aim at, however far it may be off. Do you see
that magpie yonder, sitting in the spruce fir? What will you give me if
I hit it as we stand here?"

"Well," said the sheriff, and he laughed when he said it, "I'll give you
all the money I have in my pocket, and I'll go and fetch it when it
falls," for he never thought it possible for any gun to carry so far.

But as the gun went off down fell the magpie, and into a great bramble
thicket; and away went the sheriff up into the bramble after it, and he
picked it up and held it up high for the lad to see. But just then
Little Freddy began to play his fiddle, and the sheriff began to dance,
and the thorns to tear him; but still the lad played on, and the sheriff
danced, and cried, and begged, till his clothes flew to tatters, and he
scarce had a thread to his back.

"Yes," said Little Freddy, "now I think you're about as ragged as I was
when I left your service; so now you may get off with what you have."

But first the sheriff had to pay him all the money that he had in his
pocket.

So when the lad came to town he turned into an inn, and there he began
to play, and all who came danced and laughed and were merry, and so the
lad lived without any care, for all the folks liked him and no one would
say "Nay" to anything he asked.

But one evening just as they were all in the midst of their fun, up came
the watchmen to drag the lad off to the town hall; for the sheriff had
laid a charge against him, and said he had waylaid him and robbed him
and nearly taken his life. And now he was to be hanged. The people would
hear of nothing else. But Little Freddy had a cure for all trouble, and
that was his fiddle. He began to play on it, and the watchmen fell
a-dancing and they danced and they laughed till they gasped for breath.

So soldiers and the guard were sent to take him, but it was no better
with them than with the watchmen. When Little Freddy played his fiddle,
they were all bound to dance; and dance as long as he could lift a
finger to play a tune; but they were half dead long before he was tired.

At last they stole a march on him, and took him while he lay asleep by
night. Now that they had caught him they could condemn him to be hanged
on the spot, and away they hurried him to the gallows tree.

There a great crowd of people flocked together to see this wonder, and
the sheriff too was there. He was glad to get even at last for the money
and the clothes he had lost, and to see the lad hanged with his own
eyes.

And here came Little Freddy, carrying his fiddle and his gun. Slowly he
mounted the steps of the gallows,--and when he got to the top he sat
down, and asked if they could deny him a wish, and if he might have
leave to do one thing? He had such a longing, he said, to scrape a tune
and play a bar on his fiddle before they hanged him.

"No, no," they said; "it were sin and shame to deny him that." For you
know, no one could say "Nay" to what he asked.

But the sheriff begged them not to let him have leave to touch a string,
else it would be all over with them altogether. If the lad leave, he
begged them to bind him to the birch that stood there.

Little Freddy was not slow in getting his fiddle to speak, and all that
were there fell a-dancing at once, those who went on two legs, and those
who went on four. Both the dean and the parson, the lawyer and the
sheriff, masters and men, dogs and pigs--they all danced and laughed and
barked and squealed at one another. Some danced till they lay down and
gasped, some danced till they fell in a swoon. It went badly with all of
them, but worst of all with the sheriff; for there he stood bound to the
birch, and he danced till he scraped the clothes off his back. I dare
say it was a sorry looking sight and a sore back.

But there was not one of them who thought of doing anything to Little
Freddy, and away he went with his fiddle and his gun, whither he chose,
and he lived merrily and happily all his days, for there was no one who
could say "Nay" to the first thing he asked for.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of East O' the Sun and West O' the Moon, by 
Gudrun Thorne-Thomsen

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EAST O' THE SUN AND WEST O' THE MOON ***

***** This file should be named 8653.txt or 8653.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/6/5/8653/

Produced by David Garcia, Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

