Project Gutenberg's Woman And Her Saviour In Persia, by A Returned Missionary

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Woman And Her Saviour In Persia

Author: A Returned Missionary

Posting Date: August 20, 2012 [EBook #8699]
Release Date: August, 2005
First Posted: August 2, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WOMAN AND HER SAVIOUR IN PERSIA ***




Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Tiffany Vergon, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.










[Illustration: PLAIN OF OROOMIAH, FROM THE SEMINARY AT SEIR.]




WOMAN AND HER SAVIOUR IN PERSIA.

BY

A RETURNED MISSIONARY.


With

Fine Illustrations, and a Map of Nestorian Country.




PREFACE.

Our Saviour bade his disciples gather up the fragments, that nothing be
lost; and many who have known of Miss Fiske's fifteen years of labor
for woman in Persia, have desired her to prepare for publication the
facts now presented to the reader. The writer was one of these; and it
was only when he found that she could not do it, that he attempted it,
in accordance with her wishes, simply that these interesting records of
divine grace might not be lost.

The materials have been drawn from the letters and conversations of
those familiar with the scenes described, and especially from Miss
Fiske. In all cases, the language of others has been condensed, as much
as is consistent, with the truthful expression of their ideas; and, in
the translation of the letters of Nestorians, it has not been deemed
essential to follow slavishly every Syriac idiom, for, instead of these
letters owing their interest, as some have supposed, to their
translators, they may have sometimes rather suffered from renderings
needlessly idiomatic.

It was at one time proposed to embrace the history of both the Male and
Female Seminaries, but the proposition came too late, and the memoir of
the lamented Stoddard gives so full an account of the former, that now
we need to hear only the story of its less known companion; but let the
reader bear in mind that as much might have been said of the one as of
the other, had the design been to give an account of both.

A strict adherence to the order of events in the following pages would
have produced a series of disjointed annals. To avoid such a breaking
up of the narrative, each subject has been treated in full whenever
introduced, though that has involved a freedom somewhat independent of
chronological order.

The notices of the revivals are mere incidental sketches. Their
complete history remains to be written.

The beautiful Illustrations introduced are all new, copied from
sketches taken on the spot by the skillful pencil of a dear missionary
brother, whose modesty, though it will not consent to the mention of
his name, yet cannot prevent a grateful sense of his kindness. The Map
is an improvement on others previously published, and, besides adding
to our geographical knowledge, will be found valuable to the friends of
missions.

If the readers of these pages enjoy but a small part of the delight
found in their preparation, the writer will not regret his undertaking.
May the day be hastened when heaven shall repeat the hosannas of a
regenerated world, even as now the abundant grace bestowed upon the
Nestorians redounds, through the thanksgiving of many, to the glory of
God.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

WOMAN WITHOUT THE GOSPEL.

POLITICAL CONDITION.--NESTORIAN HOUSES.--VERMIN.--SICKNESS.--POSITION
AND ESTIMATION OF WOMAN.--NO READERS AMONG THEM.--UNLOVELY
SPIRIT.--SINS OF THE TONGUE.--PROFANITY.--LYING.--STEALING.--STORY
ABOUT PINS.--IMPURITY.--MOSLEM INTERFERENCE WITH SEMINARY.


CHAPTER II.

MARBEESHOO.

VISIT THERE.--NATIVE ACCOMMODATIONS.--HOSPITALITY OF SENUM.--MOHAMMEDAN
WOMEN.


CHAPTER III.

THE SCENE OF THE NARRATIVE.

NESTORIANS.--THEIR COUNTRY.--FRONTISPIECE.--LAKE.--PLAIN.--FORDING THE
SHAHER.--MISSION PREMISES IN OROGMIAH.


CHAPTER IV.

MISSIONARY EDUCATION.

OBJECT.--MEANS.--STUDY OF BIBLE.--PUPILS KEPT IN SYMPATHY WITH THE
PEOPLE.--PEOPLE STIMULATED TO EXERTION AND
SELF-DEPENDENCE.--TAHITI.--MADAGASCAR.


CHAPTER V.

BEGINNINGS.

MRS. GRANT.--EARLY LIFE AND LABORS.--GREAT INFLUENCE.--HER SCHOOL.--HER
PUPILS.--BOARDING SCHOOL.--GETTING PUPILS.--CARE OP THEM.--POVERTY OF
PEOPLE.--PAYING FOR FOOD OF SCHOLARS.--POSITION OF UNMARRIED MISSIONARY
LADIES.--BOOKS.


CHAPTER VI.

THE SEMINARY.

MAR YOHANAN.--STANDARD OF SCHOLARSHIP.--ENGLISH BOOKS READ IN
SYRIAC.--EXPENSE.--FEELINGS OF PARENTS.--DOMESTIC DEPARTMENT.--DAILY
REPORTS.--PICTURE OF A WEEK DAY AND SABBATH.--"IF YOU LOVE ME, LEAN
HARD."--ESLI'S JOURNAL.--LETTER FROM PUPILS TO MOUNT HOLYOKE
SEMINARY--FROM THE SAME TO MRS. C.T. MILLS.


CHAPTER VII.

VACATION SCENES.

IN GAWAR AND ISHTAZIN.--VILLAGES OF MEMIKAN.--OOREYA, DARAWE, AND
SANAWAR.--IN GAVALAN.--ACCOMMODATIONS.--SABBATH SCHOOL.


CHAPTER VIII.

EARLY LABORS FOR WOMEN.

FIRST MEETINGS WITH THEM.--FIRST CONVERT.--FIRST LESSONS.--WILD WOMEN
OF ARDISHAI.


CHAPTER IX.

FRUITS OF LABOR IN NESTORIAN HOMES.

USEFULNESS AMONG RELATIVES OF PUPILS.--DEACON GUWERGIS.--REFORMED
DRUNKARD AND HIS DAUGHTER.--MATERNAL MEETINGS.--EARLY INQUITIES FROM
GEOG TAPA.--PARTING ADDRESS OF MR. HOLLADAY.--.VISIT TO GEOG
TAPA.--SELBY AND HER CLOSET.


CHAPTER X.

GEOG TAPA.

DEACON MURAD KHAN IN 1846.--PENTECOSTAL SABBATH IN 1849.--MEETINGS IN
1850 AND 1854.--EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL OF YONAN IN 1858.


CHAPTER XI.

REVIVAL IN 1846.

PREPARATORY WORK.--SANCTIFIED AFFLICTIONS.--NAME FOR REVIVAL.--SCENES
IN THE SEMINARIES IN JANUARY.--DEACON JOHN, SANUM, AND SARAH.--MR.
STODDARD.--YACOB.--YONAN.--MEETING IN THE BETHEL.--PRIEST
ESHOO.--DEACON TAMO.--PHYSICAL EXCITEMENT AND ITS CURE.--ARTLESS
SIMPLICITY OF CONVERTS.--MISSIONARY BOX.--MEETINGS BEFORE
VACATION.--MR. STODDARD'S LABORS.--FEMALE PRAYER MEETING.--REVIVAL IN
THE AUTUMN.


CHAPTER XII.

FIRST FRUITS.

SARAH, DAUGHTER OF PRIEST ESHOO.--MARTHA.--HANNAH.


CHAPTER XIII.

SUBSEQUENT REVIVALS.

DEACON JOHN STUDYING BACKSLIDING IN 1849.--WORK IN VILLAGE OF
SEIR.--WIVES OF SIYAD AND YONAN.--KHANUMJAN.--WOMEN AT THE
SEMINARY.--GEOG TAPA.--DEGALA.--A PENITENT.--SIN OF ANGER,--REVIVAL IN
1856.--MISS FISKE ENCOURAGED,--STILLNESS AND DEEP FEELING.--UNABLE TO
SING.--CONVERSION OF MISSIONARY CHILDREN.--VISIT OF ENGLISH
AMBASSADOR.--REVIVAL OF 1857.--LETTER OF SANUM.


CHAPTER XIV.

DARK DAYS.

SEMINARY BROKEN UP IN 1844.--DEACON ISAAC.--PERSECUTION BY MAR
SHIMON.--FUNERAL OF DAUGHTER OF PRIEST ESHOO.--DEACON
GUWERGIS.--ATTEMPT AT ABDUCTION OF PUPIL.--PERIL OF SCHOOL.--MRS.
HARRIET STODDARD.--YAHYA KHAN.--ANARCHY.--LETTER FROM BARILO.


CHAPTER XV.

TRIALS.

EVIL INFLUENCE OF HOMES.--OPPOSITION IN DEGALA.--ASKER KHAN.--POISONING
OF SANUM'S CHILDREN.--REDRESS REFUSED.--INQUISITOR IN SCHOOL.--TROUBLES
AT KHOSRAWA.--LETTERS FROM HOIMAR.


CHAPTER XVI.

PRAYERFULNESS.

LANGUAGE OP PRAYER.--PRAYER ON HORSEBACK.--OLD MAN IN SUPERGAN.--MAR
OGEN.--EARNESTNESS.--FAREWELL PRAYER MEETING IN 1858.--LETTER FROM
PUPIL.--SPIRIT OF PRAYER IN 1846.--WOMAN WHO COULD NOT PRAY,--"CHRIST
BECOME BEAUTIFUL."--CLOSET IN THE MANGER.--MONTHLY
CONCERTS.--PRAYERFULNESS IN 1849 AND 1850.--SABBATH, JANUARY
20TH.--INTEREST CONTINUED TILL CLOSE OF TERM.--FAMILY
MEETINGS.--AUDIBLE PRAYER.-ANSWER TO MOTHERS' PRAYERS.--CONNECTION OF
REVIVALS WITH PRAYER AT HOME.


CHAPTER XVII.

FORERUNNERS.

MOUNTAIN GIRLS IN SEMINARY.--PRAYING SARAH.--RETURN TO THE
MOUNTAINS.--VISIT OF YONAN AND KHAMIS, IN 1850.--OF MR. COAN, 1851.--OF
YONAN, AGAIN, 1861.--SARAH'S LETTERS.


CHAPTER XVIII.

LABORERS IN THE MOUNTAINS.

LETTER OF BADAL.--ACCOUNT OP HANNAH.--THE PIT.--LETTER OF GULY AND
YOHANAN.--ACCOUNT OF SARAH.--LETTERS OF OSHANA.--LETTERS AND JOURNAL OF
SARAH,--LETTERS FROM AMADIA,--CONFERENCE OF NATIVE HELPERS.


CHAPTER XIX.

EBENEZERS.

EXAMINATION IN 1850.--COLLATION AND ADDRESS.--VALEDICTORY BY
SANUM.--SABBATH SCHOOL IN GEOG TAPA.--EXAMINATION THERE IN
1854.--PRAYER MEETING AND COMMUNION AT OROGMIAH, MAY, 1858.--SELBY, OF
GAVALAN, AND LETTER.--LETTER FROM HATOON, OF GEOG TAPA.


CHAPTER XX.

COMPOSITIONS.

THE FIELD OF CLOVER.--THE LOST SOUL.--THE SAVED SOUL.--HANNAH.


CHAPTER XXI.

KIND OFFICES.

HOSPITALITY OF NESTORIANS.--KINDNESS OF PUPILS.--BATHING FEET.--LETTERS
OF GOZEL, HANEE, SANUM OF GAWAR, MUNNY, RAHEEL, AND
MARTA.--HOSHEBO.--RAHEEL TO MRS. FISKE.--MOURNING FOR THE
DEAD.--NAZLOO.--HOSHEBO'S BEREAVEMENT.--DEATH OF MISSIONARY
CHILDREN.--LETTER FROM SARAH, DAUGHTER OF JOSEPH.


CHAPTER XXII.

PROGRESS AND PROMISE.

BENEVOLENCE, EARLY MANIFESTATION OF.--PROGRESS.--REVIVAL OF BENEVOLENCE
IN APRIL, 1861.--INTEREST OF PARENTS FOR THE CONVERSION OF THEIR
CHILDEREN.--PEACE IN FAMILIES.--REFORMED
MARRIAGES.--ORDINATIONS.--COMMUNION SEASONS.--MISS RICE AND MISS
BEACH.--CONCLUSION.



       *      *       *       *       *

_List of Illustrations._

I. PLAIN AND LAKE OF OROOMIAH, AS SEEN FROM ROOF OF SEMINARY AT SEIR

II. MAP OF THE NESTORIAN COUNTRY.

III. FEMALE SEMINARY.

IV. TENTS.

V. MISSIONARY SCENE IN TURGAWER.

VI. COURT YARD OF SEMINARY.

VII. SEIR GATE, OROOMIAH.

VIII. TIARY GIRL.




WOMAN AND HER SAVIOUR.




CHAPTER I.


WOMAN WITHOUT THE GOSPEL.

POLITICAL CONDITION.--NESTORIAN HOUSES.--VERMIN.--SICKNESS.--POSITION
AND ESTIMATION OF WOMAN.--NO READERS AMONG THEM.--UNLOVELY
SPIRIT.--SINS OF THE TONGUE.--PROFANITY.--LYING.--STEALING.--STORY
ABOUT PINS.--IMPURITY.--MOSLEM INTERFERENCE WITH SEMINARY.

We love to wander over a well-kept estate. Its green meadows and
fruitful fields delight the eye. Its ripening harvests make us feel as
if we too were wealthy. But while the view of what lies before us is so
pleasant, our joy is greater if we can remember when it was all a
wilderness, and contrast its present beauty with the roughness of its
former state.

So, in viewing the wonders of divine grace, we need to see its results
in connection with what has been. We can appreciate the loveliness of
the child of God only as we compare him with the child of wrath he was
before. Paul not only recounts the great things which God had done for
the early disciples, but bids them remember that they were once without
Christ; and before he tells them that God had made them "sit together
in heavenly places in Christ Jesus," he reminds them that they had
"walked according to the spirit that now worketh in the children of
disobedience."

In seeking, then, to set forth the great things which God has done for
woman in Persia, let us first look on her as his gospel found her, that
we may better appreciate the grace which wrought the change.

We can understand the condition of woman in that empire only as we bear
in mind that its government is despotic, and that no constitutional
safeguards shield the subjects of a thoroughly selfish and profligate
nobility. The Nestorians, too, are marked out alike by religion and
nationality as victims of oppression. However great their wrongs, they
can hope for little redress, for a distant court shares in the plunder
taken from them, and believes its own officials rather than the
despised rayahs, whom they oppress. Even when foreign intervention
procures some edict in their favor, these same officials, in distant
Oroomiah, are at no loss to evade its demands.

The Nestorian is not allowed a place in the bazaar;[1] he cannot engage
in commerce. And in the mechanic arts, he cannot aspire higher than the
position of a mason or carpenter; which, of course, is not to be
compared to the standing of the same trades among us. When our
missionaries went to Oroomiah, a decent garment on a Nestorian was safe
only as it had an outer covering of rags to hide it. [Footnote 1: The
bazaar is, literally, the market, but denotes the business part of a
city.]

In their language, as in Arabic, the missionaries found no word for
_home;_ and there was no need of it, for the thing itself was wanting.
The house consisted of one large room and was generally occupied by
several generations. In that one room all the work of the family was
performed. There they ate, and there they slept. The beds consisted of
three articles--a thick comfortable filled with wool or cotton beneath,
a pillow, and one heavy quilt for covering. On rising, they "took up
their beds," and piled them on a wooden frame, and spread them down
again at night. The room was lighted by an opening in the roof, which
also served for a chimney; though, of course, in a very imperfect
manner, as the inside of every dwelling that has stood for any length
of time bears witness. The upper part of the walls and the under
surface of the roof--we can hardly call it ceiling--fairly glitter, as
though they had been painted black and varnished, and every article of
clothing, book, or household utensil, is saturated with the smell of
creosote. The floor, like the walls, is of earth, covered in part with
coarse straw mats and pieces of carpeting; and the flat roof, of the
same material, rests on a layer of sticks, supported by large beams;
the mass above, however, often sifts through, and sometimes during a
heavy rain assumes the form of a shower of mud. Bad as all this may
seem, the houses are still worse in the mountain districts, such as
Gawar. There they are half under ground, made of cobble stones laid up
against the slanting sides of the excavation, and covered by a conical
roof with a hole in the centre. They contain, besides the family, all
the implements of husbandry, the cattle, and the flocks. These last
occupy "the sides of the house" (1 Sam. xxiv. 3), and stand facing the
"decana," or raised place in the centre, which is devoted to the
family. As wood is scarce in the mountains, and the climate severe, the
animal heat of the cattle is a substitute for fuel, except as sun-baked
cakes of manure are used once a day for cooking, as is the practice
also on the plain. In such houses the buffaloes sometimes break loose
and fight furiously, and instances are not rare when they knock down
the posts on which the roof rests, and thus bury all in one common ruin.

The influence of such family arrangements, even in the more favored
villages of the plain, on manners and morality, need not be told. It is
equally evident that in such circumstances personal tidiness is
impossible, though few in our favored land have any idea of the extent
of such untidiness. If the truth must be told, vermin abound in most of
these houses; the inmates are covered not only with fleas, but from
head to foot they are infested with the third plague of Egypt. (Ex.
viii. 16-19). This last is a constant annoyance in many parts of Turkey
as well as Persia. If one lodges in the native houses, there is no
refuge from them, and only an entire change of clothing affords relief
when he returns to his own home; even there the divans have to be
sedulously examined after the departure of visitors, that the plague do
not spread. The writer has known daughters of New England, ready for
almost any self-denial, burst into tears when first brought into
contact with this.

At first, the teachers of the Female Seminary in Oroomiah had to
cleanse their pupils very thoroughly, and were glad thus to purify the
outside, while beseeching Christ to cleanse the heart. Each one, on her
first arrival, had to be separately cared for, lest the enemy should
recover ground from which he had already been driven with much labor.
Missionary publications do not usually tell of such trials, but those
who drew the lambs from the deep pit, loved them all the more tenderly
for having gone down into it themselves, that thence they might bring
them to Jesus. Such trials are less common now, for it is generally
understood that a degree of personal cleanliness is an indispensable
requisite for admission to the Seminary; but such a demand, at that
time, would have rendered the commencement of the school impossible.

The pupils became much improved in personal appearance, and some of
their simple-hearted mothers really thought their children had grown
very pretty under their teachers' care. So, as many of them were
strangers to the cleansing properties of water, they would ask again
and again, "How do you make them so white?"

But if such houses were comfortless abodes for those in health, what
were they for the sick? Think of one in a burning fever, perhaps
delirious, lying in such a crowd. In winter, there they must remain,
for there is no other place, and in summer, they are often laid under a
tree in the day time, and carried up to the flat roof, with the rest of
the family, at night.

Dr. Perkins, in the early part of his missionary life, tells us that in
a village the family room was given up to him for the night, and in the
morning he found a little son had been born in the stable. He supposed
that he had been the unwitting cause of such an event occurring there;
but longer acquaintance with the people shows that woman almost
invariably resorts to that place in her hour of sorrow, and there she
often dies. The number who meet death in this form is very large.

In Persia, as in other unevangelized countries, women spend their days
in out-door labor. They weed the cotton, and assist in pruning the
vines and gathering the grapes. They go forth in the morning, bearing
not only their implements of husbandry, but also their babes in the
cradle; and returning in the evening, they prepare their husband's
supper, and set it before him, but never think of eating themselves
till after he is done. One of the early objections the Nestorians made
to the Female Seminary was, that it would disqualify their daughters
for their accustomed toil. In after years, woman might be seen carrying
her spelling-book to the field, along with her Persian hoe, little
dreaming that she was thus taking the first step towards the
substitution of the new implement for the old.

Nestorian parents used to consider the birth of a daughter a great
calamity. When asked the number of their children, they would count up
their sons, and make no mention of their daughters. The birth of a son
was an occasion for great joy and giving of gifts. Neighbors hastened
to congratulate the happy father, but days might elapse before the
neighborhood knew of the birth of a daughter. It was deemed highly
improper to inquire after the health of a wife, and the nearest
approach to it was to ask after the welfare of the house or household.
Formerly, a man never called his wife by name, but in speaking of her
would say, "the mother of so and so," giving the name of her child; or,
"the daughter of so and so," giving the name of her father; or, simply
"that woman" did this or that. Nor did the wife presume to call her
husband's name, or to address him in the presence of his parents, who,
it will be borne in mind, lived in the same apartment. They were
married very young, often at the age of fourteen, and without any
consultation of their own preference, either as to time or person.

There was hardly a man among the Nestorians who did not beat his wife.
The women expected to be beaten, and took it as a matter of course. As
the wife lived with the husband's father, it was not uncommon for him
to beat both son and daughter-in-law. When the men wished to talk
together of any thing important, they usually sent the women out of
doors or to the stable, as unable to understand, or unfit to be
trusted. In some cases, this might be a necessary precaution; for the
absence of true affection; and the frequency of domestic broils,
rendered the wife an unsafe depositary of any important family affair.
The same causes often led the wife to appropriate to her own foolish
gratification any money of her husband she could lay hands on,
regardless of family necessities. Women whose tastes led them to load
themselves with beads, silver, baser metal, and rude trinkets, would
not be likely to expend money very judiciously.

In 1835, the only Nestorian woman that knew how to read was Heleneh,
the sister of Mar Shimon; and when others were asked if they would not
like to learn, with a significant shrug they would reply, "I am a
woman." They had themselves no more desire to learn than the men had to
have them taught. Indeed, the very idea of a woman reading was regarded
as an infringement of female modesty and propriety.

It is a little curious, and shows how we adapt ourselves to our
situation, that the women were as unwilling to receive attention from
their husbands as they were to render it. Several years after the
arrival of Miss Fiske in Oroomiah, the wife of one of her assistants
visited the Seminary, and on leaving to return to her village, the
teacher, in the kindness of her heart, proposed to the husband to go
and assist her to carry the child. She seemed as if she had been
insulted in being thought unable to carry it, and sent her husband back
from the door in any thing but a gracious mood, leaving the good
teacher half bewildered and half amused at this reception of her
intended kindness.

Indeed, until some of them were converted, all that was lovely and of
good report in woman was entirely wanting. They were trodden down, but
at the same time exceedingly defiant and imperious. If they were not
the "head," it was not because they did not "strive for the mastery."
They seemed to have no idea of self-control; their bursts of passion
were awful. The number of women who reverenced their husbands was as
small as the list of husbands who did not beat their wives. Says Miss
Fiske, in writing to a friend, "I felt pity for my poor sisters before
going among them, but anguish when, from actual contact with them, I
realized how very low they were. I did not want to leave them, but I
did ask, Can the image of Christ ever be reflected from such hearts?
They would come and tell me their troubles, and fall down at my feet,
begging me to deliver them from their husbands. They would say, 'You
are sent by our holy mother, Mary, to help us;' and do not think me
hard-hearted when I tell you that I often said to them, 'Loose your
hold of my feet; I did not come to deliver you from your husbands, but
to show you how to be so good that you can be happy with them.'
Weeping, they would say, 'Have mercy on us; if not, we must kill
ourselves.' I had no fear of their doing that, so I would seat them at
my side, and tell them of my own dear father,--how good he was; but he
was always _obeyed_. They would say, 'We could obey a good man.' 'But I
am very sure you would not have been willing to obey my father.'

"It is one thing to pray for our degraded sisters while in America, but
quite another to raise them from their low estate. When I saw their
true character, I found that I needed a purer, holier love for them
than I had ever possessed. It was good for me to see that _I_ could do
nothing, and it was comforting to think that Jesus had talked with just
such females as composed the mass around me, and that afterwards many
believed because of one such woman."

Sometimes the revilings of the women were almost equalled by similar
talk among the men, as in a village of Gawar, where they said, "We
would not receive a priest or deacon here who could not swear well, and
lie too." In the same village, a young man spoke favorably of Mr.
Coan's preaching in Jeloo. Instantly a woman called out, "And have you
heard those deceivers preach?" "Yes," was the reply, "both last year
and this, and hope I shall again." Hearing this, her eyes flashed, and
drawing her brawny arms into the form of a dagger, with a vengeful
thrust of her imaginary weapon, she cried, "The blood of thy father
smite thee, thou Satan!" and dreadful was the volley of oaths and
curses that followed. Yet she was only a fair specimen of the village.

We of the calmer West do not know what it is to have a mob of such
women come forth in their wrath. In one town was a virago, who often,
single-handed, faced down and drove off Moslem tax-gatherers when the
men fled in terror. No one who has ever heard the stinging shrillness
of their tongues, or looked on their frenzied gestures, can ever forget
them, or wonder why the ancients painted the Furies in the form of
women. Words cannot portray the excitement of such a scene. The hair of
the frantic actors is streaming in the wind; stones and clods seem only
embodiments of the unearthly yells and shrieks that fill the air; and
yet it was such beings that grace made to be "last at the cross and
first at the sepulchre."

The East is notorious for profanity, and among the Nestorians women
were as profane as men. The pupils in the Seminary at first used to
swear, and use the vilest language on the slightest provocation. Poor,
blind Martha, on her death bed, in her own father's house, was
constantly cursed and reviled. She was obliged sometimes to cover her
head with the quilt, and stop her ears, to secure an opportunity to
pray for her profane and abusive brother; and though, in such
circumstances, she died before her prayers were answered, yet they were
heard, for he afterwards learned to serve his sister's God. "Do you
think people will believe me," said a pupil to her teacher, who was
reproving her for profanity, "if I do not repeat the name of God very
often?"

Lying was almost as common as profanity, and stealing quite as
prevalent as either. It was a frequent remark, "We all lie here; do you
think we could succeed in business without it?"

In the early days of the Seminary, nothing was safe except under lock
and key. Sometimes there seemed to be a dawn of improvement, and next,
all the buttons would be missing from the week's washing, and the
teacher was pretty sure to find that her own pupils were the thieves.
Miss Rice tells of one, amply supplied with every thing by her parents,
yet noted for her thefts. Indeed, sons and daughters were alike trained
to such practices. In 1843, Miss Fiske could not keep a pin in her
pin-cushion; little fingers took them as often as she turned away, and
lest she should tempt them to lie, she avoided questioning them, unless
her own eye had seen the theft. No wonder she wrote, "I feel very weak,
and were it not that Christ has loved these souls, I should be
discouraged; but he has loved them, and he loves them still." If the
pins were found with the pupils, the answer was ready--"We found them,"
or, "You gave them to us;" and nothing could be proved. But one summer
evening, just before the pupils were to pass through her room to their
beds on the flat roof, knowing that none of that color could be
obtained elsewhere, the teacher put six black pins in her cushion, and
stepped out till they had passed. As soon as they were gone, she found
the pins gone too, and at once called them back. She told them of her
loss, but none knew any thing about it. She showed them that no one
else had been there, and therefore they must know. Six pairs of little
hands were lifted up, as they said, "God knows we have not got them;"
but this only called forth the reply, "I think that God knows you have
got them," and she searched each one carefully, without finding them.
She then proposed to kneel down where they stood, and ask God to show
where they were, adding, "He may not see it best to show me now, but he
will do it some time." She laid the matter before the Lord, and, just
as they rose from their knees, remembered that she had not examined
their cloth caps. She now proposed to examine them, and one pair of
hands went right up to her cap. Of course she was searched first, and
there were the six pins, so nicely concealed in its folds that nothing
was visible but their heads. This incident did much good. The pupils
looked on the discovery as an answer to prayer, and so did their
teacher. They began to be afraid to steal when God so exposed their
thefts, and she was thankful for an answer so immediate. The offender
is now a pious, useful woman.

Yet some were so accustomed to falsehood, that, even after conversion,
it cost a struggle to be entirely truthful, and missionaries could see,
as Christians in our own land cannot see, why an apostle should write
to the regenerate, "Lie not one to another." The teacher labored to
impress her charge with the sinfulness of such conduct, but in the
revival of 1846, they seemed to learn more in one hour than she had
taught them in the two years preceding. Yet that faithful instruction
was not lost. It was the fuel which the Spirit of God kindled into a
flame. The sower has not labored in vain because the seed lies for days
buried in the soil.

In that revival, the awakened hastened to restore what they had stolen.
One came to Miss Fiske in great distress, saying, "Do you remember the
day, two years ago, when Sawdee's new shoes were taken from the
door?"--They leave off their shoes on entering a house.--"Yes, I
recollect it." "You thought a Moslem woman stole them, but"--and here
her feelings overcame her--"I took them, for I was angry with her, and
threw them into a well. What shall I do? I know Christ will not receive
me till I have confessed it to her. Can I go and confess it to-night,
and pray with her, and then may I go and work for money to replace
them?" She paid for the shoes, and became a bright light in her dark
home. There were many such cases, and from that time the teachers had
little trouble from theft. New pupils would sometimes steal, but the
older ones were ready to detect them, and show them a more excellent
way. Miss Fiske says of this, "The frequent visits of the Holy Spirit
have removed an evil which mocked my efforts. God made me feel my utter
helplessness, and then he did the work." That same term there was but
one case of theft in the Male Seminary, though formerly it was not
infrequent there.

In reference to transgressions of the seventh commandment, much detail
is not expedient. It is sufficient to say, that the first impressions
of earlier missionaries respecting the purity of Nestorian women were
not sustained by subsequent acquaintance. The farther they went beneath
the surface of things, the more they found of corruption. One might go
to Persia supposing that he knew a good deal of the degradation of the
people, and yet really know very little of the pit into which he was
descending.

A seminary gathering together such a company of young females, was a
new thing in Persia, and it will readily be conceived that amid a
Mohammedan community it was an object of peculiar solicitude to its
guardians. Many a Moslem eye was on those girls, as the results of a
religious education appeared in their manners, their dress, and
personal beauty. In one instance, an officer of government attempted to
take one of them to his harem, but God thwarted his purpose through the
interference of the English consul. Similar dangers threatened from
other sources, and eternity alone will reveal the burden of care and
watchfulness they involved. If only one pupil had been led astray, what
a hopeless loss of confidence would have followed among the people! In
the early years of the institution, when parents could hardly be
persuaded to trust their daughters out of their sight for a single
night, it might have broken up the whole enterprise; but in this
matter, also, God showed himself the hearer of prayer, and not one
danger of the kind was ever allowed to be more than an occasion for
renewed intercession, and more confiding dependence on his gracious
care. Sometimes, in vacation, it seemed strange to its guardians that
they had no longer a fold to protect, and could retire to rest free
from that anxious solicitude that sometimes drove sleep from their eyes.

It is not in the beginning of missionary life that all these things are
understood: they are learned gradually. This is wisely ordered, that
the missionary be not discouraged at the outset. Strength is given each
day to meet new trials as they come, and it would not be leaving a
truthful impression on the reader, if, at the close of this description
of what has been, it should not be recorded, to the praise of divine
grace, that a great change has taken place. There are many to-day to
whom the missionary may say, "Such were some of you; but ye are washed,
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God." Not only do some who stole steal
no more, but many young husbands now provide separate apartments for
the bride whom they bring home, and they need all that the word "home"
expresses to describe their mutual joy. The hour of suffering is
anticipated by a considerate affection, and that affection is so
reciprocated that many hearts safely trust in the daughters of the
Female Seminary of Oroomiah.

It is not merely education that has wrought this change, but a Bible
education. Paul cared for just such converts, and left divine teachings
for the use of those who should come after him in the same work. As a
young wife said to her teacher one day, after she had been talking with
her about her new duties, "I thank you; you are right. I am glad that
you have told me what Paul says, and I think that God has told you the
same thing." Many a graduate might say, with another, "I thank you for
your instructions, and as I look on the trials of ungodly families,
every drop of my blood thanks you."




CHAPTER II.


MARBEESHOO.

VISIT THERE.--NATIVE ACCOMMODATIONS.--HOSPITALITY OF SENUM.--MOHAMMEDAN
WOMEN.

The following account of Miss Fiske's visit to Marbeeshoo, in November,
1847, presents a vivid picture of things as they were, and the
Christian thoughtfulness of one who had learned a more excellent way:--

"As we sat at dinner a few days since, Mr. Stocking proposed that I
spend the Sabbath with him at Marbeeshoo. I said at once, 'I cannot
leave my school.' But he forthwith called Sanum, Sarah, and Moressa, my
oldest girls, and asked them if they did not love souls in Marbeeshoo
well enough to take good care of school, and let me be absent till
Tuesday. They were delighted to think of my going where no missionary
lady had ever been, and said, 'We will do all we can for the girls, and
we will pray for you, if you will only go and try to do those poor
women good.' It was hardly two o'clock before we were on horseback.
Marbeeshoo is about fifty miles from us, and in Turkey. Two years ago
it was said 'no lady should try to go there,' but brother Stocking
thought not so now; and I was willing to follow where he led,
especially as a former pupil had recently settled there. We must be out
over night, but we thought best not to spend it in a tent, on account
of the cold. Near sunset we came to Mawana, a village of mud huts. We
went to the house of the head man, who joyfully welcomed us to his
house. It consisted of a single low room, inhabited by at least a score
of men, women, and children. They came in one by one, but already the
hens had found their resting place, evidently no strangers there.
Several lambs had been brought into their corner, and three or four
calves, each had his couch of grass. Our horses had been arranged for
the night on the other side of a partition wall, some three feet high.
When all were within, the coarse bread and sour milk were brought out
for supper. Then Mr. Stocking read from the Bible, and talked, and
prayed with the numerous family, and the women sat around me, while I
tried to do them good, till about ten o'clock. At that time, the mother
of the family rose, saying, 'Now we will settle it.' I listened to hear
the settlement of some family quarrel, but to my surprise her meaning
was, 'We will settle where to lie down for the night;' and as I looked
over the room I thought, surely some little skill in settling is
needed, if we are all to sleep here. But soon she took out three of the
children to an empty manger, where she put new hay, and quickly settled
them; they were covered with an old rug, and at once fell fast asleep.
She then returned, saying, 'Now there is room for our guests,' and
brought a piece of cotton cloth, which she said was _all_ for me. In a
short time, one and another was fast asleep. They lay on mats, without
either bed or pillow, and the divers breathing or snoring of men, and
calves, and lambs was soon heard, all mingled together.

"I found myself sitting alone with the old lady, and so, putting my
carpet bag under my head, and drawing my shawl about me, I lay down
too. This was a signal for extinguishing the light; but before that, I
had marked a road, where I thought I might possibly pass out between
the sleepers should I need fresh air. There was no sleep for me; and
the swarms of fleas made me so uncomfortable, that before midnight I
found my way out, and remained as long as the cold air of that November
night allowed, and so passed out and in several times during the night.
I watched long for the morning, and at length it came, and the
sleepers, one by one, arose. They all hoped I had slept well, and I
could not tell them I had not, for they had given me the best they had,
and told me again and again how glad they were that I had come, and
hoped their house would always be mine when I came that way. There was
a proposal for breakfast, but the morning was so fine that I suggested
to Mr. Stocking that a carpet bag sometimes furnished a very good
breakfast.

"We did enjoy that ride very much after a sleepless night. The road was
often only a narrow path on the edge of a precipice, and such as I had
never passed over before; but I thanked my God at every step for the
pure, fresh air of those mountains. As we approached the village, hid
away among the cliffs, and in such a narrow spot that houses were
placed one above another on the terraced hill-side, one of our
attendants insisted on riding forward, and we were not greatly
surprised to find a crowd ready to welcome us. One and another cried
out, 'Senum wants you to go to Zechariah's.' So to Zechariah's we went,
and there was my pupil, waiting with open arms to receive me. She took
me from my horse, exclaiming, 'Is it true that you have come? I have
heard where you staid last night, and I know you did not sleep at all.
Come right into my room; there are no fleas here; I have a bed that is
clean, that I keep for the missionaries. I will spread it for you, and
you shall sleep before any body comes to see you.' The bed was spread;
she gave me milk to drink (Judg, iv. 19), and then said, 'I will guard
the door so no one shall disturb you, and I will wake you for dinner.'
I was soon asleep, and slept two long hours before she woke me.

"When she did, she came with her tray in her hand, where was the
freshly baked bread, the nicely cooked little fish, which, she said,
'my husband caught expressly for you and Mr. Stocking,' honey from
their own hives, milk from their flock, and other simple refreshments.
All was neatly prepared, and we were so thankful for the dear child's
attentions! When dinner was over, she said, 'Now I want you to see the
women; but they must not come here, for they will leave fleas, and you
will not be able to sleep tonight. There is another large room the
other side, and we will have meeting there this afternoon.'

"About three o'clock I met there more than one hundred poor women, who
of course must ask many questions before their curiosity would be
satisfied. They finally became quiet, however, and I could tell them of
the Saviour, who had loved to teach just such needy ones as they were.
I enjoyed the afternoon very much; it was all the more precious for the
discomforts of the night, and the comforts of Senum's house. The next
day was the Sabbath, and most of the time I was in the 'large room,'
where the women came freely. In the afternoon about three hundred were
present. I was weary at night, but Senum's care, with the thought of
the privilege of meeting so many who had never before heard of Christ
as the _only_ Saviour, made me forget it all."

Painful as is this view of woman as she was among the Nestorians, her
condition was still worse among the Mohammedans; not, indeed, in
matters of outward comfort, for the wealth of Persia is in Moslem
hands, and they occupy every position of rank or authority in the land.
But in all that pertains to morality and religion, they stand on a
lower level.

The Nestorian woman may not have known what was contained in the Bible,
yet she knew that it was the word of God, and was ready to receive all
its teachings as of divine authority. To her Moslem sister it is not
only an unknown book, but one she is taught to regard as superseded by
the Koran.

Although the Nestorian woman knew nothing of spiritual worship, yet she
regarded the Lord's day as set apart for his service. The Moslem, on
the other hand, regards it like any other day of the week, and exalts
her Friday to the place that of right belongs to the Sabbath of the
Lord.

In all her degradation, the Nestorian woman reverenced the name of
Jesus as her God. True, she had no correct idea of salvation or
redeeming love; yet even a blind attachment to that sacred name is not
without its reward. She may have fallen very low, but there was a power
even in her ignorant adherence to Christ, that kept her from falling to
the level of those who renounced him for the Arabian impostor. This was
seen especially in the blessings that came to her through the
institution of Christian marriage, while others groaned under the
debasing influence of a sensual polygamy. The wretchedness this
occasioned is a topic too large and too painful to dwell upon here. But
the wide gulf that separated the two classes was clearly seen, when on
her Sabbath the missionary could speak to the Nestorian of her Saviour
out of her Bible, while the Moslem knows nothing beyond her kohl and
her henna,[1] her dresses and her follies, and other topics at once
belittling, debasing, and corrupting. [Footnote 1: Kohl is a black
powder used to paint the eyebrows and eyelashes. Henna is a plant
employed to stain the nails, and sometimes the entire hand and part of
the foot, of a dark orange hue.]




CHAPTER III.


THE SCENE OF THE NARRATIVE.

NESTORIANS.--THEIR COUNTRY.--FRONTISPIECE.--LAKE.--PLAIN.--FORDING THE
SHAHER.--MISSION PREMISES IN OROOMIAH.

We will now glance at the scene of the events to be narrated, as it may
not be familiar to every reader. To write of woman in Persia would
embrace the whole empire as the field of inquiry; for the existence of
woman is coextensive with the population. But "Woman and her Saviour in
Persia" confines our attention to those who have been taught the truth
as it is in Jesus; for when Christ sent forth Paul to preach his gospel
to the Gentiles, it was that they might receive forgiveness of sins,
and inheritance among them who are sanctified by faith that is in him;
and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? Our
theme, then, confines us to the Nestorians, who number about one
hundred thousand souls. About two thirds of these live in Turkey; but
the following pages relate principally to those residing in Persia, and
hence the title of the volume.

This people inhabit, along with Koords and other races, the territory
extending from the western shore of the Lake of Oroomiah to the eastern
bank of the Tigris. It includes the Persian province of Oroomiah, and
both the eastern and western slope of Central Koordistan. The most
inaccessible recesses of the Koordish Mountains have been their refuge
for centuries. The whole region extends across four degrees of
longitude, with a varying breadth of from one to two degrees of
latitude. Attention will be called especially to the city of Oroomiah
and the villages around it. The plain of that name is seventy-five
miles long and from twelve to twenty miles in width, containing more
than a thousand square miles. It is dotted with perhaps three hundred
villages, the population varying, according to the size of the village,
from less than one hundred to more than a thousand inhabitants.

The frontispiece gives a view of this plain, from the roof of the
mission premises at Seir, one thousand feet above the city. The lofty
Wolf mountain appears on the right, and the high range west of the
narrowest part of the lake on the left. The lake itself is seen beyond
the plain at the foot of the mountains which rise abruptly from its
eastern shore. The distance makes it seem much narrower than it is, for
while one hundred miles in length, it is not far from thirty miles in
breadth. Its surface is forty-one hundred feet above the sea, and four
hundred feet below the city of Oroomiah. No living thing exists in its
waters, which are both salt and bituminous.

The plain is more crowded with villages than here represented, and each
one is made conspicuous by its grove of trees, as well as its houses.
The city appears prominent at the foot of the hill, though six miles
distant from the spectator. It is in the same latitude with Richmond,
Virginia, and contains about thirty-five thousand souls. The plain
slopes up very gradually from the lake, and Mount Seir rises, behind
our point of view, two thousand eight hundred and thirty-four feet
above the city. Farther west, the summits of Central Koordistan rise,
range above range, to the height of seventeen thousand feet.

We pass down from Seir to the city by a carriage road, now by the side
of vineyards, and now near fields of wheat and clover, diversified by
orchards and gardens of cucumbers. All of these, and indeed the whole
plain, owes its fertility to canals, led out from the rivers which
descend from the mountains. Willow, poplar, and sycamore trees line
these watercourses. All kinds of fruit trees abound, while the rich
verdure of the plain contrasts strikingly with the bare declivities
that overlook it from every side. The villages on either hand are
clusters of mud houses crowded together for greater security, and every
tree in their groves has to be watered as regularly as the fields and
gardens.

Before reaching the city we must ford the Shaher, a river that, though
frequently all drained off into the fields in summer, is very deep in
early spring, when fatal accidents sometimes occur. It was here that,
in May, 1846, Miss Fiske narrowly escaped a watery grave. On her way to
Seir, with Mr. and Mrs. Stoddard, the horse lay down in the middle of
the river, leaving her to be swept off by the rapid current. Mr.
Stoddard hastened to the rescue; but the moment his steed was loose, he
rushed to attack the horse of Mrs. Stoddard, and, as Miss Fiske rose to
the surface, she caught a glimpse of Mr. Stoddard looking back on the
battle, and his wife held between the combatants by her riding habit,
which had caught on the saddle; but while she looked the dress gave
way, and Mrs. Stoddard was safe. She herself had sufficient presence of
mind not to breathe under water, and, on coming up for the fifth time,
floated into shallow water near the opposite shore, forty rods below
the ford, just as Mr. Stoddard reached the same point.

From the river, beautiful orchards line the road on both sides to the
city gate, of which a representation is given on page 154; and about
one eighth of a mile inside of that, where the Nestorian and Moslem
sections of the city join each other, stand the mission premises, built
of sun-dried bricks, like the houses around them.

They occupy a little more than an acre, in the form of a parallelogram;
and if, for the sake of clearness, we compare it to a window, the
bottom of the lower sash is represented by a long, earthen-roofed
structure, half of it a dwelling house, once the home of Dr. Grant, but
now the dwelling of Dr. Wright. It is the building on the left of the
engraving at page 131, and the round object occupying the nearest
window in the second story is a clock, the gift of a well-known
merchant of Boston, brother of one of our deceased missionaries. Let
our lower sash be filled by two large panes in modern style, and these
are represented by two courts surrounded by pavements, and shaded by
large sycamore trees. In the engraving just referred to, the spectator
stands in one of these courts, looking over a low wall into the other.
For the top of the lower sash, we have another building, extending
across the premises. The left half of this appearing on page 131,
behind the trees, and on the opposite page represented without them,
was the first home of Dr. Perkins, and is now the Female Seminary; but
repeated additions and modifications have been required to transform a
building, originally erected for a private residence, into a structure
suitable for such a school.

Miss Fiske first taught in one room of a building to the right, which
does not appear in the engraving, though a part of it is seen on page
131; then, as the school grew larger, another room was added, and when
those quarters became too strait, this building was remodelled for its
use.

[Illustration: Female seminary at Oboomiah]

As we shall have a good deal to do with the Seminary in these pages,
let us become familiar with its home. Between the central door and the
one on the left, those three windows belong to a large room once used
as a chapel, but since then as a guest room for the accommodation of
the women whom we shall see coming here to learn of Jesus. In this
room, Nestorian converts first partook of the Lord's supper with the
missionaries. The left of the three windows directly over these, with
the rose-bush in it, belongs to Miss Fiske's private room, and the
other two to her sitting room. This the pupils have named "The Bethel,"
and it is so connected that the teacher can step into recitation room,
dining room, or kitchen, as occasion requires. The last named apartment
is on the rear of the building. The largest recitation room, by a
curious necessity, is in the form of a carpenter's wooden square, with
the teacher's desk in the angle between the two compartments. One of
these is on the back side of the building, out of sight; the other,
extending across the end, is represented in front by the window at the
extreme left.

Over the central door is, first, the steward's room, and then closets
over that; for one of the results of the successive alterations and
additions is, that parts of the building are two, and other parts
three, stories high. Miss Rice's room is directly over the door on the
left hand, as the steward's is here. The three windows in the second
story, to the right of the two central closets, open into the dining
room, and one of the girls' rooms occupies the corner beyond. On the
lower floor, going from the central door to the right, is first a
closet, and then a large guest room for visitors; and underneath the
whole is the cellar where the boys' school was first taught, that has
since grown into the Male Seminary at Seir.

The rooms of the pupils are mostly in the rear. These are large enough
to accommodate six or eight occupants, as the Oriental style of living
does not require so much furniture as ours. In each room is a member of
the senior class, who exercises a kind supervision over her younger
companions. Every room has two or more closets, designed especially,
but not exclusively, for devotion; and some sleep in the recitation
rooms, as such a use of them at night does not interfere with other
uses during the day.

But we had almost forgotten our imaginary window, the upper sash of
which remains to be described. In that we have only one pane,
representing a large court, with the chapel on one side, and the wash
rooms and other outbuildings of the Seminary on the other. This court
is more garden-like than the other two, has fewer trees, and a long
arbor, covered with grape vines, forms a covered walk in the middle of
it. It was in this arbor that the tables were spread for the collation
in 1850, to be described hereafter. This court is invaluable as a place
for out-door exercise, where the pupils may enjoy the fresh air, free
from the annoyances and exposures of the streets in an Oriental city.

A stream is led through all these courts in a channel lined with stone.
Its murmuring waters are a pleasant sound at early dawn, when they
mingle sweetly with the morning song of birds. Here many Nestorian
women come to fill their earthen pitchers, as the water is not carried
through the courts of Christian houses. The mission premises belonged
to Mohammedans; and here, in the shade of the tall sycamores, Mrs.
Grant used to sit, with her children, and talk with the women who came
for water. Her successors find time to continue the same practice, and
as the natives let down their pitchers (Gen. xxiv. 18), and now and
then one is broken (Eccles. xii. 6), realize that they live in a Bible
land, and seek to make its daughters feel the power of Bible truth.

The Seminary is outwardly very humble, and would contrast very
unfavorably with the stately edifices of similar institutions at home.
But we shall see that the Saviour has not disdained to honor it with
his presence, and its earthen floors and mud walls[1] have witnessed
many a gracious visit of the Holy Spirit. Though the glory of Lebanon
has not come unto it, yet has God himself beautified the place and made
it glorious. [Footnote 1: The pilasters in the engraving are made of
brick, and not only support the large timbers of the roof, but, by
their greater projection, protect the softer material of the wall from
the weather. The whole is plastered outside with a mixture of lime and
clay, that requires frequent renewal.]




CHAPTER IV.


MISSIONARY EDUCATION.

OBJECT--MEANS--STUDY OF BIBLE--PUPILS KEPT IN SYMPATHY WITH THE
PEOPLE.--PEOPLE STIMULATED TO EXERTION AND SELF-DEPENDENCE--TAHITI.
--MADAGASCAR.

Let us now look at some of the principles on which missionary education
was here carried on, that we may see what kind of an instrumentality
God was pleased to crown with his blessing.

The Seminary was founded, not to polish the manners, refine the taste,
or impart accomplishments, but to renovate the character by a permanent
inward change. The main dependence for bringing this about was the
power of the Holy Ghost--the only power that can impart or maintain
spiritual life in man. This dependence was expressed in fervent prayer,
offered for years amid discouragement and opposition, and, instead of
ceasing when an answer came, only offered by a greater number. It is
worthy of note that some of the seasons of greatest revival were
preceded by disasters that threatened the very existence of the mission.

The principal text book was the word of God; partly, as we shall see,
through a providential necessity, but chiefly because it was God's own
chosen instrumentality for the salvation of our race; and it was
eminently adapted for the education of such a people. The teachers
could say, with a beloved co-laborer on Mount Lebanon, "To the
Scriptures we give increased attention; they do more to unfold and
expand the intellectual powers, and to create careful and honest
thinkers, than all the sciences we teach." It is also most efficient in
freeing mind and heart from those erroneous views that are opposed to
its teachings; and actual trial developed a richness and fulness of
practical adaptation to the work that astonished even those who already
knew something of its value. Its precepts and instructions were also
clothed with power: requirements and counsels which from the missionary
had only awakened opposition, coming from the Bible were received as
messages from heaven. Said a Nestorian to a missionary who had been
speaking to him the words of God, "His words grew very beautiful while
we were talking." In reference to every suspicious novelty or
distasteful duty, the Bible was the ultimate appeal. The missionary
could say to them as Paul did to an early church, "When ye received the
word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of
man, but, as it is in truth, the word of God, which effectually worketh
also in you that believe." Besides, those thus educated were to teach
others, and needed to be thoroughly furnished from the divine oracles
with the truths they were to impart. It is not strange, then, that in
the Seminary the Bible was studied both doctrinally and historically;
that they had a system of theology and tables of Scripture chronology;
that biblical biography and geography were regular studies; that
different portions of Scripture occupied different years; and that,
instead of Butler's Analogy and Wayland's Moral Science, were the
Epistles to the Romans and Hebrews studied with all the accurate
analysis and thoroughness bestowed elsewhere upon the classics. Such
teaching would yield good fruit any where, and the good seed found good
ground in Persia.

So much for the instrumentality; but, then, influences are every where
at work to check the growth of the plant of grace, and these must be
overcome. There is danger that missionary education may be made worse
than useless by allowing the sympathies of pupils to become alienated
from the masses around them. Children from heathen families may be
puffed up with an idea of superiority to their own people. Their taste
may be cultivated so as to render disgust with heathen degradation
stronger than the Christian desire to do them good. A foreign language,
foreign dress, and foreign habits may widen the gulf that separates
them from their people, till, what with an undue exaltation on the one
hand and a suspicious jealousy on the other, usefulness is well nigh
impossible. But here such tendencies have been carefully watched and
guarded against. The pupils have been trained with the view of doing
good among their own people. No line of separation has been drawn in
dress or diet, furniture or household arrangements. While taught to be
neat, the goal kept ever in sight has been, a happy usefulness in their
own homes, the elevation of the mass just as fast as was consistent
with mutual love and sympathy, the people not feeling that their
daughters were denationalized, and they not lifted out of sympathy with
the homes they were to bless. Hence, even in 1844, we find the mud
floor of the small school room covered with straw mats; one window, of
oiled paper, admitting the light; and a brick stove, with a few rude
benches, its only furniture. In the other room, where the cooking was
done, the pupils ate, and spent their time out of school. Here were two
windows of like material; and besides the mats, the floor was covered
with a thick felt, on which they spread their beds at night. A table
was provided, covered with a coarse blue and white check. There were
also a set of coarse plates and a few other dishes, but no knives nor
forks. They eat their soup with wooden spoons, and their other food
with their hands. Their clothing, like their cooking, was mostly in
native style; and they were taught to make it for themselves.

Another object in missionary education is, to do enough to stimulate to
exertion, and yet not foster inefficiency or undue dependence. The
Nestorians are poor, but doing too much for them may make them still
poorer. They must be brought to sustain their own institutions at the
earliest possible moment, and their training should keep that end in
view. Hence Miss Fiske writes, "At first I was inclined to do more for
them than afterwards, and at length settled down on this principle,--to
give my pupils nothing for common use which they could not secure in
their own homes by industry and economy. So I furnished only such
articles as they could buy in the city. I preferred that they should
make all their own clothing, and may have grieved friends sometimes by
declining clothing which they offered to send for them. We chose rather
to spend our own strength in training them to provide for themselves. I
do not mean that I am not glad to see foreign articles in Oroomiah; but
we were in danger of fostering a more expensive taste than they would
have the means of gratifying. Our great object is to raise up the most
efficient coadjutors from among the people, and they must labor among
their neighbors as of them, and not as foreigners, and be prepared to
carry forward the work when we leave it.

"At first we clothed as well as boarded our pupils, and then led them
to provide one article after another, till they clothed themselves. It
was delightful to see the interest parents began to take in clothing
their daughters, in order to send them to school after they provided
their own garments. They took better care of them, and so learned to
take better care of other things. Since I left, Miss Rice has advanced
farther in this matter; and last year most of the pupils paid a trifle
for tuition, amounting in all to over twenty dollars. It often costs
more than the amount to secure these pittances; but it does our pupils
good, and we spared no pains to this end."

It is touching to see the spirit manifested by some parents in this
connection. One very poor widow, whose little field of grain had been
devoured by locusts, brought a large squash and a quantity of raisins
which she had earned by laboring for others--a self-denial almost equal
to her previous giving up of her only bed for the use of a daughter in
the Seminary, which she brought, saying, "I can sleep on the _hasseer_
[rush mat], if you will only receive her into school."

It certainly is not benevolence to do for others what they can do as
well for themselves, or to do for them in a way to diminish either
their ability or disposition to provide for themselves. Missionaries
may be in danger of staying too long and doing too much for a people,
rather than of leaving them too soon after the gospel has taken root
among them.

Native pastors came into being at Tahiti simply because the French
drove off the missionaries. They were not ordained before, but at once
proved themselves equal to the work that Providence assigned them; and
after twenty years of French misrule, in spite of Popery on the one
hand and brandy and vice on the other, there are now more church
members under these native pastors than ever before.

Twenty years ago the European shepherds were driven from Madagascar,
and a few lambs left in the midst of wolves; but God raised up native
pastors, and, instead of tens of Christians under Europeans, there are
now hundreds, yea, thousands, under these natives.[1] Those
missionaries are wise who aim constantly at results like these; and it
is in such a spirit that work has been done among the women of Persia.
[Footnote: Rev. Dr. Tidman, secretary of the London Missionary Society,
in "Conference of Missions at Liverpool," 1860, p. 225.]




CHAPTER V.


BEGINNINGS.

MRS. GRANT.--EARLY LIFE AND LABORS.--GREAT INFLUENCE.--HER SCHOOL.--HER
PUPILS.--CHANGED INTO BOARDING SCHOOL.--GETTING PUPILS.--CARE OF
THEM.--DIFFICULTIES FROM POVERTY OF PEOPLE.--PAYING FOR FOOD OF
SCHOLARS.--POSITION OF UNMARRIED MISSIONARY LADIES.--BOOKS.

We have seen that among the Nestorians it was counted a disgrace for a
female to learn to read; and even now, in the districts remote from
missionary influence, a woman who reads, and especially one who writes,
is an object of public odium, if not of persecution. How, then, could
the Nestorians be induced to send their daughters to schools? What
overcame this strong national prejudice? These questions open a
delightful chapter in divine providence, showing how wonderfully God
adapts means to ends, even on opposite sides of the globe.

A Christian gentleman in the State of New York, on the death of his
wife's sister, adopted into his own family her infant child. She was
trained to the exercise of a practical Christian benevolence, and her
superior mind was improved by an education remarkably thorough. In the
classics and mathematics she exhibited uncommon aptitude, and made
unusual attainments; so that it was truly said of her, "Perhaps no
female missionary ever left our country with a mind so well disciplined
as Mrs. Judith S. Grant." She sailed for Persia, July 11, 1835; and
there she displayed rare ability in acquiring the language of the
people. The Turkish she soon spoke familiarly. In a short time she read
the ancient Syriac, and acquired the spoken language with at least
equal facility. Previous even to these acquisitions, she taught Mar
Yohanan and others English; and as they noticed the ease with which she
turned to her Greek Testament, whenever ours seemed to differ from the
ancient Syriac, they regarded her with feelings in which it would be
hard to say whether wonder, love, or reverence was the strongest. Some
might have cried out, when her fine intellect and rare acquirements
were devoted to the missionary work, "Why is this waste of the ointment
made?" But had her friends searched the round world for a sphere of
greatest usefulness, they could not have selected one where her rare
gifts would have accomplished so much; and when such a woman manifested
deep solicitude for the education of her sex, ancient prejudice fell
before her. She taught her own domestics to read. She sedulously
cultivated the acquaintance of both Christian and Mohammedan women; nor
did she rest till she had opened a school for girls in what is now Mr.
Coan's barn. Such was her zeal, that when her health would not allow
her to go there, she taught the pupils in her own apartment. She
commenced with only four scholars, but at the same time prepared the
maps for Parley's Geography in modern Syriac, and the old map of
Oroomiah, so familiar to the readers of the Missionary Herald, was her
handiwork. Nor was her usefulness confined to her school room. Hers was
the privilege of creating such a public sentiment in favor of the
education of woman, that her successors have found the gates wide open
before them, and often wondered at the extent and permanence of the
influence she acquired. There is no one topic of which Miss Fiske has
spoken to the writer so frequently, and with such enthusiasm, as the
great work that Mrs. Grant accomplished for woman in Persia, during her
short missionary life. She was the laborious and self-denying pioneer
in female education, and every year thus far has brought to light new
evidence of her extensive usefulness. It was no empty compliment, when
the venerable Mar Elias said, "We will bury her in our church, where
none but very holy men are laid. As she has done so much for us, we
want the privilege of digging her grave with our own hands."

Miss Fiske writes, shortly after her arrival, "The first Syriac word I
learned was 'daughter;' and as I can now use the verb 'to give,' I
often ask parents to give me their daughters. Some think that I cannot
secure boarding scholars, but Mrs. Grant got day scholars; and when I
hear men, women, and children say, 'How she loved us!' I want to love
them too. I mean to devote at least five years to the work of trying to
gather girls into a boarding school, as Mrs. Grant desired to do. She
has gone to her rest. I wonder that I am allowed to take her place."
And again: "I am usually in school till three P.M., and then I go out
among the poor mothers till tea time. They often say to me, 'Mrs. Grant
did just as you do.' Her short life was a precious offering. I feel
each day more and more that I have entered into the labors of a
faithful servant of Christ."

Among the pupils of Mrs. Grant was Selby, of Oroomiah, who was
hopefully converted while teaching some day scholars connected with the
Seminary, in 1845. Raheel, (Rachel,) the wife of Siyad, the tailor
mentioned in the Memoir of Mr. Stoddard, was another. So were Sanum,
the wife of Joseph; Meressa, the wife of Yakob; and Sarah, the daughter
of Priest Abraham, and wife of Oshana, of whom we shall hear more
hereafter.

After the death of Mrs. Grant, January 14, 1839, the school was
continued under the charge of Mr. Holladay, who employed native
teachers to assist him, the ladies of the mission cooperating as they
could. It then passed into the hands of Dr. Wright, who had the care of
it when Miss Fiske arrived in Oroomiah, June 14, 1843. During all this
time it was only a day school, and contact with vice in the homes of
the pupils greatly hindered its usefulness. It was for this reason that
Miss Fiske was exceedingly anxious to make it a boarding school, so as
to retain the pupils continuously under good influences. But would they
be allowed to spend the night on the mission premises? This was doubted
by many, and all had their fears; yet in August an appropriation was
made for the support of six boarding pupils, who were to be entirely
under the control of the mission for three years. Some said they could
not be obtained for even one year, and not one of them would remain to
complete the three. Even Priest Abraham said, "I cannot bear the
reproach of having my daughter live with you." At that time, scarcely a
girl twelve years old could be found who was not betrothed; and years
were devoted to the preparation of a coarse kind of embroidery, a
certain amount of which must be ready for the wedding.

One day in August, Mar Yohanan said to Miss Fiske, "You get ready, and
I find girls." She devoted that month and the next to preparation for
her expected charge. But the day came for opening the school, and not
one pupil had been obtained. The teacher was feeling somewhat anxious,
when, from her window in the second story, she saw Mar Yohanan crossing
the court, with a girl in either hand. One of them was his own niece,
Selby, of Gavalan, seven years of age; the other, Hanee, of Geog Tapa,
about three years older. They were not very inviting in outward
appearance; but it did not take Miss Fiske long to reach the door,
where the bishop met her, and placing their little hands in hers, said,
in his broken English, "They be your daughters; no man take them from
your hand." She wrote to a friend an account of her success, adding, "I
shall be glad to give them to the Lord Jesus, and love to look on them
as the beginning of my dear school." These two pupils were supported by
ladies in Maiden, Massachusetts, and the number soon increased to six;
but fifteen days after, two of them, finding the gate open, suddenly
left for home. Their teacher did not think it advisable to follow them;
nor did she see them again till, ten years after, an invitation for a
reunion of all her scholars brought two whom she did not recognize. She
said, "Perhaps you were here under Mrs. Grant?" "No, we were your own
scholars for fifteen days, and we are very sorry we ran away." They are
now both useful Christians, and the places they left in 1843 were
speedily filled by others.

The care of the school was much more exhausting than its instruction.
When the teacher went out, and when she came in, she must take her
pupils with her, for she dared not leave them to themselves. Indeed, so
strong were the feelings of their friends, that they allowed them to
remain only on condition that they should lodge with or near their
teacher, and never go out except in her company. A native teacher
rendered such help as he could, needing much teaching himself; and
everything combined to make the principal feel that hers was to be a
work of faith and prayer. As the first of January approached, she
thought how sweet it would be to be remembered by dear friends at Mount
Holyoke; and when it came, she wrote to Miss Whitman, "In looking over
Miss Lyon's suggestions for the observance of the day, last year, I
cannot tell you how I felt as I read the words, 'Perhaps next new
year's day will find some of you on a foreign shore. If so, we pledge
you a remembrance within these consecrated walls.' I thought not then
that privilege would be mine; but since it is, I count your prayers the
greatest favor you can confer."

At Oroomiah, the missionaries met together for prayer at one o'clock,
and after that Dr. Perkins and Mr. Holladay preached to the assembled
Seminaries, while the ladies of the mission met separately for prayer;
then united intercession again closed the day. And they needed to wait
on God, for many difficulties combined to prevent success.

One was the poverty of the people. To say merely that they were poor
gives no true idea of their situation to an American reader. They were
extremely poor, and grinding oppression still keeps them so. In 1837,
Mr. Stocking found very few pupils in the schools wearing shoes, even
in the snow of midwinter; and one sprightly lad in Sabbath school had
nothing on but a coarse cotton shirt, reaching down to his knees, and a
skull cap, though the missionary required all his winter clothes,
besides a fire, to keep him comfortable.

Another evil growing out of their poverty was, that the missionairies,
in order to give the first impulse to education, resorted to some
measures which, after an interest was awakened, had to be laid aside in
order to increase it. For example, poor parents could not be persuaded
to earn bread for their children while they sent them to school; hence,
to get scholars at first, the mission furnished their daily bread; and
this having been done for the boys, had to be done for the girls also.
So, in the winter of 1843-44, twenty-five cents a week was paid to the
day scholars, the others having their board instead. But the current
having once commenced to flow in the new channel, such inducements
became more a hinderance than a help, and, in the spring of 1844, Miss
Fiske told her scholars that no more money would be paid for their
bread; and though some of the mission feared it would be necessary to
resume the practice, instead of that it was soon dropped in the other
Seminary also.

But the special difficulty growing out of the condition of woman in a
Mohammedan country demands our notice. Some may suppose that because
Miss Fiske and Miss Rice have succeeded so well, an unmarried lady from
this country has nothing to do but to go there and work like any one
else. This is not true; such a one cannot live by herself: her home
must be in some missionary family. She cannot go out alone, either
inside or outside of the city. In many things she needs to be shielded
from annoyances here unknown. And God provided all that the teachers of
the Seminary needed of such help; first, in the kind family of Mr.
Stocking, and, after his death, in the pleasant household of Mr.
Breath. Indeed, not one of all the missionary circle ever stood in need
of such a hint as Paul gave the church at Rome concerning the deaconess
of Cenchrea. As Miss Fiske says, playfully, "Whenever we went with them
to visit pupils at a distance, they always made us believe that it was
a great privilege to take us along;" and every lady who goes out, in a
similar way, to labor in the missionary field, will find just such
Christian kindness indispensable to her comfort and usefulness. In such
a sphere of action, a lady's dependence is her independence.

Another difficulty was the want of books. Such a thing as a school book
had been unknown among the Nestorians. The only ones to be had in 1843
were the Bible in ancient Syriac,--a language unintelligible to the
common people,--and the Gospel of John, with a few chapters of Genesis,
in the spoken language, besides a few tracts. Later came the Gospel of
Matthew, and, after that, the four Gospels. Mr. Stocking prepared a
Spelling Book of fifty-four pages, 8vo, a Mental Arithmetic of
twenty-four pages, and afterwards a larger Arithmetic. Mr. Coan, a
Scripture Spelling Book of one hundred and sixty pages, 8vo. Mr.
Stoddard issued a very full and complete Arithmetic for the older
scholars in 1856, but his System of Theology did not appear till after
his decease, in 1857. Dr. Wright was the author of a Geography of three
hundred and two pages, printed in 1849. Mr. Cochran's Scripture
Geography appeared in 1856, and Barth's Church History was published
the same year. But the book studied more than all others, and most
efficient in enlightening and elevating the people, was the Bible, of
which the New Testament appeared in 1846, and the Old in 1852. As many
as three hours a day were devoted to that; and no recollections of
missionary education in Persia are so pleasant as those of the Bible
lessons. The pupils have pleasant memorials of some of them in the form
of Bible maps, drawn by themselves, which now form a conspicuous and
appropriate ornament of their homes.

It may seem to some as though so much study of the Bible would make the
pupils weary of its sacred pages; but precisely the contrary was true.
When the New Testament, shortly after it was printed, was offered to
those who, during recreation hours, would commit to memory the
Scripture Catechism, containing more than one thousand texts, some
learned it in three weeks, and others in a longer time; and their joy
in receiving the reward could hardly be expressed. It was near the
close of the term, and some who had not quite finished when vacation
began remained to complete the task; for they said they could not go
home unless they carried with them their Testament; and the diligent
use they made of it afterwards showed that their desire was more than
mere covetousness. Even eighteen months after, writing to a friend in
America, they say, "Now we have each of us this blessed book, this
priceless blessing; would that in it we might all find salvation for
our souls. This book is from the unspeakable mercy of God; nor can we
ever repay our dear friends for it." I cannot forbear quoting here the
closing sentence of the letter--"Dear friend, the gentle love of the
Saviour be with you. AMEN."




CHAPTER VI.


THE SEMINARY.

MAE YOHANAN.--STANDARD OF SCHOLARSHIP.--ENGLISH BOOKS READ IN
SYRIAC.--EXPENSE.--FEELINGS OF PARENTS.--DOMESTIC DEPARTMENT.--DAILY
REPORTS.--PICTURE OF A WEEK DAY AND SABBATH.--"IF YOU LOVE ME, LEAN
HARD."--ESLI'S JOURNAL.--LETTER FROM PUPILS TO MOUNT HOLYOKE
SEMINARY.--FROM THE SAME TO MRS. C. T. MILLS.

When Mar Yohanan returned to Persia after his visit to the United
States, in 1843, Prince Malik Kassim Meerza, who could speak a little
English, asked him, "What are the wonders of America?" He replied, "The
blind they do see, the deaf they do hear, and the women they do read;
they be not beasts." Having visited Mount Holyoke Seminary, he often
said, "Of all colleges in America, Mount Holy Oke be the best; and when
I see such a school here, I die;" meaning that then he would be ready
to die. When he brought her first boarding scholars to Miss Fiske, he
said, "Now you begin Mount Holy Oke in Persia."

As she sought to reproduce one of our female seminaries, as far as was
possible in such different circumstances, it seems fitting to enter
somewhat into the minutiae of its arrangements.

Resemblance to similar institutions at home is not as yet to be sought
in the standard of scholarship, though that is rapidly advancing. In an
unevangelized community, the people move on a lower level. Not only
social condition, but morality and education, feel the want of the
elevating influence of the gospel. A seminary that commences operations
by teaching the alphabet must advance far, and climb high, before its
graduates will stand on a level with those whose pupils were familiar
with elementary algebra when they entered; yet its course of study may
be the best to secure the usefulness of its members in their own
community. If ragged village girls, untutored and uncombed, studying
aloud in school hours, and at recess leaping over the benches like wild
goats, now study diligently and in silence, move gently, and are
respectful to their teachers and kind to each other, a thorough
foundation has been laid; and if, in addition to that, the literary
attainments of the lower classes to-day exceed those of the pupils who
first left the school, the superstructure rises at once beautifully and
securely.

Leaving out the Bible,--which has been already spoken of,--to the
original reading, writing, singing, and composition; have been added by
degrees, grammar, geography, arithmetic, and theology; with oral
instruction in physiology, chemistry, natural philosophy, and astronomy.

But we should neither understand the attainments of the pupils, nor the
source of their marked ability as writers, did we not notice that, as a
reward for good conduct during the day, their teacher was accustomed to
translate orally to them, at its close, at first simple stories, and
then such volumes as Paradise Lost, The Course of Time, and Edwards's
History of Redemption. To these were added such practical works as
Pike's Persuasives to Early Piety, Pastor's Sketches, and Christ a
Friend; and the pupils understood books a great deal better in the free
translations thus given, than in the more exact renderings issued from
the press. Baxter's Saints' Rest, poured thus hot and glowing into a
Syriac mould, was more effective, at least for the time, than the same
after it had cooled and been laboriously filed into fidelity to the
original.

The Seminary was unlike similar schools at home in the matter of
expense. In 1853, the cost for each pupil was only about eighteen
dollars for the year, including rent, board, fuel, lights, and clothing
in part; and as this was paid by the American Board, education to the
people was without money and without price. We have already alluded to
the efforts of the teachers to train up the people to assume this
expense themselves.

Let us now trace the progress made in getting the pupils away from the
evil influences of their Persian homes. In 1843, besides her six
boarding pupils, Miss Fiske had a few day scholars; next year she had
still fewer; and the year after that, they were dropped entirely. Many
wished to send their daughters in this way; but she was decided in her
refusal to receive them, because thus only could the highest good of
the pupils be secured. At first, so great was her dread of home
influences, that she sought to retain them even in vacation; but she
soon saw that their health and usefulness, their sympathy with the
people, and the confidence of the people in them, required them to
spend a part of the year at home. This also gave their teachers a good
opportunity to become acquainted with their friends and neighbors, and
a door was opened for many delightful meetings with women, in which the
pupils rendered much assistance. It also secured the influence of the
parents in favor of what was for the good of their daughters, and made
them interested in the school. During Miss Fiske's entire residence in
Persia, fathers rarely disregarded her wishes concerning their
daughters in her school.

The only time that the teachers were ever reviled by a Nestorian father
was in the case of a village priest. He came one day to the Seminary to
see his daughter, and because she did not appear at once,--she was
engaged at the moment,--he cursed and swore, in a great passion, and
when she did come, carried her home. No notice was taken of it, and no
effort made to get her back; but three years after, the first
indications of his interest in religion were deep contrition for his
conduct on that occasion, and a letter full of grief for such treatment
of those who had come so far to tell him and his of Jesus. He at once
sent his daughter back, and three weeks after she too came to the
Saviour, and even begged, as a favor, to have the care of the rooms of
the teachers her father had reviled. Since then, the priest has written
no less than three letters, as he says, to be sure that so great
wickedness was really pardoned, it seemed to him so unpardonable.

The circumstances of the Seminary required a domestic department. It
was difficult, in Persia, to have girls only ten years old take charge
of household affairs; yet a beginning was made; but how much labor of
love and patience of hope it involved cannot be told to those who have
not tried it. At first, their one hour of work each day was more of a
hinderance than a help; but gradually, through watchfulness and much
effort, they were brought to do the whole without the least
interference with their regular duties in school. They were thus
trained to wait upon themselves, and so one deeply rooted evil of
Oriental life was corrected. This practice also relieved the school of
the bad influence of domestics, while it prepared the pupils for lives
of contented usefulness among a people so poor as the Nestorians.
Besides, in this way they acquired habits of regularity and punctuality
such as they never saw in their own homes.

But while these Western habits were inculcated, such of their own
customs as were harmless were left untouched. They were carefully
taught to do things in their own way, so as naturally and easily to
fall into their proper place at home.

At first, in their daily reports, Miss Fiske dared not ask any question
the answer to which she could not ascertain for herself. The earliest
she ventured to put was, whether they had combed their hair that day.
The pupils all stood up, and those who had attended to this duty were
asked to sit down. The faithful ones were delighted to comply. The
others, mortified and ashamed, remained standing; but if one of them
tried to sit down, a glance of the eye detected her. This simple method
laid a foundation for truthfulness and self-respect; and from this the
teacher gradually advanced to other questions, as their moral sense
became able to bear them, till, when they could answer five
satisfactorily, such as, "Have you all your knitting needles?" "Were
you at prayers?" "Were you late?"--things that could be ascertained at
once,--they thought themselves wonderfully good, little dreaming how
much the teacher did not dare to ask, lest she should lead them into
temptation. After the first revival, she could ask about things that
took place out of her sight; and now this exercise is conducted in the
same way as in our best schools at home. There is very little
communication now between them in the school room. In 1852, there were
only five failures on this point for four months, and those by new
scholars. Dr. Perkins wrote, that year, "The exact system in this
school, and the order, studiousness, good conduct, and rapid
improvement of the pupils, in both this and the other Seminary, are
probably unsurpassed in any schools in America."

In reply to a request for the picture of a day in the Seminary, Miss
Fiske writes, in 1862,--

"You ask for a day of my life in Persia. Come, then, to my home in
1854. You shall be waked by the noise of a hand-bell at early dawn:
twenty minutes after, our girls are ready for their half hour of silent
devotion. The bell for this usually finds them waiting for it, and the
perfect quiet in the house is almost unbroken. At the close of it,
another bell summons us to the school room for family devotion, where,
besides reading the Scriptures and prayer, they unite in singing one of
our sweet hymns.[1] In a few minutes after this, another bell calls us
to breakfast, and, that finished, all attend to their morning work.
Tables are cleared, rooms put in order, and preparations made for
supper--the principal meal in Persia; then for an hour they study
silently in their rooms. At a quarter before nine o'clock I enter the
school room, while Miss Rice cares for things without. We open school
with prayer, in which we carry to the Master more of our little cares
and trials than in the early morning. My first lesson is in Daniel,
with the older pupils, while two other classes go out to recite in
another room. Yonan stays with me, for I want him to help and be helped
in these Bible lessons. The class enjoy it exceedingly, and the forty
minutes spent on it always seem too short. The other classes now come
in, and all study or recite another forty minutes. After that, a short
recess in the yard makes all fresh again. The older classes then study,
while one of the younger ones has a Bible lesson with me on the life of
Christ. Each time I go over it with them I find things which I wonder I
had not perceived before. It is delightful to hear them express their
own thoughts of our blessed Saviour. We trace his journeyings on maps
prepared by the pupils, and they study the Scripture geography of each
place. After this, one class recites ancient Syriac to Yonan, and
another, in physiology, goes out to Miss Rice, leaving me to spend
forty minutes with the older girls on compositions. At present the
topic is, "The Christ of the Old Testament;" and I am thankful that I
studied Edwards's History of Redemption under Miss Lyon. This done,
fifteen minutes remain for a kind of general exercise, when we talk
over many things; and then the noon recess of one and a half hours
allows the girls to lunch, see friends, and recreate, till fifteen
minutes before its close, when they have a prayer meeting by
themselves. [Footnote 1: At first, only one hymn was printed on a
separate sheet; then a little hymn book of five,--as many as Luther
commenced with at the Reformation. Now the hymn book contains about two
hundred hymns, and some of the pupils can repeat them all.]

"In the afternoon, Miss Rice takes charge of the school, and I have the
time out. At present the first hour is given to writing; soon astronomy
will take its place. Recitations in geography follow till recess, and
after that singing or spelling. The last hour, I go in and hear a
lesson in Hebrews. On this Epistle we have full notes prepared in
Syriac, and we study it carefully, in connection with the Old
Testament. Miss Rice also has a lesson in Judges, and then all come
together for the daily reports, more as a family than a school. There
is still an hour before supper for mutual calls, knitting, sewing, and
family duties. After supper and work are over, and they have had a
little time to themselves, come evening prayers. Then they have a short
study hour in their rooms, followed by the half hour for private
devotion, which closes the day.

"Of course, at another time, the studies might be somewhat different.
The hours that Miss Rice and I are out of school we spend in seeing
visitors, holding prayer meetings, going out among the women, and
sometimes devote a whole day to a distant village."

Having thus looked in on a day of study, let us, through the same
glass, take a view of the Lord's day. The letter is dated December,
1855.

MY DEAR FRIEND: I have learned here that He who fed five thousand with
the portion of five can feed the soul to the full with what I once
counted only crumbs. May I give you one of the Master's sermons? A few
Sabbaths ago, I went to Geog Tapa with Mr. Stoddard. It was afternoon,
and I was seated on a mat in the middle of the earthen floor of the
church. I had already attended Sabbath school and a prayer meeting with
my pupils, and, weary, I longed for rest. It seemed as if I could not
sit without support through the service. Then I remembered that after
that came my meeting with the women readers of the village; and O, how
desirable seemed rest! But God sent it in an unexpected way; for a
woman came and seated herself directly behind me, so that I could lean
on her, and invited me to do so. I declined; but she drew me back,
saying, "If you love me, lean hard." Very refreshing was that support.
And then came the Master's own voice, repeating the words, "If you love
_me_, lean hard;" and I leaned on him too, feeling that, through that
poor woman, he had preached me a better sermon than I could have heard
at home. I was rested long before the services were through; then I
spent an hour with the women, and after sunset rode six miles to my own
home. I wondered that I was not weary that night nor the next morning;
and I have rested ever since on those sweet words, "If you love me,
lean hard."

But I intended to tell you of our Sabbaths in school. Saturday is the
girls' day for washing and mending, and we are busy all day long. Just
before sunset, the bell calls us to the school room, and there we
inquire if the last stitch is taken, and the rooms are all in order. If
any thing is still undone, the half hour before supper sees it
finished. After leaving the table, every thing is arranged for the
morning, and then we have a quiet half hour in our rooms. After this,
half the pupils come to Miss Rice, and half to me. Each has a prayer
meeting, remembering the absent ones, also the Female Seminaries in
Constantinople, South Hadley (Mass.), and Oxford (Ohio). All retire
from these precious meetings to their "half hour," as they call it, and
before nine o'clock all is quiet, unless it be the voice of some one
still pleading with her God.

The first bell, Sabbath morning, is at half past five, when all rise
and dress for the day. Morning prayers are at half past six; then comes
breakfast, and, our few morning duties being done, the girls retire to
study their Sabbath school lessons, and sometimes ask to meet together
for prayer. At half past nine, we attend Syriac service in the chapel.
The Sabbath school follows that, numbering now about two hundred
pupils. About two thirds of our scholars are teachers in it, and it is
a good preparation for teaching in their homes. Those who do not teach
form a class. We then go home to lunch, flavored with pleasant
remembrances and familiar explanations of the morning service. The
afternoon service commences at two o'clock, and our Bible lessons an
hour before supper, though some are called earlier, to help us teach
the women who come in for instruction. At supper, all are allowed to
ask Bible questions, and before leaving the table we have evening
prayers. At seven o'clock, Miss Rice and I go to the English prayer
meeting, while the pupils meet in six or seven family meetings, as they
call them, the inmates of each room being by themselves, and the pious
among them taking turns in conducting them. If any wish to come to us
after this, we are glad to see them; and often this hour witnesses the
submission of souls to God.

Besides these there is a weekly prayer meeting on Tuesday evening, a
lecture on Friday afternoon, and on Wednesday, as well as Sabbath
evening, the school meets in two divisions for prayer.

The following journal, kept during the revival, in 1860, by Esli, an
assistant teacher, forms an appropriate continuation of this interior
picture of the Seminary:--

"_February 1st_. To-day, a part of the girls wrote compositions on
'anger,' and a part on 'the gospel.'

"_3d, Friday_. John was here to-day writing to Mount Holyoke Seminary,
and attended our noon prayer meeting. In the afternoon, Deacon Joseph
of Degala preached from the words "King of kings and Lord of lords." In
the evening, Mr. Coan sung with us, and we read the weekly report of
our conduct.

"_5th, Sabbath_. In the forenoon, Dr. Wright preached from Acts ii. 37.
He said that we must know what sin is; that we are sinners; and that we
cannot save ourselves. In the afternoon, Priest Eshoo preached from
Luke xv. 32. The evening prayer meetings were very pleasant.

"_9th_. A blessed morning. Some of the girls are thoughtful. This was
seen in the quiet at table and the silence in the kitchen. The work was
done both earlier and better than usual. During the study hour, the
voice of prayer sounded very sweetly in every room. When the girls
walked in the yard, it was very quiet, and so when they came in. Our
noon prayer meeting was very pleasant; Miss Rice said a few words on
the shortness of time. While Hanee prayed, some wept. When Miss Rice
dismissed us, no one moved; all were bowed on their desks, weeping. She
then gave opportunity for prayer, and while I prayed, all were in
tears. The girls have kept all the rules well to-day. This evening, the
communicants met with Miss Rice, and the rest with Martha. Miss Rice
read about Jonah in the ship, and said a few words; after that, Raheel
the teacher prayed. Then Hanee spoke a little of her own state, and
asked us to pray for Raheel of Ardishai, who is thoughtful. I spoke,
and asked them to pray for Hannah and Parangis, who are in my room.

"10th. The state of our school is the same. Mr. Cochran preached on the
faithfulness of the Jews under Nehemiah, when they rebuilt Jerusalem.
After meeting he told us that the members of the Male Seminary spent
yesterday as a day of fasting and prayer, and many rose confessing
their sins. One very wicked man, also from the village, asked them to
pray for him. After work was done in the kitchen this evening, a little
time remained, and the girls there asked to have a meeting. With
gladness of heart I knelt and mingled my tears with theirs, as though
I, too, were commencing the work. Afterwards Mr. Coan came and sung
with us, and we read the accounts of the week."

Esli, the writer of the above, is the daughter of Yohanan, a pious man
in Geog Tapa, who for a time was steward of the Seminary. She was one
of the first fruits of the revival of 1856, and graduated after Miss
Fiske's return to America. She has since been a most faithful assistant
of Miss Rice, and is very much beloved by the pious Nestorians. But the
following letter to Miss Fiske, from her own pen, dated April 1859,
will form her best introduction to the reader:--

"When I recall your love to me, my heart is full. I remember the times
when we knelt together before our Father in heaven, in godly anguish
for priceless souls. Especially do I remember when God first came near
to me, how you shared my sorrow by day and by night, and pointed me to
Him who bled for me. After you brought me to Christ, you showed me the
helps to a Christian life; that I must pray not only in my closet, but
also in my heart, when at work or studying, that God would keep me. O
that I had heeded your counsels more!

"This winter the Lord led me to see my cold state. For a time the
Saviour's face was hidden; then it seemed to be midnight; but I looked
above, and the darkness fled. I saw him standing with open arms, and
quickly I threw myself into those arms. Tears of joy fell from my eyes,
and by the grace of God I was enabled to go forward day by day. Secret
prayer has since been very pleasant to me.

"We have had pleasant seasons of prayer in our school this winter, and
we trust that some souls have been born again. I have the care of a
circle of girls in the kitchen. They work well, and keep it clean. I
think you know that such work is difficult, but if you were to come in
you would find every thing in order. Every Wednesday we scour all the
shelves and the doors.

"The girls have made the yard very pleasant; but one thing is wanting
there: we miss you at the cool of the day, walking in it to see if any
evil has grown up in your garden.

"I went to my village in vacation; the prayer meetings there were very
pleasant, and I enjoyed much, praying with the women alone. Our seasons
of family devotion also were delightful. In the morning we read the
Acts in course; and as each read a verse, my father asked its meaning.
When he went away to preach, I used to lead, and we then read the
portion for the day, in the book called 'Green Pastures for the Lord's
Flock.'

"In the school we have studied Ezra, in connection with Haggai and
Zechariah, and are now in Nehemiah. In the New Testament we are on
Paul's third journey, and have nearly finished Scripture geography and
theology."

The Seminary keeps up a Christian intercourse with the institution at
South Hadley, as the following letters will show; and the beautiful
melodeon in the sitting room is a tuneful testimony to the liberality
of Holyoke's daughters.

"Many salutations and much love from the school of Miss Fiske to you,
our dear sisters of the school at Mount Holyoke. We rejoice that there
is such a great institution full of holy words and the warm love of
Christ: we hear that many of you have an inheritance above, and are
daily looking forward to it. We want to tell you how glad we are that
the Holy Spirit has come among you, and that God has turned so many to
himself. Though we are great sinners, we rejoice exceedingly in the
success of the work of God in every place; and we beg you to pray that
the Holy Spirit may visit us also, and our people, and strike sharp
arrows into flinty hearts, that they may melt like wax before the fire.
Blessed be God, that though we had become the least of all nations, and
adopted many customs worse than the heathen, and our holy books were
carefully laid away and never used, yet he put love into the hearts of
his servants, that they should come to this dark land. We are greatly
obliged to you and to your people for so kindly sending us these
missionaries. They have greatly multiplied our books, and, as we trust,
brought many souls to Christ. Some of us, formerly, knew not who Christ
was, or whether a Redeemer had died for us; but now he has gathered us
together in this school of godly instruction; and some of us are
awaking to our sins, and to the great love God has shown in sending his
Son to die for us. We thank God very much that we know Jesus Christ,
the only Saviour.

"Again, we want to thank you for sending Miss Fiske to teach us the way
of life; we love her because she greatly loves us, and desires our
salvation. Every day she takes much trouble that we may be the
daughters of God. But her burdens are so great, that we fear she will
not remain long with us, unless some one comes to help her. And now we
have a petition to present: we hear that in many of you dwelleth the
spirit of our Master, Jesus Christ; and that you are ready to leave
home and friends, and go to distant lands, to gather the lost sheep of
Christ. Dear sisters, our petition is, that you will send us a
teacher.[1] We shall greatly rejoice if one comes, and will love her
very much. We ask this, not because we do not love Miss Fiske. No! no!
this is not in our hearts; but she is weak, and her work is more than
she can do alone. We shall expect one to come, and pray God to bring
her to us in safety. [Footnote 1: Miss Mary Susan Rice, already
mentioned in these pages, went out this same year (1847), from the
Seminary in South Hadley.]

"Please remember us in your closets and in your meetings, and ask your
friends to pray for us and for our people. Farewell, beloved sisters."

The following extracts are from a letter written by them, in 1848, to
Miss Susan L. Tolman, now Mrs. Cyrus T. Mills of the Sandwich Islands,
and formerly of Ceylon:--

"Much love from the members of the Female Seminary of Oroomiah to you,
our dear Miss Tolman. We are very glad to find one who loves us so
much, and prays for us. Our delight in your letter was greater than we
can express. Miss Fiske came in joyfully with it in her hand, and while
she read, it seemed as if you were present, inviting and drawing us to
Christ.

"Give our love to all in your favored school, and ask them to pray for
us. We love all those dear ladies, because they have been so kind to
us, and have been willing that Miss Fiske and Miss Rice should leave
them, and come here for our sakes. Though they were dear to you, we
think that now they have come to us, your joy in them is greater. We
hope to hear of many of you carrying the leaves of life to the dark
corners of the earth.

"Dear Miss Tolman, you said, 'You love Miss Fiske, you must also love
Miss Rice.' Did you think that we would not love her? We love them
both, not only for leaving their friends to come to us, but also
because they are full of the love of our dear Redeemer.

"We have heard that you are going to India. We are glad, and love you
more for it, because the love of Christ constrains you to this, and
thus in spirit you come very near to our dear teachers. We entreat
Almighty God to be with you, and bring you in safety to the place he
appoints for you, that you may be a light among a dark people. We hope
that when there you will not forget us, but write us about your work,
and about the daughters of India, whether they love you much or not.
Tell your friends not to sorrow for you, but to rejoice that they have
a friend ready to go and teach those who know not Christ. The Saviour
guide you in all your labors."

Those who aided Miss Lyon to carry out her large-hearted plans in New
England, little dreamed that offshoots from the vine they planted would
so soon be carried to the ends of the earth. Who does not admire that
grace which, in this missionary age, raised up such a type of piety to
be diffused over the globe? Doubtless it will undergo changes in
Persia, as it has done already; but the devout student of Providence
will watch its growth with interest, and its developments will not
disappoint his hopes.




CHAPTER VII.


VACATION SCENES.

IN GAWAR AND ISHTAZIN.--VILLAGES OF MEMIKAN.--OOBEYA, DARAWE, AND
SANAWAR.--IN GAVALAN.--ACCOMMODATIONS.--SABBATH SCHOOL.

To the interior pictures of the school in the last chapter we add some
vacation scenes, though chronologically in advance of other things yet
to come.

[Illustration: Tents.]

Towards the close of July, 1851, Mr. Stocking and family, with Misses
Fiske and Rice, and several native helpers, spent the vacation in
Gawar. Mr. Coan accompanied them on his way to regions beyond.
Wandering from place to place, like the patriarchs of old, they pitched
their tents at first near the village of Memikan. A sketch of these
tents is here presented. The women there were frequent visitors, and
few went away without some idea of the truth as it is in Jesus. The
pious natives were unwearied in labor, and sometimes woke the
missionaries in the morning with prayer for the people round about
them. On the Sabbath, there was preaching in as many as five different
villages, and after morning service in Memikan, the women came to the
tents to receive more particular instruction from their own sex. In the
evening, a mother who had buried her son in February--then a very
promising member of the Seminary at Seir[1]--brought her youngest
daughter, about six years of age, saying, "We give her to you in the
place of Guwergis. He has gone to a blessed place. You led him there.
We thank you, and now intrust to you our little daughter." Eshoo, the
father, spoke of his departed son with much feeling, but most sweet
submission. He said to Miss Fiske, as the big tears glistened in the
moonlight, "I shall not be here long. I shall soon rejoin him. My hope
in Jesus grows stronger every day." The death of that dear son was not
only a great spiritual blessing to him, but the mere mention of his
name at once secured the attention of the villagers to any thing the
missionaries had to say about his Saviour. [Footnote 1: Nestorian
Biography, p. 127.]

On Monday, they left for a visit to the Alpine district of Ishtazin.
Unable to take horses along those frightful paths, they rode on hardy
mules. In a subsequent journey over the same road, the fastenings of
Miss Fiske's saddle gave way, and she fell, but providentially without
injury. Sometimes they climbed, or, more hazardous still, descended, a
long, steep stairway of rock, or they were hid in the clouds that hung
around the higher peaks of the mountain. Now the path led them under
huge, detached rocks, that seemed asking leave to overwhelm them, and
now under the solid cliffs, that suggested the more grateful idea of
the shadow of a great rock in a weary land. Down in the valley were
pleasant waterfalls, little fields rescued by much labor from the
surrounding waste, choice fruits, and such a variety of flowers, that
it seemed as if spring, summer, and autumn had combined to supply them.
Then, in looking up, the eye rested on silver threads apparently
hanging down from far-off summits, but really foaming streams dashing
headlong down the rocks, yet so distant that no sound came to the ear
from their roaring waters.

The party stopped at Ooreya, on one of its flat roofs, shaded by a
magnificent walnut tree. The villagers brought mulberries, apples, and
other fruits, till they could prepare something more substantial, and
seemed to forget their fears of the patriarch in their zealous
hospitality. After supper, all adjourned to the churchyard, and there,
in the bright moonlight, a crowd of eager listeners heard of Christ,
and redemption through his precious blood. The silence of night was
broken only by the voice of the preacher, and the echoes of the
surrounding cliffs seemed to repeat joyfully the unwonted sounds. Yonan
preached from the words "Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in
their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom." He
commenced by asking whether Christ was right in so doing. They replied,
"Certainly he did right." "Yes," said the preacher, "and as he did, so
must his followers do; and you must expect to see them in Ishtazin.
When we cease to climb over these precipices to come to you, fear lest
we have become Mussulmans, for Christians cannot but go from village to
village to preach the gospel." The reader will see the force of such an
appeal, when he remembers that Mar Shimon had forbidden these people to
receive the missionaries because they preached. This was followed by a
statement of the doctrines that Jesus preached, in which he did not
fail to bring out the essence of the gospel. When he sat down, Khamis,
the brother of Deacon Tamo, followed with a most impassioned
exhortation. The missionaries had thought him a good preacher before,
but the place and the circumstances--he was among his own native
mountains--seemed to carry him beyond himself. All through this region,
the people appeared to render as much honor to him as they would have
done to Mar Shimon. The assembly dispersed, and the travellers lay down
where they were, to battle with the sand-flies till the welcome dawn
lit up the conspicuous summits high above them.

Almost every moment of the next forenoon was filled by personal
religious conversation with many who never heard such truths before. In
the evening, even more fixed attention was given to another service in
the open air, at the village of Boobawa, for the pious Mar Ogen[1] was
then living there, and the bright light of his piety had not shone in
vain. Several were earnestly inquiring how to be saved. [Footnote 1:
Nestorian Biography, p. 267.]

On Thursday, the day after their return to Memikan, Mr. Coan, Priest
Dunkha, Khamis, and Deacon John left for Central Koordistan, and Deacon
Isaac went to Kochannes. But though the laborers were fewer, the number
of visitors continued the same. Next Sabbath, besides two services, and
two meetings with the women in Memikan, there was preaching in three
other villages. In Chardewar, the home of Priest Dunkha, Miss Fiske
found his daughter, who had come with them from Oroomiah, already full
of work. She had just dismissed her Sabbath school, and was reading the
Bible with her cousin, the village priest, who did all in his power to
help her, both in her school through the week, and her meetings with
the women. One Sabbath, almost every woman in the place had been
present, as was the case also when she was visited by Misses Fiske and
Rice, and Sanum said that she could not ask for a better place in which
to work for Christ. There was more of real hunger for the truth here
than any where else in the mountains.

Leaving Memikan, the travellers removed to Darawe, the village
described on page 21. Here they could scarcely get permission to pitch
their tent, or procure provision for themselves and horses; yet even in
such a place, the manifestation of Christian love was not without
fruit, though many bitterly opposed them to the last. The neighboring
villages wondered at the missionaries going there at all, and still
more at their being able to remain.

At Keyat, the kindness of the people, and pleasant intercourse with
them, were all the more grateful for the contrast with what had gone
before. Here Miss Fiske met with that kind reception from Mar Shimon,
then passing through the place, described on page 159, while the tent
literally flowed with milk and honey furnished by the villagers, whom
he had charged to take good care of their visitors.

On the following Sabbath, Yonan preached to a congregation of about two
hundred, at Sanawar, where forty families of refugees from Saat were
spending the summer. When Miss Fiske and Miss Rice visited their camp,
they found a number of temporary huts enclosing a circle, where the
domestic labors of spinning, weaving, and cooking were actively going
on. All the women at once left their work, and welcomed their visitors
with every mark of confidence and gladness. Some of them had heard the
gospel from the missionaries in Mosul, as they had often spent the
winter near there. So they drank in every word with eagerness.

The ladies were delighted with their visit, especially with a widow,
who, though unable to read, showed unusual familiarity with the Bible,
and, as they hoped, a spiritual acquaintance with its doctrines. When
the topic of our fallen nature was mentioned, "Yes," said she, "we were
all shapen in iniquity, as David testifies." When asked if she had any
hope of being saved from sin, she replied, "I am very far from God, yet
my only hope is in the wounded side of Jesus Christ. If penitently I
stand beneath the blood dropping from his cross, I hope that my sins,
though red like scarlet, may become as white as snow." Her views of the
way of salvation were not only clear, but beautifully expressed. It was
exceedingly refreshing, in that region where they had expected only
darkness, thus to find the rays of light struggling through from their
associates in another mission; and it gave a delightful foretaste of
the time when the voice of one watchman upon those mountain tops should
reach to another, and on all sides the eye behold the trophies of
Immanuel. It was with feelings of peculiar interest that they heard,
some years after, that this stranger in Sanawar, but, as they fondly
hoped, their sister in Christ, held fast her confidence in his grace to
the end, and so fell asleep in Jesus.

For a companion picture to the preceding, we turn to the summer of
1852. Mr. Stocking moved out to Gavalan, the native place of Mar
Tohanan, early in the season, and both teachers followed, with thirteen
of their pupils, about the middle of June. The village lies near the
base of a range of mountains, at the northern end of the plain of
Oroomiah, forty miles distant from the city. On the east the blue
waters of the lake seem to touch the sky, and stretch away to the south
in quiet loveliness. Sometimes, when reposing in the gorgeous light of
sunset, or reflecting the red rays of the full moon, they remind the
beholder of the "sea of glass mingled with fire" revealed to the
beloved disciple. The breeze from the lake, in the long summer days, is
very grateful, and the evening air from the mountains makes sleep
refreshing.

Mar Yohanan gave the school free use of two rooms as long as it
remained. In the court yard before them a large tent was pitched, that
served for dining room, dormitory, and reception room, or diwan khaneh.
An adjoining house afforded a comfortable recitation room. Here the
regular routine of the school went on, and while men from the village
found their way to Mr. Stocking's at the hour of evening prayer, women
also came to the school room at the same hour. At the last meeting of
this kind before Miss Fiske returned to the city, nearly forty were
present, listening with quiet attention to the words of life. On the
Sabbath, the sides of the tent were lifted outward from the bottom, and
fastened in a horizontal position, so as to admit the air and exclude
the sun. The ground beneath was covered with mats, and formed quite a
pleasant chapel. In the forenoon, this was thronged with attentive
hearers. The children of the boys' school in the village sat close to
their teacher. The members of the girls' school could be distinguished
from their playmates by the greater smoothness of their hair, the
whiteness of their faces, and general tidiness. Among the old men, the
venerable father of the bishop was very conspicuous. The members of the
Seminary crowded round their teachers so as to leave more room for
others, and still all could not get under the shadow of the wings of
the tabernacle. Mr. Stocking preached in the forenoon, and in the
afternoon the people came together again as a Sabbath school. Each of
the pupils of the Seminary had a class of women or girls, and seemed to
learn how to do good faster than ever before. They visited them at
their houses during the week; they sought out the absentees; and it was
delightful to go round the school and note the interest of both scholar
and teacher. If these were zealous in teaching, those were no less so
in learning. The classes, after the introductory services, filled every
available corner in the rooms, the tent, the front of the house, and
even sat on the low mud wall of the court. With the same variety of
character, there was greater diversity of lessons than in schools at
home. Some studied the Old Testament, and some the New; others were
just learning to read, and those who could not read at all were taught
the Scriptures orally. One class of Armenians was taught in Turkish.

Matters went on very well for two Sabbaths, but on the third, women and
children had vanished. What was the matter? It had been reported that
all this labor was only a preparation to transport them to America, and
the simple-minded mothers staid away with their children in great
trepidation; but visits from house to house, during the week, dispelled
their fears, and next Sabbath all were again in their places, and this
pleasant labor in Gavalan continued till September.




CHAPTER VIII.


EARLY LABORS FOR WOMEN.

FIRST MEETINGS WITH THEM.--FIRST CONVEKT.--FIRST LESSONS.--WILD WOMEN
OF ARDISHAI.

The teachers of the Seminary did not confine their labors to its
inmates; they expended both time and toil for adult women as well as
for their daughters, and never felt that they gave them too large a
proportion of their labors. At first there was a strong feeling among
most of the women that they might not worship God along with deacons
and readers; and so they could not be persuaded to attend public
preaching. But Miss Fiske found that a few would come to her room at
the same hour; so, encouraged by her missionary sisters whose hearts
were in the work, but whose family cares prevented their doing it
themselves, she visited the women at their houses, to urge them to come
in. Then, as her own knowledge of the language was as yet imperfect
(this was in 1844), and she wisely judged that listening to a gentleman
would sooner prepare them to come in to the regular service, she
secured one of the missionary brethren to conduct the meeting. The
first day only five attended; but soon she enjoyed the sight of about
forty mothers listening to the truth as it is in Jesus. On the third
Sabbath, she was struck with the fixed attention of one of them, and,
on talking with her alone, found her deeply convinced of sin. She had
not before seen one who did not feel perfectly prepared to die; but
this one groaned, being burdened, and seemed bowed to the dust with the
sense of her unworthiness. When Miss Fiske prayed with her, she
repeated each petition in a whisper after her, and rose from her knees
covered with perspiration, so intensely was she moved: her life, she
said, had been one of rebellion against God; and she knew that no
prayers, fasts, or other outward observances, had benefited her, or
could procure forgiveness. In this state of mind she was directed to
Christ and his righteousness as her only hope; and though for some time
little progress was apparent, at length, as she herself expressed it,
"I was praying, and the Lord poured peace into my soul." The change in
her character was noticed by her neighbors. From being one of the most
turbulent and disagreeable of the women in her vicinity, she became
noted for her gentleness and general consistency. She has since died,
and her last days were full of a sweet trust in her Saviour. She was
the first inquirer among Nestorian women.

This meeting was given up as soon as the women found their way to the
regular service; but ever since there have been separate meetings for
them at other hours.

Until the revival in 1846, those who conducted these meetings had to
labor alone, for there were none of the Nestorians to help them.
Indeed, Miss Fiske had been in Oroomiah more than two years, before
women came much to her for strictly religious conversation, or could be
induced to sit down to the study of the Scriptures.

Some of her first efforts to interest them in the Bible were almost
amusing in the difficulties encountered, and the manner in which they
were overcome.

She would seat herself among them on the earthen floor, and read a
verse, then ask questions to see if they understood it. For example:
after reading the history of the creation (for she began at the
beginning), she asked, "Who was the first man?" _Answer_. "What do we
know? we are women;" which was about equivalent in English to "we are
donkeys." The passage was read again, and the question repeated with no
better success. Then she told them, Adam was the first man, and made
them repeat the name Adam over and over till they remembered it. The
next question was, "What does it mean?" Here, too, they could give no
answer; not because they did not know, for the word was in common use
among them; but they had no idea that they could answer, and so they
did not, and were perfectly delighted to find that the first man was
called _red earth_, because he was made of it. This was enough for one
lesson. It set them to thinking. It woke up faculties previously
dormant. The machinery was there, perfect in all its parts, but so
rusted from disuse, that it required no little skill and patience to
make it move at all; but the least movement was a great gain; more was
sure to follow. Another lesson would take up Eve (Syriac, _Hawa_,
meaning _Life_). Miss Fiske would begin by saying, "Is not that a
pretty name? and would you not like to know that you had a
great-great-grandmother called _Life?_ Now, that was the name of our
first mother--both yours and mine." It was interesting to notice how
faces previously stolid would light up with animation after that, if
the preacher happened to repeat the name of our first parents, and how
one would touch another, whispering with childish joy, "Didn't you
hear? He said Adam."

Such were the women who came to the Seminary for instruction; but the
teachers also went forth to search out the no less besotted females in
the villages; and, as a counterpart to the above, we present an account
of labors among the wild women of Ardishai, a village twelve miles
south-east from Oroomiah.

When Miss Fiske had been in Oroomiah about one year, Mr. Stocking
proposed a visit to Ardishai. So the horses were brought to the gate,
one bearing the tent, another the baskets containing Mr. Stocking's
children, and a third miscellaneous baggage; besides the saddle horses.
The first night, the tent was pitched on one of the threshing floors of
Geog Tapa; but as American ladies were a novelty in Ardishai, the party
there, in order to secure a little quiet, had to pitch their tent on
the flat roof of a house. It was Miss Fiske's first day in a large
village, and she became so exhausted by talking with the women, that
she can never think of that weary Saturday without a feeling of
fatigue. As the village is near the lake, the swarms of mosquitoes
allowed them no rest at night; and morning again brought the crowd with
its idle curiosity as unsatisfied as the appetite of more diminutive
assailants. About nine o'clock, all went to the church, where Mr.
Stocking preached, while the women sat in most loving proximity to
their strange sisters, handling and commenting on their dresses during
the discourse. Mr. Stocking could preach though others talked, and
readily raised his voice so as to be heard above the rest. At the
close, Priest Abraham, without consulting any one, rose and announced
two meetings for the afternoon; one in another church for men, and a
second in this for women, who must all come, because the lady from the
new world was to preach. So the news flew through the neighboring
villages. The good lady called the priest to account for his doings;
but he replied, "I knew that they would come if I said that, and yon
can preach very well, for your girls told me so." He was greatly
disappointed, however, when he found that his notice left him alone to
preach to the men, while Mr. Stocking preached to some six hundred
women, with half as many children. They were a rude, noisy company, not
one of them all caring for the truth; and there was no moment when at
least half a dozen voices could not be heard besides the preacher's.
When he closed, as many as twenty cried out, "Now let Miss Fiske
preach." So he withdrew, and left her to their tender mercies. Her
preaching was soon finished. She simply told them, that when she knew
their language better, she would come and talk with them, but she could
not talk at the same time that they did, for God had given her a very
small voice, and her words would no more mingle with theirs than oil
and water. They said, "Oil and water never mix; but we will be silent
if you will come and preach." Months passed on, and she again visited
the village. The women remembered her promise, and hundreds came
together; but they did not remember to be silent. As soon as she began,
they began; and if she asked them to be quiet, each exhorted her
neighbor, at the top of her voice, to be still; and the louder the
uproar, of course the louder the reproofs. At length Miss Fiske said,
"I cannot say any more, unless you all put your fingers on your
mouths." All the fingers went up, and she proceeded: "I have a good
story to tell you; but if one takes her finger from her mouth, I cannot
tell it." Instantly muzzled voices, all round the church, cried, "Be
still, be still, so that we can hear the story!" Some minutes elapsed,
and the four hundred women were silent. "Once there was an old woman--I
did not know her, nor did my father, and I think my grandfather did
not; but he told me--" Here commenced many inquiries about said
grandfather; but again the fingers were ordered to their places, and
their owners told that they should hear no more about the woman if they
talked about the grandfather. "Now, this woman talked in meeting,--I
should think she must have been a relative of yours, for ours do not
talk in meeting,--and after many reproofs she was forbidden to go to
church any more if she continued to do so. She promised very
faithfully; but, poor woman, she could not be still; then, as soon as
she heard her own voice, she cried out, 'O, I have spoken in meeting.
What shall I do? Why, I keep speaking, and I cannot stop.' Now, you are
very much like this woman, and as I think you cannot stop, I must." By
this time their fingers were pressed closely on their lips, and no one
made a reply. Having thus secured silence, Miss Fiske took the New
Testament, and read to them of Mary, who, she was sure, never talked in
meeting; for if she had, Jesus would not have loved her so much. She
talked to them about fifteen minutes more, and prayed with them, and
they went away very still and thoughtful.

Miss Fiske gave this account to the writer, with no idea that he would
print it. But he thinks--and the reader will doubtless agree with
him--that in no other way could he convey so vivid an idea of woman as
she was in Persia, or the tact needed to secure a first hearing for the
truth. Miss Fiske was often called to deal with just such rude
assemblages, and by varied methods she generally succeeded in securing
attention. In subsequent visits to Ardishai the number of hearers was
never again so large; but they came together from better motives, and,
as we shall see, not without the blessing of the Lord. In March, 1850,
Miss Rice met nearly three hundred women in the same church, some of
them awakened, and a few already hopefully pious.




CHAPTER IX.


FRUITS OF LABOR IN NESTORIAN HOMES.

USEFULNESS AMONG RELATIVES OF PUPILS.--DEACON GUWERGIS.--REFORMED
DRUNKARD AND HIS DAUGHTER.--MATERNAL MEETINGS.---EARLY INQUIRERS FROM
GEOG TAPA.--PARTING ADDRESS OF MR. HOLLADAY.--VISIT TO GEOG
TAPA.--SELBY AND HER CLOSET.

Having thus glanced at early labors for women in the Seminary and in
the villages, let us now turn to another field of usefulness among the
relatives of the pupils, who came to visit them in school; and here we
are at no loss for a notable illustration.

In the autumn of 1845, Deacon Guwergis, of Tergawer,--and almost every
reader was either priest or deacon,--brought his oldest daughter, then
about twelve years of age, and begged for her admission to the
Seminary. He was known as one of the vilest and most defiantly
dissolute of the Nestorians, and Miss Fiske shrunk from receiving the
daughter of such a man into her flock. Yet, on the ground that, like
her Master, she was sent not to the righteous, but to the lost, she
concluded to receive her. Still the father, during his short stay,
showed such a spirit of avarice and shameless selfishness,--he even
asked for the clothes his daughter had on when she came,--that she
rejoiced when he went away.

His home was twenty-five miles off, in the mountains, and she hoped
that winter snows would soon shield her from his dreaded visits. Little
did she think that his next coming would result in his salvation. In
February he again presented himself at her door in his Koordish
costume, gun, dagger, and belt of ammunition all complete. He came on
Saturday, when many of the pupils were weeping over their sins; and the
teacher could not but feel that the wolf had too truly entered the
fold. He ridiculed their anxiety for salvation, and opposed the work of
grace, in his own reckless way. She tried to guard her charge from his
attacks as best she could; but they were too divinely convinced of sin
to be much affected by what he said. His own daughter, at length,
distressed at his conduct, begged him to go alone with her to pray.
(The window on the right of the central door of the Seminary points out
the place.) Ho mocked and jeered, but went, confident in his power to
cure her superstition. "Do you not think that I too can pray?" And he
repeated over his form in ancient Syriac, as a wizard would mutter his
incantation. His child then implored mercy for her own soul, and for
her perishing father, as a daughter might be expected to do, just
awakened to her own guilt and the preciousness of redemption. As he
heard the words "Save, O, save my father, going down to destruction,"
he raised his clinched hand to strike; but, as he said afterwards, "God
held me back from it." No entreaties of his daughter could prevail on
him to enter the place of prayer again that day.

The native teacher, Murad Khan, then recently converted, took him to
his own room, and reasoned with him till late at night. Sabbath morning
found him not only fixed in his rebellion, but toiling to prevent
others coming to Christ. At noon Miss Fiske went to the room where he
was. (The two lower windows on the right of the engraving of the
Seminary mark the place.) He sat in the only chair there, and never
offered her a seat; so she stood by him, and tried to talk; but he
sternly repelled every attempt to speak of Jesus. She then took his
hand, and said, "Deacon Guwergis, I see you do not wish me to speak
with you, and I promise you that I will never do it again unless you
wish it; but pledge me one thing: when we stand together in judgment,
and you are on the left hand, as you must be if you go on in your
present course, promise me that you will then testify, that on this
twenty-second day of February, 1846, you were warned of your danger."
He gave no pledge, but a weeping voice said, "Let me pray." The hand
was withdrawn, and he passed into the adjoining room, whence soon
issued a low voice, that Miss Fiske could hardly yet believe was
prayer. The bell rung for meeting, and she sent her precious charge
alone, while she staid to watch the man whose previous character and
conduct led her to fear that he was only feigning penitence in order to
plunder the premises undisturbed. She staid till a voice seemed to say,
What doest thou here, Elijah? then went and took her place in the
chapel; soon the door opened again very gently, and Deacon Guwergis
entered; but how changed! His gun and dagger were laid aside; the folds
of his turban had fallen over his forehead; his hands were raised to
his face; and the big tears fell in silence; he sank into the nearest
seat, and laid his head upon the desk. After Mr. Stoddard had
pronounced the blessing, Miss Fiske requested Mr. Stocking to see
Deacon Guwergis.

He took him to his study, and there, in bitterness of soul, the recent
blasphemer cried out, "O my sins! my sins! they are higher than the
mountains of Jeloo." "Yes," said Mr. Stocking, "but if the fires of
hell could be out, you would not be troubled--would you?" The strong
man now bowed down in his agony, exclaiming, "Sir, even if there were
no hell, I could not bear this load of sin. I could not live as I have
lived."

That night he could not sleep. In the morning, Miss Fiske begged Mr.
Stoddard to see him, and after a short interview he returned, telling
her that the dreaded Guwergis was sitting at the feet of Jesus. "My
great sins," and "My great Saviour," was all that he could say. He was
subdued and humble, and before noon left for his mountain home, saying,
as he left, "I must tell my friends and neighbors of sin and of Jesus."
Yet he trembled in view of his own weakness, and the temptations that
might befall him. Nothing was heard from him for two weeks, when Priest
Eshoo was sent to his village, and found him in his own house, telling
his friends "of sin and of Jesus." He had erected the family altar, and
at that moment was surrounded by a company weeping for their sins. So
changed was his whole character, and so earnest were his exhortations,
that for a time some looked on him as insane; but the sight of his
meekness and forgiving love under despiteful usage amazed them, and
gave them an idea of vital piety they never had before. He returned to
Oroomiah, bringing with him his wife, another child, and brother, and
soon found his way to Miss Fiske's room. As he opened the door, she
stood on the opposite side; but the tears were in his eyes, and
extending his hand as he approached, he said, "I know you did not
believe me; but you will love me--will you not?" And she did love him,
and wondered at her own want of faith. In a few days, he was able to
tell Mr. Stocking, with holy joy, that two of his brothers were
anxiously seeking the way of life. His own growth in grace surprised
every one, and his views of salvation by grace were remarkably clear
and accurate.

When his daughter returned to school, on the 30th of March, she was
accompanied by one of her father's brothers, who seemed to have cast
away his own righteousness, and to rely on Christ alone for pardon. As
no missionary had conversed with him, Mr. Stocking felt desirous to
know how he had been led into the kingdom, and learned that he had
promised Deacon Guwergis to spend the Sabbath with one of the native
teachers of the Female Seminary. This teacher and others prayed with
him, till he threw away his dagger, saying, "I have no more use for
this," and in tears cried out, "What shall I do to be saved?" He gave
no evidence then of having submitted to Christ, but in his mountain
home he seemed to make a full surrender, and became well acquainted
with the mercy seat. The native helpers felt that he was moving
heavenward faster than themselves. In April, it was found that as many
as nine persons in Hakkie, the village of Deacon Guwergis, gave
evidence of regeneration, five of them members of his own family; and
the whole village listened to the truth which the zealous deacon
constantly taught.

He always remembered the school as his spiritual birthplace, and ever
loved to pray for it. Once, when rising from his knees in the Male
Seminary, where he had been leading in evening devotion, he exclaimed,
"O God, forgive me. I forgot to pray for Miss Fiske's school." So he
knelt again and prayed for it. And Mr. Stoddard said he did not think
there was a smile on a single face, it was done with such manifest
simplicity and godly sincerity.

In June, 1846, Miss Fiske visited Hakkie with Mr. and Mrs. Stocking. It
was the first time ladies had been in the mountains, and the good
deacon was greatly delighted. Labors were then commenced for females
there that have been continued ever since. The annexed sketch will give
a more vivid idea of the nature of such labors than the most accurate
description. One day the party was toiling up a rough ascent, and the
deacon, as much at home among the rocks as the wild goats, offered his
assistance. The reply was, "We get on very well." At once his eyes
filled, and he said, "You once helped me in a worse road; may I not now
help you?" And his aid was at once gratefully accepted. At the top of
the hill, while the party rested, they heard his voice far off among
the clefts of the rocks, pleading for them and their relatives in
distant America.

[Illustration: MISSIONARY SCENE IN TEEGAWER.]

After his conversion, the deacon devoted himself to labors for souls,
especially in the mountains. One might always see a tear and a smile on
his face, and he was ever ready, as at first, to speak "of sin and of
Jesus." He traversed the mountains many times on foot, with his
Testament and hymn book in his knapsack. In the rugged passes, he would
sing, "Rock of Ages, cleft for me," and at the spring by the wayside,
"There is a fountain filled with blood" flowed spontaneously from his
lips. He warned every man, night and day, with tears, and pointed them
to Jesus as their only hope. He rested from his labors March 12th,
1856, and, as his mind wandered in the delirium of that brain fever, he
dwelt much on those days when he first learned the way to Christ. He
would say, "O, Miss Fiske was right when she pointed out that way;" and
then he would shout, "Free grace! free grace!" till he sunk away
unconscious. Again he would say, "That blessed Mr. Stocking! O, it was
free grace." These were almost his last words. The daughter who prayed
with him that first Saturday was by his dying bed, and her voice in
prayer was the last earthly sound that fell upon his ear.

It may strike the reader as strange that a man so notorious for
wickedness as Deacon Guwergis was, should be allowed in the Seminary;
but Oriental notions of hospitality are widely different from ours; and
in order to do good to a people, however rude, they must feel that you
are their friend. No protection from government can take the place of
this feeling of affectionate confidence from the people; and while
sufficient help was at hand to repel any overt wickedness, the highest
usefulness required that patient love should have its perfect work, and
in this case, at least, its labor was not unrewarded.

The usefulness of the Seminary among the relatives of its pupils was
illustrated in another case that occurred about the same time. March
2d, 1846, the father of one of the girls called and inquired, with
tears, if his daughter was troubled for her sins. Surprised at such an
inquiry from a notorious drunkard, he was exhorted to seek his own
salvation. He then told how he had been taught the plague of his own
heart, and, as a ruined sinner, was clinging to Christ alone. His
prayers showed that he was no stranger at the throne of grace. Father
and daughter spent the evening mingling their supplications and tears
before the mercy seat. The daughter had given more trouble than any in
school, and several times had almost been sent away. Four days later,
her mother came, and remained several days, almost the whole time in
tears, and hardly speaking, except to pray. Her daughter and the pious
members of the school were unwilling to let her go till she came to
Christ, and she seemed to take him for her Saviour before she left. She
was a sister of Priest Abraham, and had been so exceedingly clamorous
and profane in her opposition to religion, that her brother had for
years dreaded to see her. How did he rejoice, when, instead of the
customary oath, he found her uttering the praises of her Saviour! The
sister of her husband had been one of the vainest of the vain, wearing
an amount of ornament unusual even for a Nestorian; but she no sooner
put on the righteousness of Christ than she sold her ornaments, and,
giving the proceeds to the poor, clothed herself with that modest
apparel which becometh women professing godliness. The husband himself,
though an illiterate laborer, preached the gospel while at work in the
field, and often took two or three of his associates aside to pray with
them, and to tell them of Christ and his salvation.

But these cases must suffice: we can only indicate the ways in which
the school became a centre of holy influence, especially for woman; but
it is impossible to narrate all the facts.

After the revival, the Seminary was thronged with visitors, who desired
the time to be filled up with religious instruction. That year
witnessed a rich ingathering of wives and mothers, brought by their
converted husbands and children to be taught the way of salvation. The
teacher who received visitors always found enough to do both by day and
by night. As soon as there were two praying women in a village, Miss
Fiske and Miss Rice sought to establish female prayer meetings; and
when they visited a village, the women expected to be called together
for prayer; and when the women returned the visit, they each sought to
be prayed and conversed with alone. This was done also with the
communicants generally three times a year. The prayers and remarks of
the pious members of the school often gave a high spiritual tone to the
weekly prayer meeting. Occasionally there were maternal meetings; and
on such occasions one teacher met with the mothers, and the other with
the children in a separate room.

These took the place of the early meetings with women mentioned in the
beginning of the chapter, and were very useful.

Nestorian families have been already described in part, but the absence
of the religious element in them can hardly be realized by Christians
here. They did not believe that a child was possessed of a soul until
it was forty days old. This belief affected all their feelings towards
children, and their custom of burying unbaptized infants outside of
their cemeteries did not serve to correct such impressions.

Family registers were unknown. In 1835, probably not five Nestorians
could tell their birthday, and but few knew in what year they were
born. Miss Fiske kept a list of all the children, which was read at
every meeting; but at first she could record the birth of only the very
youngest. The deceased children were written down in a separate page,
and it was sad to see how much they exceeded the number of the living.
One childless mother, who had buried eleven, was always present; for
she said she wanted to pray for the children of others, though her own
were not. They assembled in Miss Fiske's room, sometimes to the number
of thirty, with, such of their little ones as were too small to attend
the other meeting, and, seated on the floor around her, were never more
happy than when telling their troubles, asking questions, and receiving
instructions about family duties, much more specific than could be
given on other occasions. Now and then she read to them, from English
books, facts and truths adapted to their needs. One good man in
Fairhaven, Connecticut, who had heard of this, sent a complete set of
the Mother's Magazine, to be used in that way. So interested were they,
that many of them walked regularly three miles and back again, under a
burning sun, to enjoy these gatherings; and from a monthly, it had to
be changed to a weekly meeting. It sometimes lasted three hours, but
never seemed to them too long; and, commenced in 1850, it is still kept
up with as much regularity as Miss Rice's many other duties will allow.
It would be interesting to dwell on its results; but a single incident
may suffice. One mother, whose husband was not a Christian, was very
regular in private devotion, but thought she could not offer prayer in
the family, till her husband became dangerously sick, when, in the
agony of her intercession for him, she vowed that, if God would spare
him, she would establish family prayer. So, as soon as he was able to
bear it, she gathered her children around his bed, and after they had
read the first chapter of Matthew, verse about, she led in prayer, and
so went on reading the New Testament in the morning and the Old
Testament in the evening, till she got through with the whole of the
former, before any one of the missionaries knew that she had commenced.

The teachers of the Seminary enjoyed very much the visits of the early
inquirers from Geog Tapa, in the summer of 1845, most of whom became
hopefully pious the following winter. Let us look in on one visit made
towards the end of May. A pupil announces that two women below wish to
see Miss Fiske; and a middle-aged stranger is shown into her room. In
answer to the usual inquiry, "From whence do you come?" she replies, "I
have come from Geog Tapa, for I have heard that you have repented, and
I want to know about it." She has walked six miles on purpose to make
the inquiry. "I wish that you, too, had repented," calls forth the
reply, "Alas, I have not! I am on my way to destruction." Feeling that
the Bible was the safest guide for such an inquirer, Miss Fiske reads
appropriate portions, explaining as she reads. The visitor shows a
great deal of Bible knowledge for one who cannot read, indicating that
she had not been inattentive to the faithful instructions of Priest
Abraham and Deacon John, and her questions are numerous and intensely
practical. Among other things, she asked, "Is it true, that for one sin
Adam and Eve were cast out of Eden?" and on being told that it was so,
"There," said she, turning to the unconcerned neighbor, who had come
with her, "do you hear that? What will become of you and me, who have
sinned so often?" At length prayer was proposed, to which she eagerly
and tearfully assented; and though the tongue that commended her to
Jesus, in that strange language, might have faltered, the heart did not
share in the embarrassment. The woman, like the first inquirer,
repeated every word of the prayer in a low whisper, as though unwilling
to lose a single syllable. The conversation was then resumed till it
was interrupted by the entrance of some of the pupils on business.
"Have you finished?" was the woman's eager inquiry. "I wish very much
to hear more of these things." Her companion now begged her to go home.
"No," was the kind reply; "you may go, but I must stay here to
prayers." Evening prayers were earlier than usual that evening for her
sake, but still she lingered. She had not yet found rest. Selby, one of
Mrs. Grant's pupils, then in the Seminary, now conversed with her; and
as there seemed to be a sympathy between them (Selby had recently found
peace in believing), they were left by themselves. After supper, Selby
remained with her an hour or more, that they might pray together, till
it was quite dark, and her friends had sent for her repeatedly. She
left, having first begged permission to come in to morning prayers.
Morning came, and before sunrise she was again listening intently to
the reading of the Word, and, after devotions, left for home, earnestly
begging Miss Fiske to come and spend a week in Geog Tapa.

The Seminary was dismissed June 5th. On that day, several hundreds of
the parents and friends of the pupils, in both Seminaries, were invited
to a simple entertainment, got up in native style. The gentlemen of the
mission ate in one room, with the men and boys, and the ladies in
another, with their own sex. The confidence and kind feeling manifested
by all towards the school was very gratifying. After dinner, the whole
company, seated in the court, listened to an address from Mr. Holladay,
then about to return home. He spoke to parents and children on their
duties, privileges, and responsibilities: towards the close, he spoke
of the almost certainty of never meeting them again till the judgment,
and bade them an affectionate farewell. His utterance was often choked,
and his hearers wept; and well they might, for in him they parted with
a faithful friend. During the exercises, the members of the two schools
sang, twice, to the great gratification of their friends.

That evening most of the pupils went home, all but a few of the girls
carrying with them a copy of the four Gospels, in modern Syriac, which
they had paid for with their needles.

Miss Fiske left for Geog Tapa on the 14th of June with Mr. Stocking,
reaching that place as the people were coming out from evening prayers
in the church. The first to welcome them were six pupils, residents in
the village, who greeted their teacher with a hearty good will. Next to
them came Pareza, the inquirer, changed somewhat in her feelings, but
with no loss of religious interest. John, too, was there (the native
pastor): he had been busy, day and night, instructing the people, and
had taken special care of the pupils, that they might both improve
themselves and exert a good influence on others. When Mr. Stocking
asked him about matters in the village, "O sir," said he, "it is a very
good time here now; very many love to hear the truth; their hearts are
very open. O sir, I have very much hope!" After supper, the villagers
poured into the room for a meeting, to the number of one hundred, while
some thirty or forty more were unable to get in. This was all the more
welcome, as no notice whatever had been given. It was a clear moonlight
evening, and the groups outside were distinctly visible, through the
latticed side of the room. John commenced with an earnest prayer for a
blessing on the evening; asking, in his simplicity, that "the people
might run after the word like sheep after salt"--a strange expression
to us, but most appropriate and striking there. Fixed attention was
given to Mr. Stocking's discourse: then John, who feared that those
around the door had not been fed, spoke to them of Zaccheus. "The crowd
about him," said he, "did not know his feelings; but Jesus knew them,
and loved him; and so, mothers and sisters"--they, as an inferior
class, had to take the lowest places while the men were within--"if you
have come here to-night with a broken heart, though we have not seen
you, Jesus has." He then, with Miss Fiske's pupils, sung a hymn, and
the meeting closed. Still, many women lingered; some sitting down by
Miss Fiske, and others in little groups, talking over what they had
heard; very different from previous visits, when dress and such things
were the most interesting themes of conversation. This was the first
meeting in the village in which the missionaries noticed much religious
interest.

Early in the morning, Miss Fiske's pupils were gathered together for a
Bible class. The women soon filled the room. The exercise continued all
the forenoon, simply because it could not be closed. It was impossible
to send away unfed those who hungered for the word. Among the women
were a few men, one of them the husband of the inquirer. He was asked,
"Have you and your wife chosen the good part?" He covered his face for
a moment; the tears rolled down his cheeks; and then he said, "By the
grace of God, I hope we have." His heart was too full to say more.

Soon after noon, Mr. Stocking preached in the church, on the barren fig
tree, to a crowded assembly. The heat and the multitude made the place
very uncomfortable, but the interest deepened till the close. As soon
as they were out of the church, many women crowded around Miss Fiske,
some of whom she could look on as truly pious, and more as thoughtful.
One, who was the first to be awakened about a year before, seemed now a
growing Christian. On leaving, she said, "Perhaps I shall not see you
again till I meet you in heaven." She seemed to be looking forward with
humble hope to a sinless home. With others, she had encountered much
opposition from her family and friends. She has since entered into rest.

On the 19th, Selby visited Miss Fiske, and in answer to a question
about a place for private devotion, "O, yes," said she, "there is a
deep hole under our house, like a cellar, and there I go every day to
pray."

A brief account of her may not here be out of place. In 1830, when she
was an infant in her mother's arms, the cholera in five days carried
her father and five of his household to the grave. In 1838, she was one
of the first pupils of Mrs. Grant. She learned more rapidly than the
rest, and yet was so amiable that she was loved by those whom she
excelled. Still, she was a stranger to God, and she felt it. When
thirteen years of age, her brother took her out of school, replying to
her earnest pleadings, to be allowed to remain, "You have been there
already too long." At the same time she was forced to marry a boy
twelve years of age, with whom she had never spoken. For days
previously, tears were her meat and drink; nor was she the only one
that wept. After this, the missionaries seldom saw her, till, one cold
Sabbath in the winter of 1844-45, a girl entered the chapel, wrapped,
as brides usually are, in a large, white sheet. She was not recognized,
of course, till her mother led her forward, saying, "I have brought
Selby here to-day to listen to the words of God; she loves them and you
very much." She was feeble and much depressed, and expressed a strong
desire to return to school. Her father-in-law consented to her teaching
in the primary department, on condition that her husband was received
into the Boys' Seminary, which was done. She now manifested much
interest in religion, and one day wept much, and inclined to be alone.
The next evening, she went to Miss Fiske, distressed with a sense of
sin. Said she, "I have lied, and stolen, and sworn; nor that only, but
have lived so long without once loving my kind, heavenly Father! When I
felt sadly about dying at home, I thought then only of hell; but now my
sins--O, how many they are! I never knew before that I was such a
sinner." The next day, at her father-in-law's request, she was to spend
the Sabbath at home. She was very loath to go, but it was not thought
best to try to retain her, and she went. There she found neither closet
nor Christian friend, and the house was full of guests from morning
till night, whom, she was required to entertain. Yet in the morning she
returned with even increased interest in spiritual things. Said she,
"Two or three times I was left alone for a moment, and then I tried to
commit my soul to my Saviour." Those few moments she seemed to value
above all price. Not long after, she found peace in Jesus, who became
her chosen theme. No wonder she loved to point others also to the Lamb
of God, and lead them to the mercy seat.




CHAPTER X.


GEOG TAPA.

DEACON MURAD KHAN IN 1846.--PENTECOSTAL SABBATH IN 1849.--MEETINGS IN
1850 AND 1854.--EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL OF YONAN IN 1858.

The village of Geog Tapa is so prominent, and has been so largely
blessed, that, though there is not room for a continuous account of the
work in that place, we here give a glimpse of its progress in different
years.

Deacon Murad Khan, one of the assistants in the Seminary, and a native
of the place, spent some Sabbaths there in May, 1846. He took turns
with the other native teacher in this, going Saturday, and returning on
Monday. He tells us that, after morning prayers in the church, pious
men met together to pray for a blessing on the day; twelve of their
number then went to labor in other villages, the rest remaining to work
at home. Passing through a vineyard, he found hidden among the vines a
youth setting home gospel truth to a group of others about his own age.
At their request, he expounded the parable of the ten virgins to them
till it was time for forenoon service; then they separated, to spend a
few moments in private devotion before entering the church.

In 1849, the pious men of the village divided it into districts, and
visited from house to house for religious conversation and prayer.
Meetings were held daily, and well attended. The most abandoned persons
were hopefully converted. Crimes committed twenty-five years before
were confessed, and restitution made. One Sabbath in February, Mr.
Stocking and Mar Yohanan found a large assembly in the house of Mar
Elias, listening to an exhortation from Priest Abraham. Mar Yohanan,
who had not been there since his conversion a little while before, was
then called on, and spoke of himself as the chief of sinners, having
led more souls to destruction than any other of his people, and being
all covered with their blood. In regard to his flock he said, the
fattest he had eaten, the poorest he had cast away, the lame and the
sick he had neglected. He begged them no longer to look to their
bishops for salvation, but to repent at once and turn to God. Priest
Abraham, then recently awakened, also made a humble confession of his
sins as their priest, and besought them, one and all, to attend to the
salvation of their souls.

In the afternoon, the church was crowded, and a number, unable to gain
admission, retired to a school room, where a meeting was conducted by a
member of the Male Seminary. In the church, they sung the hymn, "Come,
Holy Spirit, heavenly Dove." Mar Yohanan offered prayer, and Mr.
Stocking preached from the text, "Now, then, we are ambassadors for
Christ," and produced a very deep impression, which was increased by
short addresses from the bishop and others. This was known afterwards
by the name of the Pentecostal Sabbath.

In 1850, those previously renewed gained new light, and those whose
piety was doubtful--to use Deacon John's broken English,-were "very
much firmed." Miss Fiske and Miss Rice spent a day in the village,
after the close of their spring term, and had delightful intercourse
with about twenty women hopefully pious, and many more inquirers. In
the evening, supper was hurried through, and men, women, and children
hastened to the house of the pastor. Mr. Stocking preached there to a
crowded assembly of men, while the teachers adjourned to a neighboring
house, to meet with the women. Their hearts were full at meeting so
many for whom they had alternately hoped and feared, now sitting in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus; they remembered seeing their first
penitential tears, and could hardly restrain their own for joy. The
house was full, and in a silence interrupted only by stifled sobs, they
communed together concerning Jesus and his grace. It seemed as though
God perfected praise that night out of the mouths of babes, by keeping
them perfectly still in their mothers' aims; and as the pupils of the
Seminary belonging to the village, in their prayers, laid mothers,
sisters, and friends at the feet of Jesus, the place seemed near to
heaven. Next day, about one hundred and fifty attended another meeting,
and it was with difficulty the teachers could tear themselves away. One
of the pious mothers could not bear to have her daughter, recently
converted in the Seminary, leave her sight; and more than once a day
they bowed together at the throne of grace. When this mother met Miss
Fiske her feelings were so intense she could only say, "Thank God,"
over and over, and weep. Her husband was moved by his child's anxiety
for his salvation. Once, when she urged him to pray, he replied, "I
cannot; but you may pray for me." She at once knelt and interceded for
him, with many tears. The gray-headed man knelt also, deeply moved, and
tears flowed from eyes not used to weep. When she ceased praying, she
rose; but his strength was gone; he could not rise. Yet the love of the
world was strong within him, and it is to be feared that he resisted
the Holy Ghost.

In 1854, Miss Fiske found about sixty families maintaining family
prayer, and hardly a family in which there was not some one that seemed
to be a true disciple. John held a prayer meeting Sabbath morning with
those whom he sent out, two and two, to preach in the neighboring
villages, and in the evening they reported what they had done. Sabbath
school commenced about nine o'clock, and before it opened, almost all
were reading or listening to those that read; and then the school
continued in session two hours, without a sign of weariness. The number
wishing to learn to read was so large that it was difficult to provide
for them. Men came begging good teachers for their wives, and women
came pleading for spelling books for their husbands. After school, at
their own request, Miss Fiske met twenty-one girls, who had been
members of her school (twenty of them now teachers in the Sabbath
school), and gave them a word of counsel and encouragement in their
work. At the close of afternoon service, the women who could read staid
with her till near sunset, they never so thankful before, and she never
more thankful to be with them.

The next glimpse we take of Geog Tapa shall be from a native
standpoint. A young man of the village, possessed of more than ordinary
abilities, was early taken into the Male Seminary. His influence over
the rest was so great, and so decidedly opposed to religion, that he
was about to be sent away, when grace made him the first fruit of the
revival in 1846. Yonan (for that is his name) was a teacher in the
Female Seminary from 1848 till 1858, and, as he was generally
accustomed to spend his Sabbaths in his native village, on Monday
morning he handed in to Miss Fiske a written report of the labors of
the previous day; and from, these we now give some extracts:--

"_January 17th_, 1858. I had a pleasant time in morning family prayer,
at which several young persons were present. The Sabbath school was
followed by a meeting, at the close of which I returned to my room with
four young men. I talked with them about two hours, first about coming
to church,--for they attend only occasionally,--and in this they
promised to do better. I then questioned until I reached their inmost
souls. I asked one, 'What is the distance between you and God?' 'My
teacher, there is a very great distance between us.' 'Is it God's
fault, or yours?' 'It is mine.' I then looked on another, noted for his
wickedness, and said, 'Beloved, did not Christ come for you? His
stripes, his anguish, his crucifixion,--were they not for you? Why,
then, treat him so ill? Has he left the least thing undone for you?' He
admitted the truth, but seemed like a rock. At length I said to them,
'Now, Satan has provided something or somebody outside the door, to
drive these thoughts from your hearts.' One replied, 'True, Satan has
let down all the nets of the Sea of Ardishai[1] for us.' I prayed for
them, and they left me, serious. Then I prayed for them alone. Soon my
little sister Raheel came in, who is under Papal influence. I talked
with her about prayer to the saints, and opened to the ten
commandments, and began to read; but she did not want to hear. My heart
yearned over my poor sister, and I prayed with her. [Footnote 1: Lake
of Oroomiah.]

"Moses preached in the afternoon about Achan, and after that I had my
usual meeting with the pious women. Guly returned with me for
conversation. I think she is a blessed Christian. She labors and prays
with two of her companions. She told how her cousin ridiculed her, and
I encouraged her to go forward, but said, 'If all the world think you a
Christian, don't rest till you can say, 'I know in whom I have
believed."' We prayed together, and O, what a prayer she offered!
Deacon Siyad led the evening meeting.

"_January 24th_. After morning service, I took Baba Khan and Guwergis
to my room. The first I had labored with last year, and thought him
interested. His wife fears God, and has often asked me to talk with
him. He is seldom absent from church or prayer meeting, and often goes
out with our young men when they preach. This was my thought in talking
with him: 'Near the kingdom, but not in it.' I earnestly pressed these
questions: What do you think of yourself? What is your dependence for
salvation? Have you repented? In short, on which side are you? He was
troubled; tears ran down his cheeks, and for a time he made no reply.
At last he said, 'I cannot tell.' A companion began to answer for him,
with the confidence of ignorance, judging Christians and finding holes
in the coats of the righteous: 'Who knows whether a man is a Christian?
God alone.' I said, 'Are there any Christians in our village?' 'Yes.'
'Then you know some as Christians?' His words were many, while Baba
Khan's were few. My father here came in, but I prayed with them all,
and then went to church, where I preached from the words, 'And thou
mourn at the last.'

"To-day I conversed with Sadee. I found her in the habit of praying
with her sisters in Christ one by one. I advised her to try and lead
some of her unconverted neighbors to Christ by her labors and prayers.
She promised to do so. We spent more than an hour speaking the language
of Canaan, and then knelt at the feet of the Saviour whom we love. She
prayed, spreading out her hands to heaven, as I think the early saints
used to do; and it seemed as though God would fill us with blessing in
answer to that prayer. She left me alone, and thanking God for these
blessed opportunities to labor.

"_January 31st_. After meeting, conversed with Munny, daughter of
Mukdesseh. It was profitable to talk with her. She said that her
sainted mother used to say, "When, my heart is cold, I go to Christ,
and never rise from my knees till he warms it." She has some hope for
her husband, and also fear, since he does not forsake wine. She told of
a woman for whom she had prayed and labored five or six years, and
promised to do so with others. O, what a sweet savor of piety did I
receive from her! If we had many such mothers in Geog Tapa how changed
it would be! I cannot write all our pleasant words; they remain for
eternity.

"_February 7th_. I took home from Sabbath school two young men, for
whom I have fears because they drink too much wine. I talked long with
them, not as though I would take a pledge from them, or that it is a
sin ever to drink at all, for I thought this would not be profitable;
but I asked them questions, that they might themselves distinguish what
is right; as, 'Does wine make you to sin?' They owned that it did.
Their hearts seemed won to the right, but the work is the Lord's. May
he save them from this temptation.

"In the afternoon, I began to talk with Sanum without feeling, but
ended in tears. I did not ask questions, but carefully explained the
difficulties and the fight of faith, also the special grace of God to
his people. When I said to her, 'I want you to enlarge your heart, and
take in one more besides the two women whom you now labor with,' she
selected a very ignorant one. I am afraid that I do differently,
seeking rather an easy work.

"_February 22d_. This afternoon I sent for Nargis. I had never thought
of her as a Christian, but I found that I was greatly mistaken. It is
all my own fault. I had seldom met her, and never prayed with her. I
commenced: 'Do you think yourself a Christian?' 'I do.' 'How long have
you thought so?' 'About eight years.' 'How is it that I have not known
it?' 'Yakob was my pastor, and since he left I have had none.' Then she
told of her awakening, and sufferings for Christ's sake, between her
betrothal and her marriage. 'I used to go to evening meetings with
Yakob, and on my return my uncle would take me by the braids of my hair
and throw me on the ground, saying, "You go because there are young men
there." Sometimes I found the door barred against me; then I went to a
neighbor's to lodge, or oftener to the stable, and slept in a manger;
but I was never afraid, for Christ was with me: for a time my betrothed
wished to put me away. It was then I found Christ, and I have never
forsaken him since.' She is now poor and in distress. She attends
church and Sabbath school, but cannot go to evening meeting, as her two
little children keep her at home. She lamented this, not thinking that
she could serve Christ in the care of these little ones. I told her, 'I
preach that prayer and the care of children are equally a duty.' She
was greatly comforted: these words seemed like oil poured into the
flickering lamp. I gave her the 'Green Pastures,' and prayed with her.
I have great confidence in her piety.

"On Friday forenoon, I saw Martha, the wife of Eshoo. I trust she has
grace in her heart; and her husband hopes that he is a Christian, but
looks after her more than himself. She sees him not doing right, and
tells him in love; he is not pleased. Still, she thinks him a
Christian. She wished I would talk to them together, that their path
might be one. I told her I did not think it best that she should talk
much to him, but be very quiet, pray for him, be obedient to him, and
hope to win him by her chaste conversation coupled with fear. She
received my words well.

"_February 28th._ I talked with Moressa. We hoped, seven or eight years
ago, that she was a Christian; but her husband soon prevented her
attending meeting, and so she remained, till lately she came to church
again. I did not know that one of the sisters in Christ had prayed
regularly with her all this while, but supposed that she had gone back
to her dead forms, and that God moved me to call her to repentance. But
I found her trusting that she had been set in Christ's breastplate, the
light of which can never go out. I said, 'Do you think you love the
Saviour?' 'Yes, as the apple of my eye.' 'Are you sure that you have
not forsaken him in all these years?' 'I have been very sinful all the
time, but do not think I have taken my hand from Christ.' My heart was
now drawn towards her. I said, 'Moressa, forgive me. I have been an
unfaithful shepherd. I have not once searched for you. I confess my
faults.' 'I have faults. I have been a wandering sheep, forsaking the
fold.' 'Have you kept up secret prayer during all these years?' 'I
have.' I found that she had learned to read at home, and I gave her a
Testament. I have a good hope for her; but how negligent I have been!
There may be many Christians unknown."

These extracts might be extended; but enough have been given to
illustrate the inner workings of Nestorian piety, and the labors of
those so appropriately called "native helpers." It was such men that
Paul called his helpers in Christ Jesus.

The women of Geog Tapa, in a letter to Miss Fiske, written Feb. 1861,
thanking her for her labors among them, say, "We often think, What are
we more than the women of other nations, that we should have such
heavenly blessings? and are ready to cry, Blessed is the dust of the
land that sends forth such good news, and makes known the way of life
to the world." They add, that at their last communion more than eighty
souls sat down at the Lord's table; and it seemed as if He who sitteth
between the cherubim was present in the church.




CHAPTER XI.


REVIVAL IN 1846.

PREPARATORY WORK.--SANCTIFIED AFFLICTIONS.--NAME FOR REVIVAL.--SCENES
IN IHE SEMINARIES IN JANUARY.--DEACON JOHN, SANUM, AND SARAH.--MR.
STODDARD.--YAKOB.--YONAN.--MEETING IN THE BETHEL.--PRIEST
ESHOO.--DEACON TAMO.--PHYSICAL EXCITEMENT AND ITS CURE.--ARTLESS
SIMPLICITY OF CONVERTS.--MISSIONARY BOX.--MEETINGS BEFORE
VACATION.--MR. STODDARD'S LABORS.--FEMALE PRAYER MEETING.--REVIVAL IN
THE AUTUMN.

The first revival in Oroomiah seemed to burst forth like a fountain in
the desert. Yet, as such a fountain, though springing full grown from
the earth, is connected with unseen arrangements working out that
visible result, so was this revival connected with an extended process
of preparation. For years there had been a laborious inculcation of
divine truth, especially in the Seminary. True, there had been few
conversions; but those few were an essential part of the preparatory
work. The roots of this revival extended back as far as the conversion
of Deacon John, in 1844. Even in those still unconverted, there had
been a wonderful preparation of the way of the Lord. No one could
compare the condition of the places yet unblessed by missionary labor,
with those so favored, and not feel this. Religious education had made
a marked improvement in the appearance of the pupils of both
Seminaries, in their personal habits, their intelligence, and
especially in their knowledge of the doctrines of the gospel. Old
superstitions had lost their hold; they could no longer trust in fasts
and ceremonies, and they had an intellectual understanding of the way
of salvation through a Redeemer. True, all this did not necessarily
involve a spiritual work; but God is pleased to have the way thus
prepared for that Spirit who sanctifies through the truth. Those who
had received the most instruction were the first to come to Christ, and
have since lived the more consistent Christian life.

Then, in the good providence of Him who always observes a beautiful
order in the manifestations of his grace, other influences tended to
the same result. The very delay of the blessing called forth earnest
prayer from the husbandmen who were waiting for precious fruit, and had
long patience for it, till they received the early and the latter rain.
The trials which the missionaries had passed through in 1845 also
tended to produce that despair of help from themselves which usually
precedes blessing. In 1844 they numbered sixteen souls; but in 1846,
from various causes, they were diminished to ten. These were not
discouraged, but remained at their post confident that labors in the
Lord cannot be in vain. Then the persecution under Mar Shimon shut them
up to God as their only hope, while it rid them of some native helpers,
who cared chiefly for their own temporal advantage. The army of Gideon,
on all sides, was being diminished in order to secure obedience to that
precept, "He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord." The feeling was
general, "all our springs are in God." One of the missionaries said, in
the autumn of 1845, "God never formed a soul that Christ cannot redeem
from the power of sin. I know this people are sunk in sin and
degradation; but Jesus died to save them, and we may see them forever
stars in his crown of rejoicing, if we are only humble and faithful
enough to lead them to the Saviour."

At the time of the revival, Dr. and Mrs. Perkins resided at Seir, and
Dr. and Mrs. Wright were temporarily with them in that village. Mr.
Breath was in the city, but using the Turkish mainly, he never ventured
to give religious instruction in Syriac; so that Mr. Stocking and Mr.
Stoddard were the only laborers in Oroomiah. They lived on the mission
premises already described; and at that time the Male Seminary occupied
a building in the same enclosure.

One day in the autumn of 1845, Mr. Stocking, Miss Fiske, and Deacon
John were riding together, when John asked in English, "If we ever have
a revival here, what shall we call it?" Mr. Stocking replied, "Let us
get it first; then we will find a name;" and when it did come, the
pious Nestorians at once called it "an awakening."

Towards the close of December, Mr. Stocking noticed repeated
indications of deep seriousness among the pupils of Mr. Stoddard, and
felt that they were on the eve of a revival. About the same time,
Deacon John was more active in labor, and earnest in prayer. In the
Seminaries, the teachers did not think so much of what their pupils
were, as of the power of God to make them like himself. They labored in
hope, expecting a blessing; but it came sooner than they looked for,
and in larger measure. The first Monday of the new year, January 5th,
was spent as a day of fasting and prayer; and the missionaries had just
begun to pray, when they found that some were praying for themselves.
Miss Fiske went into her school, as usual, at nine o'clock, and, after
telling her flock that many prayers were being offered for them that
day in a distant land, led their morning devotions, and then sent them
into another room to study with a native teacher. Sanum and Sarah
lingered behind the rest; and as they drew near, she asked, "Did you
not understand me?" They made no reply; and she saw they were weeping.
"Have you had bad news?" Still no reply; but when they got near enough,
they whispered, "May we have to-day to care for our souls?" and Sarah
added, "Perhaps next year I shall not be here." There was no private
room to give them, but they made a closet for themselves among the fuel
in the wood cellar, and there spent that day looking unto Jesus; nor
did they look in vain. Their teacher did not know where they had gone,
till, long after one of them had died, the survivor gave her an account
of that memorable day.

On Sabbath evening, January 18th, the words at the English prayer
meeting were few; but the prayers carried the dear pupils and laid them
at the feet of Jesus. At the close of the meeting, Mr. Stoddard was
lighting his candle to go home, when Mr. Stocking asked if he saw any
indications of interest in his school. There was no reply; but the
expressive face, and the candle dropping unnoticed as he held it,
showed that thought was busy, and the heart full. At length he said,
with deep feeling, "I should expect to see interest if we felt as we
ought to feel;" and passed out. All were impressed with his manner, so
earnest, yet so humble. He retired to his study, called John, and
talked with him on the state of the school. He proposed that they
should each day make some one pupil a subject of special prayer and
personal effort, and begin that night with Yakob of Sooldooz. They
prayed together for him, and then he said, "John, I want to talk with
him to-night; we don't know what may be on the morrow; go and call
him." Yakob, who had acted badly in meeting that day, came, expecting
to be punished; but when Mr. Stoddard kindly asked him to come and sit
down by him, and, taking his hand, said, "Have you ever thought that
you have a soul to be saved or lost?" he broke down at once. He
confessed that the whole school had combined to shut out the subject
from their thoughts, but really felt so uneasy, that if one of them
should be brought to Christ he thought all would follow. Then the good
man, who was so distressed that day because he could see no impression
made by the sermon, thanked God and took courage. Not willing to devote
Monday to Yakob alone, he conversed with another of the same name, and
he too went away weeping to his closet. The two had been in the
recitation room but a little while before their feelings became so
intense that they had to ask leave to retire. "It is God!" "It is God!"
was whispered from seat to seat; and at noon a group collected to
discuss what was to be done. One proposed to rise up against the work,
and put it down; but at length Yonan of Geog Tapa said, "I don't want
to be a Christian; I don't mean to be; but I am afraid to oppose this;
we had better let it alone. If it is God's work we cannot put it down,
and if it is man's work it will come to nought without our
interference." Nothing more was said, but before school commenced that
afternoon, some of those boys were on their knees in prayer.

In the evening, Mr. Stoddard sent for two leaders in the opposition,
very promising scholars, but of late forward in every thing that was
evil--one of them this Yonan, and as he himself told afterwards: "Mr.
Stoddard said, 'If you do not wish to be saved yourselves, I beg of
you, from my inmost soul, not to hinder others;' and eternity so opened
up before me, that I was ready to be swallowed up. I longed for some
one to speak to me of the way of escape; but no such word was spoken to
me that night. I could not sleep, for I was almost sure there was but a
step between me and death." Late on Thursday evening, the other Yonan,
of Ada, came to Mr. Stoddard in extreme agitation, who conversed with
him a while, and then left him there to pray alone. That night he too
could not sleep. The years he had spent in sin rose up before him in
the light of God, and filled him with anguish; but next morning, in
conversing with Mr. Stoddard, he seemed to find rest in submitting to
sovereign mercy.

On Monday evening, the indications of interest in the Female Seminary
were such, that the teacher invited those disposed to seek salvation at
once, to come to her room at five o'clock. Before that hour, a number
had retired to pray for themselves. Just then, Mr. Stoddard came to the
door of the teacher, saying, "I cannot stop; but I wanted you to know
that four or five of my boys are much distressed for their sins." This
was the first intimation she had of what was taking place in the other
school; and she turned away from Mr. Stoddard to find five of her
pupils in the same condition. Mr. Stoddard came in again, in the course
of the evening, to pray and consult; and Mr. Stocking gave up every
thing else to labor with the pupils in both schools. Both Dr. Perkins
and Dr. Wright came down frequently from Seir. Every day brought out
new cases of those who were being taught of God. Wednesday evening, at
the conclusion of a sermon from Mr. Stocking, on the words, "Behold, I
stand at the door and knock," no member of the Male Seminary seemed
willing to leave his seat. After a few words of exhortation, they were
dismissed to their rooms; but so intense were their feelings that they
came in crowds to the teacher's study, where he preached Jesus Christ,
and forgiveness through his blood, till near midnight; then, fatigued
and exhausted, he retired to rest. Thursday evening, in the English
prayer meeting, Mr. Stoddard said, "God will assuredly carry forward
his own work. Let us give ourselves up to labor for him, in pointing
these precious souls to Christ." After the meeting, the teachers of
both Seminaries left to engage in that blessed work till midnight.
Eleven years after, on the same evening, and about the same hour, one
was called to see the other pass from earth into the presence of the
Saviour whom he then set forth so faithfully. No wonder the survivor
recalled it in the hush of that parting scene.

It is difficult to describe the occurrences of this eventful week. The
teachers' rooms were in such demand as closets for the pupils, that
they could hardly command them long enough for their own devotions.
They were ready to write "Immanuel" on every thing around them. The
girls were very free to express their feelings, and they had such
perfect confidence in their teacher, that often, during the revival,
some of them woke her in the morning, standing at her bedside, with
some inquiry about the way of life.

The two schools hardly knew any thing of each other till Friday
evening, when they met in a room fitted up for the Female Seminary the
preceding autumn. The first time Mr. Stoddard entered it after this, he
looked round, and said, "May this room be wholly consecrated to the
Lord forever;" and this evening Christ seemed to take possession of it.
The boys sat on one side, and the girls on the other; and seldom,
perhaps, has there been a company more under the influence of things
unseen. It seemed as though God himself spoke that evening through his
ministering servants, and this and that one was born there and then. It
was in the same room that that last prayer meeting of the teacher with
her former pupils was held, July 15th, 1858. In the engraving, the two
upper windows, immediately to the left of the small ones over the
central door, belong to this room.

At the close of the week, ten of the pupils were trusting in Christ;
and of the next Lord's day it might truly be said, "That Sabbath was an
high day," for the Lord was present, and many strong men bowed before
him. Priest Eshoo had watched the boys; he had watched his own praying
Sarah; and now he looked within. He had never been known to weep; he
scorned such weakness; but when, at the close of the afternoon service,
Mr. Stocking took his hand, saying, "Be sure you are on the right
foundation," he buried his face in his handkerchief and wept aloud. Nor
did he weep alone; Deacon Tamo, too,--whose levity all through the week
had been a sore trial to Mr. Stoddard, so that he had asked, "Can it be
that God has let him come here to hinder the work?"--now trembled from
head to foot. Mr. Stoddard prayed with him, and as they rose from their
knees, Tamo looked him in the face, and, with streaming eyes, said,
"Thank you, thank you for caring for my soul."

During the following week, most of the inmates of both Seminaries were
deeply convinced of sin, and daily some souls seemed to come to the
Saviour.

But some things rendered it apparent that the interest was not all from
above. One evening, fifteen or twenty boys were found rolling on the
floor, groaning and crying for mercy. Measures were taken at once to
prevent the repetition of such a scene, and at evening prayers Mr.
Stocking commenced his remarks by asking if any of them had ever seen
the Nazloo River, at Marbeeshoo, near its source. Startled by what
seemed a very untimely question, a few answered, "Yes." "Was there much
water in it?" Wondering what he could mean, the answer was, "No; very
little." "Did it make much noise?" "Yes; a great deal." The catechist
went on: "Have you seen the same river on the plain?" By this time,
every ear was listening, and all replied, "Yes." "Was it deep and
wide?" "Yes; it was full of water." "And was it more noisy than at
Marbeeshoo?" "No; it was very quiet and still." The parable was now
applied very faithfully. He said that he had hoped the Holy Spirit had
been teaching them the evil of their hearts; but their noise and
confusion that evening showed him that there was no depth to their
experience. The effect was wonderful; they hung their heads and quietly
dispersed, and from many a closet that night might have been heard the
petition, "Lord, make me to know my heart, and let me not be like that
noisy river." What threatened to be an uncontrollable excitement became
at once a quiet but deep sense of guilt. Their desires were not less
intense, but more spiritual; their consciences were very tender, and
their feelings contrite, but subdued and gentle.

In this revival, the converts had a great deal of feeling, but no
knowledge of the mode in which such feelings find expression in
Christian lands; and in the freshness and strength of their emotions
they yielded to every impulse with an unconscious simplicity that was
exceedingly interesting. If they were under conviction of sin, that
found immediate and unrestrained utterance. If they thought they were
forgiven, that, too, at once found expression. There was a wonderful
transparency of spirit that revealed each varying aspect of their
feelings, and withal a tendency to undue excitement that needed careful
handling. Indeed, it was found necessary to watch their social meetings
very closely, and sometimes to direct them to pray alone.

For three weeks, very few visitors came to the Seminary. The time
seemed to be given expressly for the benefit of the pupils, and it was
like one continual Sabbath. Every corner was consecrated to prayer, and
most of the work was direct effort for the salvation of souls. But
after that, visitors began to come, and then the young converts became
helpers in Christ Jesus, even the sight of their devotion turning the
thoughts of others to spiritual things. Often ten or fifteen women
spent the night on the premises; and at such times, all the spare
bedding was brought into the great room, which was transformed into a
dormitory. The teacher often staid with them till midnight, and then,
from her own room, could hear them praying the rest of the night. In
connection with this, one incident claims our notice. One day in
February, a box arrived from America for the Seminary; but so engrossed
was the teacher with more important duties, that it was midnight ere
she could open it. Next morning, all were invited to her room, to see
the contents. She told of the kind friends who had sent it, and the
love of Christ, that constrained to such kindness. They were moved to
tears, but not one rose to examine the things, and not a word was
spoken, till the proposal was made that the quilts should be kept for
the use of their friends who came to hear the word of God. All joyfully
agreed to that, and then, after looking at the articles, they returned
to pray for their benefactors.

The last meetings of the school before the March vacation were called
thanksgivings, and fitly, too, for in the two Seminaries as many as
fifty souls had begun to love the Saviour, When they left, the
universal cry was, "Pray for us." "Pray for us in the temptations that
await us at home." One little girl said, "Did you ever see a new-born
lamb cast into the snow and live? And can we live?" Thank God, most of
the hopeful converts did live, and we trust are to live forever, with
the good Shepherd who gave his life for their salvation.

It does not fall in with the design of this volume to give a complete
account of the revival, but we cannot leave it without a word more
about the instrumentality of Mr. Stoddard in connection with that work
of grace. He was abundant in preaching. He did not think that the most
ordinary sermons are good enough for the mission field; for he knew
that the Nestorians could discriminate as well as others nearer home,
and so wrote out his sermons carefully in English, but in the Syriac
idiom, noting on a blank page the books consulted in their preparation.
He also excelled in labors for individuals. The first inquirer became
such while Mr. Stoddard pressed home upon his conscience his guilt as a
sinner against God; and the same is true of many others. After
conversing with a person, he always led him to the throne of grace, and
then had him present his own offering there; and after such a one had
left, he seemed unable to turn his thoughts to any thing else, till
again in private he had commended him to God. Indeed, he often began to
do this before they descended the stairs. He kept a little book, in
which he recorded every case, the state in which he found the person,
and any subsequent change; and it was noticed that where he began, he
continued to labor, not only till there was hope, but even assurance of
hope. Such labor is as exhausting as it is delightful; and no wonder
his strength proved less than his zeal and love.

It was a great joy to him when his people could take part in prayer
meetings. He divided the thirty converts among them into three circles,
and met each of them twice a week: this furnished him a season of
refreshment every day, and each of them took part at least once a week.
They were thus early initiated into a course of Christian activity, and
taught that they would lose much themselves, besides failing to do good
to others, if they held back. The converts were so rooted and grounded
in this truth, that once, when Miss Fiske was in Geog Tapa, a brother
said to her that she must not leave the village till she had induced a
woman to pray with her, whom they all regarded as a Christian, but who
would not take part in their female prayer meetings; and when she
objected to urging her, Deacon John replied, "If she was an ordinary
Christian, we might let her pass; but her position is one of such
prominence, that the other women will do just as she does; and so she
must do right," Miss Fiske talked long with the delinquent, but she
insisted that she could not do it. The missionary told of her own
trials in the matter,--how she had staid away from meeting lest she
should be called on, and remained unblessed till she was willing to do
her duty. She prayed with her once and again, even a third time, before
she consented, saying, "I will not displease God any more in this." So,
drawing very close to her instructor, she offered two petitions for
herself, and one that her friend might be rewarded for showing her her
duty. Hannah was soon active in the women's meetings, and is to this
day a most useful and consistent Christian.

Another marked feature in Mr. Stoddard's labors was his tact in setting
others to work for Christ. He taught his pupils that they must toil as
well as pray, and soon after the first converts were brought to Christ,
definite labor for others was assigned to them, not only among their
schoolmates and those who visited the premises, but also in gathering
in those not disposed to come to meeting. Once, when three fourths of
the pupils were hopefully pious, Mr. Stoddard said, "I must bring in
more, just to furnish work for these converts." He himself was happy in
his work, because he gave himself wholly to it, without the least
reservation; and amid the many trials that marked the years of his
residence in Persia, he looked beyond them all, to Him who not only can
give joy in suffering, but, by means of it, bring sinners to the
Saviour.

The hopeful converts in the Seminary, after spending the summer of 1846
at their own homes, in circumstances of great trial and temptation,
returned, all save one, not only retaining their interest in spiritual
things, but established in Christian character. Their friends also
testified to their thoughtfulness, prayerfulness, and cheerful
obedience at home, and the influence of their piety was happy on others.

For a while, in the autumn of 1846, the school was disbanded on account
of the cholera. But, contrary to the fears of many, after a separation
of two months, all were spared to meet again, though hundreds had
fallen on all sides. Three weeks afterwards, the Christians among them
seemed more than usually earnest in prayer for the conversion of the
impenitent, and at once the answer came. The first one awakened was
Moressa, now the wife of Yakob, of Supergan, and then about fourteen
years of age. She had been taken into the family of Mrs. Grant nine
years before, and that of Mr. Stocking afterwards. She had received
much religious instruction, with apparently little effect; but now her
convictions were deep, though she did not submit to Christ for nearly a
week after she felt she was lost. Her case deeply enlisted the
sympathies of her fellow-pupils, and soon several others passed through
a season of deep distress, to rest in the grace of Christ.

One of these was Eneya, sister of Oshana, and now the wife of Shlemon,
in Amadia. Her widowed mother had fled with her children to Oroomiah
before the Koordish invasion of her native Tehoma. Few children have so
deep a sense of sin as she had, or exercise such implicit trust in the
Saviour. At that time, her teacher wrote, "May she become a messenger
of great good to her countrywomen;" and now, that prayer is being
answered in her usefulness in that distant and lonely field of labor.
Altogether there were seven who seemed at this time to take the Lord
Jesus Christ as their God and Saviour.




CHAPTER XII.


FIRST FRUITS.

SARAH, DAUGHTER OF PRIEST ESHOO.--MARTHA.--HANNAH.

Let us now turn aside to take a nearer view of the first fruits of this
revival. The first to ask the way to heaven, to find it, and to enter
through the gate into the city, was Sarah, or Sarra, as the Nestorians
pronounce it. She was born among the rude mountaineers of Gawar, in
1831. Her father, Eshoo, then a deacon, regarded her at first with the
aversion Nestorian fathers usually felt towards their daughters; but
her strong attachment to him while yet a child, so won his heart, that
when the Koords overran Gawar, in 1835, and the family fled from their
smouldering village, he was willing to be seen carrying her on his
back, in the same way that his wife bore her younger sister. The family
stopped for a time at Degala, and subsisted by begging from door to
door, lodging at night in a stable. The fine intellect of the
self-taught father soon brought him to the notice of the missionaries;
and one day Mrs. Grant, then just about securing her long-cherished
desire of a school for girls, asked him, in her winning way, "Have you
any daughters? and will you not send them to our little school?" The
inquiry revived a wish that he had felt while yet in Gawar, that his
daughter should learn to read; and in the spring of 1841, when he moved
from Degala to the city, he sent her to the mission school. She had
just entered her tenth year--a tall, slender, dark-eyed girl, even then
giving indications of her early death, and though often a great
sufferer, she applied herself so diligently to study, that she soon
became, as she ever continued to be, the best scholar in the school.

The ancient Syriac Bible was the principal text book; and she so far
mastered that language as to acquire a knowledge of Scripture rarely
attained in any land by a child of her years. She was the walking
concordance of the school; and her knowledge of the doctrines of the
Bible was even more remarkable. Under the teaching of Mrs. Harriet
Stoddard, she had also learned to sing sweetly our sacred music. Still,
with all her acquirements, she was destitute of grace; and her
declining health led her teacher to feel much anxiety for her salvation.

On the first Monday in 1846, she said to Sanum, one of her schoolmates,
who, she knew, was thoughtful, "Sister, we ought to turn to God. Shall
we ever find a better time than when so many are praying for us?" They
together resolved to spend the day in seeking salvation; and the manner
in which they made known this purpose to their teacher, and carried it
out, has been already related. (See p. 116). From that day, she never
seemed to waver. As soon as she found peace for herself, she sought to
make others acquainted with her Saviour; not forgetting, however, that
prayer of the Psalmist, "Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me,
and know my thoughts. See if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me
in the way everlasting." Feeble as she was, she never shrank from
labor. Hours every day were spent in her closet, and the rest of her
time was sacredly used for Christ. She had much to do with the
conversion of the twenty schoolmates whom she was permitted to see in
Christ before she went home; and she did much for the women who came to
the Seminary. Her teacher never knew a young person more anxious to
save souls. Both pupils and visitors loved to have Sarah tell them the
way. They said, "We can see it when she tells us." No wonder they saw
it, for she seemed to look on it all the time. Her teacher depended
much on her, and yet often remonstrated with her for such incessant
labors. Still she felt that she must be about her Father's business
while the day lasted. Her desires for the salvation of her father
seemed to commence with her anxiety for herself; and his feelings were
soon so tender that he could not answer an inquiry about his own state
without tears. Sarah was the first to know that he had found peace. His
first religious intercourse with her was to tell her that he had found
Jesus. He had known that she was thoughtful, but was not prepared to
find her so full of humble hope and holy joy. Next day, when urged by a
missionary to labor for the salvation of his family, he replied, "Sarah
knows the way to heaven better than I do. She can teach me far better
than I could her." Their previous strong attachment now ripened into
Christian love. He never felt that his daily bread had been given him,
if he had not knelt with her in prayer, and his heart been lifted up by
her petitions as well as his own. Her mother at first scoffed; but soon
she, too, sought the Saviour; and her younger daughter, whose evil ways
for a time tried Sarah sorely, was also afterwards brought into the
kingdom.

Mr. Stocking used to call her "the best theologian among the
Nestorians," and often said, "If I want to write a good sermon, I like
to sit down first and talk with Sarah, and then be sure that she is
praying for me."

Her attachment to the means of grace was strong. She went to every
meeting, even after she could not reach the chapel without help. Her
emaciated form, her hollow cough, her eye bright with unnatural lustre,
all told that she was passing away, but, combined with her sweet
singing and heavenly spirit, led her companions sometimes to whisper,
as she took her seat in the chapel, "Have we not an Elizabeth
Wallbridge among us?"--"The Dairyman's Daughter," in Syriac, had just
then issued from the press, and was a great favorite with the
Nestorians.

As early as March, it was seen that she must die. Still she clung to
the school, and not for nought. She had a mission to fulfil, and her
Saviour strengthened her for the work to which he called her. As yet,
none of the pious Nestorians had finished their course. With the
converts, victory over death was something heard of, but never
witnessed; and Sarah was chosen to show them "in what peace a Christian
can die." Perhaps the last days of no young disciple were ever watched
with more eager interest. "Will Christ sustain us to the last? Will he
be with us through the dark valley? Will he come for us and receive us
to himself, as he promised?" These were to them momentous questions;
and they stood ready to answer them according as the Lord supported
her. Ever since her death they have looked upon the last change from a
new point of view. But we must not anticipate.

The five months between her conversion and her decease were very
precious to all who knew her. She sometimes sat with her teacher and
talked an hour at a time on the home of the blessed. She seemed to look
in upon its glories, and share its gladness; and then her thoughts
turned to the perishing around her, saying, "I would labor a little
longer for them, if it is my Father's will." The young converts whom
she had taught could not bear the thought of her leaving them; but they
sought to stay an angel in his course. The dross had been consumed, and
the spirit was made meet for the inheritance of the saints in light.

[Illustration: Courtyard of the Female Seminary]

About the middle of May, it was felt that she must go home to her
father, whose house was near the Seminary. It was a beautiful day in a
Persian summer. The morning exercises were closed. When her teacher
told her what they thought, she replied in a whisper, "I think I had
better go, but I want to be alone a little before I leave not to
return." With weary step she sought the closet where first she found
her Saviour: it was occupied. Perhaps He saw she might think more of
the place than was meet; so she spent an hour in another room, and then
returned, saying, "I am ready to go now." She went supported by a
schoolmate on either side: stopping in the court, she turned to take a
last look of the dear home where she had learned of Jesus, and,
plucking some of the roses that bloomed by her side, passed on. On the
preceding page that court is represented, as seen from the adjoining
one. She suffered intensely for a few days. Her disease forbade her
lying down, even at night. But still not a day passed that she did not
gather some women about her, and point them to Jesus. Her teacher
visited her frequently, and often found her with her Bible open, and
several women around her bed, to whom she was explaining it. The
praying pupils, too, often knelt with her at the accustomed throne of
grace.

One Saturday in June, her father was asked if he could go to
Tergawer--twenty-five miles distant--and preach. His reply was, "I will
see what Sarah says." She said, "Go, father, and I will pray for you."
Sabbath morning came, and her teacher saw that Sarah was almost home:
she told her so, and once more committed the dear pupil to the Saviour
who stood by. She had to return to her duties in school, but first said
to her mother, "Send for me when the Master calls for her, for, if I
cannot go over Jordan with her, I would at least accompany her to the
swelling stream." In the afternoon her sufferings became intense; and
losing herself for a moment, she said, "Call my father." They told her
where he was. "O, yes, I remember. Don't call him. Let him preach; I
can die alone." She then said, "Call Miss Fiske;" and her sister
started to go. But the dying one remembered that it was the hour for
prayer meeting, and beckoned her to return, saying, "She is in meeting
now, with my companions. Don't call her; I can die alone." Perhaps,
with that teacher present, her eyes had not so clearly discerned the
Lord Jesus. Her sufferings were now so great, she hardly spoke for an
hour. Then she said, in a clear voice, "Mother, raise me, that I may
commit my spirit;" for she would never approach her Saviour but on her
knees. Supported, as she had been hundreds of times before, by that
mother's strong arms, and in the attitude of prayer, she said, "Lord
Jesus, receive--" And there she stopped: prayer had ended. Instead of
the closing words of the earthly petition was the opening of the new
song in heaven. The Saviour did not wait for the close of her petition
before he answered it. The teacher had just sat down with her pupils
when the door opened, and a messenger said "Sarah is asleep!" "Yes,"
thought she, gratefully, "till Jesus shall say, 'Awake!'" According to
Eastern custom, Sarah was buried that same evening (June 13th), and the
whole school followed her to the grave, which was close to that of Mrs.
Grant. The first fruit of the school appropriately lies by the side of
her who planted that tree in the garden of the Lord, At the funeral her
teacher was just thinking that Sarah could help her no more, that her
prayers and labors were forever ended, when she looked up, and her eye
rested on the evening star looking down upon the grave. It was a
pleasant thought that she, too, was a star in glory. She was glad that
the first to love Christ was the first to go to be with him, and still
loves to think, of her as waiting for those who used to pray with her
on earth. The Christian life of Sarah was short; but she did much, for
she taught her people how

  "Jesus can make a dying bed
   Feel soft as downy pillows are."[1]

[Footnote 1: For additional foots about Sarah, see Nestorian Biography,
pp. 25-40.]

After Sarah, like Stephen among the early disciples, had led the way
into the presence of her Saviour, Blind Martha was the next to follow.

She was constrained by sickness to leave the school early in the spring
of 1847, and go home to her parents in Geog Tapa. Though six miles
distant, her schoolmates loved to walk out there to comfort her. They
prized no recreation so much as the privilege of going to see her. They
read and talked with her about her favorite portions of Scripture,
prayed with her, and were never allowed to leave without singing
"Jerusalem, my happy home." At such times, one of them said, "Her
countenance always showed that her spirit was walking the golden
streets." When asked about her health, she uniformly replied, "The Lord
helps me;" and when urged to speak more particularly, would say, "Dear
sisters, the Lord helps me, and that is enough." When, after five or
six of them had prayed in succession, she was asked if she was not
wearied, she would reply, "I know that I am weak, but prayer never
tires me." So great a privilege was it deemed to be with her, that one
morning, when a pious member of the Seminary at Seir was called to
leave the village early, he said, "I cannot go till I have prayed with
Blind Martha, and got from her manna for the road."

Her companions desired very much to be present when she went home; but
this was not permitted. One morning in June, she said, at early dawn,
"Mother, the day breaks; I think Jesus is coming for me now; let me
go." But seeing no change in her appearance, her mother lay down again,
and, when next she woke, found that Jesus had come, and taken her to be
with him in his home above. What was that vision of the glory of
Immanuel that prompted the cry, "Mother, the day breaks!" from one who
never remembered to have seen the light? She became blind in infancy. A
smile remained on her pale face; and well might the sight of Him who
said, "If I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again and
receive you unto myself," leave such a memento of the bliss.

Little Hannah, the youngest member of the school, was suddenly called
home the following September, when only eleven years of age. When she
first came to Christ, her teacher was awakened one morning by her
asking at the bedside, "Is it wrong to wish to die?" "But why do you
want to die?" "That I may go and stay with Jesus, and never sin again."
This desire never left her. Once she said, with tears, "It seems as if
I cannot wait so long to go to my Saviour;" and at another time, "I
fear that I have sinned in not being willing to wait till Jesus calls
me." Before leaving for vacation, each pupil put up her own things in a
bundle, to be laid away till her return. As Hannah was at work on hers,
she said to a girl near her, "Perhaps you will open this. I do not
think that I ever shall. When you come together in the autumn, I trust
that I shall be in the Saviour's school above." So strong was the
desire awakened in her by Him who intended soon to gratify it.

While the cholera raged around her in August, she frequently said,
"This may be my time to go to my dear Saviour;" and repeated it to her
mother on the last morning of her life, but went out as usual to her
work in the vineyard. About noon she became unwell, and said to a
companion, "I am sick; perhaps I shall die soon." "Are you willing?"
"O, yes, I am not afraid to go to Jesus." The disease made rapid
progress, and again she said, "I am very sick; I shall die soon: shall
we not pray together?" Her young friend led in prayer, and then called
on her to follow; but her time for prayer was almost finished. She
could just say, "Bless my dear sister; take me gently through the dark
river;" when she sunk exhausted, and was carried to the house. A mother
bent over an only daughter, and three loving brothers over an only
sister; but they could not keep her back from Jesus. She sent for her
companions, and they hastened to her bedside. She called for her
Testament; but her eyesight was failing her, and she returned it,
saying, "I can never use it more; but read it more prayerfully, and
love the Saviour more than I have done." She lingered through the
night, and rose with the dawn to her long-desired rest in the presence
of her Redeemer.

It Is remarkable that three timid girls should have been chosen to lead
the advance of a great multitude of Nestorians through the dark valley
into the light beyond. No member of the Boy's Seminary died till three
years afterwards; and only two others of this before 1858--a period of
eleven years; but Infinite Wisdom chose, through such weak and timorous
ones, to glorify the power of Christ to bear his people through the
last conflict into everlasting rest.




CHAPTER XIII


SUBSEQUENT REVIVALS

DEACON JOHN STUDYING BACKSLIDING IN 1849--WORK IN VILLAGE OF
SEIR--WIVES OF SIYAD AND YONAN--KHANUMJAN--WOMEN AT THE SEMINARY--GEOG
TAPA--DEGALA--A PENITENT--SIN OF ANGER--REVIVAL IN 1856--MISS FISKE
ENCOURAGED--STILLNESS AND DEEP FEELING--UNABLE TO SING--CONVERSION OF
MISSIONARY CHILDREN--VISIT OF ENGLISH AMBASSADOR--REVIVAL OF
1857--LETTER OF SANUM

The first indication of a work of grace in 1849 was seen in the unusual
seriousness of Deacon John. He had been reading Pike's Guide to Young
Disciples, and the chapter on backsliding moved him deeply. For a long
time, he went mourning his departure from God. One day he was reading
aloud in the Seminary, when a missionary came in, and wondering to see
him there, asked what he was doing. He replied, "I am studying
backsliding; and O, sir, I love it very much;" meaning to say that he
loved to study the way back to the enjoyment of God. This state of mind
was followed by earnest effort for the salvation of others, and the
hopefully pious first passed through a season of deep heart-searching
and renewed consecration to God. Under an awful sense of the violation
of covenant vows, for many days some of them did nothing but weep and
pray. "How unfaithful have I been to my Saviour and to immortal souls!"
was the cry on all sides. One whose Bible was found blotted with tears,
had been converted in 1846, and her grief was on account of her
unfaithfulness as a follower of Christ. Having thus wept bitterly
herself, she was well fitted to lead others to the God of all comfort.
Her labors were unwearied, both in and out of school. Indeed, the
mission was now so reduced in numbers, that much of the work in this
revival was performed by the Nestorians, and they proved themselves
very efficient. Naturally ardent, they preached Christ and him
crucified with a zeal and faithfulness rarely witnessed in our own
land; but their ardor needed careful guiding, for some were, at one
time, entirely prostrated by excessive labor.

The pupils of the Seminary, during a short vacation, seemed like angels
of mercy to their families and friends. In Geog Tapa, their meetings
for women every evening had an attendance varying from thirty to one
hundred. Many of these were glad to learn the way of salvation, even
from children. Besides this, the older pupils, under the guidance of an
experienced native helper, spent much time in personal conversation and
prayer with their own sex, as did the members of the other Seminary
with the men.

In the village of Seir, the work was very general. In addition to the
labors of the pious students in the Male Seminary there, Sanum and
Moressa labored from house to house among the women. But hear their own
account of what they did, in a letter to Miss Lovell's school at
Constantinople;--

"What shall we tell you, beloved, of the great love God has shown to
our school and people? For two months we have had such delightful days
as we never saw in our lives before. The work of the Lord has also
commenced in the villages, and in many there is great inquiry for the
way of life. The servants of God are so full of zealous love, that they
preach till their strength and voice give way. But again they go on to
preach, for the harvest is great, and the laborers few. How should we,
with burning hearts, beg the Lord of the harvest to send forth
laborers! Can we bear, dear sisters, to see the deadly wings of Satan's
kingdom spread out and destroy those bought by the precious blood of
Christ? Ought we not rather to wrestle like Jacob till we see the
loving wings of the kingdom of the Saviour spread out, and impart life
to wounded souls on every side? We hope that your waiting eyes may see
greater wonders among your own people than we do here.

"Now we will tell you about the little village of Seir, which contains
nineteen houses. God has visited every house; and because the women
were much awakened, and had no teacher, the missionaries sent two of us
there, not because we were fit for such a work,--for we are deficient
in Godly knowledge, and every qualification,--but because God sometimes
chooses the ignorant and weak to do him service. And what shall we tell
you of the wonders God showed us among those poor women? There was no
time in which they did not cry, with tears, 'What shall we do?' 'Woe
unto us!' 'We are lost!' When we asked them to pray in meetings, they
prayed as if taught of God. We wondered at them very much. In one
house, we found a woman beating her head with both hands, crying, 'O my
sins! They are so great! There is no pardon!' We tried to reason with
her; but if we took her hands from her head, she beat her breast. She
said, 'You told me, when you prayed with me the other day, to go to
Christ; but he will not receive me, I am such a sinner.' With
difficulty we quieted her, and told of the great mercy of the Son of
David. We prayed with each woman of the village alone, and they with
us, fervently and in tears.

"In one instance, we heard an old man praying earnestly in the stable,
and his wife in the house. We waited till they had finished, before we
went in, and there we found an old man, perhaps ninety years old, and
his wife, also very aged. We spoke with them of the lowly Redeemer, and
how he was ready to dwell with them, poor as they were. The tears
rolled down their wrinkled faces, and made our own hearts burn within
us. The old man prayed with us as if Christ stood right before him, and
we prayed with them both.

"There were meetings several times a day, and when they closed, the
voice of prayer might be heard on all sides, in the houses and stables.
Every family now has morning and evening worship."

In this revival, the native helpers were very much interested for the
salvation of their unconverted wives. The families of Siyad and Yonan
live in Geog Tapa, and their first visits home were blessed to the
conviction of their companions, who soon came to the school, begging to
be allowed to stay and learn the way of life. Of course, they were not
refused. The wife of Siyad had been a frequent visitor there, but such
an opposer of religion, that her coming was always dreaded; but now how
changed! Day by day her convictions deepened, till they were
overwhelming. Tears were her meat, and prayer her employment, day and
night, till, as she said, "The Saviour found her," and she was at rest.
Three children and a daughter-in-law joined her in believing, and it
was delightful to see the family, not long after, each in his or her
turn, calling on the name of the Lord in one of the rooms of the
Seminary.

Yonan, the junior teacher of the school, had been married by force two
years before, by his wicked father; that, too, when his heart was fixed
on another, every way fitted to be his companion. It was a severe
trial; but grace triumphed, and his great desire, seemed to be the
conversion of the wife thus forced upon him. At midnight, he was often
heard interceding for her, and, in the early part of the revival, the
answer came. Miss Fiske will never forget the time when, in an
adjoining room, she heard her for the first time praying with her
husband. It gave her a new insight into the meaning of that scripture,
"They believed not for joy." The new convert was very active among the
women in her village; and when her father-in-law forbade social prayer
in his house, she took her little company at sunset behind the village
church, where even the bleak winds of February did not chill their
devotions.

Khanumjan, the aged mother of John, though past threescore and ten,
entered into the work with a zeal that might put to shame many younger
women in our own land. She toiled to bring the more aged women right to
the cross, taking them one by one into her own closet, that then and
there they might accept the Saviour. Though herself unable to read, she
did much for the preachers who went out to the villages, providing food
for them on their return, and exhorting them to courage and
faithfulness. No wonder she said to a visitor, "Three years ago, I saw
Christ in heaven, and I have seen him there ever since; but now he sits
by my side all day long." When she died, she said, over and over again,
"I am going after Jesus."

In this revival, the encouragement to labor for woman was greater than
ever before. After the middle of January, the Seminary was almost
constantly thronged with inquirers. Day and night, it was consecrated
by the prayers and tears of women seeking their Saviour. On Friday, and
on the Sabbath, many from the neighboring villages spent the time there
between services. The room was filled with them; and even while they
ate, they must have some one speaking to them of Jesus. Those who did
so, often spoke with such tenderness as showed that Christ himself was
very near. Sometimes the women could not eat any thing but the bread of
life. At times, the anguish of some for sin was so overpowering, that
the question, "Can a woman forget her sucking child?" might almost have
been answered in the affirmative. In some instances, the scenes that
took place were too much for frail nature to bear, and the laborers
were ready to ask to be clothed upon with immortality while the Lord
passed by. Those who spent the night in the Seminary slept in the large
room on the lower floor, between the central door and that on the left,
in the engraving; and occasionally the sound of their weeping and
praying banished sleep from the rooms above them. Yet such hinderance
to rest brought a refreshment all its own.

In Geog Tapa, the village ruler was found sitting at the feet of Jesus,
and going with the preachers from place to place, to give greater
weight to their words; and twenty-five young men, though they could not
read, yet did what they could with untiring zeal.

There was an interesting work in Degala, so noted for vice that it was
called the Sodom of the Nestorians. The first converted there was a
young man employed in the Seminary. He passed through a severe mental
conflict before his proud heart yielded; but when it did, he became a
living sacrifice to God. One day he came to the teachers, saying, "I
have a petition to make; will you receive it?" Supposing it to be some
pecuniary matter, they replied, "Tell us what it is." He at once burst
into tears, and covering his face with his garment, said, "My village
is lost; my family is perishing, and their blood is on my neck; let me
go to-night and beg forgiveness for my wicked example, and urge them to
flee from the wrath to come." He obtained his request, and left,
sobbing aloud. Next morning, he brought his wife and two other women to
be instructed. About a week after, Deacon Tamo found in the village
several inquirers, and one woman in agony on account of her sins. She
had been notorious for wickedness, and so vile as hardly to find one
who would associate with her, though now one of the most lovely
Christians in any land. The next day, she came to the Seminary, and as
soon as Miss Fiske sat down beside her, she threw herself into her lap,
crying, "Do tell me what to do, or where to go, to get rid of my sins."
She was pointed to the Lamb of God, and one moment her feet seemed to
rest on the Rock of Ages, and the next a fresh wave of conviction swept
her into the raging sea. So she vibrated between life and death. She
was asked to pray. In all her life she had not probably heard ten
prayers; but her strong crying and tears showed that the Holy Spirit
was her teacher, and the helper of her infirmities. She had learned to
pray where her Saviour found a cradle--in the manger--cast out and
derided by her friends.

She was first awakened in the Seminary; for one day, as soon as she
entered the door, a pupil, then under deep conviction herself, and to
whom she was an entire stranger, seized her hand, saying, "My sister,
my sister, what are you doing? We are all lost. We must repent, or
perish." These words she could not forget, and from that hour sought
until she found her Saviour, and then bore ill treatment with such
meekness as won others also to Christ.

The desire of the converts for instruction was most affecting. One of
them wept bitterly when asked if she was willing to forsake every sin,
saying, "What shall I do? I have one sin so strong that I fear I cannot
leave it off." "What is it?" "I cannot live without these words of God.
My husband will not let me go to hear them, and anger sometimes rises
in my heart at this. Tell me what to do with this sin."

An account of the revival in 1850 will be given in the chapter on the
prayerfulness of the Nestorians. After this were instances of
conversion each year, but not so marked, or so general, as in 1849. So
we pass over the intervening time to dwell a moment on the revival of
1856. That year, the pupils were very studious, and kind in their
feelings towards each other and their teachers; but the winter was
nearly over before any additions were made to the now diminished number
of believers. The teachers mourned; still the heavens were brass, and
the earth iron. Christians were lukewarm, and none seemed to have power
with God.

Miss Fiske returned from the English prayer meeting Sabbath evening,
February 18th, in that desponding state that sometimes follows intense
and protracted desire, when its object is not attained. At such times,
the sensibilities seem paralyzed, and emotion dies of sheer exhaustion.
The pupils had retired; so also had Miss Rice; and she was left alone.
Her thoughts brooded over the state of her charge, but she had no
strength to rise and carry those precious souls to Christ. She could
not sleep, and yet so shrunk from the duties of the morrow, that she
longed for a lengthening out of the night, rather than the approach of
dawn. Eleven o'clock struck, and there was a knock at the door. Could
she open it? Must she see another face that night? She did open it, and
there stood one of her pupils, not so without feeling as her fainting
heart had imagined. Struck by the languor of her teacher's looks, she
inquired tenderly, "Are you very tired?" "No, not very; why do you
ask?" "I cannot sleep; our school has been resting on me all day, and I
thought perhaps you would help me to pray." The spell was broken; the
dry fountain of feeling gushed out afresh, and, with a full heart, she
said, "Come in, thou blessed of the Lord." As an angel from heaven,
that dear pupil strengthened her teacher that night, and together they
carried the whole household to Jesus. When at length she retired, all
was sweetly left with Christ, and he whispered peace. She could sleep
now, and when morning came there was still peace. "Could ye not watch
with me one hour?" was the word spoken to her as she arose; and hardly
had she repeated it at morning prayers, before three, in different
parts of the room, were weeping. She said little, for she felt it safer
to go and tell Jesus their wants and their unworthiness. All day, the
feeling in the school was subdued and tender. No one asked, "What shall
I do to be saved?" but there was quiet at the table, and quiet in the
rooms. The work was done willingly and well, but in silence, and the
voice of prayer in the closets was gentle. Tuesday passed in almost
perfect stillness. No one said even, "Pray for me." Towards evening,
Miss Fiske said, "If there is one who wants first of all to attend to
her eternal interests, I would like to see her at half past eight
o'clock." At that hour, her door opened, and one entered alone; then
another and another, each alone, till the room was full. She closed the
door, but still they came. What were her feelings when she looked round
on twenty-three, sitting with their heads bowed down in silence? She
said little, for she felt that they wanted to hear God, rather than
man, and the parable of the prodigal son that evening seemed to come
fresh from the lips of Jesus.

Next day, each lesson was recited in its season, and recited well; but
tears blurred many a page, and at recess not a few went to be alone
with God. At eleven o'clock, Mr. Perkins came in as usual to sing with
them, "Bartimeus" was the first hymn. All began it; but some voices
faltered on the first stanza, more on the second, and soon the leader's
voice was heard alone. He took up the Bible lying on the desk, and
saying, "Perhaps some wanderer would like now to arise and go to her
heavenly Father," he too read the portion of the night before, and led
in prayer. The teachers had to lengthen the intermission at noon,
because they could not bear to summon the pupils so early from their
closets.

The mission met that afternoon in the Seminary. Mr. Stoddard came down
from Seir covered with snow, saying, in his pleasant way, as he opened
the door, "We have snowed down this time;" but when he learned the
state of things, he said, very tenderly, "You must have thought my
speech untimely; I did not know God was so near; but my heart is with
you, and I hope we both shall have a large blessing." That meeting was
almost all prayer, and the weeks that followed it witnessed a work
silent but deep. It was characterized by humble contrition, and much
simple dependence on Christ. Most of those twenty-three, before the
close of the term, were hoping in his mercy.

Three missionary children were among the converts in this revival, and
their conversion did much good to the Nestorians; for, though they had
felt their own need of regeneration, they were in doubt about the
children of pious parents; but when they saw the children of
missionaries weep over sin, and come as lost sinners to the Saviour,
they understood as never before that the entrance into the kingdom was
the same for all.

At this time, the English ambassador passed through Oroomiah; and
though, when he and his suite visited the Seminary, there was some
apprehension felt as to the effect it might have on the religious
interests of the pupils, they not only did themselves credit, in the
examination he made of the school, but returned from the interview with
their relish for spiritual things undiminished. Indeed, the event,
which ordinarily would have been more than a nine days' wonder, caused
scarce a ripple on the deep current of spiritual emotion.

The Seminary was again blessed in 1857, and the year following Miss
Fiske returned from Seir after the funeral of Harriet Stoddard to
welcome several who had entered the fold of the good Shepherd during
her absence.

The labors of Miss Rice, who had charge of the school (while she was
away,) have also been blessed in each of the four succeeding years.
During that time, eighteen of the pupils have been received to the
communion. The revival in the winter of 1861-62 was, however, more
interesting and extensive.

At one meeting in the Male Seminary, the young men burst into tears
while singing the hymn, "Alas, and did my Saviour bleed?" and soon
after, in the Saturday evening meeting, Miss Rice's whole school were
bowed in earnest prayer, and did not move for some time when requested
by her to retire for private devotion. On this occasion, Mr. Cobb
writes, "It was my privilege to speak a word to them, and I can truly
say that I never saw such a scene before, as, with heads bowed down on
their desks, unable wholly to repress their sobs, they listened, and
again engaged in prayer." Even then, it was only after repeated
requests that they went to their own rooms, where many continued their
supplications far into the night.

The interesting scenes of these awakenings are thus gratefully recalled
by Sanum, a convert of the first revival, in a letter dated Salmas,
June 6th, 1859:--

Beloved Teacher, Miss Fiske: I received your priceless letter with many
tears of joy, and when I read your loving, motherly counsels, my heart
was full; it was drawn to you with inexpressible love; and when you
reminded me of those blessed revivals, my eyes were darkened with
floods of tears, so that, for a time, I could not read. How can I ever
forget the first night that you met me, after the Lord had touched my
heart, in that blessed room? or how many times you took me by the hand,
and led me to the throne of grace? Often I was in the dark, and the
Lord, through you, was pleased to give me rest. Can I ever forget, when
the hand of the Lord rested on me in the death of my dear children,[1]
how many times you came as an angel of peace to wipe away my tears?
Shall I ever forget the Lord's coming among us by the still rain of the
Holy Spirit? or those meetings of the sisters for prayer? or those
tearful pleadings in the closets? Can I ever forget the fervent
supplications and preaching of blessed Mr. Stocking, and how he begged
us to flee from the wrath to come? If I forget these, let my right hand
forget her cunning, and my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth.
[Footnote 1: Page 185]

It is a year, my beloved, since I have been able to go to Oroomiah. I
have sorrowed greatly to be cut off so long from the supper of our
Lord, and them that meet around his table. Perhaps it is because I am
not worthy of the blessing. The Lord mercifully grant that I be not cut
off from the heavenly supper of the Lamb.

Our work here is much as before. I grieve to say that there are few
with whom I can pray, and in the few cases where I can do so, it must
be done as by stealth. But there are those with whom I can talk. Hoimer
and I have a meeting for the women every Sabbath, and on other days.
Every Tuesday, Hoimer, Raheel, and I have a little meeting together,
and it is very pleasant, but will be more so when the Lord shall
increase our number. O that we longing ones might see that day, and our
troubled hearts rejoice!

During the nineteen years since the Seminary was established, it has
enjoyed, in all, twelve revivals; and though it is not desirable to
count up the results of human labors, it is due to the praise of divine
grace to record, that out of those who have been connected with it, as
many as two thirds have, in the judgment of charity, been created anew
in Christ Jesus.




CHAPTER XIV.


DARK DAYS.

SEMINARY BROKEN UP IN 1844.--DEACON ISAAC.--PERSECUTION BY MAR
SHIMON.--FUNERAL OF DAUGHTER OF PRIEST ESHCO.--DEACON
GUWERGIS.--ATTEMPT AT ABDUCTION OF PUPIL.--PERIL OF SCHOOL.--MRS.
HARRIET STODDAR.--YAHYA KHAN.--ANARCHY.--LETTER FROM BABILO.

The Nestorian mission has encountered less opposition than other
missions in Western Asia. Yet here, also, they who would live godly in
Christ Jesus have suffered persecution. On June 19th, 1844, the
brothers of Mar Shimon issued this order: "Be it known to you all, ye
readers at Seir, that if ye do not come to us tomorrow, we will
excommunicate you from our most holy church; your finger nails shall be
torn out; we will hunt you from village to village, and kill you if we
can." Miss Fiske was spending the summer there with her pupils, and it
was not deemed best to provoke further trouble by retaining them. When
told of this, they all wept aloud. Nor did they weep alone. Their
teacher, and the family of Mr. Stocking, in which they lived, could not
restrain their tears. It seemed as if the girls would never tear
themselves away from their teacher; and when at length they departed,
again and again the lamentation arose, "We shall never hear the word of
God again." Miss Fiske laid them at the feet of Jesus, trusting that he
would bring them back to her, and others with them. A German Jew, who
was present, said in his broken English, "I have seen much bad to
missionaries in other countries, but nothing bad like this, to take
little children from words of Jesus Christ."

Even Deacon Isaac, a brother of Mar Shimon, who was prominent in the
act, was ashamed of it. On a visit to the school, eight years
afterwards, he asked leave to speak to the pupils, and said, "My young
friends, I want you to do all you can to help your teachers, for I once
troubled Miss Fiske, and it has made my life bitter ever since." Here
the good man broke down, and there was not a dry eye among his hearers;
while he added, "I have vowed before God that I will do all that I can
to help her as long as I live." And all who know him can testify that
he has kept his word, ever since his conversion in 1849. When he first
began to be thoughtful, he heard that one of the pupils was in the
habit of praying for him. He sent for her, and insisted on her praying
with him; and though he was the most intelligent of the Nestorians, and
possessed of rare force of character, and Sarah was more noted for
devotion, than for her mental powers, yet he learned from her in a most
childlike spirit; and that scripture which says, "A little child shall
lead them," found in this case a beautiful illustration.

He has been occasionally employed in the school, and always proved a
very useful and acceptable teacher. When he bade Miss Fiske good-bye,
in 1858, he said, "You may rest assured that I will do all I can for
the women till you come back;" and the next Sabbath found him teaching
a class of adult females. In our favored land, the grace of God has
made it nothing strange for the governor of a state to be a teacher in
the Sabbath school; but one who has not lived in Persia can form no
idea of what it is for a brother of Mar Shimon to teach a class of
women. He has great skill in bringing out the meaning of Scripture, and
is every where exceedingly acceptable as a Bible teacher. Along with
unfeigned piety, he has more real refinement than any of his
countrymen, and few Nestorians can show kindness with such true
delicacy of feeling.

The health of Miss Fiske was so impaired in the spring of 1848, that
she reluctantly yielded to the advice of the mission, and went with Mr.
Stocking to Erzroom, to meet Mr. Cochran and family, then on their way
to Persia. When they returned, they found Mr. Stoddard's health so
seriously affected by long-continued over-exertion, that he only
awaited their arrival to leave for Trebizond. Little did they dream
that it was Mrs. Stoddard's last farewell to the scene of her labors.

Nor was this all. The patriarch Mar Shimon, who had long worn the guise
of friendship, now threw off the mask. He broke up schools in small and
distant villages, and secured the beating of a man by the governor on
the charge of apostasy. The Female Seminary was honored with his
special anathema. "Has Miss Fiske taught you this?" was his frequent
demand of those who fell into his hands, followed by such reviling as
only an Oriental could pour forth.

On the morning of July 28th, the infant daughter of Priest Eshoo, named
Sarah, after her sainted sister, lay on her death bed; and to punish
her father for his preaching, Mar Shimon forbade her burial in the
Nestorian graveyard. He collected a mob ready to do his bidding as soon
as she should die; but she lingered on, and so disappointed him for
that day. Next day she died, and at once he anathematized all who
should assist in her burial. A pious carpenter, however, forced his way
through the mob, and made her coffin. He remained steadfast throughout
the storm, replying to every dissuasion of his friends, "I must go
forward, even to the shedding of my blood."

The missionaries appealed to a former governor, who owned that part of
the city, for leave to bury in the cemetery used by the Nestorians from
time immemorial; but the patriarch paid no attention to his messages,
and the child remained unburied. Miss Fiske wrote, "As we look out on
this troubled sea, and sympathize with these afflicted parents, we love
to look up and think of the dear child as sweetly resting on the bosom
of the Saviour. May the Sabbath bring us a foretaste of heavenly rest."
But it found them still "where storms arise and ocean rolls." The
governor sent men to demand the digging of a grave, which the mob would
not allow. Meanwhile, the profligate Mar Gabriel craftily suggested
that a promise from the priest not to preach any more, might end the
trouble. "Never," was the prompt reply. "Let my dead remain unburied,
but I will not go back from the service of the Lord." This so enraged
the patriarch, that, for the sake of peace, the governor advised to
bury the body in one of the villages. The sorrowing parents then locked
their house, and leaving their babe alone in its slumbers, went to the
chapel. There they found comfort from a sermon on the text, "Through
much tribulation we must enter into the kingdom of God." About twenty
men returned with them to the house. Then one bearing the little coffin
went before; the rest followed, singing the forty-sixth Psalm. Even
Moslems gazed with wonder, as they passed close by the door of the
patriarch, and went out of the city gate. The engraving (page 154)
gives a very good representation of this gate. On the green hill-side
at Seir the little one was laid to rest, and the father, thanking the
company for their kindness, hastened them back, to be in time for the
afternoon service.

In the mean time, Mar Shimon sent far and near, forbidding all
intercourse with the missionaries. At Geog Tapa, in the absence of the
Malis, he ordered an old man, who formerly held that office, to summon
the people before him. Only a few vagrants obeyed, and these he
commanded to break up the schools, and prevent preaching in the church.
So, that evening, when John commenced preaching, they proceeded to
execute their orders; but, afraid to face the determined people, they
deferred the attack till the hearers passed out; and then, like stanch
old Puritans, hardly noticing them, the congregation wended their way
homewards, singing psalms as they went.

[Illustration: SEIR GATE, OROOMIAH]

The patriarch now excommunicated Mar Yohanan, and made common cause
with the French Lazarists. He even wrote a fraternal epistle to the
pope, ready for any thing, if he could only crush the mission. His
attendants marched about the mission premises with loud threats; pious
Nestorians were knocked down in the streets; while his brother Isaac
went to a distant village, to show that he had no sympathy with such
iniquity.

Soon after, the carpenter who made the coffin was severely beaten by
his own father for attending a prayer meeting. As the blows fell thick
and fast, he cried, "Must this come from my own father?" But he
remained firm, and next day went to the chapel pale and weak, but
filled with holy joy.

Deacon Guwergis, prevented from going to the mountains,--for the Koords
sided with Mar Shimon,--fearlessly encountered the revilings of the
patriarch in his own house, and told him that he hoped to continue
preaching till he died. His countenance must have shone like Stephen's,
for his persecutor said to one of the attendants, "See how his face
glistens. If he is so bold here, what will he be in the mountains?"
Well might a missionary write, "What a blessing are such men! The sight
of them is worth ten thousand times the sacrifices made by us all."

Though this was vacation, fifteen of the pupils remained in the
Seminary for protection during the storm; yet even there they were not
wholly safe. On the 25th of August, a messenger came in haste for one
of them, saying that her dying brother wished to see her immediately.
As the man was her relative, the girl was ready to go at once; but
providentially Miss Fiske learned that the brother was well, and the
messenger had been seen last with Mar Shimon. So he left, chagrined and
enraged at his failure. The patriarch had told him to be sure and hide
his purpose from that Satan, Miss Fiske, and in case of failure, to
take the girl by force. But the teacher had had some experience in
guarding her fold, and both she and her pupil were thankful for the
deliverance. Next day, Mar Shimon forbade preaching in Geog Tapa; but
if the church was closed, the house-tops remained open. The same day,
the school in Vizierawa was repeatedly dispersed, but each time
reassembled by the teacher.

The 28th of this month was such a day as the mission had never seen
before. In the forenoon, the teacher from Charbash fled wounded from
the servants of Mar Shimon to the mission premises. Scarcely had he
entered, when his brother came in, having escaped from similar
violence. The Moslem owner of the village had to put a stop to the
tearing down of their house.

Miss Fiske and Miss Rice had just sat down to dinner with the school,
when the cry, "A man is killed!" was followed by a rush from all parts
of the yard. A mob at the gate was trying to break in and seize the
native helpers. Mar Yohanan was wounded, and all was confusion. The
teachers exhorted their little flock not to count their lives dear to
them, for Jesus' sake. Happily, they were not called to such a test of
discipleship; but the sympathies of the Moslems were plainly with Mar
Shimon, and no one knew what a day might bring forth. That tried friend
of the mission, E.W. Stevens, Esq., English consul at Tabreez, feared
lest the missionaries should fall by the hand of violence. Miss Fiske
writes, "Our native friends will doubtless suffer much, and we rejoice
to share with them. We hope that fears on our account will not be
realized. Still there is danger; and we try to be ready for life or
death, as our Father sees best. Though in a land of violence, we are
not unhappy; we trust in God, and hope this vine is being pruned that
it may bring forth more fruit. We would have all the gracious designs
of God fulfilled, even though we should be cast down."

The same day came tidings of the death of Mrs. Stoddard, at Trebizond,
and Miss Fiske wrote that night an account of it to her former teacher,
at South Hadley, adding, "Precious sister: she died far away; but my
Father knows why I might not stand by that dying bed, and I would
submit, though my heart bleeds. _Our_ homes are sad to-night, and there
is many a weeping eye among those for whom she toiled so faithfully.
From my first acquaintance with her, she has been to me all that mortal
could be. Her heart was tenderly alive to the spiritual interests of
the dear Nestorians; and to them she devoted all her powers. It was she
who first taught their daughters to sing the songs of Zion. Few,
probably, have accomplished so much in so short a life. Her family, the
mission, the Seminary, and all about us, shared in her untiring labors.
As truly as of dear Mrs. Grant may it be said of her, 'She hath done
what she could.'

"Like Mrs. Grant, she was the youngest member of the mission at the
time of her death. When she left her native land, some almost regretted
that so frail a flower should go forth to encounter the hardships of
missionary life; but she did much, and did it well. The Seminary in
Seir still bears the impress she stamped upon it. Her memory is not
only fragrant today among the Nestorians, but it draws them nearer to
Christ, and renders them more efficient in his service."

Mar Shimon now made common cause with the Persian nobility. The English
and Russian ambassadors had procured the appointment of Dawood Khan as
governor of the Christians in Oroomiah, in order to protect them from
illegal oppression. The nobility of course opposed this; and Mar
Shimon, by promising his aid in the removal of the protector of his own
people, secured their cooperation in his wickedness. The converts were
now insulted at every turn. They could hardly appear in the street, and
the authorities afforded no redress. The missionaries had no earthly
friend nearer than Mr. Stevens at Tabreez, who did all he could for
them; and the pious natives felt shut up to God as their only refuge.

Yahya Khan, the governor of the province, now wrote urging on Mar
Shimon, and ordered his agent in Oroomiah to aid him to the utmost of
his power. As Yahya Khan was brother-in-law to the king, he was able to
do the mission much harm at the court; and the patriarch, encouraged by
such a coadjutor, set himself with renewed zeal to destroy it; but in
September, the prince royal summoned him to Tabreez, and the nobility
hardly daring to resist the order, he was reluctantly preparing to
comply, when news came of the death of the shah, and all was confusion.
The missionaries had been praying for help against their dreaded enemy,
Yahya Khan, and lo! his power to harm them perished with his master.

The night after the news reached Oroomiah, anarchy reigned, and all
kinds of crime abounded. Five men were killed near the mission
premises, and the firing of guns was heard all night long; but though
outside were robberies and murders, within that enclosure all was
peace. Though its inmates knew that the fanatical population would
gladly stone them, yet they felt it a privilege to labor on under the
care of the Keeper of Israel.

In Persia, no king, no government; so besides this anarchy in the city,
the Koords came down and plundered many villages, burning the houses
and driving the people for shelter to Oroomiah. These strokes fell most
heavily on the Moslems, many of whom were robbers themselves. The fear
of an attack on Seir was at one time so great, that the ladies were
sent off, and the gentlemen remained alone to guard the mission
premises; but both in Seir and the city the houses of the missionaries
were thronged by multitudes seeking relief, and each approaching
footstep announced some new tale of woe.

Mar Shimon, after the death of the king, prudently retired into Turkey,
and his servants were put under bonds to keep the peace. The Koords,
however, drove him back, later in the season, but stripped of his power
to persecute. It may sound like the close of a tale of fiction to add,
that the next time Miss Fiske met the patriarch was in Gawar, August,
1851, when he rode up to the tents of the missionaries to inquire after
their health, before he went to his own. He staid an hour and a half,
appearing more free and social than ever before; and when they returned
his visit, he came out of his tent to meet them, and treated them with
unusual respect, saying, in the course of the interview, "I fear that
Miss Fiske is not happy here: she does not look well." On being assured
that she was both well and happy, he said to his attendants, "This lady
is happy only as she has a number of Nestorian girls around her, eating
care[1] for them, teaching and doing them good." So, when our ways
please the Lord, he maketh even our enemies to be at peace with us.
[Footnote: This is the Nestorian idiom. We say, "taking care of them."]

Babilo, the carpenter, who made the coffin for the child of Priest
Eshoo, was taught to read by the younger girls in the Seminary after
school hours, and thus writes to Miss Fiske, November 20th, 1859:--

"I remember how, thirteen years ago, in that trouble with Mar Shimon,
when my father beat me for attending meeting, and men despitefully used
me, dear Mr. Stocking and you comforted me in the great room. I shall
never forget your love. Give my love to your dear mother, who so loved
us that she willingly gave you to the Lord, as Hannah did Samuel.

"If you inquire about my work in the city Sabbath school,--I teach a
class of ten women; three of them, I trust, are Christians. When I read
your letter to them they greatly rejoiced. I reminded them of the
meetings you used to have for them in your room, and their eyes filled
with tears. In the afternoon I went to Charbash, and read your letter
to the eighteen women in my class there. They, too, were very glad.
Five of them, I trust, are Christians. We are now studying Second
Timothy. After the lesson, I question them on Old Testament history;
and then I teach the women and their children to sing."




CHAPTER XV.


TRIALS.

EVIL INFLUENCE OF HOMES.--OPPOSITION IN DEGALA.--ASKER KHAN.--POISONING
OF SANUM'S CHILDREN.--REDRESS REFUSED.--INQUISITOR IN SCHOOL.--TROUBLES
AT KHOSRAWA.--LETTERS FROM HOIMAR.

But, aside from open persecution, there is a constant danger arising
from the people themselves. The teacher in a Christian land can never
fully understand the feelings of the missionary teacher. The one sends
forth his pupils to meet Christian parents, brothers and sisters, who,
with more than a teacher's love, lead the young convert by still
waters, and establish him in holy feeling; but the flock of the other
goes out often into families where every soul would gladly break the
bruised reed and quench the smoking flax. He can sympathize with Paul
in his anxiety in behalf of those for whom he had labored in the gospel.

Sometimes the pupils of the Seminary so dreaded the scenes of home, in
vacation, that they preferred to remain in the school.

In April, 1849, Miss Fiske visited the village of Degala. As it was a
holiday, most of the women had gone out for amusement; but a little
company of twelve praying ones gathered around her, and listened in
tears while she spoke of Jesus and his love. Their fervent prayers for
neighbors and friends made her feel that a blessing was yet in store
for Degala. These women suffered all sorts of insult for their
attachment to the truth; they were often beaten and driven from their
homes by their husbands. While the pupils of the Seminary were here,
some of their own sex did all they could to annoy them. But read an
account of their trials from the pen of Sanum, of Gawar. She writes to
a friend in this country,--

"I had bitter times this vacation, for our neighbors are all very
hard-hearted, not listening at all to the words of God. When I opened
my Testament to read to them, they would shut it, and begin to quarrel
about the forms of religion. I entreat you to pray for my village, that
I, so unworthy, may see its salvation.

"One day, Miss Fiske went to the village of Degala, where is a band of
women who greatly love the Lord. They gathered about her, and she had a
very pleasant time. All these were inquiring what they should do to be
saved. She could not stay long with them; but they were so humble that
they asked to have some of the girls sent to them. So four of us,
though so weak, ventured to go in the name of Christ. We found these
sisters in great distress, being reviled and beaten by wicked men, for
Jesus' sake.

"We were speaking in an upper room there on a feast day, and the women
with us were weeping very much, while others, afraid to come in, seated
themselves on the terrace by the window. Suddenly a wicked man came
with a rod, and drove all those away who were without. Poor souls! how
my heart burned for them! One, who had not been used to come to
meeting, came that day for sport. She wore many ornaments, but as soon
as she heard the words of God, her tears began to flow. After meeting,
she arose up quickly, and threw aside her ornaments, and followed us
wherever we went. We were having a meeting in another house, when a
quarrelsome woman entered, having a large stick in her hand, and began
to beat her daughter and daughter-in-law, and she carried off her
daughter; but the other remained, though sorely bruised, saying, 'I
will spill my blood, but will not leave the place of prayer.' The women
who fear God wept much because this woman did so.

"We went to the sacrament, and there was a company of women who
separated themselves from the others, and were weeping in one corner of
the church. Some very bad women came to them, and said, 'Let us rise up
and dance, because they are weeping.' Another, in anger, took the
sacrament from the mouth of one of them, and gave it to her little
granddaughter. There was much confusion in the village, and they seemed
like those who cried, 'Great is Diana of the Ephesians.' One said, 'I
wish neither Satan nor God, but only Mar Shimon.' Once, when we were
assembled with the women, and Moressa was speaking, a wicked man fired
a pistol to frighten us. But the women encouraged us, saying, 'Go on,
and speak louder, that he may hear.' And when he heard my sister speak
of the wickedness of man's heart, he cried out, 'Those words must have
been for me. She must have known that I was there.'"

It does not fall within the object of this volume to give any detailed
account of the proceedings of Asker Khan, who for several years sought
to wear out the saints of the Most High, causing the native helpers to
be beaten, fined, and annoyed in many ways, and then arrogantly denying
all redress. Encouraged in his persecutions by the prime minister, he
was able to defy all interference. Indeed, during part of the time, the
English ambassador was constrained to leave the kingdom, and the
Russian ambassador, though personally disposed to do all in his power
for the mission, was yet officially unable to help.

At one time, he gave orders that no school should be opened without his
sanction, and that all the teachers must report to him; and in case of
disobedience, he threatened them with fines and imprisonment.

It may show in what estimation the influence of the Female Seminary was
held by enemies, when we find him issuing his command, "Allow no girls
to attend your school; schools are for boys alone;" and claiming credit
for great forbearance because he did not at once break up the Seminary.
That which called forth such opposition from enemies was surely not
inefficient. There must have been a power for good manifest even to
Moslem opposers, that taught them where to strike so as most
effectually to destroy.' But there was a Power above them that said,
"Thus far, and no farther." "The bush burned with fire, yet it was not
consumed."

The evil wrought by Asker Khan was not confined to his own doings. His
hostility, in a position so commanding, emboldened every Shimei to
curse. In Ardishai, two or three unprincipled drunkards, with their
dissolute bishop (Mar Gabriel), saved themselves from Mohammedan
rapacity by taking part against the converts. These last were made
examples of, to deter others from attending preaching or sending their
children to the schools.' One poor widow, with four children,--a most
consistent Christian,--was driven from her house by her father-in-law,
because she allowed her oldest daughter to attend the village school.
As many as thirty families, unable to endure persecution any longer,
fled from the village; and Priest Abraham himself, after suffering
much, was compelled to leave, though his congregation was from one
hundred and fifty to two hundred every Sabbath.

In Dizza Takka, on the evening of April 20th, 1856, Sanum, who
graduated in 1850, had arsenic put into the supper which she carried to
a neighbor's tandoor (native oven) to be warmed. Happily, Joseph, her
husband, was delayed beyond his usual hour, so that he was uninjured;
and the quantity of arsenic was so large, that, by the prompt use of
remedies, the mother's life was saved, though her innocent children
suffered severely, and, after lingering a few months, both of them
died. She rose from weeping over their graves to serve her Master more
faithfully than ever. But Asker Khan,--though the arsenic was found at
the bottom of the pot, though a portion of the contents, given to a
cat, speedily produced convulsions and death, and though a Jewess
testified that "the neighbor" had recently applied to her husband for
arsenic, and no one else had access to the vessel where it was
found,--instead of investigating the case, insulted Joseph and his
friends, and caused his aged father to be beaten; at the same time
telling the people of Dizza Takka to shoot Joseph if he went to their
village again. Such conduct emboldened the enemies of the truth to
complain against the more enlightened of their clergy who had renounced
many sinful customs, as forsaking the religion of their fathers; and,
with blasphemous threats, they were ordered to do the bidding of their
accusers.

On the 1st of June, an order from the authorities at Tabreez to Asker
Khan was presented to him by the missionaries, which, after a calm
recital of the facts in the case of poisoning, proceeded thus: "As the
person who did this act is a criminal, and, if unpunished, the affair
may lead to the destruction of life, it is necessary that you, high in
rank, take the attitude of investigation, and having discovered the
criminal, that you punish him, with the knowledge of the Americans, and
so act that no one, Christian or Moslem, shall dare to repeat such a
crime." This order was obtained through the kind offices of the Russian
ambassador; but the criminals were only detained a few days, and not
pressed at all to a confession. Asker Khan then proposed, as they had
not confessed, that the missionaries should intercede for their
release. Of course, they refused. Then, saying "that if he had known
that, beforehand, he would not have touched the matter, and that he
could defend himself at Tabreez," he dismissed the accused, and it was
in vain for the missionaries to prosecute the matter further.

Indeed, the opposition at this time was more serious than at any
previous period, and for a time it seemed as though the seminaries, and
especially the Female Seminary, would be destroyed.

In the autumn, a commissioner, sent from Teheran to examine into the
proceedings of the mission, made an inquisitorial visit, and went all
through the building, peeping into the chambers, and making himself and
suite every where at home. Coming into the recitation room, where most
of the girls were engaged in study, he selected, a large, robust pupil,
who could speak Turkish, and questioned her as follows:--

"Are you allowed to follow your own customs?"

"We follow all that are good, but not such foolish ones as you would
not wish us to follow."

"Do these ladies let you see your friends?"

"Certainly; we always see them when they come here, and we go home
three times a year, staying, at one time, three months."

"What do you do when at home?"

"We work in the fields, and do any thing that our friends do. Our
teachers tell us to help our friends all we can, and are displeased if
we do not."

"Can you work, or have you become Ingleez?" (English.)

"Look at me; I am strong; I can carry very large loads."

"What do you do here?"

"We study, and learn all wisdom."

"Are you allowed to use your own books?"

"Certainly; the principal book of our religion they have printed for
us, and we use it more than any other."

"But have you not left the books of your fathers?"

"The book I spoke of is our sacred book, like your Koran, and we use
all others that agree with that."

"Do you fast?"

"One day at the beginning of the year, and other days afterwards."

"But have you not forsaken some of your church fasts?"

"None that are written in that book. I keep all those very carefully."

"What! twice in the week?"

"No; for that is not required in the book."

"But your people do."

"Yes; not being readers, they do many things that are not written in
the book."

"Would your teachers allow you to fast?"

"O, yes; but we don't want to fast more than our book requires."

"What are your prayers?"

"Those taught in the book."

Then followed questions about dress, employment, and such things, all
of which she answered in the same manner. The teacher was very thankful
that the Master had neither left to her the selection of the witness,
nor her preparation for the examination. But the examiner expressed
very decided disapproval of female education, and held up their
previous condition as their only proper one. The truth was, the Moslems
were angry that their rayahs were being elevated, and they were
specially indignant at the education of women.

So the opposition went on. Messrs Stoddard and Wright proceeded to
Tabreez, and secured orders for redress which, as usual, were
counteracted by secret orders to the contrary. The native helpers were
now beaten because they were in the employ of the mission: some were
thrown into prison, and threatened with being sent to Teheran in irons.
But when the Lord saw that the wrath of man had proceeded far enough,
he restrained the remainder thereof. For one of the leading spirits in
this onset on the mission fell under the daggers of the Koords, and his
death at once called off attention from missionary operations to other
things.

Again, in January, 1858, two pious residents at Khosrowa, in the
province of Salmas, were shamefully oppressed; and when application was
made for redress, Asker Khan not only refused to adjudicate the matter,
but beat one of the complainants so severely that he was confined to
his bed for weeks. Still later, after urgent importunity from
Nestorians and nominal Papists, two very able and excellent men,
Deacons Joseph and Siyad, were sent to labor in that distant province.
On one occasion they entered the village of Khosrowa to purchase fuel,
and were quietly passing along the street, when a mob stoned them out
of the village. Shortly after, Deacon Siyad was expelled from the
district so suddenly that he had to leave his wife, Merganeeta: she,
too, was driven away alone; but Holmar, a pious woman residing there,
went with her. The first night they spent in a field, and the next day
they sought refuge in an Armenian village; but, driven from thence, the
persecuted wife fled to Oroomiah. After long effort, an officer was
sent from Tabreez to Salmas, and ample promises of full redress were
given, ending, as usual, in nothing. A mob, headed by a French Lazarist
and native bishop, rescued the offender, and the officer desisted from
further procedure.

The reader will be interested in the following extract, from a letter
of Hoimar to Miss Fiske, in 1859:--

"I cannot tell you how glad I am to hear that your health is better. O
that quickly you might meet us, if the Lord will! Till death I can
never forget your love, nor your reminding your pupils to ask the Lord
to support a poor, ignorant one like me. I do not believe your thoughts
can ever rest about your little company of Nestorians. If a mother
leaves a nursing child, she cannot rest till she returns to it. If you
are far from us in body, I know your spirit is with us. If Jonah
mourned over the gourd for which he had not labored, how shall not you
mourn after those for whom you have labored?

"If the breezes did not bring the cry of 'Salvation' over the ocean,
our desolations would cry out. But thanks to Him who favors those that
leave their native land to labor among the ignorant. Yet what shall
this people do? The beast having great iron teeth still reigns here;
but it may be the Lord will speedily destroy him with the breath of his
mouth. I trust that you will ever remember in your prayers one who will
remember you in her weakness till death."

Two years later brought the following, with its graphic delineation of
the trials that such as choose the better part may meet with yet for
years to come:--

BELOVED MISS FISKE: Almost every day of this summer has been a bitter
day. For my mother had become willing to give Raheel (Rachel, sister of
Hoimar) to the Papists, and she had prevailed over my father to do the
same. And now I will tell you how Goliah fell upon the earth, and he
that had no weapons overcame; but it was from the power of God. The
arrangement had all been made by my parents, and the betrothal feast
made ready. Sanum and I were in Oroomiah, but Deacon Joseph was in
Salmas, and we had also this comfort--my oldest brother stood firm,
saying, "Fear not; till death _I_ stand." Raheel also was firm, hoping
for help. With entreaties and tears, I asked Deacon Isaac to go to
Salmas. He went, but Raheel knew it not. She was very sorrowful for
only an hour remained to the time fixed for putting the betrothal ring
on her finger. The hope of her life seemed to hang on a hair. She went
to the vineyard, and prayed God to deliver her; then returned sorrowful
to her room. She hears them say, "They have come!" and locks her door.
They ask her to open it, bat she opens it not. Just then, Deacon Joseph
goes to the window, and, seeing that Doacon Isaac has come, says,
"Open; be not afraid." Deacon Isaac sits down with the Papists who have
come to the betrothal. My father leaves it with him, and he says, "Very
well; I have only now come; I must have time to examine into this
business. To-morrow I will give you an answer." He talks with my
father, saying, "How can you give your daughter to the Papists? The
missionaries are not willing, our people are not willing, I am not
willing; and more than all, the girl is not willing." My father at
length said, "She is your daughter, not mine; do as you please." Then
Deacon Isaac sent word to the Papists, "There is no possibility of your
carrying this forward. I have questioned the girl, she is not willing;
speak no more about it." The deacon then asked my father to let her go
to the city to school again. At first he consented, but finally left it
with her mother, who did not let her go. The deacon left displeased.
When I heard this, I arose and took Mar Yohanan's brother, and went to
Salmas, thinking I might possibly bring Raheel. While yet a good way
from the village, like Canaan's spies, we sent for my oldest brother
(who is, as we trust, a Christian). He, gave us good news, and said,
"Raheel is all ready to go to school." As the Lord favored Eleazar
about Rebecca, so he favored us; and the next morning my sister and
Deacon Joseph returned to Oroomiah, while I remained to meet the wrath
of my mother. As soon as Raheel was gone, she left, and as yet we know
not where she is. Truly, great is the power of prayer. So God brought
to nought evil counsels, scattered fearful, dark clouds, and caused the
light of joy to rise upon us. But I am very sad about my mother,
because she has turned away from the fear of God, and is fleeing from
life. My father and husband still get intoxicated. I trust that you
will multiply your prayers for them; and ask your friends to do the
same, and to pray for me, and our village and country. Give my love to
all your friends.

From your lover, HOIMAR.

We shall hear from Hoimar again, in connection with the communion.




CHAPTER XVI.


PRAYERFULNESS.

LANGUAGE OF PRAYER.--PRAYER ON HORSEBACK.--OLD MAN IN SUPERGAN.--MAR
OGEN.---EARNESTNESS.--FAREWELL PRAYER MEETING IN 1858.--LETTER FROM
PUPIL.--SPIRIT OF PRAYER IN 1846.--WOMAN WHO COULD NOT PRAY.--"CHRIST
BECOME BEAUTIFUL."--CLOSET IN THE MANGER.--MONTHLY
CONCERTS.--PRAYERFULNESS IN 1849 AND 1850.--SABBATH, JANUARY
20TH.--INTEREST CONTINUED TILL CLOSE OF TERM.--FAMILY
MEETINGS.--AUDIBLE PRAYER.--ANSWER TO MOTHERS' PRAYERS.--CONNECTION OF
REVIVALS WITH PRAYER AT HOME.

The Nestorian converts have been noted for their spirit of prayer.

In 1846, the prayers of the hopefully pious in the Male Seminary were
very remarkable. Several rooms were appropriated to devotion, and there
one might hear the voice of supplication from morning till night. Many
spent several hours a day in this holy employment; and one needed only
to listen to know that their prayers came from the depths of the soul.
At one time, they beg that the dog may have a single crumb from the
table of his master; again, they are smiting on their breasts by the
side of the publican. Now they are prodigals--hungry, naked, and far
from their Father's house; and now they sink in the sea, crying, "Lord,
save me; I perish!" or, as poor outcast lepers, they come to the great
Physician for a cure. This one builds on the Rock of Ages, while the
torrents roar around. That one washes the feet of Jesus with his tears,
and wipes them with the hair of his head; another, as a soldier of the
cross, plants its blood-stained banner in the inner citadel of his
heart. Their ardent feelings found such appropriate expression in their
Oriental metaphors, that one might learn from children to pray as he
never prayed before.

On the reopening of the Seminary that spring, the first desire of the
pupils was to enter their closets and commune with God.

Riding out one evening, Mr. Stoddard saw three persons before him on
the way to Seir. Their horses went from one side of the road to the
other, at random; and their own heads were uncovered to the cold March
wind. At first he took them for dervishes; but on coming nearer he
heard the voice of prayer, and found they were Nestorians. The eyes of
all were reverently closed, and when one finished the other continued
their supplications. He turned aside, and left them undisturbed. On
another occasion, when John and Moses were riding to Geog Tapa on the
same horse, they again engaged in devotion; but as the horse was
unruly, they each prayed in turn, while the other held the reins.

Sometimes the language of their prayers is very broken. Mr. Stoddard
once stood in the church in Supergan, twenty miles from Oroomiah, while
prayers were read in the ancient Syriac, and overheard an old man, very
ignorant, praying back in the congregation by himself. He had, perhaps,
never heard five prayers, in his whole life, in a language he could
understand; but reverently, and in a low tone, commingling the memories
of old forms with the utterance of new desires, he was saying, "Our
Father in heaven--always going, after Satan--O Lord Jesus
Christ--hallelujah--forever and ever, Amen!" It was incoherent, but
comprehensive. He addresses God as his heavenly Father. He confesses
his sins. He appeals to Christ as his only helper. He praises God for
his unspeakable gift, and then closes in the usual form.

The pious Mar Ogen, of Ishtazin, when in great pain, and hardly able to
move, often broke out in words like these: "O Lord Jesus, thou art the
King of glory, the King of kings and Lord of lords; thou art great and
holy, and merciful. I am a sinner, condemned. My face is black, my
bones are rotten. O Lord Jesus, have mercy upon me, poor, and blind,
and naked, and miserable. O Lord Jesus Christ, I am vile. I am lost;
but do thou remember me."

No language expressed their sense of guilt better than the words, "All
our righteousnesses are as filthy rags." In the fervor of their desire
for Christ, and grace through him, they would say, "Blessed Saviour, we
will cling to the skirts of thy garment, and hope for mercy till our
hands are cut off." A common petition was, "O Lord, we pray that we may
never deny thee, even to the blood of our necks"--most expressive
words, in a land where so many criminals are beheaded.

One prayed for our country, when he heard of the southern rebellion,
thus: "O God, pour peace into that land. Permit them not to fight with
each other, but with Satan and their wicked hearts, and may they fight
spiritually to subdue the whole world to Christ."

During one of the revivals in the Female Seminary, the prayers of the
pupils were exceedingly earnest. A member of the mission, having
occasion to open the door of a room where a few of them were together,
heard as follows:

"We are hanging over a lake of fire, with a heavy load upon our backs,
by a single hair, and that is almost broken. We are in a ship burned
almost down to the water; the flames are just seizing upon us. O God,
have mercy. Jesus, Son of David, have mercy. O Lamb of God, have mercy
on us." "No wonder," a missionary wrote, "I sometimes think that it is
pleasanter to pray in Syriac than in our own language, because I have
such fervent-minded ones with whom to pray."

The day Miss Fiske left Oroomiah, a large number of women and girls
gathered around to bid her farewell. They said, "Can we not have one
more prayer meeting before you leave?" They were told that they might
meet in the school room. "But may it not be in that Bethel?" they
asked, referring to the teacher's own room. She told them she could not
lead their devotions then. Their reply was, "You need not do it; we
will _carry you_ to-day." Seventy were soon assembled in her room. They
sung, "Blest be the tie that binds," and offered six prayers. One asked
that when Elijah should go up, they might all see the horsemen and
chariot, and all catch the falling mantle; not sit down to weep, or
send into the mountains to search for their master, but take up the
mantle, go, smite Jordan, and, passing over, go to work. She then
reminded the Saviour that he had promised not to leave them orphans
(John xiv. 18, Greek and Syriac), and begged him not only to come to
them, but to abide with them when their teacher was gone. Her thoughts
then turned to the departing company, who were to take their long land
journey of six hundred miles on horseback. She asked that the sun might
not smite them by day, nor the moon by night. Theirs was a desert way,
and the Lord was entreated to spread a table for them through all the
wilderness, and, when they should pass over the narrow, precipitous
roads, to give his angels charge to keep them in all their ways, and
bear them up in their hands, lest they dash a foot against a stone; and
when they should go through the rivers, not to let the waters overflow
them. The company would lodge by night in tents, and it was asked that
the angel of the Lord might ever encamp round about the moving
tabernacle. Borne in mind as they should pass on, first to the steamer,
and then to the sailing vessel, she asked that when they should be on
the "fire ship," the flame might not kindle upon them; and when on the
"winged ship," where the waves would go up to heaven, and down to hell,
that He would keep them in the hollow of his hand, and bring them to
the desired haven. She then asked that all her teacher's friends might
be spared till she should reach them, especially the aged mother, and
that when she should fold her daughter in her arms, she might say, like
Simeon of old, "Now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace." Here she
paused, and Miss Fiske thought she had finished; but soon she added,
"May our teacher's dust never mingle with a father's dust, or with a
mother's dust; but may she come back to us to mingle her dust with her
children's dust, hear the trumpet with them, and with them go up to
meet the Lord, and be forever with him." Nor did their prayerfulness
cease after their teacher had left them.

There was a pupil in the Seminary, who, before conversion, was
exceedingly obstinate and rude; but afterwards, in writing to Miss
Fiske, she uses expressions like these: "I remember how you used to put
your arms about my neck, and tell me how Christ became obedient unto
death; not for friends, but for enemies like me. Especially do I
remember how you spoke of that love which saw a remedy in its own
blood, when there was no help for a lost world. At that time I did not
understand it, but now I know not how to express my gratitude. I know
that you are very happy with your aged mother, though your heart is
here; and she is happy, too, that she sees your face. Yet these earthly
meetings, though so pleasant, are but for a season. But how delightful
will be that meeting with the holy angels, with the risen Lamb, and
with God our Father! and if separations are so trying here, what must
be those of the last day? May I not then be separated from you. If I
should be, I know you will say, 'Holy, holy Lord God, just art thou,
for she has been taught.' We miss you much; but the Teacher who is
better than any earthly instructor, came and taught us this winter
(1858-1859). The Lord Jesus has been the gardener of our school. He has
come down and watered it with heavenly rain. He has truly fulfilled his
promise, 'I will not leave you orphans; I will come to you.' He said,
'Wait for the promise of the Father.' We waited for his coming, and he
turned himself quickly, and we had delightful seasons. Our times of
prayer were longed for. We prayed more than we did any thing else. When
we retire from the school room now, in many places two girls are found
praying together. In my village I meet the women together and alone. I
also have precious seasons, praying with a company of girls; and I have
selected two women to pray with and for till they shall be Christians.
I hope that they will choose Christ for their portion. Some of the
women of our village, like Mary, sit at Jesus' feet. One Christian
mother had an only son, and very wicked, who trod the Sabbath under
foot, and was wholly given up to his own pleasure. She set apart a day
for fasting and prayer in his behalf, and soon the Lord met him in his
evil way, and now he is a decided Christian."

But let us leave these general views, and look at this prayerfulness
more in the order of its manifestations.

During the revival in 1846, two of the pupils spent a whole night in
prayer for the conversion of their brothers, first one leading in
devotion, and then the other, till morning. Like Jacob they felt, "We
will not let thee go except thou bless us." While the missionaries
admired their pious zeal, it is proper to add, that they generally
insisted on the observance of regular hours of sleep, as conducive
alike to bodily and spiritual health. Yet one writes on a similar
occasion, "Sometimes, in my anxiety, I have gone to their cold closets
to persuade them to leave; but the fervor of their prayers has oftener
driven me to mine, than it has allowed me to call them from theirs."

Twice, and even three times, a day, were not enough for them to retire
for communion with God. Many spent hours every day at the mercy seat.
There were but few closets, and this was a great trial to them. Often
three or four of them might be seen sitting, in tears, waiting their
turn to go in to the mercy seat. Would that they might have had some of
those closets at home that are never entered! At another time, the
Bible of one of the girls was found on one of their wooden stools, open
at the fifty-first psalm, and the page blotted with weeping, as she
read it preparatory to retiring for prayer. Her teacher could put her
finger on no part of those large pages without touching a tear.[1]
Still later, when news of the death of Munny, of Ardishai, by the
accidental discharge of a gun, reached Miss Fiske in America, her first
thought was, "Dear child, I shall never again break off your communion
with Jesus;" for she remembered that when once she begged her to leave
her closet and get rest for the Sabbath, her reply was, "O, I am so
sorry that you spoke to me! I was having such a good time with my dear
Saviour." Only a few days before her death, while in the vineyard with
her brother, she suddenly clasped her hands, and exclaimed, "Blessed
Mr. Stoddard! when shall I see him? and when shall I see my blessed
Saviour?" [Footnote 1: See page 138.]

A poor woman came to the Seminary one day, weeping for her sins, and
seated herself on the floor. The teacher was soon at her side, telling
her of Him who was wounded for our transgressions. She prayed with her,
and then asked her to pray for herself. "But I can't pray; I don't know
your prayers." "Hatoon, don't try to pray like me, or like any body;
but just tell God how you feel and what you want." "May I tell God just
what is in my heart?" Being assured on that point, she fell on her
face, weeping aloud, saying amid sobs, "O God, I am not fit even for an
old broom to sweep with," and could say no more. This was doubtless the
most worthless thing the poor woman could think of in her humble home.
But it was not long ere she could join others in their little meetings
for prayer; and she still lives, honoring the Saviour, whom she loves.
She is the mother of two of the most useful graduates of the Seminary.

Again: a pious man brought his wife to spend a few days in the
Seminary, when she was somewhat thoughtful, and left her nearly a week.
Let Miss Fiske describe their meeting. "He came for her at noon, and I
was conversing with him in my room, when she passed out from her closet
without seeing him. (The small upper window to the left, over the
central door, marks the closet.) But he saw her, and reached out his
hand, saying, 'My beloved, come here.' She placed her hand in his,
looked up in his face, and answered his 'Is Christ become beautiful?'
with a gentle '_I_ think so.' The tears of both fell fast, while he led
her, without leave, into my chamber, that they might unite in prayer.
But I was glad to have them offer their first _united_ prayers there.
It was ever after a more sacred place."

Miss Fiske spent most of the vacation that followed the first revival,
in 1848, with Mr. Stoddard, in the villages, where her pupils aided her
much in labors among the people. After a very pleasant evening spent in
Geog Tapa with those who were seeking Jesus, Hanee, the pupil with whom
she staid, came and asked, "Would you like to be alone?" It was the
first time she had ever been asked such a question by a Nestorian, and
it awakened feelings similar to those that filled her heart when first
she heard the voice of a Nestorian woman leading in prayer. To use her
own words, "I followed the dear child, and she led me to the best
closet she could give me--a manger, where she had spread clean hay; and
she said to me, as she turned to leave, 'Stay just as long as you
like.' You may well suppose it was a precious spot to me. It was my own
fault if I did not there meet Him who was once laid in a manger for us."

The members of the Seminary were especially interested in the monthly
concert, which was held in Oroomiah, on the first Monday of the month.
On that day they generally wanted two or three meetings; and in 1846 it
was often difficult to persuade them to study at all. From the rising
to the setting sun, the voice of supplication for a dying world
continually fell upon the ear. At one time, all united in pleading for
a world's redemption; then, in little companies of five or six, they
urged the request; and again, each, alone in her closet, still pressed
the same petition.

Previous to 1846, so few of the Nestorians knew how to pray, that
religious meetings were for instruction rather than prayer; but now it
was a delightful privilege to unite with them in pleading for the
conversion of the world to Christ. Never were their petitions so full
of unction as when offered for this object. In April, Miss Fiske's
pupils, not satisfied with an extra meeting by themselves, though
continued till near sunset, were induced to close it only by the
promise of having a similar meeting next day. No wonder their teacher
never enjoyed a monthly concert in America as she did that one. It was
indeed a rare privilege to unite with such spirits in its observance.

The pupils wrote to the Seminary, at South Hadley--"Dear sisters, we
love the monthly concert very much. Three hours on that day we meet
together to pray that the kingdom of God may come among us, and among
all the nations of the earth. It is a very sweet day to us, and we love
none so well, except the Sabbath."

In January, 1849, they spent day and night in weeping and prayer,
mostly for themselves, as unfit to pray for others. The same was true
of the Male Seminary. The teachers, the older pupils, and Deacons John
and Guwergis spent nearly the whole of one night in prayer; and so
burdened were they with the lost condition of their people, and their
own unfaithfulness, that almost all of them gave up their former hope
in Christ, and sought anew for pardon. The voice of praise and prayer
was now heard, not only through the day, but frequently during the
night.

Up to January 29th, only two or three of the unconverted in the
Seminary showed any concern for salvation. Most of them were so
careless and trifling, that their teachers were almost heart-broken;
but when the retiring bell rung that night, many were so distressed for
sin that they could not heed it. The pious were pleading in behalf of
those out of Christ, and many of these last were crying for mercy. One
prayer commenced, "O Lord, throw us a rope, for we are out in the open
sea, on a single plank, and wave after wave is dashing over us." So
they continued till near midnight, when their teachers constrained them
to retire.

At the beginning of February, the other Seminary witnessed a remarkable
outpouring of the spirit of prayer. Every spare moment of the previous
day, and much of the night, had been devoted to fervent intercession by
those who feared that the Spirit of God was about to leave them. So
intense was the feeling, that the ordinary services were suspended, and
at once every closet was filled; yet a majority had no place for
retirement. One of them proposed prayer in the yard, and there, on that
wintry day, for an hour, their earnest cries went up to heaven. All of
the careless were deeply moved, and many dated their conversion from
that day.

The work extended to Geog Tapa, Seir, and other villages. From Degala,
Deacon Joseph wrote, "Whenever I went home, I found our house a house
of mourning. After the lamp was put out at night, I could not sleep for
the sounds of prayer and weeping on all sides. In some houses, very
young children had heard their parents pray so much, that they also did
the same. The women, too, had frequent meetings by themselves. One day
I led some men to a place where they could hear women praying within
the latticed window of a house, and, trembling, they begged me to teach
them also how to come to God."

The missionaries avoided all stirring appeals to the passions, among a
people so excitable, though the ready performance of every duty
manifested the sincerity of the praying pupils, while it made the
labors of their teachers pleasant.

There was not that agonizing wrestling in prayer on the first Monday of
1850 that had marked the same day the year before; but the following
week was characterized by unusual tenderness in both Seminaries, and
two of the older pupils of the Female Seminary found no rest except in
their closets.

On the evening of the second Sabbath in January, Miss Fiske was not
able to attend the prayer meeting, and remained in her room alone. The
gentle opening of her door announced that the meeting was over, and a
little group passed on hastily, but quietly, to the rooms beyond. She
had just risen to follow, when she heard several voices in earnest
supplication. She turned to the stairway, and there also the sound of
fervent entreaty came up from many closets, while some groped about to
light their lamps, or stirred the dying embers of their fires. What
meant this simultaneous movement to the mercy seat? There had been
nothing unusually exciting in the meeting, and she sat down with the
sweet assurance that it was from above. It was late before the
suppliants left their closets, and retired in perfect silence; but
morning found them resuming the same loved employment, and good news
came of similar blessings from the Boys' Seminary.

That week was one of deep solemnity. The pious pupils devoted every
leisure moment to prayer. Their domestic duties were performed
faultlessly, and much earlier than usual, and then they sought their
closets. Some spent five hours each day of that week in those sacred
retreats, and when urged to leave for needed sleep, the reply was, "For
weeks we have slept, doing nothing for God and souls. How can we sleep
until forgiven?"

Saturday afternoon, several begged leave to give themselves entirely to
prayer for a blessing on the morrow; and never did the teachers more
gladly welcome the approach of holy time. A blessed Sabbath followed
such a preparation day. During morning service, almost all were in
tears. At dinner, many seats were vacant. It may seem an exaggeration,
but it was literally true, that no voice was heard all that day save
the voice of prayer. Miss Fiske has never known such a Sabbath before,
nor since. In the afternoon, the feeling was overpowering. There was no
request for prayer, but unbroken stillness and the perfect performance
of every duty, without a word being said. At the supper table, every
face seemed to say, "Our meat and drink are not here." Some asked to be
excused, but at length all were seated; and the scene that followed can
never be forgotten. All who were previously interested, and more
beside, wept tears of silent sorrow. The blessing was asked, and the
steward[1] began to help them, himself in tears; but no plate was
touched, for even the uninterested gazed in silent wonder. Their
teacher urged them to eat; but one, seizing her hand, said in a voice
too low to be overheard, "You would not ask _me_ to eat if you knew my
heart." The reply was, "I feel just as sure that the Lord would have
you eat, as that he would have you pray." They were then besought to
eat, so as to have strength to pray. This touched a tender chord, and
so succeeded; and then they silently withdrew to make that use of their
renovated strength. Each hour that night found some at the mercy seat,
feeling that to leave off at such a crisis might lessen the blessing.
[Footnote 1: Yohanan, father of Esli. See page 67.]

Two months now passed on, each day furnishing new evidence that those
prayers were heard. There was less of excitement, but no diminution of
interest, to the close of the term. The uniform and sustained
prayerfnlness of those months surprised the beholders. The voice of
supplication was the latest sound of evening, the watchword of
midnight, and the lark song of the dawn. One pupil, nine years of age,
after spending two hours in her closet, consented to retire only when
allowed to rise and pray if she awoke during the night; and she was
sure to wake. About three o'clock every morning, her earnest pleadings
roused her teachers from repose.

The hours of social prayer were full of tenderness. Those who heard the
pupils pleading far within the veil, close by the mercy seat, almost
forgot that they were yet on earth. The school, their parents and
relatives, were all affectionately remembered. The hour always seemed
too short, and often closed with such expressions as these: "If we have
not been heard here, we will go to our closets, and if not heard there,
we will return here, and again go back to our closets, and so continue
to plead for these loved ones to the last." These meetings, though
varied in character, were always of thrilling interest. Now there was
an overwhelming sense of sin, as committed against a holy God, and
then, as a ray of hope appeared, a weeping voice would implore, as on
one occasion, that "the Holy One would walk over the hills of Judea,
find Golgotha, and let them live." Again, the sight of manifold
transgressions prompted the cry, "But we fear our sins have covered
Golgotha from thy sight, and then are we forever lost." Another part of
the same prayer contained the entreaty, "Lift not the mercy seat from
off the holy ark, to look on the law we have broken, but look into
Jesus' grave, and bid us live."

In the daily family prayer meetings every inmate of the room was
specially and tenderly remembered. Once, when a father had come for his
daughter, and Miss Fiske went to find her, on opening the door she
heard a prayer for one who had shown little feeling; and in pleading
the sufferings of Christ on her behalf, each petition seemed to rise
higher, till every face was turned upward, as if to see him; and the
one who led in devotion involuntarily stretched out her hands to lay
hold of him, saying, "Come, Lord Jesus, and save our perishing sister;
but if she will not receive thee in this life we must forever rejoice
in her destruction"--a striking illustration of intense spiritual
emotion, bringing the heart into sympathy with the whole truth of God.
(Rev. xix. 3.)

These labors for their impenitent associates, and for those women who
came to the Seminary, were full of Christ. The hour between supper and
the evening meeting was usually spent in personal labor from room to
room; and the entreaties and prayers, then audible on all sides, made
it delightful to be a stranger in a strange land for Jesus' sake. It
was scarcely less affecting when superstitious grandmothers, worldly
mothers, and giddy sisters were prayed with and entreated to come to
Christ.

The audible prayers of the pupils may trouble some readers, but not
more than they troubled their teacher. She desired more silent
devotion; but Mr. Stoddard, himself in the habit of praying aloud,
looked on it with more favor, and feared to have it checked. Soon after
his own conversion, a friend remarked to him, "I think you had better
not pray quite so loud;" and for days after it he could not pray at
all. He had never thought of others while communing with God, and he
was troubled that others should think of him. Even to the last he
continued the practice of praying audibly.

Miss Fiske sometimes spoke to her pupils on the subject. There was one
who spent hours daily in her closet, but her teacher heard all she
said. So, on a fitting opportunity, she suggested to her, in a gentle
way, that she might modify the practice. "I will try to pray in a lower
voice," was the reply; "but I never thought of anybody's hearing me."
That night her voice was more subdued, but her prayer was very short;
and soon after midnight her teacher was awakened by the voice of prayer
out on the roof. She stepped out quietly; and there was her pupil
wrapped in a blanket, and thanking the Lord for such a place to pray.
She continued her devotions till near morning; and the kind teacher had
no heart to interfere any further. Mr. Stoddard was much amused with
her success; and it may teach all of us, in this matter, to suffer the
Holy Spirit to divide to every one severally as he will.

On another occasion, not liking to assume the responsibility herself,
and yet fearing for the health of her pupil, who generally spent a long
time in fervent devotion, she led the physician to the outside of the
door; but he, too, after listening for a while, did not venture to
interrupt such communion with God. Sarah of Tiary was within.

Meetings were held three days in the week with the women in the
neighborhood, and were well attended. The older pupils were allowed to
assist in these in order to form habits of doing good for after life;
and they did so to edification, both leading in prayer and addressing
the beloved mothers--as they called those older than
themselves--tenderly and in fitting words.

It was of such a work that Miss Fiske wrote at the time, "We cannot
speak confidently of its fruits at this early date, especially as many
of our dear charge are so young; but we can say what present
appearances are; and while we daily try to obey our Saviour's command,
'Feed my lambs!' we trust that friends at home will hear no less
distinctly the same voice, saying, 'Pray for my lambs in Persia.' All
those whom we regarded as Christians have shown themselves most
faithful to their Master during this season. Others, of whom we were
less confident, have seemed to pass through a previously untried
experience, and, we tremblingly hope, have laid hold of eternal life.
The same is true of several never before convicted. Among these last is
a little girl who was suddenly awakened, with as clear convictions,
apparently, as I ever saw in any; and her final trust in Christ as
implicit. For several days she would say, with tears and sobs, 'I have
never yet loved the Saviour; but O, I do want to love him now.' Her
mother is one of the few converted in Geog Tapa before the first
revival. She has suffered almost every thing for Christ. Often, on
returning late from meeting, she has found herself shut out for an hour
in a piercing winter wind, before her husband would open the door. At
other times she has been beaten, but never denied Him who bought her.
The pious natives often say that in the conversion of her daughter, she
now receives the reward of her years of prayer and faithful endurance.
The last days of the term bound the dear pupils very closely to each
other, and we trust to Christ. When the hour of separation came, a
prayer meeting was held in each room, and continued to the last moment.
Those without hope clung to their praying sisters, with tears and
entreaties for prayer. The hopeful converts went forth with a holy,
chastened gratitude and trust. We tremble for them among their wicked
friends, but rejoice that Israel's Shepherd will keep his own."

Their prayer was, "May we not carry to our homes the poison of the
second death in our hearts, but bear to them the seeds of eternal life."

But the rich blessings bestowed in Oroomiah were not all in answer to
prayer ascending from that place. There was a connection between them
and prayer offered in our own country, of which David would say, "Whoso
is wise, and will observe it, even he shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord." Most of the revivals in Oroomiah commenced on
the day of the monthly concert of prayer, and several on or immediately
after the first Monday in January--a day specially set apart to prayer
for missions. But there was a special centre of prayer for the Female
Seminary in the institution at South Hadley; and pious hearts loved to
watch the connection between the two. While the two inquirers, on that
first Monday in 1846, were making closets for themselves with the
sticks of wood in the cellar, some of Miss Lyon's pupils distinctly
remember how she said to them that morning, "We must pray more for Miss
Fiske and her school." They did so; and they remember, too, how the
good news of the revival cheered them, when it came.

The earliest indication of interest, in 1847, was on the first Monday
in January; and letters afterwards told of special prayer for the
school offered that day in South Hadley. Almost every letter written
during the winter of 1849 contained similar information. The revival of
1856 came suddenly and unexpectedly; but when, on the night of February
17th, one of the praying pupils could not sleep, because, as she said,
"the whole school was resting on her," and at midnight went to her
teacher to ask her help in prayer, subsequent letters from America
showed, that on that night she wrestled not alone. In 1857, the first
inquiry for the way of life was on the last Thursday in February, the
day of prayer for institutions of learning. Miss Fiske returned from
the February concert of prayer, in 1858, feeling depressed on account
of the want of interest in the school, and in half an hour was called
to see two of her pupils, who felt that they could not remain the
enemies of God. In the first week of February, 1859, meetings were held
every evening in the Seminary at South Hadley to pray for the school in
Oroomiah; and a letter from Miss Rice, written that week, says, "God is
with us; souls are seeking Christ; and I am so strengthened for labor,
that I am sure Christian friends are praying for us more than they did
last month." Do Christians in this country realize as they ought the
connection between their prayers and the blessings bestowed on the
opposite side of the globe? Do we go to the monthly concert believing
that prayer, offered then and there, will, through infinite grace in
Christ Jesus, result in the salvation of souls and the advancement of
his kingdom? Such facts as these ought surely to increase our faith.
Well might a missionary say, "I have so often felt sure that I was
reaping in answer to the prayers of those far away, that on this
subject my heart is full, and my first and last word to friends is,
'Pray for us.'"




CHAPTER XVII.


FORERUNNERS.

MOUNTAIN GIRLS IN SEMINAKY.--PRAYING SARAH.--RETURN TO THE
MOUNTAINS.--VISIT OF YONAN AND KHAMIS, IN 1850.--OF MR. COAN, 1851--OF
YONAN, AGAIN, 1861.--SARAH'S LETTERS.

But rich as are the benefits conferred on the females of the plain, the
influence of the Seminary is not confined to Persia. It has climbed the
rugged steeps of Kurdistan, and pours into its wild glens and secluded
hamlets the same spiritual blessings. It is delightful to trace the way
in which God has led to results, as yet only beginning to appear, among
the mountain Nestorians.

As the Seminary could not enter the mountains, Providence brought the
mountains to the Seminary. In 1843, Badir Khan Beg sacked and burned
the villages of Tiary, and the homeless fugitives who escaped the sword
fled to the plains of Assyria and Azerbijan. Towards the close of that
year, a miserable group presented themselves at the Seminary door for
charity, asking for the lady who teaches Nestorian girls. The quick eye
of the teacher detected three in the company before her, and replied,
"Silver and gold we have not, but such as we have we will give you--a
home for these children." This sent them away sorrowful, for it was not
what they wanted. But while the parents retired to the shade of the
tall sycamores to debate the matter, the little ones, attracted by
kindness in a stranger, staid with their new friend. By and by the
parents came back, and, falling on the necks of their children, told
them they might stay, till they returned to Tiary. The teacher never
heard a more gentle and subdued "thank you" than this announcement
called forth from those mountain girls. This was the first movement of
the school towards the evangelization of Kurdistan, and it will be seen
how Providence led the Seminary at Seir in the same path.

The girls were taken in, washed, and clothed; and though at first they
knew no more of good manners than of the alphabet, they made
commendable progress in both. Better than that, Sarah and Nazeo became
hopefully pious in the revival of 1846, and Heleneh three years
afterwards.

The last days of the spring term, in 1849, as we have seen, were full
of interest. The teachers did not understand it then, but now they see
that God was preparing his first messengers to the rude mountaineers
for the work before them. Among a company of praying ones, Sarah had
long been known as "the praying Sarah." She was the pupil whom Deacon
Isaac invited to come and pray[1] [Footnote 1: See page 151.] with him;
and the strong man bowed before the simple piety of that mountain girl.
Her mind was not so gifted as many of her associates. She comprehended
truth with difficulty, but she prayed with all prayer and supplication
in the spirit. At this time an unusual spirit of prayer was imparted to
the school. The prospect of vacation, instead of diverting the mind
from devotion, seemed to produce intenser earnestness. The voice of
prayer fell on the ears of the teachers at all hours, except the most
silent watch of the night. After the evening meeting, some spent two
hours in their closets, and others of the older pupils could not leave
till they had prayed with each one in the school alone. On the last
morning of the term, they separated with many tears and fervent
supplications. The quiet of the hour seemed a foretaste of the rest of
heaven. Not a loud voice, heavy step, or harshly shutting door was
heard in all the house. All was so sacredly quiet that the still small
voice might be heard the more distinctly. The teachers sent out the
lambs from the fold with feelings of peculiar anxiety. Some were to go
into families where every soul would gladly undo in them the work of
the Spirit; others to villages where not one heart could enter into
their feelings as the followers of Christ; and as they went forth,
their teachers prayed, from full hearts, that the Shepherd of Israel
would himself be to them for a little sanctuary in the places where
they went.

While their thoughts were on such of their flock as belonged to the
plain, the thoughts of God were on those also whom he was about to send
forth to a life-long separation from these means of grace. As late as
ten o'clock, on the evening after the close of the term, Miss Fiske
heard the voice of prayer for the absent ones, and fearing that the
occupant of the closet was transgressing the laws of health, she
approached the door, intending to enter, and advise her to retire; but
as she listened to her strong crying, with tears, for each of the
school by name, she could not find it in her heart to disturb the
intercessions of Sarah. She was then a great bodily sufferer, but very
patient, and for a long time had not spent less than four hours daily
in her closet. The next day her disease assumed a serious form, and for
more than a week she hovered on the borders of the grave. Several times
she appeared to have drawn her last breath. But though her sick room
seemed to all like the gate of heaven, and though to her the dark
valley was all light, and she longed to embrace the messenger who
should lead her through, it was not her Father's will to call her then.
She was at first disappointed at the prospect of coming back to the
world; yet still she sweetly said, "Thy will be done," as God restored
her to health, with its responsibilities and temptations.

April came, and a scarcity in the plain, occasioned by locusts, drove
the fugitives from Tiary back to their mountains. The teachers hoped
the girls might remain, and besought their parents to allow them to do
so, but in vain. They were only too glad to get their daughters away
from influences which in their blindness they abhorred. But God
intended through these daughters to lay the foundations of many
generations, and build again the old waste places of those mountains.

It was hard for them to go. How could they leave their Christian home,
and the means of grace they had enjoyed so much? It was no less hard
for the teachers to think of those lambs as about to be left at the
mercy of wolves, in rocky glens, so far away that no cry of distress
would ever reach them. Yea, even if those loved ones died, long years
might pass ere their friends could hear of their death. Those were days
of sadness, and communion with God was the only comfort of all, and
especially of Sarah.

On the day of their departure, the whole school came together, in the
room of the teachers, for the parting prayer. All was silent, till the
three asked to go and bid a farewell to their closets. They went, and
only He who seeth in secret knows how they prayed. They returned
weeping. A few words of comfort were uttered, and the teachers
commended them to God. They rose from their knees, but only to kneel
again; for one of the pupils proposed that all who would pledge
themselves to remember their Tiary sisters in every prayer should join
hands around them, commend them to the good Shepherd, and give to him
their pledge. About twenty thus enclosed the departing sisters, and so
they continued in prayer until the last moment. As the dear ones passed
out, they could not speak, they whispered but one word,--"the
promise,"--and so they went. For years after, no prayer was heard
within those walls that did not contain a petition for "blessings on
our Tiary sisters."

Many a time had her teacher noticed the large folio page of Sarah's
Syriac Testament wet with her tears, and after she left, found the
whitewash of the wall in her closet furrowed with the same. It opened
out of the passage behind the door on the left of the engraving. She
did not tell this to the school, lest superstition should attach an
idolatrous sacredness to the place; and yet she could not obliterate
marks that to her own heart were so full of comfort. Sarah had gone but
a little way before she pleaded with her parents to stop, and allow her
to retire a little from the road for prayer.

And so, weeping and praying as they went, these lambs were led into the
dark recesses of a den of lions. We shall see persecution raging,
pitiless as the mountain storm, and long continued. But we shall also
see the Hearer of prayer preserving them unharmed; and if we hear more
from the others than from Sarah, it may be that the revelation of the
answers to her prayers is reserved for that day which shall unfold
displays of grace too glorious for comprehension here.

Nothing was heard from them till October, 1850, when Yonan and Khamis
entered those rocky fastnesses to gather tidings of them. They spent
the first Sabbath of the month in the house of Nazee; but she was
absent. They say in their journal,--

"We preached three times to large assemblies. They brought us Nazee's
Testament to preach from, and seemed accustomed to the sound of the
gospel. In respectful attention to the word, as well as in knowledge,
they were far superior to other villages in Tiary. This we knew was the
result of her teachings. Monday we waited her return. She came about
noon. How can we express the joy of that meeting! We spent another
night there, the most of it in sweet Christian conversation with Nazee.
We were surprised at the respect shown to her, and the restraint felt
in her presence. If any chanced to swear, he at once went and asked
pardon for thus injuring her feelings. Tuesday we had to leave, lest we
should be detained by the snow till spring. We longed to pray with her
before we left, but custom here forbade it; yet she accompanied us a
little on our way, which gave as an opportunity to mingle our prayers
and tears together. As we bade her farewell, she said, weeping, 'Here
is my love for my teachers, for my sisters in the school, for the
missionaries, their children, and all that know me. Tell them to
remember me in their prayers, that God may keep me in this place of
temptation.' We left her looking after us, and wiping away her tears,
till we were out of sight.

"We went that day to the village of the other two. As soon as Heleneh
saw us, she began to weep, thinking of the past. Sarah we did not see;
she was in another village, very anxious to come, but her wicked
husband, whom she had been forced to marry, would not permit it. We
spent the night with Heleneh, and preached to a large company. Next
morning we left, and she too, with tears, begged that all her friends
in Oroomiah would remember her in their prayers."

Was Sarah prevented from seeing her Christian friends, that God might
show hereafter how, without even that help, he could answer the prayers
of others for her, and her own?

The next we hear of them is through Mr. Coan, who visited Tiary in
August, 1851. The writer can understand his account of crossing the
Zab, as the bridge was in the same condition when he crossed it with
the late Dr. Azariah Smith, August 31st, 1844. But hear Mr. Coan:--

"A toilsome day, over the roughest of roads, brought us opposite
Chumba. The bridge had been swept away, and fording such a torrent was
impossible. Two long poplar trees spanned the flood; and we crossed on
them, bending under us at every step. Nazee was on the bank, ready to
greet us. After a few words of salutation and kind inquiry, she
hastened to prepare a place for us; and while doing this, the malik
took us to his house. She was much disappointed, but followed, anxious
to treasure up every word. After supper, we spoke long to the company
assembled on the roof. It was affecting to see how eagerly she
listened. She staid after the rest, for religious conversation, till
near midnight, when she apologized for keeping us up so late. She is
cruelly persecuted by her wicked mother and ungodly neighbors; for she
is a shining light, by which the dark deeds of the wicked are reproved;
and hence their hatred. When Mar Shimon's attendants come, they treat
her with wanton cruelty. Some friends in America had sent her several
articles of clothing; but her neighbors came together and tore them in
pieces before her eyes. She bore it meekly, and only prayed for them.
She expected fresh insults because of our visit, but prayed that
nothing might separate her from the love of Christ. Long before day,
she again sought to improve every moment for Christian conversation. We
tried to comfort her: and her eyes filled with tears of gratitude. She
received a copy of the Gospels with joy. When we left, she followed us,
lonely and sad, to the river side. I opened her Testament, and pointed
to Matt. xi. 28: 'Come unto me, all ye that labor, and are heavy
laden;' but her voice choked, and tears prevented her reading. We
kneeled by the roaring Zab, and in broken accents commended her to Him
who will keep her, for his promise is sure."

For ten long years we hear nothing of either of the three; till, in
September, 1861, Yonan--the same who found them in 1850--and another
preacher visited the mountains. In a village of Tiary, some two
thousand people were keeping the feast of the cross--eating, drinking,
dancing, and carousing. They sat down among the quietest of the crowd.
Heleneh came up and saluted them. Though she had not seen her teacher
for eleven years, she recognized him at once. They talked from morning
till near sunset. As they spoke of old friends, Yonan asked, "Heleneh,
do you remember where our Lord was crucified?" "On Calvary. Can I
forget _Calvary?_" as though grieved that he should think she could
forget. Yonan gave her a kerchief for the head, saying, "Take this, and
remember me by it." "Shall I remember you by this?" was the reply. "I
will remember you in my prayers." "Do you pray, Heleneh?"--She was the
last one converted, and left Oroomiah soon after her conversion; so he
wanted to know whether she still held on her Christian way.--"Always,"
was the answer. They sought a place to pray together; and though they
might not go away alone, yet there, in sight, but not in hearing of the
crowd, they approached the mercy seat, the spectators little dreaming
of the nature of their intercourse. It was delightful to find that she
had not forgotten the language or the spirit of devotion.

The accompanying sketch of a Tiary girl will show how the kerchief is
worn. It also exhibits the mode of using the Oriental spindle, which is
probably a facsimile of the article mentioned by Solomon. (Prov. xxxi.
19.)

[Illustration: A TIARY GIRL]

The other two were not at the feast; so, next day, they left to seek
them at their homes. Nazee was absent, but came home in the morning--a
widow with two children. She was delighted, and even her children
seemed to recognize in the strangers their mother's friends. She was
poor; her house had been burned, and almost all it contained; but a
stone was on her Testament, and that was saved. They talked long with
her, and gave her a copy of the Rays of Light (the monthly periodical
issued by the mission), and a pencil to write to her friends. She gave
them letters written ten years before, which she had penned in secret,
and carried about with her ever since, waiting an opportunity to send
them.

The next day, another long journey brought them to the home of Sarah;
she saw them coming and hastened to meet them; but that very night she
had to leave for a distant village: yet not till in answer to prayer
they had an opportunity to pray together; and the friends left that
village happy; for, as Yonan said, they "found her, like the others,
having the love of our Christ in her heart."

That solitary disciple, through those long years of seclusion, never
hearing the voice of Christian fellowship, or knowing whether her pious
friends were alive, or if her sisters still remembered their pledge,
was yet kept of God according to his promise; and it is interesting to
see that she does not once allude to her persecutions in her letters,
but only solicits the prayers of her friends for her relatives and
neighbors; and then, while both Mr. Coan and her teacher testify to her
usefulness, with what humility does she allude to herself, and "the
very little she has made known of the Lord Jesus Christ."

Extracts from the letters that she kept so long here follow. The first,
to friends in Middlebury, Vermont, is dated September, 1851, and reads
thus:--

"To you, dear friends, I write a letter unworthy and imperfect, in
which I make known to you my lost condition and my present abode. Know
ye that a little more than two years ago I left the Seminary, and came
with my friends to our country. I did not wish to leave so soon, for I
had learned but very imperfectly what the Scriptures teach about our
Lord Jesus Christ. But my mother was not willing I should remain, for
her heart is yet hard and dark. Know, then, dear sisters in Christ, I
dwell in Tiary, in the village of Chumba, about six days' journey from
Oroomiah. Again, though so far away, know ye, that your letter reached
me in May. It was translated and sent to me by Mr. Perkins, our beloved
father, whom we are unworthy to call such. My dear sisters, when I took
your letter in my hands and read, my heart longed to fly and sit down
by you, and behold your faces in the body; but I said, "The will of the
Lord, not mine, be done." When I look within myself, and see not a
place worthy to cherish gratitude to God for his great mercy and grace,
which he hath wrought for us, sinful and unworthy, I liken myself to
the slothful servant, who did not the will of his Lord. Yet, O, my
sisters, though I have not done the will of my Saviour, I have hope in
him that I shall do it, and serve him henceforth so long as I am in
this world--fleeting as a dream in the night.

Though our country has been, in time past, greatly afflicted by the
Koords, yet God has spared many of us, who had sinned and trodden under
our feet the blood of his holy Son. But do not marvel that we have
sorrow from the scourge God brought upon us for our sins. No. Still
every day we provoke our Maker more and more. Then ought we not to
mourn over this people, lost and fallen under the yoke of Satan? For
should you go through all Tiary, you would not find one soul that fears
the Lord, but all bound in fetters not to be loosed. If God do not
loose them, quickly will they perish; and not this country only, but
many others, sit under the shadow of death and walk in darkness, going
to destruction. Then, dear sisters, though unworthy, we should increase
our painful efforts, and our prayers to God, that speedily his kingdom
may come and his will be done on earth as it is done in heaven, that
all regions may know him and praise him forever. Beloved sisters, I am
unworthy to thank you, and still more to thank God, who has disposed
you to show such kindness to my poor body, and yet more to my perishing
soul, with words so gentle and full of love; yet greatly do I thank you.

Again, dear friends, I have one request to make--that every time you
bow before God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of all who
love him, you will remember me in your prayers, for I am very needy,
and there is great danger that my soul will perish forever. Remember
also my mother, and all my friends, sinners, and on their way to
destruction. Know ye, further, that I conceal the writing of this
because they would not allow me openly to write, for they are very
foolish and benighted. Accept, then, this poor letter, as a token of
friendship and gratitude, in the love of our Lord Jesus Christ.

From your unworthy and sinful sister,

NAZRE, of Tiary. Amen.

The following are extracts from another letter to the same persons:--

"Though we are far from each other in this evil world, yet I hope that
our Lord Jesus Christ will make us pure from sin, and worthy of his
kingdom, where we shall see each other with that light which shall not
end, in the joy of the holy angels. Ah, my friends, how great are our
mercies and we how unworthy, but especially I!--unworthy of the gift of
the gospel of God, which I have received, that I might make it known to
lost souls around me. But know ye, very little have I made known about
our Lord Jesus Christ. Now, dear friends, I desire to speak of him to
lost souls, in the imperfection of my mind. But many do not desire even
to hear of the sound doctrine of the Lord Jesus Christ, and yet think
to gain heaven, while they practise in this world according to their
wicked desires. And for this reason, O my sisters, I beseech you that
you will remember this people, lost and fallen under the snares of
Satan; especially my mother, and brother, and all my friends. But more
especially, I beseech you to remember me, a sinner, in your prayers,
every time that you bow the knee before God, the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and the Father of all who fear him, and listen to his
commandments."

Accompanying these was the following to Dr. Perkins, dated October 3d,
1851:--

"To you, O my spiritual father, Mr. Perkins, I presume to send two
letters, for friends in Middlebury. If you please, you will translate
them, and send them; but I fear that they will give you much trouble.

"Again, you wrote me in your letter, that I should teach children to
read. Now, I am very needy myself of instruction. Yet I desire that
that might be my employment. But that is a very difficult matter among
such a people, of whom you have heard that although there may be here
and there one who would walk in this way, yet there is a stone of
stumbling and a rock of offence therein; so that every one that goeth
in it, his foot stumbleth, and quickly he turns back.

"Again, O friend beloved, though I am unworthy to call you such, yet I
beseech you that you remember me always in your prayers. I know that
you do remember me, but I desire that you remember me more, for I
greatly fear for my perishing soul. Greatly do I desire to see you once
more in this world, if the Lord will."

He who is wonderful in counsel and excellent in working, commissioned
these praying souls to prepare his way in the mountains, even as he
chose those other three to show forth his grace in death; and they who
live to mark the future course of the river of life in those rocky
glens will find, we trust, that his strength was made perfect in their
weakness.




CHAPTER XVIII.


LABORERS IN THE MOUNTAINS.

LETTER OF BADAL.--ACCOUNT OF HANNAH.--THE PIT.--'LETTER OF GULY AND
YOHANAN.--ACCOUNT OF SARAH.--LETTERS OF OSHANA.--LETTERS AND JOURNAL OF
SARAH.--LETTER FKOM AMADIA.--CONFERENCE OF NATIVE HELPERS.

Besides these, the Seminary has sent up other laborers into the same
field. At the monthly concert in Oroomiah, June, 1858, there were
present four graduates, with their husbands, either going there for the
first time, or returning to resume their labors. Guly, the wife of
Yohanan, who had already spent one year in little Jeloo, was now about
to return there with her husband. Nargis, the wife of Khamis, who had
spent the winter laboring alone in the vicinity of Amadia, on the
Turkish side of the mountains, was now with him, going back to Gawar.
Hannah, the wife of Badal, who had sent her husband, three days after
marriage, to his winter's campaign in the same region, was now
accompanying him to the chosen field of his labors; and Eneya, the wife
of Shlemon, his associate, was also expecting to leave in a few days.

By the way of introducing the reader to one of these laborers, we
subjoin a letter from Badal to Miss Fiske, dated December 12th, 1859.
It is a good specimen of Oriental style.

"Writing to you brings to mind many sweet conversations with you.
Dwelling on them, my mind is sad. My sighs rise like the swelling
stream, and almost carry me away, especially when I look at your
garden, where you labored with so much skill to graft in these wild
olive plants, cutting off your sleep with watchings by night, that they
should not be rooted up by the desert wind. Thus you watched them, till
they became as noble forest trees that not even the avalanche can
overturn. Your garden, now, not only gives a shade pleasant to the
traveller, but it yields sweet fruits; clouds rise from it that give us
the early and the latter rain; they empty themselves,--the plain
rejoices, and the barren places become verdant. Yes, the vine that you
planted has budded, and blossomed, and gives of its fruit to every
passer by. Come to us, our beloved, open the door of your garden, that
the traveller may enter in and be refreshed. You have left many
pleasant remembrances in the work of your hands. On every side you have
left a picture for our eyes, and the skilful work of your hands (his
wife), lo, and behold! it is with me. I cannot be silent. My voice
shall be heard as the turtle's; 'Behold, your feet are within my doors,
and your counsels are ever in my family.' The Lord reward you for these
pupils, that you have taught to be patient and persevering, so that
they truly help us in the work of life.

"Beloved, give my love to your friends, and ask them, when they go up
to Shiloh to offer sacrifice, to place me in the censer of their
prayers.

"We are troubled that as yet we know not the Lord's thoughts concerning
you,--whether he will allow you to meet your flock again, or says to
you as to Daniel, 'Thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of
the days.' Like Moses, you are gathered to your fathers; but Miss Rice
stands like Joshua, commanding the sun not to go down till the sword of
the gospel shall triumph. We thank the Lord that she is still a judge
in Israel, so that as yet the sceptre has not departed from Judah.

"Your affectionate friend, BADAL."

There are some things about Hannah, and the work of divine grace in
her, that demand grateful record.

She was the daughter of one of the most intelligent and wealthy
Nestorians, who placed her in the Seminary as early as 1845. She was
then quite small, and the teacher objected very much to taking her; but
paternal importunity prevailed. As soon as her father turned to go, she
began to scream; but he left, saying she must remain, and "learn
wisdom." The kind teacher took her in her lap to soothe her; but it was
of no use; her bleeding hands bore the marks of the nails of her new
proteg�e for weeks. She called for her father, but he was intentionally
out of hearing.

The child remained, but learned wisdom very slowly. She had her fits of
rage so often, that she was sent home sometimes for weeks, and again
for months. She made little progress, either in study or other good,
till the winter of 1850, when she seemed to begin to love the truth;
yet, though her general deportment was correct, she often showed such a
determined will, that her instructors feared she had never said from
the heart, "Not my will, but thine," and often told her that, if she
was a Christian, God would, in love, subdue that will. She could not
feel her need of this, and thought that they required too much of her.
So they were obliged to leave her with God, and he cared for her in an
unusual way. The mission premises had formerly been occupied by an
Oriental bath; and here and there were old pits, once used for carrying
off the water, but now covered up, so that no one knew where they were.
One evening Miss Fiske called the girls together, and told them some
things she wished they would refrain from. They promised compliance,
and went out; but hardly had they gone before their teacher heard the
cry, "Hannah is in the well!" She ran there, but all was right. Then
they led her to an opening just before the back door, saying, "The
earth opened and swallowed her up." The covering of one of the pits had
given way, and she had fallen perhaps twenty feet below the surface.
Fortunately, as in the case of Joseph, there was no water in the pit,
and in a few days she was able to resume her place in school, but much
more gentle and subdued than ever before. The change was marked by all.
Months after, in a private interview with her teacher, she gave an
account of the whole matter. She said the girls went out, most of them
saying, "We will obey our teachers;" but she, stamping her foot, said,
"I did right before, and I shall do so again." With these words on her
lips, she sunk into the earth. At first she did not know what had
happened, but remembered all that had been said, and felt that God was
dealing with her. Lying there helpless and bruised at the bottom of the
pit, she made a solemn vow to God, "Never again my will." From that
time she was a most lovely example of all that was gentle. She seemed
to give up every thing, and "bear all things." Her father saw the
change, and one day said to her teachers, "I am not a Christian; but
Hannah knows nothing but God's will. If she should die now, I should
know she was with Christ, she is so like him." Her Christian character
developed beautifully; the school learned of her to be Christ-like. She
longed to do good, and was ready to make any sacrifice for the good of
souls. When Badal sought her hand from her father, the latter called
her, and said, "Hannah, Badal the son of the herdsman, wants you to go
to the mountains with him, and wants you to live here with him. It
shall be as you say." She replied very meekly, "I wish to suffer with
the people of God. I choose to go with Badal;" and June 8th, 1858, she
left for her mountain home.

The parting prayer meeting with those four girls, going as missionaries
to the mountains, was one of the pleasantest memories that Miss Fiske
carried away from Oroomiah. She left soon after, but often heard from
Hannah and her companions that she was happy in her life of privation
for Jesus' sake, and did what she could. She suffered, however, from
the change, and was advised to visit Oroomiah for her health. It was
hoped she might soon recover; but she went only to leave her sweet
testimony to the blessedness of knowing no will but God's, and then go
home. She sent the following messages to Miss Fiske from her dying bed:
"I love to have God do just as he pleases. I thank you for all your
love, and especially for showing me my Saviour." She died in December,
1860.

Having given herself to Missionary work among the mountains, it is
interesting to know that her little property also went to the same
object. In the remarkable revival of benevolence, in Oroomiah, in the
spring of 1861, her brother gave her inheritance, which had fallen to
him, to sustain laborers in the mountains: thus, after her life had
been laid down in the work, all her living went to carry it on.

Let Guly introduce herself to the reader by giving her own account of
her conversion, in 1856:--

MY DEAR SUPERINTENDENT, MISS FISKE: I wish now, as far as I can, to
describe to you my spiritual state. The first four weeks of the revival
I did not realize that I was lost, but afterwards was more burdened; my
sins were round about me like dark clouds. One night I went to Miss
Rice to have her pray with me. I did not know how to find Christ. She
told me; yet all that night I saw no light, but only darkness. I was
almost in despair, yet felt that this was from Satan. In the morning
the sun rose pleasantly, but it was as night to me; for I knew that I
had no portion in God. So I continued all that day. I could not read in
my class, but went to my room, and vowed not to leave it till I had
some token that Christ was mine. I brought nothing in my hands save my
sins, which were like mountains. I remembered that scripture, "Though
your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow;" and I
recalled the promises of God, and that no other could pardon me. With
earnest longing, I laid my soul into the hands of Jesus. I heartily
covenanted to serve him all my life, and sought help from him in
prayer. Then suddenly I saw light, as if he were at my side; and I did
not wish to rise from my knees, so blessed was that communion. From
that time I had hope, but sometimes fear I may be deceived. Yet daily I
find Christ more and more precious. Though old Adam is not dead, yet in
the strength of God I will resist him.

Yes, my dear mother in Christ, my guide to the cross, my desire is to
please God, and live for him, not for myself. I cannot say that I shall
never sin, for I am weak, and my foe is strong; but I will seek help
from Him who was tempted, and can succor me when tempted.

I am most thankful to you that you have been the means of my salvation,
and can never forget your love till my tongue is silent in the grave.

Your affectionate GULY, of Seir.

She and her husband, Yohanan, have labored in the mountains ever since
their marriage. He writes to Miss Fiske in February, 1861,--

"I have not forgotten your pleasant love, and trust I never shall until
I die. I hope that, with all your friends here, I shall see you again.
As our joy is not full in your absence, may you not rest till you
return.

"We are now in Vizierawa of Gawar; for the people of Ishtazin,
instigated by Mar Shimon, have cast us out. I had hoped to go to
Amadia, but was robbed and wounded, in the autumn, by the Koords; and
before I could recover my goods, it was too late to go so far. So I
remain here; and, thanks to God, our labor in the gospel is more
pleasant than ever. Some of the men wish to hear the whole will of God;
and women and girls come to Guly to hear his words. A few children also
are constant in learning to read. The work of God prospers this year in
Gawar, and the laborers are more numerous and more faithful."

In estimating the zeal and self-denial of these Nestorian missionaries,
it should be borne in mind that our missionaries there, think it
requires as much self-denial for a native of Oroomiah to go to the
mountains, as for an American to go to Oroomiah; and according to the
testimony of a native observer, the married graduates of the Seminary,
in the mountains, are centres of light in that great sea of darkness.

Besides those already mentioned, Oshana and Sarah, with Shlemon and
Eneya, are laboring in Amadia. This Sarah is daughter of Priest
Abraham, of Geog Tapa, and was one of the earliest pupils of the
Seminary. When Deacon Isaac broke it up, in 1844, she was the only
pupil who remained. She was hopefully converted in 1846, and while in
the Seminary was supported by the Sabbath school in Owego, New York.

In 1849, it was proposed that her father labor in Ardishai, one of the
darkest and most wicked villages of the plain, as one might expect the
home of the notorious Mar Gabriel would be. Great opposition was made
by the people to his coming among them; and his own wife--not then
converted--did much to hinder his going; but Sarah did all in her power
to encourage him; and a letter of hers on the subject decided him to
go. She rejoiced to give up her friends, her pleasant home, and even
her privileges, that he might labor in that unpromising field. Nor was
she by any means idle. She spent all her vacations there, laboring with
much acceptance and success; and after she graduated, in 1850, besides
her day school through the week, she had a Bible class on the Sabbath,
with the women; and on Friday, also, she sent out her pupils, in the
afternoon, to invite their mothers and other women to a meeting she
held with them in the evening. She thus acquired great influence, and
led several to the Saviour. Her labors were very systematic. She had a
plan for conversing personally with one pupil each day, and was noted
for her tact and success in efforts with individuals. Others might act
from impulse, and soon tire; but hers is an activity controlled by
principle, and therefore uniform and enduring. Very faithful in
admonition when admonition is required, she is at the same time noted
for gentleness, and thus expresses to Miss Fiske her delight in
laboring for Christ: "Separated from Christian friends, I am sometimes
sad; but I am not greater than my Master, who left the holy society of
heaven to come to earth, and I am glad for a corner where I may labor
for such a Master. Come and spend a Sabbath here if you can; if not,
pray much and often for these poor women." Again speaking of her
school, she says, "It is the goodness of God that gives me these little
girls. Pray for them. I see indications that they will be lovers of the
Lord. Forty or fifty of the women come to meeting, and twenty-two are
willing to receive the truth." She was accustomed to study the Bible
with her father, and in that way also aided him in his labors.

But it is time to bring forward her husband, in letters which open up a
new department of usefulness, and illustrate the meaning of Mar
Yohanan, when he brought her first pupils to Miss Fiske, and said, "No
man take them from you." The truth was, that the same parents, who at
first could not trust their daughters in the Seminary for a single
night, were now unwilling that they should be united to a husband who
did not commend himself to its teachers as a suitable companion for
their pupils. But let Oshana speak:--

HONORED LADY, MISS FISKE: I have a petition to lay before your zeal,
which is active in doing good to all poor insignificant ones like me.
Dear lady, whose love is like the waters of the Nile, and spreads more
than they; for it reaches the sons of the mountains of Kurdistan, as
well as those of the plain. I am venturing to trouble you more than
ever before. This summer, when I went to my country (Tehoma), my mother
and uncles, who greatly love me, with a natural love, beset me to marry
one of the daughters of my country, whomsoever I should please; but I
made known to them that I wished, if possible, to take one of the
pupils of your school, for I said to them, "If I take one of these who
are so wicked, ignorant, immodest, and disorderly, they will embitter
my life;"' I entreated of them not to put this yoke of iron on my neck.
They listened a little to my petition, from the mercy of God, but made
me promise that if it should reach my hand, I would marry this winter.
The girl on whom I have placed my eye, to take her, is Sarah; because
she has the "fear of God, which is the beginning of wisdom," and she
has been brought up in all the graces of Christianity, and has well
learned the holy doctrines; and in the fear of God, and the knowledge
she has acquired, she can help me, and strengthen me, in the work of
God, on which I have placed my heart for life.

And now, to whom shall I look to help me in this matter? I will look to
God, the Lord of heaven and earth. But he works by instruments. Then to
whom shall I look, as the instrument to do this work? I am a stranger,
poor, and without a name here. My relatives are far away. If I have
friends in Oroomiah, they cannot do this kindness for me. If I remain
silent, silence alone shall I see. Now, my lady, I look to you for
help; and with confidence shall I do so more than I should to my
parents; for you have guided me and my sister better than any
Nestorians have guided their children. Yes, by your hand God will
supply my need. Now do as you think proper. From your unworthy

OSHANA.

P.S. The other letter (enclosed) is for Sarah, and on this subject.

Some time after he was engaged to her, she was very sick, when he wrote
as follows; and the reader will notice that the "honored lady" gives
place to

DEAR MOTHER, AND NOURISHER OF SARAH: I have no friend in whose
pleasant, pure love I can delight as in Sarah, and she is now wasting
away on a bed of sickness. My heart is very heavy with sorrow on her
account. Yes, I am so borne down with trouble, that for three days my
tears have not been stayed. I do not say this to boast of my love. I
owe her all this. I have a petition to make; which is, that you will do
all you can for Sarah. But I need not ask this, for I am confident that
your kindness, will lead you to do, and cause to be done, all that can
be done for her. But will you not let me know whether her sickness
increases or diminishes?--if it increases, that my sighs and tears may
increase in pleading before the Lord for mercy, and if it diminishes,
that my thanksgivings may increase before our merciful Father in heaven.

Dear mother, if it is the will of our Father in heaven to take Sarah to
the upper mansions,--though I shall be comforted on account of her
being saved from all the bitter misery of this world, and her blessed
rest with the Saviour, where she can praise his love with her pleasant
voice, joined with the sweet songs of angels,--still it will be hard
for me. If I live after she has gone, God forbid that I behold her
dust, and not long to be her companion in heaven. Your unworthy

OSHANA.

Our next letter is from Sarah to Miss Fiske, written at Seir, in 1859,
more than two years after her marriage, and gives a good idea of her
Christian spirit:--

BELOVED: The good news that you gave us of the revivals in your
country, rouses our hearts to warmer zeal. Shall we not also prepare
the way of the Lord? We know, by the gracious visits of God here this
winter, that Christians there are ever praying for our poor people. For
we hear from the preachers who come up to the concert every month, that
the work of the Lord goes forward in the villages of the plain, and
also in the mountains.

Here in Seir, the good work began among the women. I hear them say,
"Though we have had revivals before, we have never seen a year like
this, when the words of God had such deep effect." Mrs. Cochran and I
have good meetings with these women. Our congregations make glad the
Christian heart, and I am particularly happy in laboring for them, one
by one. A portion of them, with tearful eyes, are covenanting to be the
Lord's. We ask the Lord to strengthen them in their covenant, and we
entreat of you and of your friends to pray for them.

Our Sabbath schools are very pleasant. Mr. Cochran will tell you how
the work goes forward. Mrs. Cochran has a class of women, and so have
I. Last Sabbath Mr. Cochran read one of your letters to the
congregation, and we learned from it how the work of the Lord goes
forward in your blessed churches. We praised the Lord, and then we
entreated him to bless our churches, and make them more spiritual, for
we are confident that his grace is sufficient for us all.

She visited Tehoma, in May, two months after the date of the preceding,
with her husband, Oshana, and two little children, and gives the
following account of their journey:--

"Through the favor of our heavenly Father, I have made a journey into
these mountains, rejoicing in the opportunity to labor for my people. I
am very happy that my father and friends brought me on my way in
willingness of soul. From the day that I left my own country, in every
place that I have entered, until now, my heart has been excited to
praise my Guide and my Deliverer, and I have also been grateful to my
teachers who brought me to labor in a desolate vineyard, joyfully, I,
who am so weak, and such a great sinner. In all the various
circumstances in which I have been, your counsels have been of great
benefit to me.

"I think you will be glad to know that the gospel door is wide open
here. You and your friends will pray that the Lord of the harvest would
send forth laborers into his harvest.

"We left the city of Oroomiah, May 6th. We were ten souls--Hormezd, of
Aliawa, Sagoo, of Geog Tapa, Matlub, the Tehomian, Guly, and little
Gozel, Oshana and his brother, our two little girls, and myself. May
8th, we reached Memikan, and remained there three days.

"It was our first Sabbath in the mountains. I met that company of women
for whom our departed Mrs. Rhea used to labor. May 12th, we left
Memikan, and went up to the tops of the snowy mountains of Gawar. The
cold was such that we were obliged to wrap our faces and our hands as
we would in January. As we descended the mountain, we found it about as
warm as February. That night we staid in the deep valley of Ishtazin,
in the village of Boobawa, where Yohanan and Guly dwell. The people
here are very wild and hard. Yohanan and Guly were not here, having
gone to visit Khananis. Only a few came together for preaching. The
people said, 'Yohanan preaches, and we revile.' May 13th, we left
Boobawa, and soon crossed the river. Men had gone before us, and were
lying in wait there. They stripped us, but afterwards, of themselves,
became sorry, and returned our things. As we were going along this
wonderful, fearful river, and beheld the mountains on either side
covered with beautiful forests, we remembered Mr. Rhea, the composer of
the hymn, 'Valley of Ishtazin.' And when filled with wonder at the
works of the Great Creator, we all, with one voice, praised him in
songs of joy fitting for the mountains. Here the brethren reminded me
that our dear Miss Fiske had trodden these fearful precipices. This
greatly encouraged me in my journey. This day we went into many
villages, and over many ascents and descents. At evening we reached
Jeloo, and remained over night in the pleasant village of Zeer, which
lies in a valley made beautiful by forests, and a river passing through
it. They showed great hospitality here, and were eager to receive the
word of the Lord. May 14th, we left Zeer, and went to Bass. It was
Saturday night, and we remained over the Sabbath in the village of
Nerik. I shall always have a pleasant remembrance of the Sabbath we
passed there. Prom the first moment that we went in till Monday
morning, we were never alone, so many were assembling to hear the words
of the Lord. With tearful eyes and burning hearts, they were inquiring
for the way of salvation. They would say, 'What shall we do? We have no
one to sit among us, to teach us, poor, wretched ones.' Truly, a man's
heart burns within him as he sees this poor people scattered as sheep
without a shepherd. May 16th, we mounted our mules, and went on our
way. Half an hour from Nerik we came to the village of Urwintoos. An
honorable, kind-hearted woman came out, and made us her guests. This
was Oshana's aunt. As soon as we sat down, the house was filled with
men and women. They brought a Testament themselves, and entreated us to
read from that holy book. Did not my heart rejoice when I saw how
eagerly they were listening to the account of the death of our Lord
Jesns Christ! When the men went out, the women came very near to me,
entreating for the word of the Lord, as those thirsting for water. Then
I read to them from the book.

"There are many sad deeds of wickedness among these mountain
Nestorians; and when Christians hear how anxious they are to receive
the words of life, will they not feel for them? We reached Tehoma May
17th. Now, from the mercy of God, we are all well and in the village of
Mazrayee. I am not able to labor for the women here, as I desired,
because many of them have gone to the sheep-folds. It is so hot we
cannot remain here, and we will go there also, soon. I trust, wherever
I am, and as long as I am here, I shall labor for that Master who
wearied himself for me, and who bought these souls with his blood.

"The Lord keep and bless you, our beloved, who have been a mother to
the Nestorian girls, all of whom, with longing hearts are expecting
your return. We continually pray Him who gave you to us, to restore you
again in mercy to our people. If counted worthy, I should greatly
rejoice to receive a little note from you."

She returned to Oroomiah in the spring of 1860, and left again in 1861
for Amadia. When she went away, her three children had the whooping
cough; so she would not go into any of the mission families lest she
should spread the disease among the children; but after she was all
ready to go, and the heads of her own little flock were peeping out of
the saddle-bag contrivance in which they rode, Mrs. Breath went out to
bid her good by. Sarah told her how Miss Fiske had said, when she took
her oldest child into her arms for the first time, "'Now, Sarah, you
will not seek for this child a pleasant home upon the plain, as Lot
did, but rather to do God's will, and then he will give you all
things." "I have always remembered it," she added, "and am not willing
now to be found seeking my pleasure here."

During the long winter of 1861-62, no messenger could cross the
mountains from Oroomiah to Amadia; and she thus writes in March, 1862,
to Miss Rice:--

"I did greatly long for the coming of the messenger. We were very sad
in not hearing a single word from home. Now I offer thanksgivings to
Him in whose hands are all things, that he has opened a door of mercy,
and has delighted us by the arrival of letters. They came to-day. Many
thanks to you and your dear pupils. The Lord bless them, and prepare
their hearts for such a blessed work as ours.

"Give Eneya's salutations and mine to all the school. I think they will
wish to hear about the work of the Lord here. Thanks to God, our health
has been good ever since we came, and our hearts have been contented
and happy in seeing some of our neighbors believing, and with joy
receiving the words of life. Every Sabbath we have a congregation of
thirty-five, and more men than women. For many weeks only the men came;
but now, by the grace of God, the women come too, and their number is
increasing. I have commenced to teach them the life of the Lord Jesus
from the beginning. I have strong hopes that God is awakening one of
them. His word is very dear to her. Her son is the priest of the
village, and a sincere Christian. Four other young men and five women
are, we trust, not far from the door of the kingdom. We entreat you,
dear sisters, to pray in a special manner for these thoughtful ones,
that they may enter the narrow door of life.

"From the villages about us we have a good report. They receive the
gospel from Oshana and Shlemon, who visit them every Sabbath. In my
journeys through these mountains, I have seen various assemblies of men
and women listening to the gospel, poor ones, exclaiming 'What shall we
do? Our priests have deceived us: we are lost, like sheep on the
mountains. There is no one to teach us.' They sit in misery and
ignorance. They need our prayers and our help. I verily believe that if
we labor faithfully--God help us to labor thus--we shall soon see our
church revived, built up on the foundation Christ Jesus, and adorned
for him as a bride for her husband. With tears of joy we shall gaze on
these ancient ruins becoming new temples of the Lord. Soon shall these
mountains witness scenes that will rejoice angels and saints. Those
will be blessed times. Let us pray for them, and labor with Christ for
their coming."

Our latest news from Sarah is, that during the summer of 1862, her
little son had died, and she herself was just recovering from a
dangerous fever.

The joyful anticipations awakened by such a letter from a graduate of
the Seminary, in ancient Amadia, are not diminished by accounts
received of a conference of "Mountain helpers," held in Gawar, from May
30th to June 2d, 1862. They came from Gawar, Jeloo, Tehoma and Amadia.
At the opening of each session, half an hour was spent in prayer; then
carefully prepared essays were read on subjects previously assigned,
and each topic was afterwards thoroughly discussed. The first subject
was, "Hinderances to evangelization in the mountains,--such as their
ruggedness, deep snows, superstition of the people, and persecution."
Deacon Tamo, in speaking, admitted all these, but said, "For rough
roads we have our feet and goats' hair sandals; for deep snows, snow
shoes; for the darkness and superstition of the people, we have the
light of the truth and the sword of the Spirit; and for persecution, we
have God's promise of protection and the firman of the sultan." "The
faithful pastor's duty to his flock," and "Means of securing laborers
for the field," were among the topics discussed. Their discussions on
the subject of benevolence showed that they regarded that duty as
binding as any other. They engaged to observe the monthly concert, and
take up monthly and also annual collections in their congregations, and
apply the proceeds to the support of a laborer in the mountains. On
Sabbath evening the monthly concert was observed, and after stirring
addresses, the contribution amounted to what was for them the very
large sum of fifty-two dollars. Among the offerings were a horse, an
ox, a sheep, a goat, and different articles of jewelry. Arrangements
were made at the conference for the formation of a Protestant community
in Gawar, in accordance with the firman of the sultan. In all respects
the meeting was a rich spiritual festival, and from the spirit its
members manifested, and the progress already made, we may hope for
extensive and important results before many years have passed away.




CHAPTER XIX.


EBENEZERS.

EXAMINATION IN 1850.--COLLATION AND ADDRESS.--VALEDICTORY BY SANUM.
--SABBATH SCHOOL IN GEOG TAPA.--EXAMINATION THERE IN 1854.--PRAYER
MEETING AND COMMUNION AT OROOMIAH, MAY, 1858.--SELBY, OF GAVALAN, AND
LETTER.--LETTER FROM HATOON, OF GEOG TAPA.

There are occasions, interesting in themselves, that also serve to mark
the progress which they promote. Such an occasion was the examination
of the Seminary, June 6th, 1850. There have been examinations since,
but none so marked in their influence for good; none where the teachers
felt so much like calling the name of it "Ebenezer," and saying,
"Hitherto hath the Lord helped us."

The pupils had improved, during the last weeks of the term, more than
they had ever done in twice the same length of time, both spiritually
and mentally. At the close of the term, their parents and friends, with
some of the leading Nestorians, were invited to the examination. More
than one hundred and sixty spectators, besides the pupils, were crowded
into the large recitation room. This had been adorned with a profusion
of roses, from the vineyard of Mar Yohanan, arranged in wreaths and
bouquets, with festoons of sycamore leaves, and other devices. The
people were delighted,--for, like other Persians, they are great
admirers of flowers,--and many, on entering, involuntarily exclaimed,
"Paradise! Paradise!" In their various studies, the attainments of the
pupils would have reflected honor on a seminary in our own land; but
their knowledge of Scripture exceeded all besides. Even on the details
of the Tabernacle they rarely faltered; and their compositions showed
an intimate acquaintance with Bible facts and doctrines.

Dr. Perkins delivered an address, comparing the early days of the
mission with that scene, and felicitously answering various objections
that had been raised against female education; and, at the close,
diplomas were given to three of the oldest pupils.

The exercises were pleasantly diversified by a plentiful collation
under the arbor in the court behind the Seminary, where lambs roasted
whole, in the native style, lettuce, cherries, pilav (a preparation of
rice), and some cake, prepared by the pupils, were duly discussed. Many
of the women had never before sat at the same table with men, and it
was amusing to witness their awkward embarrassment. Some snatched the
food from the table by stealth, and ate it behind their large veils, as
though it were a thing forbidden.

Hormezd, the Miner of John, now aged and blind, who had been led all
the way from Geog Tapa, said, towards the close of the afternoon, "I
wish Joshua were here."

"And what do you, want of Joshua?"

"I want him to command the sun and moon to stand still, for the day is
altogether too short." As the company dispersed, several old men took
Miss Fiske and Miss Rice by the hand, saying, with moistened eyes,
"Will you forgive us that we have done no more for your school?" But
the best of all was, some sixty adult women, from different villages,
begging for spelling books, that they might commence learning to read.
Thirty of them did not rest till they could read their Bibles. The
cause of female education never lost the impulse that it received that
day.

Instead of the valedictory composed for this anniversary, is here
subjoined the greater part of the one prepared by Sanum, for a like
occasion, because it takes a wider range, and is richer in its
historical allusions:--

"Now that another year is closed, and we are ready to leave each other
in peace, it is fitting to review the past, that together we may praise
the sweet Keeper of Israel for the blessings he has poured upon our
heads. We fear to try to recount them all, lest we tempt the Lord; so
we will speak of but a few.

"Let us renew the wings of our loving thoughts, send them to the years
that are past, and see where rests the dust of some of the dear
teachers of this school. Listen! There comes a voice, 'They are not to
be found among the living.' Yes, the place of one is empty here, and of
another there. Then, where are they? Thou, O country art a witness that
they have pressed thy soil; and you, ye blessed winds, answer us, 'They
have gone!' and ye green leaves of time are true witnesses that they
lie among the numbered dead. But where shall we find them? They lie far
apart. We must visit one that first laid her hand on some of us to
bless us (Mrs. Grant); and though we remember her not, she often
embraced us in the arms of love, and carried us before a throne of
grace. She was one of the first that left all her friends, and ploughed
the mighty waves of ocean, that she might come to Oroomiah's dark
border. Though fierce tempests raged, and heavy waves raised themselves
above the ship, her prayers, mingled with love for us, ascended higher
still, and overcame all. At the foot of Mount Ararat she doubtless
remembered the bow of promise; and her consolations were renewed, when
she thought of it as a prophecy, that a company of the fallen daughters
of Chaldea should become heirs of glory. She so labored, that her
influence is widening from generation to generation.

"The Lord is rewarding her even to the third and fourth generation. But
though she engaged in her work with such holy zeal, her journey was
short. Some of us had not seen our eighth summer when those lips, on
which were written wisdom, were still; and that tongue, on which dwelt
the law of kindness, was silent in death. Now she rests in our
churchyard. She sleeps with our dead, and her dust is mingled with the
dust of our fathers, till that day when she shall rise to glory, and a
company of ransomed Nestorians with her.

"But where is that other dear friend of our school [Dr. Grant], who was
the beautiful staff of her support? He encouraged her to labor for us
while many of us were yet unborn. His heart was large enough to love
every son and daughter of our people. He sowed with many tears, and
gave himself for the Nestorians. Shall we not believe that the fruits
of his labors have sprung up among us? Then, where is he? Let us go
silently, silently, and ask that ancient city, Nineveh. It will direct
us, 'Lo, he rests on the banks of the noble Tigris.' Would that our
whisper might reach the ear of the wild Arab and cruel Turk, that they
walk gently by that stranger grave, and tread not on its dust. Then,
shall we think no more of it? No; with a firm hope we expect that those
mountains, on which his beautiful feet rested, shall answer his name in
echoes, one to the other; and the persons who saw his faithful example
there shall mingle in the flock of his Saviour.

"But the journey of our thoughts is not finished. We must leave in
peace this blessed grave, and go search for one with whom we were well
acquainted [Mrs. Stoddard], and whose gentle, loving example is so
graven on the tablet of memory, that it cannot be erased. Can we forget
her prayers with some of us the week she left us? or how, when she took
our hand for the last time, she said, 'The blessing of the Lord rest
upon you'? We did not then expect that our eyes would no more rest on
that lovely face, and our ears no more hear that sweet voice in our
dwellings. When we heard of her departure to a world of light, it was
hard to believe that she had gone and left us behind. Lo, on the shores
of the Black Sea she has laid her down to rest. O ye angry waves, be
still, and ye winds of God, fan gently that sacred spot. All our people
are indebted to thee, thou blessed one. Thou, who didst first teach us
to sing the songs of Zion, now removed from sin and sorrow, thou art
singing with the myriads of the just. We would not call thee back, but
rather praise the Lord that you and those other dear friends are
entered into rest. No, ye are not lost, ye spirits made holy; but as it
was necessary that some should come from a distant land to labor here,
so ye were necessary to do a greater work in heaven. We believe that ye
are doing there more than ye could have done here; yea, that ye form a
part of that great cloud of witnesses that encompass us to-day. It is
delightful to us to think that ye blessed ones guard us. It is a
comfort to our teachers to think that you, who laid these foundations,
are still round about us. Beloved ones, we would not call you back.
Cling closely, and more closely, to your Saviour, till we, too, through
free grace, shall share in your glory.

"And now, beloved friends, who with them flew on the wings of the
gospel across the ocean to tell us of salvation, we rejoice to-day that
the sharp arrows of death have not touched you. Ye have been more than
fathers and mothers to us. Our hearts are full of love to every one of
you, O blessed band! but we cannot express it, except with a heavenly
tongue. When darkness reigned in the breast of every son of the
Chaldeans, and no whisper of salvation had fallen on the ear of their
daughters, you opened the beauties of the priceless pearl before our
eyes, that it should enlighten us with heavenly brightness. We cannot
make known all that you have done for us. Let it remain till that day
of light when the Lord shall commend you before his chosen. When we
look at our dear teachers, our hearts warm to you with no common love,
because you led them to leave the sweet place of their nativity for our
sakes. You have been parents to them, wiping away their tears with the
soft hand of a mother, and sharing their trials with a father's heart.
While you have helped them in every department of their school, the
blessing has all been ours.

"If on the wings of an eagle we should fly to the extreme north, we
should find no such school as this, crowned with blessings, but should
see our sisters groaning in bitterness, saying, 'Not one ray from the
divine sun rises on us in our misery.' If we turn to the south, there
we see the daughters of Arabia lamenting, 'In all this desert, not one
oasis yields the waters of life to quench our burning thirst.' Eternity
alone will suffice to praise Him who sent you, the only heralds of his
grace, to us sinners.

"But our southern journey is not finished. From one end of Africa to
the other our sisters lie wrapped in the shadows of death; and if we
turn to the east, all the way to China, the daughters cry, 'Wretched is
our unhappy lot: no cloud of mercy, such as surrounds you, lights up
the place of our abode. So on the west, as far as Constantinople, our
companions in suffering have no school to sound in their ears the
blessed name of Jesus.

"What are we, that the Lord should choose us from the midst of such
darkness, and send you to us with the message of life? Let all nations,
with wondering lips, praise the Almighty for his grace to us, so
worthless.

"Now that we go from you, we leave with you this our handiwork as a
token of gratitude. [A specimen of needlework now among the curiosities
at the Missionary House in Boston.] Receive it, though a trifle. The
figures on it show what you have taught us in our pleasant school. As
we have first of all been taught to sit at the foot of the cross, and
neither hope nor glory in anything else, we have made that the
foundation. Under the cross you have watered us with the showers of
divine instruction and prayers, that, like this vine, we might entwine
about it and bear pleasant fruit. From this cross we learned, while yet
in the bloom of life, like newly-opened flowers, to join together in
sweet friendship. Above this we have placed a circle around the Holy
Bible, that bright lamp of the Lord, that will enlighten us like the
sun if we follow its leading--that well of living waters, which will
cause us to flourish like the palm tree. Thus will our leaf be ever
green, and our fruit sweet till the day when the mystery of love shall
be revealed, and we dwell in the mansions of the blest. There, joining
with all the singers in heavenly places, we shall receive harps and
sing glory to our heavenly King, who saved us from everlasting woe.
There we shall inherit crowns of gold, and, with myriads of the saints,
cast them down before the Lamb. If but one of us reach that place, will
you deem your labor in vain? God, who rewards even the gift of a cup of
cold water, will never forget what you have done to the least of his
people, and if the least are on the earth, we are they. Now that you
send us forth into the world, remember us, we beg you, whenever you
bring your sacrifice before the Lord.

"Dear teachers, your acts of kindness have been more than the hairs of
our heads; we cannot recount them. We can only ask Him, who alone is
rich, to reward you from his good treasures, for none but He can meet
our obligations to you. Each thought that reverts to the past demands a
tear of gratitude. O blessed seasons, when God sent down his Holy
Spirit, that through your labors these walls of Jerusalem, so long
broken down, might be again rebuilt. It is sweet to think that in the
hand of Christ, you have been the means of the salvation of our souls,
which are to live forever. We believe that your prayers and tears are
in the golden censer before the throne. Now that we go out from under
your wings of love, which cannot reach to all your scattered flock, we
entreat you to ask the Good Shepherd to lead us in green pastures and
beside the still waters, and keep us under his wings of mercy in our
weakness.

[Her address to the native teachers, bishops, &c., is omitted.]

"Dear parents, we rejoice exceedingly to see you here, looking on us
with eyes of love. No words can express what you have done for us,
especially in sending us here to learn of Jesus. We trust that it has
been, or shall be, a blessing to you also. It is our hope that you will
be willing to send your daughters to distant places, to make known
eternal life. If you do, great will be your reward from the Lord.

"And now, sweet sisters, another year have we sat under our own vine
and fig tree unmolested. We have tasted the honey and milk of the
blessed land, and drank of the waters from the Rock. But now the time
has come to leave these bowers of knowledge, but not the lessons here
learned, nor the counsels of our teachers, nor the sweet whispers of
the Holy Spirit.

"Dear sisters, let us bear forth with us the light-giving countenance
of the Saviour, which will scatter all the evil around us as the light
dispels the darkness: without this we cannot go. Though separated in
body, let us be united in fervent prayer. Let a conscience made
sensitive by grace be our abiding companion. Let the tent of Abraham
teach us that we have no abiding city here; and like him, let our first
work be to offer those prayers to God which shall testify that he is
ours. And now, before going forth, let us clothe ourselves with the
meekness and gentleness of Christ. Yea, let us take with us all his
virtues, being obedient, teaching our dying associates, and leading
them one and all to Christ. Though we part, our love can never be
sundered, and we will ask the Lord to send his ministering spirits to
strengthen our faltering steps, and feed our souls with heavenly manna,
so that if we never more see each other here, we may meet in heaven
with our sisters who have gone before."

The teachers improved the interest awakened by the examination in 1850,
to urge their older pupils to labor in the village Sabbath schools; and
let us look in on their efforts in Geog Tapa. The children there were
divided into ten classes, each with one of the pupils for a teacher.
Others taught the women who could not read. Soon these were joined by
both old and young men, who were taught by pupils from the Seminary at
Seir, and as many as forty spelling books were in active use. The
children, too, were taught to sing. Thus they labored till winter, when
the school was put in charge of the village school teachers. In the
spring the pupils resumed the work with undiminished zeal. Nor did they
toil in vain, for the attendance increased from about seventy to four
hundred; and some of the teachers testified that they spent there some
of the most delightful Sabbaths they ever knew. Yonan, who
superintended the school with Moses, had also a class of old women,
that increased from six to thirty-seven, whom he taught from the book,
well known to our Sabbath school children, "Line upon Line." His own
account of it is very interesting. He says, "The women, especially the
aged among them, have a habit, when they meet, of engaging in
unprofitable conversation, and, both on the way to church and in it, we
could not stop it. Awakening sermons produced no impression; and though
they had heard preaching for fifteen years, they were still very
ignorant. But now what I teach them on one Sabbath I require them to
repeat the next; and so they are obliged to leave off their gossip, and
talk over what they have heard, that they may not forget it. These
women are so anxious to be taught, that if I am hindered a little
longer than usual in arranging the classes, they cry out after me in
the church, that all the other classes are being taught, but they
forsaken."

A class of old men, taught by Deacon John, commenced with an attendance
of ten, but soon numbered forty. Formerly they went to market on the
Sabbath, or sat sunning themselves in the street, going to hear
preaching about half the time; but they became so interested in the
exercises, that they were unwilling they should close. They brought
others with them, and if one of them was kept away one Sabbath, he
mourned that the rest had got so far before him.

The women carried their books with them when they went out to the
vineyards, and at resting time: while others slept, they read. Some,
who could not afford oil at night, read by moonlight, and when they
spun, they fastened the book open on a shelf, so that they could read
at the same time. Once, when a woman was asked if she could repeat her
lesson, she replied, "O, yes; I repeated it over just now while I was
milking." The men also took their books out to the fields, that they
might improve every spare moment, and one was so earnest that, when
waked in the night to attend to the cattle, he read till morning; but
his family, finding that he burned so much oil, took care after that to
let him sleep. Good old Mar Elias rejoiced to see such a work among his
flock; and it was most pleasant to see the large church so crowded by
people, seated on the floor, that one could hardly walk about among
them.

After the teachers had attended to their classes about an hour and a
half, the younger scholars repeated the portion of Scripture they had
learned during the week, and the parents were much pleased to hear
their children recite.

The daily report of the Seminary was introduced into the Sabbath school
in a way that only Orientals could do it. The older members of the
school were required to report any cases of swearing, stealing, or
quarrelling among the younger ones during the week, who were publicly
reproved on the following Sabbath. This made the parents more careful
to watch over their children, and the children more circumspect in
their daily behavior. If any little trouble occurred among them during
the week, they said to each other, "Let us be careful; Sabbath is
near;" and though at first some of the people smiled when the children
were reproved, it soon became more common for them to weep.

After taking an account of the attendance, the children sung, divided
into two companies, on opposite sides of the church; and then Mar
Ellas, or some of the elders of the village, addressed the school.
Yonan closes his account of it by saying, "We have learned in this work
more than ever before the value of female education. Among our most
energetic, faithful teachers are young women who love to sit down
before little children, and the ignorant of their own sex, and teach
them the way of life."

Thursday, June 1st, 1854, was a great day in Geog Tapa. The forenoon
was devoted to the examination of a girls' school, taught by Hanee and
Nargis, graduates of the preceding year, and both belonging in the
village. As it was a feast day, a large number were present from the
neighboring hamlets. At nine o'clock the examination commenced in the
spacious church, which was crowded, the congregation numbering about
six hundred in all. The fifty pupils occupied the middle of the church.
The studies pursued were ancient and modern Syriac, geography,
arithmetic, both Scripture and secular history, reading and spelling;
and in all of them the pupils did credit both to themselves and their
teachers. The singing, that day, especially pleased the parents, many
of whom exclaimed with wonder, "Our daughters can learn as well as our
sons." Miss Fiske rejoiced to see her children's children in the pupils
of her first pupil, who gracefully managed her little flock with an
easy control. The villages of Gavalan, Vizierawa, and Ardishai, had
each a similar school, containing in all one hundred pupils; and each
of these schools was as valued a centre of religious influence as of
intellectual training. The teachers were in the habit of praying with
one of their pupils alone every day, as well as of opening the school
with prayer; and Friday afternoon was regularly devoted to a religious
meeting with the mothers of the pupils. These schools fitted the
teachers for usefulness, and the pupils for admission to the Seminary,
as well as for teachers in the Sabbath school; and they furnish a
delightful view of the present and prospective usefulness of the
Seminary among the people.

Noon came, and the large assembly scattered, to enjoy the hospitality
of the village. For the people opened their houses for those in
attendance, just as they do with us at the annual meetings of the
American Board. Geog Tapa could also boast of its committee of
arrangements, in humble imitation of greater things.

After a recess of an hour and a half, the people reassembled for the
examination of the Sabbath school, in a grove behind the church, as
that building could not contain the multitude which now numbered more
than a thousand. First came a class of men, from twenty to seventy
years of age, headed by Malik Aga Bey, the village chief. They had been
taught orally by Deacon John, and answered questions in Old Testament
history very readily. Then followed a class of women, fifty or sixty in
number, most of them over forty years of age. These had been taught by
Yonan, and were quite familiar with the Old Testament, from the
creation to the reign of David. One old blind woman wanted to point out
the stopping places of Israel in the desert, on the map which hung on
one of the tall trees: she had learned their names by heart, and was
familiar with their location by touch.

Next came a class of twenty men, who had recently learned to read; for
which they had each received a copy of the New Testament. A class of
women then followed, numbering twenty-three, who had also been taught
to read by the boys and girls in the village schools. Mr. Stoddard
called for the teacher of each woman to step forward; and a copy of the
Old Testament was presented to every one of them, as they stood in a
row in front of their pupils. There was one woman who stood without a
teacher. Mr. Stoddard called for hers also, and some one whispered to
him that she had been taught by her husband. Mr. Stoddard thereupon led
him out, and, placing his hand on his head, said, before the whole
assembly, "All honor to the man who has taught his wife to read!" and
presented him also with a Bible.

One who was frequently present often wept to see Women giving a morsel
to their infants to quiet them, that they might devote the longer time
to their lessons; some of them so intent on the work of learning, that
their faces were bathed in perspiration. She used to fill her pocket
and reticule with cakes for the little ones, so that their mothers
might be more free from interruption. The exercises of that day gave a
great impulse to the cause of education in Geog Tapa. As many as
seventy adults were soon poring over their spelling books; and the next
summer one half of the adult women were either readers or engaged in
the same employment; though previous to the examination of the Seminary
in 1850, not one in thirty could read, or cared to learn.

Having given an account of these two interesting occasions, let us now
look in on another equally interesting, though of a different kind,
that took place in Oroomiah, three years later. During the interval,
Mr. Stoddard had entered into rest; and his bereaved widow, Dr. Perkins
and family, and Miss Fiske, were about to sit down together, perhaps
for the last time, with the Nestorian converts, at the table of the
Lord.

It was in May, and the day one of the finest of those charming May days
in Oroomiah. The most of the Nestorians who had been admitted to the
communion were present; and in distributing the guests among the
mission families, it was understood that all who had been connected
with the Seminary should go there. The object of this was, to gather
all the scattered members of the family together once more in the place
where prayer had been wont to be made, before they went to the Lord's
table. As yet, no one knew that their teacher was about to leave them;
for she did not wish any thing else to turn away their thoughts from
Jesus. When they had assembled in the school room, she could not say
much, but besought the Lord Jesus to be the Master of the assembly.
After singing a hymn, the words "looking unto Jesus" were given as the
key-note of the meeting. He came and whispered peace, and all felt that
they sat together in heavenly places. The eyes of their hearts were
opened, so that they realized the fulfilment of the promise, "There am
I in the midst of you."

They were invited to speak freely of their joys and sorrows, in order
that together they might carry them to Jesus. The first to speak was
Hanee, one of the two whom Mar Yohanan brought to Miss Fiske at the
commencement of the school.[1] She had, not long before, buried her
only child; and holding her hands as though the little one still rested
on her arms, she said, "Sisters, at the last communion you saw me here
with my babe in these arms. It is not here now. I have laid it into the
arms of Jesus, and come to-day to tell you there is a sweet as well as
a bitter in affliction. When the rod is appointed to us, let us not
only kiss it, but press it to our lips. When I stood by that little
open grave, I said, 'All the time I have given to my babe, I will give
to souls.' I try to do so. Pray for me." She told but the simple truth;
for after the death of her child, she used to bring the women into the
room where it died, and there talk and pray with them. Since then, she
has received another little one, and in the same spirit given it back
to Christ. When she ceased, the whole company were in tears. The leader
could only ask, "Who will pray?" and Sanum, whose children had died by
poison, and who could enter into the feelings of the bereaved mother,
knelt down and prayed as very few could pray for mothers left desolate,
and for those who still folded their little ones in their arms. There
was perfect silence while she pleaded for them, save as the sweet voice
of her own babe sometimes added to the tenderness of her petitions. A
child in heaven! what a treasure! and what a blessing, if it draw the
heart thither also! [Footnote 1: See page 51.]

There was a little pause after the prayer; and, to the surprise of all,
the voice of Nazloo was heard in another part of the room; for they had
supposed her near, if not already entering, the river of death.
"Sisters," said she, "since seeing you, I have stood with one foot in
the grave; and may I tell you that it is a very different thing to be a
Christian then, from what it is in this pleasant school room. Let me
ask you if you are sure that you are on the Rock Christ Jesus." A
tender prayer followed, the burden of which was, "Search us, O Lord,
and try us, and see if there be any wicked way in us, and lead us in
the way everlasting."

The next to speak was one of the early pupils, who had come many miles
that day to be present. She said, "I could think but one thought all
the way as I came, and that was, 'Freely ye have received, freely
give.' We have certainly received freely: have we given any thing? Can
we not do something for souls? I fear the Lord Jesus is not pleased
with us."

They were then asked if they were ready to engage in direct labors for
souls, to search them out, and by conversation and prayer seek to lead
them to Christ. Many pledged themselves to the work, and engaged to
bring the names of those for whom, they had labored to the next
communion, that all together might intercede in their behalf to God.
Before that time arrived, Miss Fiske left for America; but the first
letter she opened, out of a large parcel that awaited her in Boston,
was one containing the names of those with whom her pupils had labored
and prayed in distant Persia. Is it strange that, as the slips of paper
fell at her feet, her heart was moved?

But we cannot dwell longer on the prayer meeting. As many as twelve
said a few words, and more than that number led in prayer, during the
two hours they were together: from thence all repaired to the dining
room,--the three upper windows on the right of the engraving belong to
this,--where they did "eat their meat with gladness and singleness of
heart." Then it was announced that arrangements had been made for class
prayer meetings. It seemed to be just the thing that all longed for,
though none had spoken of it; and at once each class went along the
familiar passages to the room assigned it, and the voice of prayer
arose from nearly every apartment in the building. The chapel bell
rung, but it was unnoticed; and each little company had to be
separately summoned to church. There, according to previous
arrangement, Miss Fiske led each to a seat, that the communicants might
be together, and then herself sat down behind them all. A glance
revealed ninety-three sisters in Christ before her; and as the services
had not yet commenced, her thoughts went back to the day when, asking
concerning many of them, "Is this one a Christian?" "or that one?" "or
that other?" the answer came, "You have no sister in Christ among them
all!" No wonder she now inwardly exclaimed, "What hath God wrought? The
Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we are glad." There was but
one among the ninety-three with whom she had not bowed the knee in
prayer, and that same evening, as she was devising methods to get her
away from the rest to her room alone, the Lord sent her, unexpectedly,
to the door; and with her also she enjoyed the privilege of personal
religious intercourse and prayer.

At the communion, when all stood up to enter into covenant with
thirty-nine new converts, six of them pupils of the Seminary, there
seemed a deeper meaning than ever before in engaging to be the Lord's
forever.

In Hanee we have seen the grace bestowed on one of the two whom Mar
Yohanan brought to form the nucleus of the school. The other was Selby,
of Gavalan, his own niece. She became hopefully pious in 1846, when
hardly ten years of age. There were very few in whom her teachers took
such uniform delight, though they felt some anxiety when she married
Priest Kamo, of Marbeeshoo, a cousin of Mar Shirnon--intelligent and
influential, but unconverted. Yet she had strong faith that he would
become a Christian, and soon gained a wonderful influence over him,
without compromising in the least her own religious principles. She
became his teacher in the Bible,--it was a new book to him,--and in her
he saw the Christian life it described beautifully exemplified. She had
just begun to hope that her prayers were answered in his conversion. He
was much interested in aiding the evangelists in the mountains, and the
mission was hoping great things from him, under the good influence of
Selby, when he died. Her feelings, under this affliction, are thus
described by her own pen, in a letter to her teacher, dated Marbeeshoo,
June 4th, 1859:--

"It is not because I have forgotten you that I have not written you
until now. How can I forget you? And were that possible, I could not
forget your instructions. I remember them at all times, by day and by
night. They comfort me in sorrow, and strengthen me in anguish. You
have taught me the duties of this life, and you have pointed me to the
world to come. I remember when you used to take me by the hand, and
lead me into your closet, and there pray with me; and my heart fills
with mingled joy and sorrow--with joy, that such precious seasons were
given me; with sorrow, that they will be mine no more. Shall I never
see your face again--that face, which bore to us more than a mother's
love? You were a perfect mother, because in Christ.

"I grieve very much that I did not see you before you left; but I
believe that the seed you have sown will continue to spring up to the
end of the world. You asked me, in your letter, to tell you about my
work. I have a greater work than any of my companions, but it is in a
place covered with thick darkness, like that of Egypt. The people are
stiff-necked, wise to do evil, but of God they have no knowledge.
Temptations surround me as mountains; they rise up about me like the
waves of the sea. While Kamo lived, I was comforted, for he loved the
truth. Every day he used to read the Scriptures with me, and ask the
meaning of each verse. I had hoped he would have Paul's zeal in the
work of the Lord. I had expected that we should have schools in our
village after a year or two, and that the places of concourse for idle
conversation would become places for reading the Scriptures, and for
prayer. But it has pleased the Lord to give me a great and heavy
affliction. He has smitten me with his own rod, making this world a
vale of tears. But it is the Lord; let him do what he pleaseth. It is
all for my profit.

"I want to ask you and your friends to pray for me, that I may endure
to the end."

The feelings of the pupils, after the departure of Miss Fiske, are
graphically expressed in the following letter from Hatoon, of Geog
Tapa:--

"My heart longs to tell you of the change in our dear school. Our
return, after vacation, was much like that of the Jews from Babylon,
when they found their city laid waste, and their temple in ruins. Every
time they looked on the spot where it had stood, their hearts were
crushed. So when we did not see you, and went not to take your hand and
be kissed by you,--when we saw not your ready feet coming to the door,
to bring in each one and make her happy,--our hearts were broken, and
we could not restrain our tears; especially when I remembered the times
that the daughters of the church used to meet in your room to mingle
our prayers, our tears, and our joys together. These recollections
leave an aching void which cannot be filled. It seems to me that the
ways of your room mourn, because you come not to the solemn feasts. If
Jeremiah were here, I think he would say, 'How doth Miss Fiske's room
sit solitary that was full of people! How do the daughters of the
Oroomiah schools mourn, and their eyes run down with water, because
Miss Fiske is far from them?' These changes show us that this world is
as down driven by the wind. Perhaps you will reply, in your cheerful
way, 'Do you feel so? There is much that is pleasant in the world.' I
know it; but our school was always such a pleasant place to me. I was
so happy in it and its heavenly employments, that not even the death of
friends could destroy that joy. But now I seem overshadowed by dark
clouds, and sinking in deep mire. Yet I will try, in all this, to bow
my will to the holy will of Him who doeth all things well."




CHAPTER XX.


COMPOSITIONS.

THE FIELD OF CLOVES.--THE LOST SOUL.--THE SAVED SOUL.--HANNAH.

It was very important that the pupils should be able to express their
own thoughts, readily and correctly, with the pen, and unwearied effort
was devoted to this end; but for a long time they seemed incapable of
clothing an idea in words. The simplest sentence was copied over and
over without the change of a single word; and even when it was
expressed for them in other language, they only repeated over that
variation of the first. Three years were spent in trying to teach them
to write their own thoughts, with very little success; but in 1846, the
Spirit of God secured the result that man had sought in vain. After
that, both their ideas and their language were very beautiful. Nothing
pleased them better than to be allowed to write; and it was matter of
grateful remark that those compositions which were penned during a
revival were always the best.

This was especially true in the awakening of 1850, which was noted for
the prevalence of a spirit of meditation and holy communion with God.
The pupils at that time came forth from private intercourse with their
Saviour, to pen some of the sweetest writings in the Syriac language.

One day that winter, both the teachers wished to attend an examination
at Seir, and asked them if they would be diligent during their absence.
"O, yes," was the reply, "if you will only let us write composition."
The following was found on the slate of Nazloo, when they returned:--

"THE CLOVER FIELD.

"We walk out in the country, and the road leads us by a lovely field of
clover. We see it in all its modest beauty. There are the green leaves,
so regular in their form and outline; the beautiful flowers, so
wonderful in their structure; and the sweet fragrance, that regales our
senses as we pass. All these are there, but we see not whence they
come. No showers descend to make it grow; the earth is parched on all
sides. Do you inquire for the source of all this loveliness? A tiny
rill of water flows gently underneath. No eye sees it. You cannot hear
its quiet advance, for it does not murmur as it wears itself out in its
work of love. Noiseless it hies to each little rootlet. It conveys
nourishment to every leaf; not one is overlooked or forgotten. That
unseen rill causes these fair blossoms to spring forth. It distils
these odors for the enjoyment of all that pass this way. What that
streamlet is to the field, prayer is to the Christian. We see it not;
it is all hid from human eye; but O, the rich fruit that it yields
every day in the soul thus made partaker of the life of Christ! That
also makes the wilderness to rejoice and blossom as the rose."

At the annual examination in 1850, Sanum read her composition, a
translation of which is here inserted:--

"THE LOST SOUL.

"I have dreamed a dream, dear friends--may I relate it?

"In my dream I was wandering about, seeking for earthly pleasures,
though my life was crowned with blessings more plentiful than the dew
of the morning. My father and mother did every thing they could to
bring me to Christ. Their labors for me were enough to make me weep my
last tear, but my hard heart remained unmoved. Four times did the Holy
Spirit strive with me, and as often I grieved him away. I broke every
promise that I made to serve the Lord.

"There came a beautiful day in spring. The sun lighted up every thing
with gladness. The fields were dressed in green. The trees were in
blossom. Loved by my friends, surrounded by every thing to make me
happy, and rejoicing that so much enjoyment was still in store for me,
I was saying to my soul, 'Take thine ease,' when suddenly a voice
cried, 'This night thy soul shall be required of thee; then whose shall
be all these?' Another voice added, 'These four years heaven and earth
have pleaded with you to bring forth fruit to God, but you have
refused. Your heart has said "I will fix my seat above the stars of
heaven." Now you must go down to the abyss.' Like arrows these words
pierced my heart; my strength departed, and others bore me to my home.
There my parents were speechless with sorrow. The bed of down was made
ready, but it afforded me no rest. I seemed to lie on thorns. Then I
appeared to faint, though still able to hear their conversation.
Sobbing aloud, they said, 'Sweet child, if you were only a Christian,
gladly would we go with you to the gates of heaven, hoping soon to meet
again; but this is more than we can bear. Alas, that one borne in the
arms of our love, with whom and for whom we have prayed, must now say
that our God is not her God, nor our Saviour hers! Is there no ray of
light for her in the darkness? Can we never again point her to Jesus?'
As I listened in anguish, I cried aloud, 'Is there no hope for me?'
They replied, 'We will implore mercy for you again and again, and
possibly the physician may help you. Here he is.' As he came in the
recollection of his past faithful warnings made me weep aloud. He said,
'Why weep? Do you not wish to see me?' 'Dear friend, it is not that;
but the sight of you recalls your entreaties to come to Christ, and my
neglect of them. If you can only give me one hour of quiet, I will try
to come now.' He saw that the hand of death was on me, and replied,
'What you do you must do quickly.' 'What can I do in such distress?'
'Can you not cry, "Lord, remember me," like the dying malefactor?'
'Those words comforted me once, but now I cannot use them.' 'Can you
not pray?' 'No. Once I would not hear God, and now he will not hear me.
O father, mother, friends, pray for me. Send for my teacher to pray for
me. Ask every servant of God to entreat for me while yet I live.' The
request went forth. The weeping physician offered supplication at my
side. My father and mother seemed to pour forth their last breath in
intercession for me. As I turned, I saw my teachers, and conscience
arrayed before me every word they had ever spoken to me of Christ and
heaven. All my own actions were likewise spread out before my eyes.
Then the whirlwind of my sins swept me away like a tiny leaf, to sink
in a sea of anguish. My teacher now cried, 'We had hoped to see our
dear pupil passing over to the new Jerusalem; but, instead of that,
must she dwell among the lost?' A gentle voice then whispered, 'Go to
Jesus; he will not cast you out.' 'To Jesus! nay, for knowingly my
hands have pierced him. Willingly these feet have trampled on his
precious blood. I have compelled his spirit to forsake me, and must
perish.'

"Then I saw those whom I had led into sin and encouraged in unbelief,
and said to them, 'Can you forgive me?' But a voice from heaven
replied, 'You cannot be forgiven; for the name of Jesus you have set at
nought, and there is none other.' Then my teacher pressed my hand; she
could not speak. I said, 'You have ever shown great love; can you not
help me now?' 'Dear child, have I not told you that though I love you,
yet I have no power to help in this hour or hereafter.' 'O, dreadful
thought! Must I leave you all, forever? parents, teachers, all! Can you
do nothing for me?' 'We can only point you to Jesus.' 'I have no part
in him. I am a Demas; and with such agony now, what will be the wrath
to come?' I begged all present not to live as I had lived. 'Seize the
moments that fly swifter than the lightning. There is no place for
repentance now: my retribution begins. Forget not these words of your
lost sister.' I turned to my mother: 'There is no love like a mother's;
can that do nothing for me now?' What could she do? 'Can no one help
me? Father, father, I am going; can you do nothing?'

"Now the light forsook my eyes. O for a few moments more! But even this
was denied me; for, as I remembered, 'Cursed is the man that trusteth
in man, and whose heart departeth from the living God.'

"I now heard a voice as of a rushing, mighty wind. Trembling seized me,
as I discerned four fiends of darkness. I uttered a piercing shriek,
and died. Then I found myself suspended between heaven and earth.
Behind me, the world I loved so well had gone forever. Before me I saw
the Ancient of Days seated on his throne, his raiment white as snow,
his eyes as a flame of fire, his feet like brass glowing in the
furnace, and a stream of fire issued from before him; thousand
thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before him. Brightness radiated from him on all sides. He fixed
his eyes on me, glowing with holy indignation, while a two-edged sword
proceeded out of his mouth. My sins arose before me. Conscience
condemned me. I could not look up. The pains of hell gat hold upon me.
In a voice unlike all I ever heard before, he said, 'Slayer of my Son,
despiser of my grace, what hast thou done? Thou hast set at nought all
my counsels.' I longed to flee; but above me stood the Judge, below,
the abyss. I could give no reply. Again he said, 'My covenant thou hast
trodden under foot;' and he commanded his servants, 'Bind her hand and
foot, and cast her into outer darkness, where is weeping and gnashing
of teeth. There let her remain till that great day, when all mine
enemies shall be trodden in the wine-press of my wrath.'

"Then a voice from out of the throne said, 'Praise our God, all ye his
servants, and ye that fear him, both small and great;' and all cried,
like the voice of many waters, 'Amen. Allelujah.' Heaven responded from
all sides, 'Just and true are thy judgments, thou King of saints.' Then
Satan and his angels clapped their hands; and mocking my misery, they
thrust me into the inner prison.

"I now found myself associated with Cain, Judas, Jeroboam, and Jezebel.
I understood what Christ meant when he said, 'Bind the tares in bundles
to burn them,' for I was enclosed by them on all sides, and the flames
from them kindled on me. Then a voice said, 'Judas sold his Lord once,
but thou many times. Cain slew one brother; thou hast brought many to
this place of torment.' Then all, especially those whom I had led
there, cursed me. Fallen spirits gloried over me. The evil passions of
all the lost were let loose on me. My own wicked feelings were kindled
into a flame by the divine wrath. Now I understood that scripture,
'They have no rest day nor night.' My ears, that had taken pleasure in
evil conversation, were filled with revilings. My tongue, which had set
on fire the course of nature, now itself set on fire of hell, I gnawed
for pain. I looked up to beg a drop of water; but instead of it came
the word, 'Daughter, remember.' As I looked up, I got a glimpse of one
of my companions in Abraham's bosom. Once we were together pointed to
Jesus. Now the impassable gulf was between us. Hope now fled forever,
and that word, 'Remember,' brought every moment of my life before me in
characters of flaming fire. Gladly would I have exchanged this agony
for the pangs of death endured a thousand times over, or for all the
sufferings of earth till the final conflagration. I cursed my soul,
weeping without a tear. Why were my associates, once, like me, children
of wrath, now in heaven, while I was shut out? Ah, they listened to
Jesus, while I rejected him, and to enjoy a momentary pleasure plunged
into all this anguish. I had loved those who now tormented me, and cast
aside the loving Saviour. No ray of mercy can ever reach me more. No
friend will ever love me again. In my madness I sought to flee; but
wrath held me rooted to the spot. Cloud on cloud rose above me, each
inscribed, 'Eternity!' A voice cried aloud, 'Forever!' and another
replied, 'Forever and ever!' The waves of fire now rolled over me, and
the worm that dieth not seized hold of me. I begged for even the
smallest mitigation of misery, and the vials of wrath were poured out
upon me. In my anguish I cried, 'Roll on, ye eternal ages!' But why?
They will be no nearer through. 'O Lord, how long?' With an earthquake,
that seemed to shake the very throne, came back the reply, 'Forever!
Forever!' I sank down in unutterable agony. Then I awoke, and lo, it
was all a dream. The darkness of night was yet around me; a cold sweat
covered me; and that word, 'Forever!' still rang in my ears. Friends,
this was a dream, and only a drop in the ocean, compared with the
terrible reality. Let us pray that we may be saved from it through
Jesus Christ our Lord."

The large audience listened to these vivid delineations, part of the
time, in breathless silence; and again the women beat on their breasts
with half-suppressed cries for mercy. The reader, as well as they, will
find relief from the companion picture by Moressa. Sanum's was an
original conception of her own. The theme of this last was suggested by
Miss Fiske, as a fitting counterpart to the preceding, but the
treatment of it was left wholly with the writer.

"THE SAVED SOUL.

"While meditating on death, I fell into a sweet sleep, and dreamed a
dream which rejoiced my spirit. I cannot refrain from relating it to
you, dear Christian friends, who are looking forward to the glory that
shall be revealed. I dreamed that my heavenly Father said to me, 'Dear
child, heir of my kingdom, you have long enough borne the troubles of
this vale of tears; now you shall be freed from them, and come to your
heavenly home, to worship me in holiness.' As I listened, sickness
came, and I laid me down on my bed of death with this thought: 'One
more fruit of sin, and then--heaven.' My poor friends, not
understanding this, inquired, with weeping, if I could not possibly
recover; but when they saw that I was dying, they gathered round me, to
go down with me to the banks of Jordan. My soul was exceeding joyful,
for the light of the promised land shone on me, and the dread river was
quiet, for Jesus had said to it, 'Peace, be still.'

"While in this joyful state, I remembered with sorrow how many years I
had refused to acknowledge the Prince of life as my King, while he
waited with open arms to receive me; and how often, after putting my
hand to the plough, I had looked back. My backsliding, my evil example,
my neglect of souls, all rose before me like a dark cloud, and I was in
agony. But soon a voice said, 'Thy sins are forgiven!' and all was
light. I said, 'Lord, I must praise thee for this forever; but I cannot
forgive myself.' Yet, though the pains of death were on me, I was
comforted to be nearer the land where they sin no more. Earthly
pleasure now seemed emptiness. The pleasures of heaven filled my
thoughts. I said, 'Is this death--that which we poor mortals fear?' My
friends asked, 'Has he no terrors for you?' 'No; none. The king of
terrors is to me the chief of joys.' One of my teachers said, 'So you
have no fear of him--no sorrow that your body shall lie in the grave!'
'Why fear or sorrow, when Christ has overcome both death and sin?' My
father then asked, 'Do you suffer much'?' 'Yes; but if I suffered a
thousand times more, what would that be to those bitter hours upon the
cross. This veil must be rent asunder, though by suffering, before I
can see Him, whom, even now, I long to behold.' My poor mother
interposed, 'But are you willing to leave us?' 'You are all very dear
to me; but there is only one who is altogether lovely. When shall I see
him as he is, and be filled with his love?'

"It was now difficult to speak, but I could bid my friends farewell. I
could thank my dear teachers for telling me of Christ, and ask their
forgiveness for all I had ever done to grieve them. As my weeping
mother wiped the cold sweat from my brow, she gently whispered, 'Where
is my child going?' 'Mother,' I replied, 'your poor sinful child is
going to that Saviour who has been willing to receive her.' His rod and
staff then comforted me, till I had passed quite over into the blessed
land. And, as I was borne on in my Saviour's arms, voices cried,
'Welcome, dear sister; you are now made whole--you shall sin no
more--enter into rest.' Mortal tongue cannot tell what I now saw of the
treasures which Christ has prepared for the redeemed. He gave me a
mansion he had made ready for me, and I found myself gazing on the
brightness of the Father's glory. What a change had come over me! I was
among those without spot, for they had been made white in the blood of
the Lamb. Their voices were one, for all praised the Lord. Now the
glory of the Ancient of Days filled me with awe. He sat upon a throne
of light, with seraphim on the right and cherubim on the left, and I
could read the foundations of his throne. Legions of bright angels and
happy saints were around him. I fell down with them to worship at his
feet, when he touched me and raised me up, saying, 'Thou art blessed,
for thou art redeemed with the blood of my Son.' Then he clothed me in
a heavenly robe, and bade all heaven rejoice, saying, 'This my child
was dead, and is alive again, and is saved from everlasting
destruction.'

"He then revealed to me more fully that mystery of ages--the Redeemer
standing on the right hand of the Father. He stood with open arms,
saying, 'Come, daughter of my bitter grief, come in peace. I remembered
thee on the cross. For thee I drank that cup of agony; thy curse has
rested on me, that everlasting joy might dwell in thee.' As he thus
spoke, I fell down to worship, and when I looked up, my eyes rested on
his pierced hands and wounded side. Tears filled my eyes when I
remembered that my sins had caused them; but they were tears that Jesus
wiped away.

"When I saw the book of remembrance at his side, I thought, there is
the record of my sins; but he opened it, saying, 'Fear not; from the
day thou first camest to me, they have been blotted out.' He then held
out to me the Book of Life, bidding me to read my name recorded there,
and added, 'Ages hence, in the great day of account, the world shall
know that I have saved thee; and as thou hast not denied me before men,
I will confess thy name before my Father and before his angels; enter
into the full joy of thy Lord; inherit the kingdom, prepared for thee
from the foundation of the world.' Then all the blessed ones cried,
'Amen.' Their harps were tuned to a new song, and they praised the
living God that another soul was rescued from the great adversary. A
crown was also placed upon my head, that, with the saints, I might cast
it at the feet of the Redeemer.

"Afterwards I was led to our first parent, now for more than five
thousand years in Paradise, but not walking amid forbidden fruit.
Still, when he stretched out his hand to the tree of life, he seemed to
remember that first sin, and to thank God more than others for the
healing of the nations. His bright face glistened with a tear as he
took my hand, saying, 'Heir of my fallen nature, welcome to this
inheritance of the second Adam;' and I learned that tears are always
wiped from that face when Christ brings home his fallen children.

"As I turned, I saw the great company of the patriarchs, perfect in
holiness, and clothed in light. Faithful Abraham was there, his faith
changed to perfect sight, and rejoicing in his spiritual children. The
meek Moses was there, adoring the Prophet whom God raised up from the
midst of Israel like unto him. And I beheld Isaiah, satisfied with the
eternal sight of the glory of which he had a glimpse on earth.
Jeremiah, too, was no more weeping for the slain of the daughter of his
people, and all the holy prophets were clothed upon with immortality,
and praising their Beloved with holy lips.

"While I stood gazing, on them in wonder, my thoughts reverted to my
former state. What a glorious change, from a world of sin to a world of
holiness--from sinful friends to the Friend of sinners. How different
these sweet sounds of praise from the rude sounds of earth! I am
receiving my reward for every bitter tear of penitence I shed on earth;
an age of joy is before me. Who am I, that I should be raised from
companionship with sin to the society of heaven? My soul at length is
at rest. But how? Not as rests my poor body in the grave, but in
blessedness; for I rest from sin, but not from praise. I rest from
suffering, but not from everlasting joy. How sweet to rest, while not
ceasing to cry, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty! I rest in
the bosom of my Saviour. My prayers are turned to praise, and my love
is perfect.

"While these thoughts filled my soul, I thanked the Lord with a new
song on the golden harp that had been placed in my hands, singing with
a loud voice, 'What is my worthiness, O eternal King, that thou hast
made me to walk in thy pilgrimage, while millions are shut out from it?'

"Now a company of the holy ones led me through a street of pure gold,
to where the river of water of life proceeded out of the throne of God.
They showed me the hidden manna, and the tree of life yielding its
twelve fruits, and leaves for the healing of the nations; and beyond, I
saw a great company of martyrs who had been slain for the word and for
the testimony of Jesus Christ. They stood beneath the altar, for they
were living sacrifices. They were clothed in white, and wore crowns of
glory on their heads, and they sang hallelujah to him who had been
slain for them, and made them kings and priests forever in his kingdom.

"While thus wandering among those holy mansions, I met a spirit crowned
with honor,--Mary, the mother of our Lord. She was specially delighted
at seeing me, saying, 'How glad I am that you, from that erring people
who trust in me, have found the right way to this blessed place! Are
there other sisters of like faith, who believe in the only Mediator?'
When I told her that there were, she embraced me, and led me where I
could see the twelve apostles of the Lamb. They were all seated round
their Master, just as they used to be on earth; but no more debating
who should be greatest, for now they ascribed all greatness to their
King, and dwelt in perfect love. Among them I saw Peter, zealous still,
but with a holy zeal. I heard him ask, 'How long shall those precious
souls, redeemed by thy blood, be led astray? May I not fly on the wings
of love, and destroy that city of blasphemy on the seven hills, that
the glory may be thine?' But Jesus looked on him with an eye of love,
and said, 'Simon, son of Jonas, the time is not yet come.' Then Peter
only replied, 'Lord, thou knowest. Thy will be done.'

"While in this joyful state, I walked in the green pastures of life. I
went round about the holy city, and counted its towers. They were all
of purest gold, and built with skill divine. I looked from the top of
one of them, and beheld the sea of glass, and also caught a glimpse of
the abyss, enough to see that the enemies of our God were all beneath
his feet. I could see some, once my friends among them; but I could
say, 'Holy and just art thou, O Lord God; and O, wonderful grace, that
has made such as I to differ.'

"But while thus filled with praise, and delighting myself in that ocean
of love, I awoke, yet only to say, 'Blessed are the dead that die in
the Lord.' Dear friends, let us cleave to Christ on earth, until he
plants our feet on the Mount Zion above."

The next composition was written by Nargis, of Geog Tapa, in 1852. It
is an account of Hannah, the mother of Samuel, and gives a very good
idea of the Bible knowledge of the pupils, and their interest in
Scripture themes. The allusions to the condition of Nestorian families,
illustrate, and are illustrated by, the statements of Chapter I.

"About three thousand years ago, the family of Elkanah dwelt on the
hill of Zophim, in Palestine. He was a just man, and one that feared
God. According to the custom of those days, he had two wives, Peninnah
and Hannah. Let us turn our thoughts to Hannah, for every memory of her
is pleasant. She had no son, on whom she could look as a staff of joy
for her old age. Yet Hannah had a worthy portion in the love of
Elkanah, which flowed unceasingly like a crystal stream. Why was she
thus loved? We believe because of the lovely spirit which she had
received from that gentleness of the eternal Son which maketh great;
and, like him, her voice was not heard in the streets. Instead of the
contentious temper of the women of this age, we find in her a meek and
quiet spirit; instead of pride, humility; and instead of anger,
patience; she was kind, pleasant, and abounding in other graces. Shall
not such a woman be praised?

"Now Elkanah took his family to Shiloh, to worship and feast before the
Lord. But the envious Peninnah so grieved Hannah that she could neither
eat nor drink. Soon, however, she heard the sweet tones of her
husband's voice. Was it not like an angel's? saying, 'Hannah, why
weepest thou? and why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart grieved? Am
I not better to thee than ten sons?' When she heard that she arose and
ate. Love was rewarded by love. She would not grieve Elkanah. Unlike
many in our day, she was obedient to her husband, yielding her will to
his, and clothed with humility. They were not only one flesh, but one
spirit; and they walked together in the valley of love to that world
where love is made perfect. Now, after she had shown her love by
partaking of the feast,[1] may we not suppose that she arose and
whispered to Elkanah to know if he would approve of her intended vow;
and did he not reply, 'Your vow is mine.' Then did she not seek a
corner of the court where she might pray? Radiant spot, where Hannah
communed with God! herself a bright light among the women of that age.
There, in bitterness of soul, she wept before the Lord, and obtained
his blessing. She believed that God would grant her request, as he saw
best, and gave back her expected son to the Lord to be his forever.
Here was true faith. She left all with God; and though, like her
Saviour, she prayed the more earnestly: still her voice was not heard.
But we hear the voice of Eli: 'How long wilt thou be drunken?' 'O Eli,
Eli, why speak to her thus? She was of thy flock, and thou shouldst
have distinguished her from other women round about her.' [Footnote 1:
In Oriental families, anger is shown by refusing to eat, sometimes for
several days.]

"Bright star of that generation! Blessed art thou among the daughters
of Levi. The moving of thy lips is like the voice of the dove. There
was a blessing in thy mouth, like the olive leaf of Noah's dove, that
told of rest from the tossings of the flood; for thy request was about
to give rest to the millions of Israel. Blessed art thou, daughter of
Zion. Thou soughtest not a son for thy own glory, but for the glory of
thy God.

"What a prayer was Hannah's! It brought a deliverer and a prophet to
Israel, an intercessor and a preacher to the people of God. May the
daughters of Hannah and the sons of Elkanah be multiplied among our
people. She is a mirror into which we may look, to learn how to forsake
our evil ways. Let us, like her, build up the kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

"Her prayer finished, Hannah returned to her house. Her sorrow was now
turned into joy, and her happy face was like the opening rose of the
morning. No wonder she was joyful. The will of the Lord was her will,
and what evil could befall her? Blessed Israel, that contains such a
praying soul.

"Time passes on, and the answer to that prayer is a beloved son. The
grateful mother calls him Samuel--'God heard.' Her full heart could
give no other name to this child of prayer. She would remember ever,
Not mine, but God's. And now the childless one folds in her arms a
child of the covenant. New joy fills the heart of Elkanah. Their son
was new to them every day; yet not alone as theirs, but His who
answered prayer.

"The time now draws near for them to go again to Shiloh. The happy
father does not forget God in his mercies. He appears before the Lord
with his thank offering;--a noble example to us. He asks Hannah to go
with him: not in a voice of harsh command, but in love he said, 'Will
you go?' and it was, doubtless, a gentle voice that answered, 'Not now,
for then I must bring Samuel back with me. He is too small to leave;
but when he is weaned, I will bring him, that he may appear before the
Lord, and there abide forever.' The good Elkanah was satisfied, saying,
'Only the Lord establish his word;' for he had not forgotten the vow.
So the happy Hannah remained at home another year, and taught the child
as a mother only can.

"When the time came to go up again to Shiloh, Samuel was probably three
years old. That praying mother did not say, 'He is small; let him stay
with me one year longer.' No! With her whole heart she carried him to
the house of the Lord, to abide there; and she went not up empty,
saying, 'It is enough that I give my son;' but in the three bullocks we
find the burnt offering, the sin offering, and the peace offering, and
in her son the first fruits besides. She was ready to say, 'In all
things I am a debtor to the Lord.'

"Nor did she come in pride of spirit, saying to Eli, 'You called me
drunken, while offering a prayer that God hath heard;' but in all
humility she accosts the aged priest, saying, 'I am the woman that
stood by thee here, praying;' and then, leading forward the child, 'for
this child I prayed, and the Lord hath given me my petition, and I have
lent him to the Lord.' We seem to see little Samuel approaching Eli
reverently; and then turning those speaking eyes to his mother, he
says, 'Is this my father, of whom you told me, and with whom I am to
live?' 'Yes, my child, he will be your father.' And now Eli places his
hand upon the head of Samuel, saying, 'Blessed art thou, son of a true
daughter of Levi. The Lord bless thee, and make thee a prophet of the
Most High.'

"Hannah worships, and returns to her home. Her little son asks not to
go with her; for he has been taught that he is the Lord's, and is to
abide in Shiloh. What a blessing are praying mothers, training their
children for God!

"Still she does not forget the Lord's Samuel. Every year she goes up to
Shiloh, with her husband, and as often does she carry for the little
prophet a coat, made by a mother's loving hand. She did not say, like
some of our mothers, 'If he is in the school of the prophets, let the
prophets clothe him;' but she clothed him for the Lord's service, and
he comforted Eli as he was never comforted by his own children. Will
our mothers follow the example of Hannah? Should a voice come from the
mountains to-day, calling for preachers, would they give their sons to
go and save the lost? Blessed are those mothers who give their sons to
be soldiers of the cross; who, like Hannah, lead the way to the throne
of grace, and serve God in their households.

"The Lord helped Hannah to pray, and he helped her to write that
beautiful song. Her words are golden and full of wisdom. It is fitting
to call her a mother in Israel. Deborah sat as judge, but Hannah gave a
judge and teacher to the people of God. Both were bright stars, but
where is the people on whom they shone? The chosen people are
scattered. Deborah, perchance, sleeps under the oak of judgment, and
Hannah on the hill of Zephim. We love to think that her son stood by
her dying bed to thank her for all her prayers and instructions, and
see her reverently gathered to her people.

"We leave thee, mother of the holy prophet. Thou hast passed through
this valley of humiliation. Thy works follow thee, and thy God hath
crowned thee with glory and honor. Sweet singer of Israel, sing on in
heaven, for with thy Saviour thou canst never sorrow more. Who will
rise among us to carry forward the kingdom of our Christ? Such as honor
the Master here, he will honor when mothers in Israel see their sons
made kings and priests unto the Lord forever."




CHAPTER XXI.


KIND OFFICES.

HOSPITALITY OF NESTORIANS.--KINDNESS OF PUPILS.--BATHING FEET.--LETTERS
OF GOZEL, HANEE, SANUM OF GAWAR, MUNNY, RAHEEL, AND
MARTA.--HOSHEBO.--RAHEEL TO MRS. FISKE.--MOURNING FOR THE
DEAD.--NAZLOO.--HOSHEBO's BEREAVEMENT.--DEATH OF MISSIONARY
CHILDREN.--LETTER FBOM SARAH, DAUGHTER OF JOSEPH.

The foregoing pages have told something of the change that grace has
wrought among women in Persia. Let us now look at some points in that
change more carefully.

The Nestorians are noted for their hospitality. Kindness to strangers
is regarded as a part of their religion; and if, after bringing out the
choicest of their stores, it is said, even in a strange language, "How
can I eat this?" or, "Who could endure a dish like that?'" the words
may be unintelligible, but not so the look and tone of the speaker. Yet
even such treatment often only calls forth additional efforts to
please. A stranger may not relish some of their dishes. Yet a spirit of
kindness would be careful not to let this appear. In the Seminary, the
pupils studied how to please, even in the folding of a table napkin;
and the kind-hearted steward was perfectly delighted when reminded that
the pains he took in the preparation of a meal was so much service to
Christ, because it strengthened his servants to labor for him.

The girls were very kind to each other. When any one was sick, her
companions not only readily performed her share of domestic work, but
nursed her tenderly besides. If their teachers were ill, they coveted
the privilege of attending them by night and by day. It may comfort
some timid one to know, that in Oroomiah Miss Fiske never had a
missionary sister with her by night in sickness; not that they were
backward to come, but the services of the pupils left nothing to be
desired. It did good like a medicine to see those girls, once coarse
and uncouth, showing even kindness in a way offensive to refined
feelings, now move with noiseless step, anticipating every wish. They
sought to conform every thing to the home tastes of their teachers; and
yet there was nothing of that show of effort that says, "See how much
we do for you." They seemed to feel that they could not do too much, or
do it well enough. If Miss Fiske was exhausted and feeble during the
day, they might say nothing at the time, and not trouble her even to
answer a question; but when they supposed she was ready to retire,
there would be a gentle knock on the door, sometimes on more than one
door, and then, with a "Teacher, you looked tired to-day. Shall we come
in and bathe your feet? The water is warm, and every thing ready,"
their loving service would not cease, till every thing was in its
place, and they had put out the light after she retired.

Woman, there, as in the days of our Saviour, still bathes the feet of
the guest whom she wishes to honor. And sometimes, when stooping over
them, she rubs them gently with her loosely-flowing hair--not as a
substitute for a towel, but as a token of kindly welcome. This
privilege belongs to the oldest daughter of the family; and the custom
once liable to perversion, now shines with new beauty, as the
expression of Christian love. He who once accepted the service in his
own person, will hereafter say, to many a daughter of Chaldea,
"Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye
did it unto me."

Their tender sympathy with the afflicted was not confined to their own
household. In January, 1857, Miss Fiske was absent at Seir, assisting
in taking care of Mr. Stoddard in his last illness; and from a number
of letters written to her, at that time, by her pupils, we select the
following:--

JANUARY 1st, 1857.

Many of your flock have observed this as a day of fasting and prayer;
and all have looked on it as a blessed day. The pleasant voice of
prayer has been heard during all its hours, and it seems as if the
Saviour was about to come among us with great power. I trust that he
will work in many hearts by the Holy Spirit. We greatly desire to have
you here; but again, with all our hearts, we wish you to do for the
sick one whom we love. Yes, if each pupil were to write to you, all
would say, we wish you to remain, and do all you can for him; and may
he be raised up again to labor for our poor people. Give our love to
Mrs. Stoddard, and tell her we are glad to have the one we greatly
love, with her at this time.

Your daughter, GOZEL.

JANUARY 2d, 1857.

My heart is drawn towards you all the time; but I thank God that he has
given you strength to do for our beloved brother Mr. Stoddard. I am
very much distressed when I think of him, and can only say, "The will
of the Lord be done." I greatly desired to hear your voice yesterday.
It was indeed a blessed day. Give my love to Mrs. Stoddard, and though
it is hard for her to bear these bitter pains, tell her to try to trust
the Lord of our beloved brother.

Peace be to you, HANEK.

The next is written by a graduate, who was then on a visit at the
Seminary:--

JANUARY 3d, 1857.

I cannot tell you what great anxiety and anguish I have for Mr.
Stoddard. He has won my whole heart by taking so much pains for my dear
companions, and particularly for Elisha. I did not think he would be
taken from us. This trial seems to me heavier than losing Elisha and
Jonathan (her children, who died by poison), for it is not only a loss
to his dear family, but also to this band of stranger missionaries, and
a dreadful desolation to our poor people. May the Lord see how great is
the harvest, and how few the laborers. I cannot write more; my eyes
fail because of my tears. Give my tenderest love to dear Mrs. Stoddard.
I know her sorrows in such trying days; would that I could help her.

From your truly afflicted pupil,

SANUM.

The following was written the day after the death of Mr. Stoddard,
which took place the 22d of January, and refers to that sad
occurrence:--

JANUARY 23d, 1857.

What bitter intelligence comes to us these days!--the taking away of
those who carried us in the arms of love to the blood-stained cross of
Christ. Truly, my mother, these afflictions fall very heavily on our
heads. The guides of our souls are cut off from us. What shall we do?

Dearly loved sister Mrs. Stoddard, sorrow and mourning are ours. There
is hope that you will soon meet the ornament of your life. But in his
school and in ours are those for whom there is no hope that they will
ever see him. Wounded sister, blessed is the heavenly pilgrim who has
spent his life in a strange land, and been a well of living water to
many thirsty souls. I know this separation is bitter to you; but there
is consolation for you, for it is not eternal. But what shall I say of
our poor people?

O, how much more than any of you knew we loved that dear brother. It
was a quarter past three o'clock this morning when your letter reached
us (Miss Fiske's). I handed it to Miss Rice, and never saw such a
bitter night except that in which my father died. I did not sleep till
almost dawn; and when I slept, I saw the loved one standing in Miss
Rice's room, his face shining like the morning star. Both his hands
were raised to heaven, when suddenly he stooped and looked in my face.
I said, "O, you are not dead!" He answered, "No!" and I cried aloud,
"O, Mr. Stoddard is not dead!" and my own voice awoke me. How favored
those of you are who see the face of our beloved friend!

MUNNY.

Still later, she writes to her teacher, who was again at Seir, during
the sickness of Harriette Stoddard, whose death occurred March 16th,
1857.

Though it is a time of anguish, yet, blessed be God, he has given us
One to whom we may look for comfort. A thousand thanks to the Saviour
that he does not chastise us by taking away the Holy Spirit. Though the
discipline is bitter, yet it is mingled with love, in that the Lord
comes by death among his own, and by his Spirit to those who have not
known him, that he may make them his own also. What grief would the
lovers of the Lord have, if you now sat by the bedside of a sister of
whom we had no evidence that her heart was purified by a Saviour's
blood? If you are so distressed about one whom you trust your Father Is
taking to rest in the bosom of his Son, how would you feel if she were
one of those who, as soon as the breath left her body, would dwell with
everlasting burnings! How thankful we should be that it is not the bed
of one of these!

I have never seen such a trying year; but I do not believe it is for
the harm of those that fear the Lord. It only fulfils the promise,
"Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth." O that the gentle voice of Jesus
might be heard, whispering, "Daughter, I say unto thee, arise!" Who
knows but, if our faith were as Christ would have it, he would call
this sister back to life, though now so near to death! But your Father
knows what is for your good, and you know that here he often gives
anguish to those who love him, that they may be exceedingly joyful with
him hereafter. The Lord grant that these afflictions do not harden our
hearts.

I have conversed and prayed with all the younger girls, save two.
Eleven say that they are resolved to follow Christ; but I fear lest the
vineyards and the cotton fields do not testify hereafter that they have
walked with God. It is very pleasant to me to sit down by them and ask
them of their state.

Yesterday (Sabbath) was a delightful day, but it seemed very short. The
Lord help us in our weakness, and cause the dark clouds to rise from
all your friends. The God of consolation heal the wounded spirit of
your poor sister, Mrs. Stoddard. I have never seen the death of the
righteous--only by hearing have I heard of it. The Lord be with you
more and more.

MUNNY.

Others, written during the same period, are as follows:--

Sorrower for us, who hast also become as a stranger to us!--Now we know
your anxious love for us. We have no doubt that He who directs not
according to man's thoughts has directed you to be away from us much
this year. We had thought that it would be a very pleasant year; but
the Lord has ordered it as he pleases, and let us say, "His will be
done." We know that he does all for our profit. What a comfort this is
to us who have given our all to the Saviour to do with us as he will!

It is very hard to look at your vacant place; but we thank God it is
not made vacant by death. Though not with us in body, we believe that
you are, in spirit, and we rejoice that you can do as few can, for the
sick. The Lord be with you, who are the second in anguish, and
strengthen your weak body. The prayer of your pupils is ever for your
life. We have no words with which to comfort you; we can only say, "The
Saviour, with whom you are better acquainted than we are, give you
comfort."

What can we say to you, dear Mrs. Stoddard, who are shrouded in a cloud
that is very dark? We know it is very hard for you to look on the great
vacancy that is made in your dwelling. But do trust in the Lord; he
will bring light out of darkness. We feel for you, plunged in a sea of
sorrow, in the deep places of sighs. Our eyes are every hour upon the
door, expecting what we shall hear from Harriette; and our prayer is,
that if it can be the Lord's will, she may be brought back to you; but
every letter increases our anxiety. We understand not the Lord's
dealings this year, except this: we know that he does all things for
the profit of our souls.

RAHEEL.

MARTA.

The writer of the following was at that time a teacher in the Seminary,
and a striking illustration of the elevating power of a good education.
Formerly a female who was either lame or deformed was so despised, that
she could never hope to be the head of a family: she was doomed to drag
through a miserable life, the object of universal neglect. But Hoshebo,
though a fall in early youth had shattered her ankle, and the ignorance
of native surgeons made her a cripple for life, yet because of her
education was as much esteemed as before she would have been despised,
and is now the wife of Meerza, our native helper at Saralon. Miss Fiske
might have filled up her school with such, but, with a wise foresight,
selected her pupils with an eye to their future usefulness among the
people, as well as their own personal advantage.

When I understood from Miss Rice, that you would not meet your loved
flock next Sabbath, I felt that I could not let all your absence pass
without giving you an account of my charge. I have been sitting with
them, as I do every Saturday evening, to search out their spiritual
state; and I have good news to tell you of one for whom you, and also
others, have been very anxious--Esli, of Takka. I noticed her changed
all this week; but last night I saw a great breaking down under Mr.
Cochran's preaching. She came out in anguish of soul. I then saw her
alone, and found her contrition still increasing. I know this is not
evidence that she has passed from death unto life; but I rejoice that
she is visited by the Holy Spirit, and I trust she will become a
Christian. I am anxious for her and for all the girls of my room. I
look for the gentle shower that shall make the withered plants like the
fresh springing grass. Though you are absent, we know well that you
carry every one of your flock in the arms of love to Him who can do all
things, whether you are far away or near to us. The girls send up many
petitions for Harriette. We fear much when we recall your former going
to Seir. How glad should we be to hear of indications that she will
recover. Peace and love to Mrs. Stoddard.

Your affectionate

HOSHEBO.

More than a year after this, Miss Fiske left Oroomiah, and at Salmas,
on her way home, met her dear pupil Sanum, the wife of Joseph. Having
no other place for devotion, they retired together to an orchard for
the parting prayer. In a subsequent letter, Sanum thus beautifully
alludes to it:--

"O, the remembrance of that bitter separation! and of those prayers,
when the green grass was watered with our tears! How could I have borne
it, but for the recollection of Him who prayed and wept in the garden
of Gethsemane, and whose kneeling upon the tender grass was for the
comfort of our souls!"

The gratitude of the pupils to their teacher extended also to her aged
mother. Seldom have they written a letter to Miss Fiske, in America,
without its message of kind remembrance to the parent who gave up her
daughter, as Hannah gave up Samuel, to be the Lord's; and several wrote
letters to her separately. From among these we select the following,
written by Raheel (Rachel), of Geog Tapa, Sept. 10th, 1859:--

MY DEAR GRANDMOTHER HANNAH: Though I have never seen you, yet I must
write to you, for I love all Miss Fiske's friends as I do my own, and
especially yourself. I want to thank you for all your love to me.
Blessings have thus reached me which were not given to my early
sisters. When it was a great reproach for a girl to learn to read, God
had mercy on us in that he poured such love into your heart as made you
willing to send your daughter eight thousand miles, by sea and land, to
show our people the great mystery that had been previously hidden from
their eyes--that there is salvation for women. They used to dwell much
on those words of Solomon, "One man among a thousand have I found, but
a woman among all these have I not found;" but now they see their
mistake, and that Christ died for women also. Many thanks for your
patience all these years. I know something of it from the feelings of
my own mother, for if she did not see me for five months during term
time, she would mourn that she had not seen her daughter for so long.

It was certainly a sacrifice for Christ to come into this world, and
deny himself; and it was also a sacrifice for the Father to send his
Son, when he knew all the sorrows and wounds there were in the cup
which he was to drink in this world of sin.

You will see your daughter much changed from what she was fifteen years
ago; but I am confident that when that day comes, which will be longer
than any day we have seen in this world,--when He whom the Jews could
not bear to hear called king, shall sit upon his throne, judging the
world,--then all troubles, sorrows, and separation from friends will
appear to the Christian as the small dust of the balance; and I think
that it will especially seem so to you, when you see a band of
Nestorian girls on the right hand of the Redeemer, whom you, through
your daughter, were the means of bringing there. Yes, justly might they
have been left to dwell with Satan forever; but instead of that, they
will have joyful life with Christ in his kingdom.

I can never repay your love; but there is one so rich that he can give
you what man cannot, and I ask him to reward you in heaven.

Is there another Miss Fiske in your country? We can hardly believe it.
I hope that I shall see her again, but it is difficult for me to expect
it.

It is very pleasant for me to write to friends, and especially to my
own dear mother, Miss Fiske. I should never be weary if I wrote to her
every day; but I thought that this time she would like to have me write
to you, and I trust that you will live to receive it.

Please give my love to Martha, and also to Mrs. Stoddard and Sarah, and
tell them that our hearts are with them.

From your granddaughter, whom you have not seen,

RAHEEL.

No reader of the Bible needs any description of Oriental mourning for
the dead. The rent garments and sackcloth (2 Sam. iii. 31), loud
weeping and wailing (ver. 32), protracted lamentation as for Jacob
(Gen. 1.10 and 11), and for Moses (Deut. xxxiv. 8), and the hired
mourning women (Jer. ix. 17, and Matt. ix. 23), were to be found
nowhere in greater perfection than among the Nestorians. It is very
difficult for us, in this land, to realize the force of such habits;
but it required much grace to break over them; and even now, when the
Christian heart grows cold, it is apt to return to the old ways. One
day, in 1845, the whole school were going to attend a funeral. When the
time came, one of the pupils requested to be excused. "Why? are you
sick?" "No." "Why not go, then?" "I do not wish to tell." But another
said, "May I tell you alone?" "It will be a great shame if we do not
all weep. We all think we can do it but Sarah, and we are afraid her
tears will not come; and so, lest she bring reproach upon us, we do not
want her to go." The heart of the teacher sunk within her, as she found
that she was about to lead a company of mourning women to the funeral.
She asked them how they could make themselves weep. "O, when we go to
such places, we call to mind all the sad things we ever knew, and so we
weep; but if the tears do not come, we leave very quickly."

But grace has wrought a great change in this matter also. In the
journal of Yonan, we find the following entry: "At the close of
afternoon service, I had a Bible class with the women: this was
followed by a prayer meeting. Then Munny came to see me: she has buried
a little child recently. It is a matter of joy to me, that these women
can lift up their eyes and see their children with the dear Saviour,
and feel that they have treasures in heaven. I asked her, 'Did you ever
do any thing for your little girl that you remember now with
gratitude?' 'Many times I carried her with me to the stable, and knelt
with her upon the straw in the manger, to ask blessings on her.'
'Christ was in the manger, and perhaps there your daughter was
consecrated to him.'"

In another place, we find him asking Esli,--the wife of Joseph, of whom
he had just said, "Her little daughter has died recently, and her heart
is broken,"--"When your child died, did you weep and wail as your
people do?" and she answered, "No."

Nazloo, of Vizierawa, a pupil who hoped she took Christ for her Saviour
in 1849, and graduated in 1853, within less than a year after her
conversion was summoned to the death-bed of her uncle; and scarcely had
she returned to her studies before she was called to the bedside of her
father. For three days she watched with him incessantly, by day and by
night. Those who were present were greatly moved by her tender care of
him. During the whole of his sickness, she never failed to improve
every opportunity to point him to Christ. Even to the last, she begged
him to look to the Lamb of God and live. And when he died, with his
head resting on her hand, though she had no evidence that her efforts
were successful, her wonderful calmness, under so severe a stroke, led
many to feel that she possessed a source of consolation to which they
were strangers. But her cup was not yet full. A few days passed, and
she hastened once more to her afflicted home, to find her mother
entering the dark valley. Others wept aloud, but she pointed the dying
one to Jesus; and supporting her in her loving arms, she seemed to
plant her feet in the cold waters of the river of death, and commit her
departing mother into the hands of Him who could bear her safely to the
other side. So sensible was her mother of the benefit she and hers had
received from the school, that when the teacher came in, she beckoned
her to her side, and said, with difficulty, "God is not willing I
should be a mother to my daughters any longer. I commit them to you:
they are yours." She soon fell asleep, as was hoped, in Jesus. After
this, Nazloo was in the school most of the time till her marriage. As a
teacher, no one could have been more faithful: her religious experience
was very marked, and she labored wisely for souls. She still lives to
show how God can make grievous afflictions yield the peaceable fruit of
righteousness in his people.

In this connection, we cannot omit another letter, written by Hoshebo
to her teacher, in 1860, on the death of her son Absalom. It is dated
Saralon, where she and her husband Meerza reside.

DEAR MOTHER: I received your letter just before I received a bitter
stroke from the never-erring hand of my heavenly Father. Many thanks
for your loving remembrances of me. I cannot reward you for one of a
thousand of the good things that you have shown me, so unworthy. I have
many thoughts of you, and of those pleasant days that we passed
together in that blessed school. I am very sad when I think that
perhaps I may never, in this house of my pilgrimage, see your face,
which makes others to be exceeding glad.

Dear mother: like a daughter distressed, who would find a little rest
by falling into the kind arms of her mother, I come to tell you what
has pierced the heart of your poor child. It is true that you are so
far from me that I cannot lean on your kind breast, and let you lead me
in prayer to the Father who has afflicted me; but with a feeling like
that I write you. Beloved, you used to write me that I must take good
care of my dear and tender babe, Aweshalom. Perhaps I did not fully do
as you told me. But one thing I know: the Lord, who loves little
children, was not willing that I should keep him. And I believe that he
will take better care of my dear child than I could. You must know that
I am deeply wounded and crushed by the death of Aweshalom. My tears
cease not. His first birth was October 14, 1858; his second and
spiritual one, April 23, 1860. His life with us was a pleasant one, and
he made our lives very sweet and delightful; but now he has gone to
heaven, while we remain on the earth. He lives the new life, while we
die daily. He is strong, while I am weak. He has grown beautiful, in
the light and image of the Saviour, while I am pining away. If you have
heard what a child he was, you will not wonder at my sickness since his
death. My husband is greatly afflicted in the death of this, our first,
our only child. We find no comfort except in casting our wounded souls
at the feet of the Saviour, who was tempted that he might heal our
wounds. It seems, sometimes, as if our comforters were far from us; but
our Saviour is very near to help and comfort.

Our work has been as last year. My husband has taught in the Seminary
at Seir, coming here to preach on the Sabbath. I have taught a school
of eighteen boys and girls here. Before vacation, my babe sickened, and
rested in Jesus. Since that time, I have had fever, and am still very
weak.

Five in the village, besides ourselves, are communicants. My father and
brother are among them. I trust that my mother and brother's wife will
soon unite with us. The work of the Lord in the village goes forward
better than formerly. I try to talk and pray with the women alone, and
they are more ready to have me do it, which makes me to rejoice in the
Lord.

Give my loving peace to my dear grandmother Hannah. Though with the
eyes of this mortal body we have not seen each other, nor have I any
hope that we shall, the Lord her God help me, that we may meet on the
blessed hill of Zion above. I believe, my mother, that you will
remember your weak, unworthy lamb, when you bow before the throne of
mercy and grace. Perhaps this is the last letter you will receive from
me, for death seems very near. Receive loving peace from the priest
[her husband].

Your true daughter,

HOSHEBO.

Jesus has seemed to be almost bodily present, taking up these lambs in
his arms; and the mothers have not feared, for they felt sure that
under such a Guardian it was well with their children.

Perhaps bereaved missionary mothers In Persia do not realize how much
their patient suffering has done for their poor Nestorian sisters. The
short lives of those twenty missionary children, who lie in Persian
graves, were a precious offering to Christ. They were all missionaries,
and did not go home till their work was done. Each one had a place to
fill among the instrumentalities employed by the Master to promote his
kingdom in Persia. There was no waste in the breaking of those
alabaster boxes of precious ointment. Nestorian parents looked on, to
learn how to lay their children into the arms of Jesus, and become more
Christ-like themselves. No years of mature toil have been more blessed
than the years of those thus early called home; and in this truth their
bereaved parents may find abundant consolation. There are influences
too deep and silent to be fully understood; but they are none the less
real and powerful; and the mother who to-day misses the little feet,
the loving eyes, and the pleasant voice, which God had lent to gladden
her earthly home for a season, may rejoice in the assurance that her
loving submission to a Father's hand is teaching a lesson to the people
whom she loves, such as they could never learn from words.

During the revival of 1846, a little child of Dr. Perkins died; and as
the missionaries laid it away, in the hope of a glorious resurrection,
it helped them to point others to him who is the Resurrection and the
Life. It was buried on a snowy Sabbath day, and the faces of the young
converts, who stood in silence around the grave, showed that to them
the associations of death were no longer fearful. Turning away from the
cemetery, Mr. Stoddard, feeling that he could not be separated from
those young disciples even in death, said, "Do you not hope that you
shall rest here to rise with these to everlasting life?"[1] Little did
they who heard him know how soon that cemetery at Seir would become
more sacred as his own resting place. [Footnote 1: See Nestorian
Biography, page 242.]

Before leaving this topic, we insert a letter from Sarah, daughter of
Joseph, a former pupil in the Seminary, and the oldest of four sisters.
The death of little Deborah seemed to draw her heart very closely to
her Saviour, and she now sleeps by her side, doubtless understanding
better the meaning of those arms of love that here she believed "folded
her little sister in his own bosom."

"What word of fitting love can I write, and how tell you what God has
done? We are afflicted, for he has taken from us our dear little
Deborah. She was only two years and seven months old. We mourn; and yet
are comforted; for we know that He who loves little children has taken
her into his own arms, that we may love him more and better praise his
glorious name. She did not leave us to go to a stranger. The dear
Saviour, we think, has made her happier than we could; and now we dwell
much on this scripture, 'Prepare to meet thy God.' Deborah was very
sick, and suffered much; but when she died, there was a pleasant smile
on her little face. Then she rested from sorrow, and Jesus folded the
little Iamb in his own bosom."




CHAPTER XXII.


PROGRESS AND PROMISE.

BENEVOLENCE, EARLY MANIFESTATION OF.--PROGRESS.--REVIVAL OF BENEVOLENCE
IN APRIL, 1861.--INTEREST OF PARENTS FOR THE CONVERSION OF THEIR
CHILDREN.--PEACE IN FAMILIES.--REFORMED
MARRIAGES.--ORDINATIONS.--COMMUNION SEASONS.--MISS RICE AND MISS
BEACH.--CONCLUSION.

The pupils were early trained to form habits of self-denying
benevolence. In 1844, the day scholars made as many as fifty garments
for poor children. Early in 1845, when some mountaineers came to beg
money for their ragged children, the question was put, "Who will give
her own clothes and wear poorer ones till she can make others." Many
responded at once, and she who gave her best dress was deemed the most
happy. Some even wept because they could not do the same. In a letter
written December, 1848, the pupils say, "The last day of the term was
monthly concert. We had a good time of prayer, and then a collection,
which went up to thirty-two sahib korans--(seven dollars.) We hope this
will be increased, and used for sending the gospel to the poor people
of the mountains."

They were accustomed to devote several hours a week to sewing for some
benevolent object. At the close of one term the articles thus prepared
were sold for sixteen dollars, and the proceeds sent to Aintab to pay
for teaching women there to read.

The same virtue was assiduously cultivated in the people. Deacons John
and Yonan had for some time been urged to take up a collection at the
monthly concert at Geog Tapa, but they dared not try; not that they did
not wish it, but they feared that the people, in their poverty, might
take offence at the innovation. At length, on the first Sabbath of
1852, John preached on the subject, and a few korans (worth twenty
cents each), were contributed. The first Sabbath of February it was
Yonan's turn to preach there. So he prepared himself thoroughly on this
subject,--Miss Fiske had read with him the prize essays on Benevolence,
published by the American Tract Society,--and, carrying his map into a
crowded church, he spoke at some length about missions in various parts
of the world. His account was well received. Then Bibles were
distributed through the church, and the readers were called on to read
passages previously selected, showing, first, the antiquity of
benevolent contributions; secondly, that the poor were to give as well
as the rich; and thirdly, that the blessing of God was promised to the
benevolent. The readers were scattered all over the church, and the
people listened with great attention. Then several spoke on the
subject, and the elders of the village gave the work their hearty
approval. Afternoon came, and as the time for meeting drew near, old
and young were eagerly engaged in getting ready their contributions (in
Geog Tapa the monthly concert is held on Sabbath afternoon), and as
many as two hundred came together. There were remarks and prayers, and
while the missionary hymn was being sung at the close, the collection
was taken up, amounting, in money and cotton yarn, to more than fifteen
korans. One sick boy, who had heard what was going on, rose from his
bed, and crept in to deposit his little coin. Instead of spending their
saints' days in idleness, as had been the custom, many now wrought on
those days to earn money for giving, saying to objectors that it was
better to labor for the spread of the gospel than to be idle for Satan.
Mr. Stoddard attended the March concert, with some idols from India,
and so interested the people that the collection amounted to more than
twenty-five korans, thus the good work went on.

After this the spirit of benevolence steadily increased, and instances
of marked self-denial were not wanting. It shows at once their poverty
and their disposition to do what they could, that at the monthly
concert a basket was passed round along with the contribution box, to
receive eggs from the little children and such as were too poor to give
any thing else. Crosses of ivory or silver were often found among the
contributions.

One day, a man was seen to take a silver coin out of his purse; and as
the missionary went on to describe more of the condition of the heathen
world, a second and a third was taken out, and held in readiness for
the collection. At another time, a woman, whom she had not seen before,
asked for a private interview with one of the ladies of the mission;
and when alone, besides requesting prayer that she might become a
Christian, she took out a gold ornament, the only one of any value that
she possessed, which had been handed down as an heirloom in her family
for several generations, and said she wanted to give that to send the
gospel to others, only no one must know who gave it. The ornament was
sold for four dollars and fifty cents, and the woman, in less than a
year, became a useful Christian. Sometimes the amount of interest might
be measured by the number of silver coins manufactured into buttons
that were found in the contribution box; for when their feelings were
aroused, the women cut off the fastenings of their outer garments, and
cast them into the Lord's treasury.

But the most remarkable revival of benevolence occurred in April, 1861;
and we condense the following account of it from a long letter of Yonan
to Miss Fiske and Mrs. Stoddard:--

"The prayers and tears of our missionary friends have, this winter,
received a joyful reward from our Father in heaven. We were told that
the first week in January would be devoted by all Christians to prayer
for great things, and my heart was never so enlarged before. It seemed
as if Persia, nominal Christendom, and all the heathen were under the
power of prayer; as if the Christian's measuring-line was stretched
round the four corners of the earth. One day the missionaries met, as
usual, for prayer in Dr. Wright's large room. It moved me much, and I
said to my companions, 'They are praying for us while we are idle.'
They said, 'It is good that we spend this half hour in prayer every
day.' We did so. On the Sabbath, I went to my village, Geog Tapa, and
mentioned these things to the people at the evening meeting. The Lord
opened the mouth of Abraham, who said, 'Brethren, in these places we
are always idle--let us meet for prayer half an hour before sunset.'
They did so. The clouds over our heads seemed loaded with blessings:
still they did not descend. Mr. Cobb and Mr. Ambrose had talked with me
about commencing in our village to support preachers in the mountains.
So did Mr. Labaree last week. I told him of our poverty. He said, 'I am
grieved for that; but begin with some little thing.'

"We went to Geog Tapa the last Sabbath in March. John gave notice, as
it was the gospel Sabbath, [monthly concert is so called], of the
contributions for our brothers in India. In his sermon he said that
much of our poverty is from our indolence. Last year our collection was
fifteen tomans. [A toman is about two dollars.] If we had more zeal, we
might raise twenty, and that would support a preacher in the mountains.
At once Guwergis cried out, 'I will give one.' I said, 'We will support
one preacher and two schools among ourselves, and if any thing is over,
we will send it far away.' Priest Abraham approved of this. Then all
the brethren in the congregation began to speak. 'So is good.' 'Thus we
will do.' John would have stilled them; but I said, 'Perhaps God is
blessing your preaching; let them speak.' Praised be God's name
forever; in a moment every obstacle was swept away. Had we known that
God was so near, we would have bowed our heads before him. Now Aib Khan
cried, 'I give one toman;' and 'I,' said Priest Moses, 'twelve korans;'
and another, 'I two monats.' [A monat is seventy-five cents.] Moses now
took out his pencil to write. The Malik said, 'I have often thought
that I would put a gold imperial in the box [four dollars and fifty
cents]; write that.' I then said, 'My family of eight souls hear
preaching all the year, and three or four attend school. I am a debtor;
write for me three tomans--it is not too much.' When God pleases,
excuses flee away; high prices and oppression were not thought of; we
were lords of wealth. Moses then said, 'I am troubled that I remain to
the last; but we are three brothers in company, and I know not whether
they will act through me, or each one for himself.' One brother cried
out, 'Our agent and I, five korans more.' Another man then said, 'I
also am at a loss on account of my brother;' and his brother replied,
'Four monats.' These things made brotherly love very firm. Guwergis now
cried out, 'Women, where are you? In the wilderness women gave their
brazen mirrors.' I said, 'Holy women, to-day ends fifteen years of the
prayers of Christianity among us. Speak!' [It was fifteen years since
the revival in 1846.] One replied, 'I half a monat;' and 'I a
head-dress;' 'I a silver ornament;' 'I my earrings;' and so on. A widow
said, 'I have kept my husband's coat till now; I will sell it, and give
half the price.' And others made similar responses. Isaac, a poor old
mountaineer, gave two korans; and another said, 'I have nothing but the
mat I sit on: I give that.' It was a new one he had just finished. A
mother said, 'I have nothing now, but I will give the work of my hands
this winter--a tope [ten yards] of cotton cloth.' A pilgrim said, 'When
I was in Jerusalem, an Armenian and a Russian bid against each other,
and the Russian prevailed, giving five hundred tomans to the Greek
convent. If they had such zeal for error, we ought to have more for the
truth.' And one unaccustomed to come to church gave the fruit and
prunings of fifteen rows in his vineyard. [The prunings of the vines
are sold for fuel.] We were in the church about four hours. Time was
given for all to contribute, and then we spent a season in joyful song
and pleasant prayer.

"The report of what had been done spread quickly through the village,
and my mother-in-law sent word that she would give a hundred and
twenty-eight pounds of raisins. At evening meeting, the house was full.
Benjamin said, 'Brethren, the teacher of our school was one day
explaining the verse, "Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that
treadeth out the corn;" and Mr. Stoddard, who stood near, added, "But
the Nestorian oxen eat from the straw of America." That word has worked
in my heart ever since. I trust that, hereafter, we will eat our own
straw.' That night we lay awake a long time for joy. In the morning,
before I was up, my uncle and his wife came and promised a load of
wheat [five bushels]; and when passing through the village, a woman put
an ornament in my pocket to sell for the cause.

"Monday we came to the city for the gospel day [the concert is held
there on Monday], and every one who met us remarked our glad faces. In
the meeting, after Mr. Coan spoke, John opened a bundle of the gifts,
and Moses described the scenes of the day before. I said, 'One toman
led to sixty in our village yesterday: perhaps it will lead to hundreds
more. Many times the good in the heart of the Christian comes up into
his mouth, and then goes back; but when the power of God prevails, it
not only comes into the mouth, but comes forth and abounds.' Priest
Moses arose, and said, 'As long as a man is sick, it is no shame if he
does not walk; but if the blood walks well in his veins, and he becomes
fat, and still lies in bed, every one reproaches him. We have grown
fat; and how long shall we lie under the quilts?' Priest Yakob added,
'For twenty-five years we have said, "Let the Lord go before;" and now
that he has come, let us wait no longer, but give.' He gave two tomans,
and others followed. Mar Tohanan's wife gave a toman of ornaments, and
almost every girl in school from one koran to three or four. Isras, of
Degala, gave fifteen tomans and a new vineyard that he had recently
bought. Guwergis, who had already proposed to plough the field the
second time, now rose, and opening his hand, said, 'If a man thrust his
hand into a pile of gold, and give of it to God, is it a great thing
when He has filled his hand with the blood of his Son, and given it to
us?' Sagoo,[1] of Gulpashan, said, 'My father gave each of my two
sisters thirty tomans. When Hannah died, hers became mine. I give it
for the bride's veil; [The kingdom of Christ is here spoken of as the
bride], also a silver watch.' One who had only two or three sheep
promised one of them. My little girl, Sherin, had asked, a few days
before, for a new dress. She now sent word to me that she would do
without it for a year, if I would give the money for the gospel. I
cannot fully describe the spirit of the meeting: we went out wondering
and congratulating each other at having witnessed such a pleasant
sight. At the evening meeting one said, 'I heard in the market what you
were doing; I give a gun, the price of which was seven and a half
tomans.' Some gave for themselves, and others for their wives and
children. Moses gave four monats for his brother's children. There were
tithes and sixths, fifths and fourths, thirds and halves, of crops of
hay and grapes. Priest Abraham said, 'We say a thief will never own a
house. Did you ever see one that had wealth? We are thieves, and
therefore are so poor. We have robbed God. I will give a tithe of my
vineyard.' Another replied, 'And I of every thing.' And a man, who had
before given one quarter of his vineyard, now gave the half. A widow,
who had nothing but a cow, pledged a hepta [four pounds] of butter. A
poor man, who has a few fruit trees in his yard, promised ten heptas of
apricots. Guwergis spoke up, 'We have butter: what shall we cook in it
for the bride?' A woman answered, 'I give four heptas of rice;' to
which her husband added two. [Footnote 1: See page 209.]

"Mar Elias now kissed us much; he put nineteen korans into John's hand,
saying, 'As yet I have not grown indifferent.' And Mar Yohanan said,
with tears, 'The crown of the bride remains for me. I give thirty
tomans.'

"In our village, besides the tithes, seventy tomans were collected, and
in the city two hundred and fifty. I hope the whole will go up to five
hundred or more. I stand amazed. I can think nothing but, 'I am a
miserable sinner.' The glorious God has gone before us in mercy. For
two or three years our village was going down; we were at variance and
in trouble; but Immanuel has met us with a blessing, a hundred fold
beyond our expectation. It is the beginning of a great work for future
generations. I know that the joy of heaven is awakened in the joy of
blessed Mr. Stocking and Mr. Stoddard. I want to fly to them and talk
with them about it, but this veil does not allow it. You, too, will
want to fly to the people that are so dear to you. I trust that this
pouring out of such a spirit will be the door of many blessings. We
have had a scarcity for seven years, so that wheat is six times its
former price. Our people are poor and sorely oppressed. From the depths
of their poverty they have given: I never knew them before. If all were
Christians, what might we not see? Perhaps the poor widows and orphans,
who have contributed for our good, have been discouraged; but truly
their gifts have not been sown in vain among our people. I believe at
the last day you will see fruit according to the word of Jesus--thirty,
sixty, and a hundred fold. The time is not far off when every converted
Nestorian will go to ten Mussulmen to teach them the word of God.

"Pray for us more than ever, for many are the enemies of Nehemiah and
ruined Jerusalem. Our hope is in God. He has begun, and he will finish."

The pledges then made have since been fulfilled, with very few
exceptions, and that not regretfully, but with a heartiness truly
affecting to those who knew their poverty. In July, 1861, the mission
resolved to furnish no teacher for a school--except in new
villages--where a part of his support was not assumed by the people.
The Barandooz congregation, in the spring of 1862, cheerfully assumed
the burden of their schools; and some have also expressed a readiness
to aid in the support of their pastors. A number of pupils, in both
Seminaries, contribute liberally towards their support.

In bringing to a close these glimpses of the changes wrought by grace
among the Nestorians, we must not pass by the number of pious parents
who now aid the missionaries by their prayers. While, in the early days
of the Seminary, its teacher was left to pray alone for her pupils,
before she left, in 1858, she rejoiced to know that two thirds of them
had either a pious parent, or other member of the family, who prayed
for their salvation.

One cold morning, in 1856, a pious mother walked three miles through
the snow, to inquire if there was any interest in the school. "Why do
you ask?" replied the teacher. "I have thought of you continually for
two or three days; and last night, after falling asleep, thinking about
you, I dreamed that God was visiting you by his Holy Spirit. So, when I
awoke, I arose and baked, and hurried here. I am so anxious about my
daughter! Can I see her?" She was told that her daughter was among the
inquirers the evening before, and sank down where she stood, weeping
for joy. The heart of the teacher grew strong in the feeling that the
mothers were wrestling with her. The mother passed into an adjoining
room to see her daughter; and a missionary brother, who came in just
then, could not restrain his tears as he listened to her earnest
intercessions, saying, "This is more to me than any thing I have seen
in Persia." After that year, some parents, when they came to the
Seminary, were never willing to leave till they had prayed with their
children. A father once wrote, "Yesterday I invited some Christian
friends to my house, and had three prayers offered for the school; and
while praying for you, we felt our own sins very much, and cried to God
to save us from their power."

Nor were the pupils wanting in interest for their impenitent parents.
During the long vacation in 1850, Hanee, who used to spend several
hours a day in prayer for her mother, so pressed her with entreaties to
come to the Saviour, that one day she roughly replied, "Enough! Enough!
Stop your praying and weeping for me: you will weep yourself blind." "O
mother," was the beautiful reply, "it seems as though I would gladly
become blind, if thereby you might be brought to Jesus."

Perhaps the effects of grace were nowhere more conspicuous than in the
effects it produced in those great households already described. Let us
first look in on the hinderances they occasioned to a life of piety.
Yonan writes, in his journal of March 7, 1858, "Widow Hatoon is a
devout woman, and tries to erect the family altar in her house; but it
is very difficult. She often collects the readers in the neighborhood
on Sabbath morning, to read the Bible with her family. I asked her, 'Do
you pray with your children? They have no father; they are left in your
hands, and God will require them of you again.' 'I do; but I find it
very hard in our house: we are all in one room, our beds very near each
other, and there is no separate chamber: when about to retire, I gather
them together behind a quilt, and talk and pray with them.'"

Again he writes, "Hatoon, the wife of Sarhoosh, is a member of a large
family. Three of the women in the house, and one of their husbands,
fear God; but the older members of the household are very wicked, and
even violent in their opposition. She is much troubled about family
prayer. While the devout ones engage in worship at one end of the room,
the rest, at the other end, talk, laugh, and revile."

Yet, even in such households, grace reveals its divine power. We find
Yonan putting this question to a communicant: "Do you and M. live
pleasantly together?" M. was her sister-in-law, in a household of more
than thirty souls. "She is a little quick tempered," was the reply;
"but I try not to trouble her, and to have our love perfect that we may
be a good example to the rest." Yonan prayed with her, and asked if he
could do any thing for her relatives. "Dear brother in Christ," she
replied, "in the name of the Lord Jesus, our precious Saviour, I beg
you to pray with my husband: it maybe God will bless him." "My sister,
God will bless him: this your anguish shall be turned into joy." "My
own heart was moved," adds the narrator. "I saw my own love very
little, compared with hers, and felt my unworthiness very much."

The change in their social condition was beautifully illustrated by a
little incident in the Seminary, in 1849. One of the older pupils had
been betrothed; but when the ring of betrothal was brought, to be
placed on her finger, she could not be found. After long search, her
gentle voice was heard in the most retired part of the building,
imploring the blessing of God to abide with her in that new relation.
Only those who had seen the rioting and folly common on such occasions
could appreciate the change.

The marriage of Mar Yohanan, in 1859, was a step in the work of lifting
up woman to her true position. Formerly, marriage had been deemed
something too unholy for a bishop; and the consequence was the general
degradation of the sex. The entrance of the gospel corrected public
sentiment on this point; and that act of the bishop only gave
expression to the popular conviction that marriage is honorable in all,
even the highest and holiest, nurturing some of the loveliest graces of
the Christian character. The event for a time caused some stir among
the enemies of the truth; but it soon died away, and the old ascetic
views of piety are passing away with the social degradation in which
they had their origin.

About the same time Yohanan, whom we have seen laboring in the
mountains with his estimable wife, was ordained to the work of the
ministry without any of the mummeries that had been added to the simple
usage of the New Testament; the venerable Mar Elias uniting with the
missionaries in the laying on of the hands of the presbytery. Two
months later, six more of the most pious and best educated young men,
who had long deferred ordination through aversion to the old forms,
followed his example; among them our mountain friend Oshana, Deacon
John, of Geog Tapa, and Deacon Yakob, of Sapergan. Marriage ceremonies
and entertainments have long been improved, and the revelling of former
days on such occasions is going into deserved disuse among the more
enlightened.

In the year 1858, the people of Memikan left off keeping their fasts,
on the ground that they tended to nullify salvation by grace through
Jesus Christ. Formerly this would have brought down on them, the wrath
of the patriarch, their village would have been devoted to plunder and
the torch, and themselves to death or exile; but now it caused scarce a
ripple on the current of events--not that men did not see the drift of
things, but they allowed it to have free course.

There is another sign of the times that calls for more special mention.
Other missions in Western Asia had been forced by persecution to the
early formation of churches. They had to provide a fold for the lambs
driven from their former shelter. Here there had been no such
necessity; yet the converts longed for a more spiritual observance of
gospel ordinances.

The mission had hitherto celebrated the Lord's supper by themselves,
and with one or two exceptions, no Nestorian had witnessed its
observance. There had been some thought of admitting them; but nothing
had been done, till, in the spring of 1854, three of the converts, who
had been reading an English treatise on the subject, asked one of the
ladies of the mission to intercede with the gentlemen to allow them to
be present. She informed Mr. Stoddard of their request, and he
encouraged them to go forward. The matter was laid before the mission,
and it was concluded that a few of those judged most fit for admission
to the ordinance should be invited to partake.

The first communion to which the converts were admitted was celebrated
in September, 1854, in the large room on the lower floor of the Female
Seminary. Eleven Nestorians partook with the missionaries, and three of
them were women, who had graduated there. After the service, some of
the men went up stairs and sat down without speaking. Miss Fiske, not
knowing the cause of their silence, and fearing lest they might have
been disappointed by the simplicity of our forms, did not venture to
allude to the subject, till one of them asked, "Is it always, so when
you commune, or was this an unusual occasion?" "Why, did you not enjoy
it?" "Not enjoy it! Jesus Christ himself seemed almost visibly present;
it was difficult to realize that it was not the Saviour in person who
presided at the table. It must have been just such a scene when the
ordinance was first instituted in Jerusalem; and I could not get rid of
the inquiry, 'Shall one of us go out like Judas and betray him?'" It is
a significant fact that those most accustomed to mediaeval forms, when
regenerated by the Spirit, relish them the least; and the more
spiritual they become, the more they crave the simple forms of the New
Testament, because they draw the least attention to themselves, and fix
it most completely on the Saviour.

In January, 1855, as many as seventy of the converts, after careful
examination, were allowed to partake; and once every four months the
privilege was renewed, with an accession of from twelve to thirty
communicants each time. These were occasions of unusual interest.
Several days were devoted to religious meetings, and even in midwinter
pious people made long journeys, and crossed bleak mountains on the
snow, to attend them. One woman, Hoimar, of Salmas,[1] travelled sixty
miles, through deep snow and piercing cold, to be present at this
ordinance in January, 1858. [Footnote 1: See page 171.]

In June of that year, the better to distinguish those entitled to this
privilege, before the sacrament all entered together into solemn
covenant with God. The whole number received up to that time was two
hundred and forty-nine; at the close of 1861, it had swelled to five
hundred. As the meetings became too unwieldy, and it was inconvenient
for so many to come so far, the ordinance was administered at Seir
also, in September, 1858; and here providentially another end was
secured, for as Dr. Wright was then too sick to distribute the
elements, some of the natives had to perform that service. In June
following, a very interesting communion was observed at Memikan;
Yohanan and his wife crossing a high mountain, even then covered with
snow, to bring their little child for baptism. Next year, the ordinance
was celebrated in every village where there was a sufficient number of
hopeful converts to justify its observance. Thus has God led his
people, step by step, in a way that they knew not, till now there are
all the essentials of a church at every place where God has raised up
members of the body of Christ. They enter into covenant with him and
with each other. They keep his ordinances, and grow in grace, in
knowledge, and in numbers. They may take one step farther. Since this
last sentence was written, the converted Nestorians have proceeded even
to the adoption of a creed and directory for worship.

Did the limits of this volume allow, it would be pleasant to dwell at
length on the labors of Miss Mary Susan Rice, who joined Miss Fiske in
November, 1847, and has ever since toiled diligently, and without
interruption, at her post. Since the return of Miss Fiske she has
entered into all her labors, both thoroughly and successfully. Her
fifteen years of toil will never be forgotten by those who have been
privileged to receive her instructions, both in and out of the
Seminary. They form an important part of the instrumentalities God has
employed to bring woman in Persia to the knowledge of her Saviour. A
mass of her correspondence now lies before the writer, which he has
read with much interest; but to quote from it would only be,
reproducing scenes already portrayed. It is not necessary to describe
the laying of each course of brick in the walls of the spiritual temple.

One sentence, however, now arrests my eye, which I must quote, because
it shows how the Saviour was preparing her for the sole care of the
school, that has devolved on her ever since, owing to the protracted
illness of Miss Aura J. Beach, who was sent out to her assistance in
February, 1860. Writing to her predecessor, three years ago, she says,
"O, what a relief to roll the burdens, which we cannot bear, upon the
strong arm outstretched to help, and feel that, like sinking Peter, we
shall be sustained amid raging billows!"

Labor among the Nestorians is becoming more assimilated to labor at
home. Instead of the national peculiarities conspicuous at the outset,
different from our own, and prominent because so different, things
begin to move in familiar orbits, because they set out from similar
conditions and tend to like results. In proportion as the gospel
advances in its work, the distinguishing characteristics of a people
fall into the background, to give place to those spiritual features
common to the work of grace in every land. The river is most
picturesque high up among the mountains, while its stream is yet small
and many obstacles oppose its course; after it glides out from among
the hills into the open plain, it moves with larger volume, but in a
more monotonous current, to the sea.

May the work of God advance, till this unity of all nations in Jesus
Christ shall every where replace the diversity and hostility under
which to-day creation groans, till in the placid surface of such a
river of life the Saviour shall see his own image reflected, as it is
from the sea of glass above!










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Woman And Her Saviour In Persia, by 
A Returned Missionary

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WOMAN AND HER SAVIOUR IN PERSIA ***

***** This file should be named 8699-8.txt or 8699-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/6/9/8699/

Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Tiffany Vergon, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
