The Project Gutenberg EBook of Weymouth New Testament in Modern Speech,
James, by R. F. Weymouth

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Weymouth New Testament in Modern Speech, James
       Third Edition 1913

Author: R. F. Weymouth

Posting Date: March 14, 2015 [EBook #8847]
Release Date: September, 2005
First Posted: August 25, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WEYMOUTH NEW TESTAMENT-JAMES ***




Produced by Martin Ward








Weymouth New Testament in Modern Speech, James

Third Edition 1913


R. F. Weymouth




Book 59 James

001:001 James, a bondservant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ:
        to the twelve tribes who are scattered over the world.
        All good wishes.

001:002 Reckon it nothing but joy, my brethren, whenever you find
        yourselves hedged in by various trials.

001:003 Be assured that the testing of your faith leads to
        power of endurance.

001:004 Only let endurance have perfect results so that you may become
        perfect and complete, deficient in nothing.

001:005 And if any one of you is deficient in wisdom, let him ask God for it,
        who gives with open hand to all men, and without upbraiding;
        and it will be given him.

001:006 But let him ask in faith and have no doubts; for he who has
        doubts is like the surge of the sea, driven by the wind
        and tossed into spray.

001:007 A person of that sort must not expect to receive anything
        from the Lord--

001:008 such a one is a man of two minds, undecided in every step he takes.

001:009 Let a brother in humble life rejoice when raised to a higher position;

001:010 but a rich man should rejoice in being brought low, for like
        flowers among the herbage rich men will pass away.

001:011 The sun rises with his scorching heat and dries up the herbage,
        so that its flowers drop off and the beauty of its
        appearance perishes, and in the same way rich men with all
        their prosperity will fade away.

001:012 Blessed is he who patiently endures trials; for when he has stood
        the test, he will gain the victor's crown--even the crown of Life--
        which the Lord has promised to those who love Him.

001:013 Let no one say when passing through trial, "My temptation is
        from God;" for God is incapable of being tempted to do evil,
        and He Himself tempts no one.

001:014 But when a man is tempted, it is his own passions that carry
        him away and serve as a bait.

001:015 Then the passion conceives, and becomes the parent of sin;
        and sin, when fully matured, gives birth to death.

001:016 Do not be deceived, my dearly-loved brethren.

001:017 Every gift which is good, and every perfect boon, is from above,
        and comes down from the Father, who is the source of all Light.
        In Him there is no variation nor the slightest suggestion of change.

001:018 In accordance with His will He made us His children through
        the Message of the truth, so that we might, in a sense,
        be the Firstfruits of the things which He has created.

001:019 You know this, my dearly-loved brethren.  But let every one
        be quick to hear, slow to speak, and slow to be angry.

001:020 For a man's anger does not lead to action which God
        regards as righteous.

001:021 Ridding yourselves, therefore, of all that is vile
        and of the evil influences which prevail around you,
        welcome in a humble spirit the Message implanted within you,
        which is able to save your souls.

001:022 But prove yourselves obedient to the Message, and do not be
        mere hearers of it, imposing a delusion upon yourselves.

001:023 For if any one listens but does not obey, he is like a man
        who carefully looks at his own face in a mirror.

001:024 Although he has looked carefully at himself, he goes away,
        and has immediately forgotten the sort of man he is.

001:025 But he who looks closely into the perfect Law--the Law of freedom--
        and continues looking, he, being not a hearer who forgets, but an
        obedient doer, will as the result of his obedience be blessed.

001:026 If a man thinks that he is scrupulously religious,
        although he is not curbing his tongue but is deceiving himself,
        his religious service is worthless.

001:027 The religious service which is pure and stainless in the sight
        of our God and Father is to visit fatherless children and widowed
        women in their time of trouble, and to keep one's own self
        unspotted from the world.

002:001 My brethren, you must not make distinctions between one man
        and another while you are striving to maintain faith in
        the Lord Jesus Christ, who is our glory.

002:002 For suppose a man comes into one of your meetings wearing gold
        rings and fine clothes, and there also comes in a poor man
        wearing shabby clothes,

002:003 and you pay court to the one who wears the fine clothes, and say,
        "Sit here; this is a good place;" while to the poor man you say,
        "Stand there, or sit on the floor at my feet;"

002:004 is it not plain that in your hearts you have little faith,
        seeing that you have become judges full of wrong thoughts?

002:005 Listen, my dearly-loved brethren.  Has not God chosen those whom
        the world regards as poor to be rich in faith and heirs
        of the Kingdom which He has promised to those that love Him?

002:006 But *you* have put dishonour upon the poor man.
        Yet is it not the rich who grind you down?  Are not they
        the very people who drag you into the Law courts?--

002:007 and the very people who speak evil of the noble Name by which
        you are called?

002:008 If, however, you are keeping the Law as supreme, in obedience
        to the Commandment which says "You are to love your fellow
        man just as you love yourself," you are acting rightly.

002:009 But if you are making distinctions between one man and another,
        you are guilty of sin, and are convicted by the Law as offenders.

002:010 A man who has kept the Law as a whole, but has failed to keep
        some one command, has become guilty of violating all.

002:011 For He who said, "Do not commit adultery," also said,
        "Do not commit murder," and if you are a murderer, although not
        an adulterer, you have become an offender against the Law.

002:012 Speak and act as those should who are expecting to be judged
        by the Law of freedom.

002:013 For he who shows no mercy will have judgement given against him
        without mercy; but mercy triumphs over judgement.

002:014 What good is it, my brethren, if a man professes to have faith,
        and yet his actions do not correspond?  Can such faith save him?

002:015 Suppose a Christian brother or sister is poorly clad or
        lacks daily food,

002:016 and one of you says to them, "I wish you well; keep yourselves
        warm and well fed," and yet you do not give them what they need;
        what is the use of that?

002:017 So also faith, if it is unaccompanied by obedience, has no life
        in it--so long as it stands alone.

002:018 Nay, some one will say, "You have faith, I have actions:
        prove to me your faith apart from corresponding actions and I
        will prove mine to you by my actions.

002:019 You believe that God is one, and you are quite right:
        evil spirits also believe this, and shudder."

002:020 But, idle boaster, are you willing to be taught how it
        is that faith apart from obedience is worthless?
        Take the case of Abraham our forefather.

002:021 Was it, or was it not, because of his actions that he was
        declared to be righteous as the result of his having offered
        up his son Isaac upon the altar?

002:022 You notice that his faith was co-operating with his actions,
        and that by his actions his faith was perfected;

002:023 and the Scripture was fulfilled which says, "And Abraham believed God,
        and his faith was placed to his credit as righteousness,"
        and he received the name of `God's friend.'

002:024 You all see that it is because of actions that a man is
        pronounced righteous, and not simply because of faith.

002:025 In the same way also was not the notorious sinner Rahab declared
        to be righteous because of her actions when she welcomed
        the spies and hurriedly helped them to escape another way?

002:026 For just as a human body without a spirit is lifeless,
        so also faith is lifeless if it is unaccompanied by obedience.

003:001 Do not be eager, my brethren, for many among you to become teachers;
        for you know that we teachers shall undergo severer judgement.

003:002 For we often stumble and fall, all of us.  If there is any one
        who never stumbles in speech, that man has reached maturity
        of character and is able to curb his whole nature.

003:003 Remember that we put the horses' bit into their mouths to make
        them obey us, and so we turn their whole bodies round.

003:004 So too with ships, great as they are, and often driven along
        by strong gales, yet they can be steered with a very small
        rudder in whichever direction the caprice of the man at
        the helm chooses.

003:005 In the same way the tongue is an insignificant part of the body,
        but it is immensely boastful.  Remember how a mere spark
        may set a vast forest in flames.

003:006 And the tongue is a fire.  That world of iniquity, the tongue,
        is placed within us spotting and soiling our whole nature,
        and setting the whole round of our lives on fire, being itself
        set on fire by Gehenna.

003:007 For brute nature under all its forms--beasts and birds,
        reptiles and fishes--can be subjected and kept in subjection
        by human nature.

003:008 But the tongue no man or woman is able to tame.
        It is an ever-busy mischief, and is full of deadly poison.

003:009 With it we bless the Lord and Father, and with it we curse men,
        who are made in God's likeness.

003:010 Out of the same mouth there proceed blessing and cursing.
        My brethren, this ought not to be.

003:011 In a fountain, are fresh water and bitter sent forth from
        the same opening?

003:012 Can a fig-tree, my brethren, yield olives, or a vine yield figs?
        No; and neither can salt water yield sweet.

003:013 Which of you is a wise and well-instructed man?
        Let him prove it by a right life with conduct guided by a
        wisely teachable spirit.

003:014 But if in your hearts you have bitter feelings of envy and rivalry,
        do not speak boastfully and falsely, in defiance of the truth.

003:015 That is not the wisdom which comes down from above:  it belongs
        to earth, to the unspiritual nature, and to evil spirits.

003:016 For where envy and rivalry are, there also are unrest and
        every vile deed.

003:017 The wisdom from above is first of all pure, then peaceful,
        courteous, not self-willed, full of compassion and kind actions,
        free from favouritism and from all insincerity.

003:018 And peace, for those who strive for peace, is the seed
        of which the harvest is righteousness.

004:001 What causes wars and contentions among you?  Is it not the cravings
        which are ever at war within you for various pleasures?

004:002 You covet things and yet cannot get them; you commit murder;
        you have passionate desires and yet cannot gain your end;
        you begin to fight and make war.  You have not, because you
        do not pray;

004:003 or you pray and yet do not receive, because you pray wrongly,
        your object being to waste what you get on some pleasure or another.

004:004 You unfaithful women, do you not know that friendship with
        the world means enmity to God?  Therefore whoever is bent on
        being friendly with the world makes himself an enemy to God.

004:005 Or do you suppose that it is to no purpose that the Scripture says,
        "The Spirit which He has caused to dwell in our hearts yearns
        jealously over us"?

004:006 But He gives more abundant grace, as is implied in His saying,
        "God sets Himself against the haughty, but to the lowly
        He gives grace."

004:007 Submit therefore to God:  resist the Devil, and he will
        flee from you.

004:008 Draw near to God, and He will draw near to you.
        Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and make your hearts pure,
        you who are half-hearted towards God.

004:009 Afflict yourselves and mourn and weep aloud; let your laughter
        be turned into grief, and your gladness into shame.

004:010 Humble yourselves in the presence of the Lord, and He
        will exalt you.

004:011 Do not speak evil of one another, brethren.  The man who speaks
        evil of a brother-man or judges his brother-man speaks evil
        of the Law and judges the Law.  But if you judge the Law,
        you are no longer one who obeys the Law, but one who judges it.

004:012 The only real Lawgiver and Judge is He who is able to save or
        to destroy.  Who are you to sit in judgement on your fellow man?

004:013 Come, you who say, "To-day or to-morrow we will go to this
        or that city, and spend a year there and carry on
        a successful business,"

004:014 when, all the while, you do not even know what will happen to-morrow.
        For what is the nature of your life?  Why, it is but a mist,
        which appears for a short time and then is seen no more.

004:015 Instead of that you ought to say, "If it is the Lord's will,
        we shall live and do this or that."

004:016 But, as the case stands, it is in mere self-confidence that
        you boast:  all such boasting is evil.

004:017 If, however, a man knows what it is right to do and yet does
        not do it, he commits a sin.

005:001 Come, you rich men, weep aloud and howl for your sorrows
        which will soon be upon you.

005:002 Your treasures have rotted, and your piles of clothing are moth-eaten;

005:003 your gold and your silver have become covered with rust,
        and the rust on them will give evidence against you,
        and will eat your flesh like fire.  You have hoarded up wealth
        in these last days.

005:004 I tell you that the pay of the labourers who have gathered
        in your crops--pay which you are keeping back--is calling
        out against you; and the outcries of those who have been
        your reapers have entered into the ears of the Lord of
        the armies of Heaven.

005:005 Here on earth you have lived self-indulgent and profligate lives.
        You have stupefied yourselves with gross feeding; but a day
        of slaughter has come.

005:006 You have condemned--you have murdered--the righteous man:
        he offers no resistance.

005:007 Be patient therefore, brethren, until the Coming of the Lord.
        Notice how eagerly a farmer waits for a valuable crop!
        He is patient over it till it has received the early and
        the later rain.

005:008 So you also must be patient:  keeping up your courage;
        for the Coming of the Lord is now close at hand.

005:009 Do not cry out in condemnation of one another, brethren, lest you
        come under judgement.  I tell you that the Judge is standing
        at the door.

005:010 In illustration, brethren, of persecution patiently endured take
        the Prophets who have spoken as messengers from the Lord.

005:011 Remember that we call those blessed who endured what they did.
        You have also heard of Job's patient endurance,
        and have seen the issue of the Lord's dealings with him--
        how full of tenderness and pity the Lord is.

005:012 But above all things, my brethren, do not swear,
        either by Heaven or by the earth, or with any other oath.
        Let your `yes' be simply `yes,' and your `no' be simply `no;'
        that you may not come under condemnation.

005:013 Is one of you suffering?  Let him pray.  Is any one in good spirits?
        Let him sing a psalm.

005:014 Is any one ill?  Let him send for the Elders of the Church,
        and let them pray over him, after anointing him with oil
        in the name of the Lord.

005:015 And the prayer of faith will restore the sick man, and the Lord
        will raise him up to health; and if he has committed sins,
        they shall be forgiven.

005:016 Therefore confess your sins to one another, and pray for one another,
        so that you may be cured.  The heartfelt supplication of a
        righteous man exerts a mighty influence.

005:017 Elijah was a man with a nature similar to ours,
        and he earnestly prayed that there might be no rain:
        and no rain fell on the land for three years and six months.

005:018 Again he prayed, and the sky gave rain and the land
        yielded its crops.

005:019 My brethren, if one of you strays from the truth and some one
        brings him back,

005:020 let him know that he who brings a sinner back from his evil
        ways will save the man's soul from death and throw a veil
        over a multitude of sins.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Weymouth New Testament in Modern
Speech, James, by R. F. Weymouth

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WEYMOUTH NEW TESTAMENT-JAMES ***

***** This file should be named 8847.txt or 8847.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/8/4/8847/

Produced by Martin Ward
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

