The Project Gutenberg EBook of Weymouth New Testament in Modern Speech, 1
Peter, by R. F. Weymouth

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Weymouth New Testament in Modern Speech, 1 Peter
       Third Edition 1913

Author: R. F. Weymouth

Posting Date: March 14, 2015 [EBook #8848]
Release Date: September, 2005
First Posted: August 25, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WEYMOUTH NEW TESTAMENT--1 PETER ***




Produced by Martin Ward








Weymouth New Testament in Modern Speech, 1 Peter

Third Edition 1913


R. F. Weymouth




Book 60 1 Peter

001:001 Peter, an Apostle of Jesus Christ:  To God's own people
        scattered over the earth, who are living as foreigners
        in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Roman Asia, and Bithynia,

001:002 chosen in accordance with the foreknowledge of God the Father,
        through the sanctifying work of the Spirit, with a view
        to their obedience and to their being sprinkled with the blood
        of Jesus Christ.  May more and more grace and peace be
        granted to you.

001:003 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
        who in His great mercy has begotten us anew to an ever-living
        hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,

001:004 to an inheritance imperishable, undefiled and unfading,
        which has been reserved in Heaven for you,

001:005 whom God in His power is guarding through faith for a salvation
        that even now stands ready for unveiling at the End of the Age.

001:006 Rejoice triumphantly in the prospect of this, even if now,
        for a short time, you are compelled to sorrow amid various trials.

001:007 The sorrow comes in order that the testing of your faith--
        being more precious than that of gold, which perishes and yet
        is proved by fire--may be found to result in praise and glory
        and honour at the re-appearing of Jesus Christ.

001:008 Him you love, though your eyes have never looked on Him.
        In Him, though at present you cannot see Him, you nevertheless
        trust, and triumph with a joy which is unspeakable and is
        crowned with glory,

001:009 while you are securing as the outcome of your faith the salvation
        of your souls.

001:010 There were Prophets who earnestly inquired about that salvation,
        and closely searched into it--even those who spoke beforehand
        of the grace which was to come to you.

001:011 They were eager to know the time which the Spirit of Christ within
        them kept indicating, or the characteristics of that time,
        when they solemnly made known beforehand the sufferings that
        were to come upon Christ and the glories which would follow.

001:012 To them it was revealed that they were serving not themselves but you,
        when they foretold the very things which have now been openly
        declared to you by those who, having been taught by the Holy Spirit
        which had been sent from Heaven, brought you the Good News.
        Angels long to stoop and look into these things.

001:013 Therefore gird up your minds and fix your hopes calmly
        and unfalteringly upon the boon that is soon to be yours,
        at the re-appearing of Jesus Christ.

001:014 And, since you delight in obedience, do not shape your lives
        by the cravings which used to dominate you in the time
        of your ignorance,

001:015 but--in imitation of the holy One who has called you--
        you also must be holy in all your habits of life.

001:016 Because it stands written, "You are to be holy, because I am holy."

001:017 And if you address as your Father Him who judges impartially
        in accordance with each man's actions, then spend in fear
        the time of your stay here on earth,

001:018 knowing, as you do, that it was not with a ransom of
        perishable wealth, such as silver or gold, that you were set
        free from your frivolous habits of life which had been handed
        down to you from your forefathers,

001:019 but with the precious blood of Christ--as of an unblemished
        and spotless lamb.

001:020 He was pre-destined indeed to this work, even before the creation
        of the world, but has been plainly manifested in these last
        days for the sake of you who, through Him,

001:021 are faithful to God, who raised Him from among the dead and gave
        Him glory, so that your faith and hope are resting upon God.

001:022 Now that, through your obedience to the truth, you have
        purified your souls for cherishing sincere brotherly love,
        you must love another heartily and fervently.

001:023 For you have been begotten again by God's ever-living and enduring
        word from a germ not of perishable, but of imperishable life.

001:024 "All mankind resemble the herbage, and all their beauty is like
        its flowers.  The herbage dries up, and its flowers drop off;

001:025 But the word of the Lord remains for ever."  And that means
        the Message which has been proclaimed among you in the Good News.

002:001 Rid yourselves therefore of all ill-will and all deceitfulness,
        of insincerity and envy, and of all evil speaking.

002:002 Thirst, like newly-born infants, for pure milk for the soul,
        that by it you may grow up to salvation;

002:003 if you have had any experience of the goodness of the Lord.

002:004 Come to Him, the ever-living Stone, rejected indeed by men
        as worthless, but in God's esteem chosen and held in honour.

002:005 And be yourselves also like living stones that are being built
        up into a spiritual house, to become a holy priesthood to offer
        spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.

002:006 For it is contained in Scripture, "See, I am placing on Mount Zion
        a Cornerstone, chosen, and held in honour, and he whose faith
        rests on Him shall never have reason to feel ashamed."

002:007 To you believers, therefore, that honour belongs; but for
        unbelievers--"A Stone which the builders rejected has been
        made the Cornerstone,"

002:008 and "a Stone for the foot to strike against, and a Rock to
        stumble over."  Their foot strikes against it because they are
        disobedient to God's Message, and to this they were appointed.

002:009 But you are a chosen race, a priesthood of kingly lineage,
        a holy nation, a people belonging specially to God,
        that you may make known the perfections of Him who called
        you out of darkness into His marvellous light.

002:010 Once you were not a people, but now you are the people of God.
        Once you had not found mercy, but now you have.

002:011 Dear friends, I entreat you as pilgrims and foreigners
        not to indulge the cravings of your lower natures:
        for all such cravings wage war upon the soul.

002:012 Live honourable lives among the Gentiles, in order that,
        although they now speak against you as evil-doers, they may
        yet witness your good conduct, and may glorify God on the day
        of reward and retribution.

002:013 Submit, for the Lord's sake, to every authority set up by man,
        whether it be to the Emperor as supreme ruler,

002:014 or to provincial Governors as sent by him for the punishment
        of evil-doers and the encouragement of those who do what is right.

002:015 For it is God's will that by doing what is right you should
        thus silence the ignorant talk of foolish persons.

002:016 Be free men, and yet do not make your freedom an excuse
        for base conduct, but be God's bondservants.

002:017 Honour every one.  Love the brotherhood, fear God,
        honour the Emperor.

002:018 Household servants, be submissive to your masters, and show them
        the utmost respect--not only if they are kind and thoughtful,
        but also if they are unreasonable.

002:019 For it is an acceptable thing with God, if, from a sense of duty
        to Him, a man patiently submits to wrong, when treated unjustly.

002:020 If you do wrong and receive a blow for it, what credit is there
        in your bearing it patiently?  But if when you do right and
        suffer for it you bear it patiently, this is an acceptable
        thing with God.

002:021 And it is to this you were called; because Christ also suffered
        on your behalf, leaving you an example so that you should
        follow in His steps.

002:022 He never sinned, and no deceitful language was ever heard
        from His mouth.

002:023 When He was reviled, He did not answer with reviling;
        when He suffered He uttered no threats, but left His wrongs
        in the hands of the righteous Judge.

002:024 The burden of our sins He Himself carried in His own body
        to the Cross and bore it there, so that we, having died
        so far as our sins are concerned, may live righteous lives.
        By His wounds yours have been healed.

002:025 For you were straying like lost sheep, but now you have come
        back to the Shepherd and Protector of your souls.

003:001 Married women, in the same way, be submissive to your husbands,
        so that even if some of them disbelieve the Message, they may,
        apart from the Message, be won over by the daily life
        of their wives, after watching your daily life--

003:002 so full of reverence, and so blameless!

003:003 Your adornment ought not to be a merely outward thing--one of plaiting
        the hair, putting on jewelry, or wearing beautiful dresses.

003:004 Instead of that, it should be a new nature within--
        the imperishable ornament of a gentle and peaceful spirit,
        which is indeed precious in the sight of God.

003:005 For in ancient times also this was the way the holy women
        who set their hopes upon God used to adorn themselves,
        being submissive to their husbands.

003:006 Thus, for instance, Sarah obeyed Abraham, acknowledging his
        authority over her.  And you have become Sarah's children if you
        do what is right and permit nothing whatever to terrify you.

003:007 Married men, in the same way, live with your wives with a clear
        recognition of the fact that they are weaker than you.
        Yet, since you are heirs with them of God's free gift of Life,
        treat them with honour; so that your prayers may not be hindered.

003:008 In conclusion, all of you should be of one mind, quick to sympathize,
        kind to the brethren, tenderhearted, lowly-minded,

003:009 not requiting evil with evil nor abuse with abuse, but,
        on the contrary, giving a blessing in return, because a blessing
        is what you have been called by God to inherit.

003:010 For "He who wishes to be well-satisfied with life and see
        happy days--let him restrain his tongue from evil, and his
        lips from deceitful words;

003:011 Let him turn from evil, and do good; Let him inquire for peace
        and go in pursuit of it.

003:012 For the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and His ears
        are open to their supplication; but the face of the Lord
        is set against evil-doers."

003:013 And who will be able to harm you, if you show yourselves
        zealous for that which is good?

003:014 But even if you suffer for righteousness' sake, you are to be envied.
        So do not be alarmed by their threats, nor troubled;

003:015 but in your hearts consecrate Christ as Lord, being always ready
        to make your defence to any one who asks from you a reason
        for the hope which you cherish.

003:016 Yet argue modestly and cautiously, keeping your consciences
        free from guilt, so that, when you are spoken against,
        those who slander your good Christian lives may be put to shame.

003:017 For it is better that you should suffer for doing right,
        if such be God's will, than for doing evil;

003:018 because Christ also once for all died for sins, the innocent
        One for the guilty many, in order to bring us to God.
        He was put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the spirit,

003:019 in which He also went and proclaimed His Message to the spirits
        that were in prison,

003:020 who in ancient times had been disobedient, while God's
        longsuffering was patiently waiting in the days of Noah
        during the building of the Ark, in which a few persons--
        eight in number--were brought safely through the water.

003:021 And, corresponding to that figure, the water of baptism now saves you--
        not the washing off of material defilement, but the craving
        of a good conscience after God--through the resurrection
        of Jesus Christ,

003:022 who is at God's right hand, having gone into Heaven, angels and
        authorities and powers having been made subject to Him.

004:001 Since, then, Christ has suffered in the flesh, you also must
        arm yourselves with a determination to do the same--
        because he who has suffered in the flesh has done with sin--

004:002 that in future you may spend the rest of your earthly lives,
        governed not by human passions, but by the will of God.

004:003 For you have given time enough in the past to the doing of
        the things which the Gentiles delight in--pursuing, as you did,
        a course of habitual licence, debauchery, hard drinking,
        noisy revelry, drunkenness and unholy image-worship.

004:004 At this they are astonished--that you do not run into the same
        excess of profligacy as they do; and they speak abusively of you.

004:005 But they will have to give account to Him who stands ready
        to pronounce judgement on the living and the dead.

004:006 For it is with this end in view that the Good News was
        proclaimed even to some who were dead, that they may be judged,
        as all mankind will be judged, in the body, but may be living
        a godly life in the spirit.

004:007 But the end of all things is now close at hand:
        therefore be sober-minded and temperate, so that you may give
        yourselves to prayer.

004:008 Above all continue to love one another fervently, for love
        throws a veil over a multitude of faults.

004:009 Extend ungrudging hospitality towards one another.

004:010 Whatever be the gifts which each has received, you must
        use them for one another's benefit, as good stewards of
        God's many-sided kindness.

004:011 If any one preaches, let it be as uttering God's truth;
        if any one renders a service to others, let it be in the strength
        which God supplies; so that in everything glory may be given
        to God in the name of Jesus Christ, to whom belong the glory
        and the might to the Ages of the Ages.  Amen.

004:012 Dear friends, do not be surprised at finding that that scorching
        flame of persecution is raging among you to put you to the test--
        as though some surprising thing were accidentally happening to you.

004:013 On the contrary, in the degree that you share in the sufferings
        of the Christ, rejoice, so that at the unveiling of His glory
        you may also rejoice with triumphant gladness.

004:014 You are to be envied, if you are being reproached for bearing
        the name of Christ; for in that case the Spirit of glory--
        even the Spirit of God--is resting upon you.

004:015 But let not one of you suffer as a murderer or a thief
        or an evil-doer, or as a spy upon other people's business.

004:016 If, however, any one suffers because he is a Christian,
        let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God for being
        permitted to bear that name.

004:017 For the time has come for judgement to begin, and to begin
        at the house of God; and if it begins with us, what will be
        the end of those who reject God's Good News?

004:018 And if it is difficult even for a righteous man to be saved,
        what will become of irreligious men and sinners?

004:019 Therefore also, let those who are suffering in accordance
        with the will of God entrust their souls in well-doing
        to a faithful Creator.

005:001 So I exhort the Elders among you--I who am their fellow Elder
        and have been an eye-witness of the sufferings of the Christ,
        and am also a sharer in the glory which is soon to be revealed.

005:002 Be shepherds of God's flock which is among you.
        Exercise the oversight not reluctantly but eagerly,
        in accordance with the will of God; not for base gain but
        with cheerful minds;

005:003 not lording it over your Churches but proving yourselves
        patterns for the flock to imitate.

005:004 And then, when the chief Shepherd appears, you will receive
        the never-withering wreath of glory.

005:005 In the same way you younger men must submit to your elders;
        and all of you must gird yourselves with humility towards
        one another, for God sets Himself against the proud,
        but gives grace to the humble.

005:006 Humble yourselves therefore beneath the mighty hand of God,
        so that at the right time He may set you on high.

005:007 Throw the whole of your anxiety upon Him, because He Himself
        cares for you.

005:008 Curb every passion, and be on the alert.  Your great accuser,
        the Devil, is going about like a roaring lion to see whom
        he can devour.

005:009 Withstand him, firm in your faith; knowing that your brethren
        in other parts of the world are passing through just
        the same experiences.

005:010 And God, the giver of all grace, who has called you to share His
        eternal glory, through Christ, after you have suffered for a
        short time, will Himself make you perfect, firm, and strong.

005:011 To Him be all power unto the Ages of the Ages!  Amen.

005:012 I send this short letter by Silas, our faithful brother--
        for such I regard him--in order to encourage you, and to bear
        witness that what I have told you is the true grace of God.
        In it stand fast.

005:013 The Church in Babylon, chosen like yourselves by God,
        sends greetings, and so does Mark my son.

005:014 Greet one another with a kiss of love.  Peace be with all of you
        who are in Christ.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Weymouth New Testament in Modern
Speech, 1 Peter, by R. F. Weymouth

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WEYMOUTH NEW TESTAMENT--1 PETER ***

***** This file should be named 8848.txt or 8848.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/8/4/8848/

Produced by Martin Ward
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

