The Project Gutenberg EBook of P.'s Correspondence (From "Mosses From An
Old Manse"), by Nathaniel Hawthorne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: P.'s Correspondence (From "Mosses From An Old Manse")

Author: Nathaniel Hawthorne

Posting Date: December 8, 2010 [EBook #9230]
Release Date: November, 2005
First Posted: September 6, 2003
Last Updated: February 6, 2007

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK P.'S CORRESPONDENCE ***




Produced by David Widger.  HTML version by Al Haines.









                     MOSSES FROM AN OLD MANSE

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne

                       P.'S CORRESPONDENCE



My unfortunate friend P. has lost the thread of his life by the
interposition of long intervals of partially disordered reason. The
past and present are jumbled together in his mind in a manner often
productive of curious results, and which will be better understood
after the perusal of the following letter than from any description
that I could give.  The poor fellow, without once stirring from the
little whitewashed, iron-grated room to which he alludes in his
first paragraph, is nevertheless a great traveller, and meets in his
wanderings a variety of personages who have long ceased to be
visible to any eye save his own.  In my opinion, all this is not so
much a delusion as a partly wilful and partly involuntary sport of
the imagination, to which his disease has imparted such morbid
energy that he beholds these spectral scenes and characters with no
less distinctness than a play upon the stage, and with somewhat more
of illusive credence. Many of his letters are in my possession, some
based upon the same vagary as the present one, and others upon
hypotheses not a whit short of it in absurdity.  The whole form a
series of correspondence, which, should fate seasonably remove my
poor friend from what is to him a world of moonshine, I promise
myself a pious pleasure in editing for the public eye.  P. had
always a hankering after literary reputation, and has made more than
one unsuccessful effort to achieve it.  It would not be a little
odd, if, after missing his object while seeking it by the light of
reason, he should prove to have stumbled upon it in his misty
excursions beyond the limits of sanity.


LONDON, February 29, 1845.

MY DEAR FRIEND: Old associations cling to the mind with astonishing
tenacity.  Daily custom grows up about us like a stone wall, and
consolidates itself into almost as material an entity as mankind's
strongest architecture.  It is sometimes a serious question with me
whether ideas be not really visible and tangible, and endowed with
all the other qualities of matter. Sitting as I do at this moment in
my hired apartment, writing beside the hearth, over which hangs a
print of Queen Victoria, listening to the muffled roar of the
world's metropolis, and with a window at but five paces distant,
through which, whenever I please, I can gaze out on actual London,--with
all this positive certainty as to my whereabouts, what kind of
notion, do you think, is just now perplexing my brain?  Why,--would
you believe it?--that all this time I am still an inhabitant of that
wearisome little chamber,--that whitewashed little chamber,--that
little chamber with its one small window, across which, from some
inscrutable reason of taste or convenience, my landlord had placed a
row of iron bars,--that same little chamber, in short, whither your
kindness has so often brought you to visit me!  Will no length of
time or breadth of space enfranchise me from that unlovely abode?  I
travel; but it seems to be like the snail, with my house upon my
head.  Ah, well!  I am verging, I suppose, on that period of life
when present scenes and events make but feeble impressions in
comparison with those of yore; so that I must reconcile myself to be
more and more the prisoner of Memory, who merely lets me hop about a
little with her chain around my leg.

My letters of introduction have been of the utmost service, enabling
me to make the acquaintance of several distinguished characters who,
until now, have seemed as remote from the sphere of my personal
intercourse as the wits of Queen Anne's time or Ben Jenson's
compotators at the Mermaid.  One of the first of which I availed
myself was the letter to Lord Byron.  I found his lordship looking
much older than I had anticipated, although, considering his former
irregularities of life and the various wear and tear of his
constitution, not older than a man on the verge of sixty reasonably
may look.  But I had invested his earthly frame, in my imagination,
with the poet's spiritual immortality.  He wears a brown wig, very
luxuriantly curled, and extending down over his forehead.  The
expression of his eyes is concealed by spectacles.  His early
tendency to obesity having increased, Lord Byron is now enormously
fat,--so fat as to give the impression of a person quite overladen
with his own flesh, and without sufficient vigor to diffuse his
personal life through the great mass of corporeal substance which
weighs upon him so cruelly.  You gaze at the mortal heap; and, while
it fills your eye with what purports to be Byron, you murmur within
yourself, "For Heaven's sake, where is he?"  Were I disposed to be
caustic, I might consider this mass of earthly matter as the symbol,
in a material shape, of those evil habits and carnal vices which
unspiritualize man's nature and clog up his avenues of communication
with the better life.  But this would be too harsh; and, besides,
Lord Byron's morals have been improving while his outward man has
swollen to such unconscionable circumference. Would that he were
leaner; for, though he did me the honor to present his hand, yet it
was so puffed out with alien substance that I could not feel as if I
had touched the hand that wrote Childe Harold.

On my entrance his lordship apologized for not rising to receive me,
on the sufficient plea that the gout for several years past had
taken up its constant residence in his right foot, which accordingly
was swathed in many rolls of flannel and deposited upon a cushion.
The other foot was hidden in the drapery of his chair.  Do you
recollect whether Byron's right or left foot was the deformed one.

The noble poet's reconciliation with Lady Byron is now, as you are
aware, of ten years' standing; nor does it exhibit, I am assured,
any symptom of breach or fracture.  They are said to be, if not a
happy, at least a contented, or at all events a quiet couple,
descending the slope of life with that tolerable degree of mutual
support which will enable them to come easily and comfortably to the
bottom.  It is pleasant to reflect how entirely the poet has
redeemed his youthful errors in this particular.  Her ladyship's
influence, it rejoices me to add, has been productive of the
happiest results upon Lord Byron in a religious point of view.  He
now combines the most rigid tenets of Methodism with the ultra
doctrines of the Puseyites; the former being perhaps due to the
convictions wrought upon his mind by his noble consort, while the
latter are the embroidery and picturesque illumination demanded by
his imaginative character. Much of whatever expenditure his
increasing habits of thrift continue to allow him is bestowed in the
reparation or beautifying of places of worship; and this nobleman,
whose name was once considered a synonyme of the foul fiend, is now
all but canonized as a saint in many pulpits of the metropolis and
elsewhere.  In politics, Lord Byron is an uncompromising
conservative, and loses no opportunity, whether in the House of
Lords or in private circles, of denouncing and repudiating the
mischievous and anarchical notions of his earlier day.  Nor does he
fail to visit similar sins in other people with the sincerest
vengeance which his somewhat blunted pen is capable of inflicting.
Southey and he are on the most intimate terms.  You are aware that,
some little time before the death of Moore, Byron caused that
brilliant but reprehensible man to be evicted from his house.  Moore
took the insult so much to heart that, it is said to have been one
great cause of the fit of illness which brought him to the grave.
Others pretend that the lyrist died in a very happy state of mind,
singing one of his own sacred melodies, and expressing his belief
that it would be heard within the gate of paradise, and gain him
instant and honorable admittance.  I wish he may have found it so.

I failed not, as you may suppose, in the course of conversation with
Lord Byron, to pay the weed of homage due to a mighty poet, by
allusions to passages in Childe Harold, and Manfred, and Don Juan,
which have made so large a portion of the music of my life. My
words, whether apt or otherwise, were at least warm with the
enthusiasm of one worthy to discourse of immortal poesy.  It was
evident, however, that they did not go precisely to the right spot.
I could perceive that there was some mistake or other, and was not a
little angry with myself, and ashamed of my abortive attempt to
throw back, from my own heart to the gifted author's ear, the echo
of those strains that have resounded throughout the world.  But by
and by the secret peeped quietly out.  Byron,--I have the
information from his own lips, so that you need not hesitate to
repeat it in literary circles,--Byron is preparing a new edition of
his complete works, carefully corrected, expurgated, and amended, in
accordance with his present creed of taste, morals, politics, and
religion.  It so happened that the very passages of highest
inspiration to which I had alluded were among the condemned and
rejected rubbish which it is his purpose to cast into the gulf of
oblivion.  To whisper you the truth, it appears to me that his
passions having burned out, the extinction of their vivid and
riotous flame has deprived Lord Byron of the illumination by which
he not merely wrote, but was enabled to feel and comprehend what he
had written.  Positively he no longer understands his own poetry.

This became very apparent on his favoring me so far as to read a few
specimens of Don Juan in the moralized version.  Whatever is
licentious, whatever disrespectful to the sacred mysteries of our
faith, whatever morbidly melancholic or splenetically sportive,
whatever assails settled constitutions of government or systems of
society, whatever could wound the sensibility of any mortal, except
a pagan, a republican, or a dissenter, has been unrelentingly
blotted out, and its place supplied by unexceptionable verses in his
lordship's later style.  You may judge how much of the poem remains
as hitherto published.  The result is not so good as might be
wished; in plain terms, it is a very sad affair indeed; for, though
the torches kindled in Tophet have been extinguished, they leave an
abominably ill odor, and are succeeded by no glimpses of hallowed
fire.  It is to be hoped, nevertheless, that this attempt on Lord
Byron's part to atone for his youthful errors will at length induce
the Dean of Westminster, or whatever churchman is concerned, to
allow Thorwaldsen's statue of the poet its due niche in the grand
old Abbey.  His bones, you know, when brought from Greece, were
denied sepulture among those of his tuneful brethren there.

What a vile slip of the pen was that!  How absurd in me to talk
about burying the bones of Byron, who, I have just seen alive, and
incased in a big, round bulk of flesh!  But, to say the truth, a
prodigiously fat man always impresses me as a kind of hobgoblin; in
the very extravagance of his mortal system I find something akin to
the immateriality of a ghost.  And then that ridiculous old story
darted into my mind, how that Byron died of fever at Missolonghi,
above twenty years ago.  More and more I recognize that we dwell in
a world of shadows; and, for my part, I hold it hardly worth the
trouble to attempt a distinction between shadows in the mind and
shadows out of it.  If there be any difference, the former are
rather the more substantial.

Only think of my good fortune!  The venerable Robert Burns--now, if
I mistake not, in his eighty-seventh year--happens to be making a
visit to London, as if on purpose to afford me an opportunity of
grasping him by the hand.  For upwards of twenty years past he has
hardly left his quiet cottage in Ayrshire for a single night, and
has only been drawn hither now by the irresistible persuasions of
all the distinguished men in England. They wish to celebrate the
patriarch's birthday by a festival. It will be the greatest literary
triumph on record.  Pray Heaven the little spirit of life within the
aged bard's bosom may not be extinguished in the lustre of that
hour!  I have already had the honor of an introduction to him at the
British Museum, where he was examining a collection of his own
unpublished letters, interspersed with songs, which have escaped the
notice of all his biographers.

Poh!  Nonsense!  What am I thinking of?  How should Burns have been
embalmed in biography when he is still a hearty old man?

The figure of the bard is tall and in the highest degree reverend,
nor the less so that it is much bent by the burden of time.  His
white hair floats like a snowdrift around his face, in which are
seen the furrows of intellect and passion, like the channels of
headlong torrents that have foamed themselves away. The old
gentleman is in excellent preservation, considering his time of
life.  He has that crickety sort of liveliness,--I mean the
cricket's humor of chirping for any cause or none,--which is perhaps
the most favorable mood that can befall extreme old age. Our pride
forbids us to desire it for ourselves, although we perceive it to be
a beneficence of nature in the case of others. I was surprised to
find it in Burns.  It seems as if his ardent heart and brilliant
imagination had both burned down to the last embers, leaving only a
little flickering flame in one corner, which keeps dancing upward
and laughing all by itself.  He is no longer capable of pathos.  At
the request of Allan Cunningham, he attempted to sing his own song
to Mary in Heaven; but it was evident that the feeling of those
verses, so profoundly true and so simply expressed, was entirely
beyond the scope of his present sensibilities; and, when a touch of
it did partially awaken him, the tears immediately gushed into his
eyes and his voice broke into a tremulous cackle.  And yet he but
indistinctly knew wherefore he was weeping.  Ah, he must not think
again of Mary in Heaven until he shake off the dull impediment of
time and ascend to meet her there.

Burns then began to repeat Tan O'Shanter; but was so tickled with
its wit and humor--of which, however, I suspect he had but a
traditionary sense--that he soon burst into a fit of chirruping
laughter, succeeded by a cough, which brought this not very
agreeable exhibition to a close.  On the whole, I would rather not
have witnessed it.  It is a satisfactory idea, however, that the
last forty years of the peasant poet's life have been passed in
competence and perfect comfort.  Having been cured of his bardic
improvidence for many a day past, and grown as attentive to the main
chance as a canny Scotsman should be, he is now considered to be
quite well off as to pecuniary circumstances. This, I suppose, is
worth having lived so long for.

I took occasion to inquire of some of the countrymen of Burns in
regard to the health of Sir Walter Scott.  His condition, I am sorry
to say, remains the same as for ten years past; it is that of a
hopeless paralytic, palsied not more in body than in those nobler
attributes of which the body is the instrument.  And thus he
vegetates from day to day and from year to year at that splendid
fantasy of Abbotsford, which grew out of his brain, and became a
symbol of the great romancer's tastes, feelings, studies,
prejudices, and modes of intellect.  Whether in verse, prose, or
architecture, he could achieve but one thing, although that one in
infinite variety.  There he reclines, on a couch in his library, and
is said to spend whole hours of every day in dictating tales to an
amanuensis,--to an imaginary amanuensis; for it is not deemed worth
any one's trouble now to take down what flows from that once
brilliant fancy, every image of which was formerly worth gold and
capable of being coined.  Yet Cunningham, who has lately seen him,
assures me that there is now and then a touch of the genius,--a
striking combination of incident, or a picturesque trait of
character, such as no other man alive could have bit off,--a glimmer
from that ruined mind, as if the sun had suddenly flashed on a
half-rusted helmet in the gloom of an ancient ball.  But the plots of
these romances become inextricably confused; the characters melt
into one another; and the tale loses itself like the course of a
stream flowing through muddy and marshy ground.

For my part, I can hardly regret that Sir Walter Scott had lost his
consciousness of outward things before his works went out of vogue.
It was good that he should forget his fame rather than that fame
should first have forgotten him.  Were he still a writer, and as
brilliant a one as ever, he could no longer maintain anything like
the same position in literature.  The world, nowadays, requires a
more earnest purpose, a deeper moral, and a closer and homelier
truth than he was qualified to supply it with.  Yet who can be to
the present generation even what Scott has been to the past?  I had
expectations from a young man,--one Dickens,--who published a few
magazine articles, very rich in humor, and not without symptoms of
genuine pathos; but the poor fellow died shortly after commencing an
odd series of sketches, entitled, I think, the Pickwick Papers.  Not
impossibly the world has lost more than it dreams of by the untimely
death of this Mr. Dickens.

Whom do you think I met in Pall Mall the other day?  You would not
hit it in ten guesses.  Why, no less a man than Napoleon Bonaparte,
or all that is now left of him,--that is to say, the skin, bones,
and corporeal substance, little cocked hat, green coat, white
breeches, and small sword, which are still known by his redoubtable
name.  He was attended only by two policemen, who walked quietly
behind the phantasm of the old ex-emperor, appearing to have no duty
in regard to him except to see that none of the light-fingered
gentry should possess themselves of thee star of the Legion of
Honor.  Nobody save myself so much as turned to look after him; nor,
it grieves me to confess, could even I contrive to muster up any
tolerable interest, even by all that the warlike spirit, formerly
manifested within that now decrepit shape, had wrought upon our
globe.  There is no surer method of annihilating the magic influence
of a great renown than by exhibiting the possessor of it in the
decline, the overthrow, the utter degradation of his powers,--buried
beneath his own mortality,--and lacking even the qualities of sense
that enable the most ordinary men to bear themselves decently in the
eye of the world.  This is the state to which disease, aggravated by
long endurance of a tropical climate, and assisted by old age,--for
he is now above seventy,--has reduced Bonaparte.  The British
government has acted shrewdly in retransporting him from St. Helena
to England.  They should now restore him to Paris, and there let him
once again review the relics of his armies.  His eye is dull and
rheumy; his nether lip hung down upon his chin. While I was
observing him there chanced to be a little extra bustle in the
street; and he, the brother of Caesar and Hannibal,--the great
captain who had veiled the world in battle-smoke and tracked it
round with bloody footsteps,--was seized with a nervous trembling,
and claimed the protection of the two policemen by a cracked and
dolorous cry.  The fellows winked at one another, laughed aside,
and, patting Napoleon on the back, took each an arm and led him
away.

Death and fury!  Ha, villain, how came you hither?  Avaunt! or I
fling my inkstand at your head.  Tush, tusk; it is all a mistake.
Pray, my dear friend, pardon this little outbreak.  The fact is, the
mention of those two policemen, and their custody of Bonaparte, had
called up the idea of that odious wretch--you remember him well--who
was pleased to take such gratuitous and impertinent care of my
person before I quitted New England. Forthwith up rose before my
mind's eye that same little whitewashed room, with the iron-grated
window,--strange that it should have been iron-grated!--where, in
too easy compliance with the absurd wishes of my relatives, I have
wasted several good years of my life.  Positively it seemed to me
that I was still sitting there, and that the keeper--not that he
ever was my keeper neither, but only a kind of intrusive devil of a
body-servant--had just peeped in at the door.  The rascal!  I owe
him an old grudge, and will find a time to pay it yet.  Fie! fie!
The mere thought of him has exceedingly discomposed me.  Even now
that hateful chamber--the iron-grated window, which blasted the
blessed sunshine as it fell through the dusty panes and made it
poison to my soul-looks more distinct to my view than does this my
comfortable apartment in the heart of London.  The reality--that
which I know to be such--hangs like remnants of tattered scenery
over the intolerably prominent illusion.  Let us think of it no
more.

You will be anxious to hear of Shelley.  I need not say, what is
known to all the world, that this celebrated poet has for many years
past been reconciled to the Church of England.  In his more recent
works he has applied his fine powers to the vindication of the
Christian faith, with an especial view to that particular
development.  Latterly, as you may not have heard, he has taken
orders, and been inducted to a small country living in the gift of
the Lord Chancellor.  Just now, luckily for me, he has come to the
metropolis to superintend the publication of a volume of discourses
treating of the poetico-philosophical proofs of Christianity on the
basis of the Thirty-nine Articles.  On my first introduction I felt
no little embarrassment as to the manner of combining what I had to
say to the author of _Queen Mali_, the _Revolt of Islam_, and
_Prometheus Unbound_ with such acknowledgments as might be
acceptable to a Christian minister and zealous upholder of the
Established Church.  But Shelley soon placed me at my ease.
Standing where he now does, and reviewing all his successive
productions from a higher point, he assures me that there is a
harmony, an order, a regular procession, which enables him to lay
his hand upon any one of the earlier poems and say, "This is my
work," with precisely the same complacency of conscience wherewithal
he contemplates the volume of discourses above mentioned.  They are
like the successive steps of a staircase, the lowest of which, in
the depth of chaos, is as essential to the support of the whole as
the highest and final one resting upon the threshold of the heavens.
I felt half inclined to ask him what would have been his fate had he
perished on the lower steps of his staircase, instead of building
his way aloft into the celestial brightness.

How all this may be I neither pretend to understand nor greatly
care, so long as Shelley has really climbed, as it seems he has,
from a lower region to a loftier one.  Without touching upon their
religious merits, I consider the productions of his maturity
superior, as poems, to those of his youth.  They are warmer with
human love, which has served as an interpreter between his mind and
the multitude.  The author has learned to dip his pen oftener into
his heart, and has thereby avoided the faults into which a too
exclusive use of fancy and intellect are wont to betray him.
Formerly his page was often little other than a concrete arrangement
of crystallizations, or even of icicles, as cold as they were
brilliant.  Now you take it to your heart, and are conscious of a
heart-warmth responsive to your own.  In his private character
Shelley can hardly have grown more gentle, kind, and affectionate
than his friends always represented him to be up to that disastrous
night when he was drowned in the Mediterranean.  Nonsense, again,--sheer
nonsense! What, am I babbling about?  I was thinking of that
old figment of his being lost in the Bay of Spezzia, and washed
ashore near Via Reggio, and burned to ashes on a funeral pyre, with
wine, and spices, and frankincense; while Byron stood on the beach
and beheld a flame of marvellous beauty rise heavenward from the
dead poet's heart, and that his fire-purified relics were finally
buried near his child in Roman earth.  If all this happened
three-and-twenty years ago, how could I have met the drowned and burned
and buried man here in London only yesterday?

Before quitting the subject, I may mention that Dr. Reginald Heber,
heretofore Bishop of Calcutta, but recently translated to a see in
England, called on Shelley while I was with him.  They appeared to
be on terms of very cordial intimacy, and are said to have a joint
poem in contemplation.  What a strange, incongruous dream is the
life of man!

Coleridge has at last finished his poem of Christabel.  It will be
issued entire by old John Murray in the course of the present
publishing season.  The poet, I hear, is visited with a troublesome
affection of the tongue, which has put a period, or some lesser
stop, to the life-long discourse that has hitherto been flowing from
his lips.  He will not survive it above a month, unless his
accumulation of ideas be sluiced off in some other way.  Wordsworth
died only a week or two ago.  Heaven rest his soul, and grant that
he may not have completed _The Excursion_!  Methinks I am sick of
everything he wrote, except his _Laodamia_.  It is very sad, this
inconstancy of the mind to the poets whom it once worshipped.
Southey is as hale as ever, and writes with his usual diligence.
Old Gifford is still alive, in the extremity of age, and with most
pitiable decay of what little sharp and narrow intellect the Devil
had gifted him withal.  One hates to allow such a man the privilege
of growing old and infirm.  It takes away our speculative license of
kicking him.

Keats?  No; I have not seen him except across a crowded street, with
coaches, drays, horsemen, cabs, omnibuses, foot-passengers, and
divers other sensual obstructions intervening betwixt his small and
slender figure and my eager glance.  I would fain have met him on
the sea-shore, or beneath a natural arch of forest trees, or the
Gothic arch of an old cathedral, or among Grecian ruins, or at a
glimmering fireside on the verge of evening, or at the twilight
entrance of a cave, into the dreamy depths of which he would have
led me by the hand; anywhere, in short, save at Temple Bar, where
his presence was blotted out by the porter-swollen bulks of these
gross Englishmen.  I stood and watched him fading away, fading away
along the pavement, and could hardly tell whether he were an actual
man or a thought that had slipped out of my mind and clothed itself
in human form and habiliments merely to beguile me.  At one moment
he put his handkerchief to his lips, and withdrew it, I am almost
certain, stained with blood.  You never saw anything so fragile as
his person.  The truth is, Keats has all his life felt the effects
of that terrible bleeding at the lungs caused by the article on his
Endymion in the Quarterly Review, and which so nearly brought him to
the grave.  Ever since he has glided about the world like a ghost,
sighing a melancholy tone in the ear of here and there a friend, but
never sending forth his voice to greet the multitude. I can hardly
think him a great poet.  The burden of a mighty genius would never
have been imposed upon shoulders so physically frail and a spirit so
infirmly sensitive.  Great poets should have iron sinews.

Yet Keats, though for so many years he has given nothing to the
world, is understood to have devoted himself to the composition of
an epic poem.  Some passages of it have been communicated to the
inner circle of his admirers, and impressed them as the loftiest
strains that have been audible on earth since Milton's days.  If I
can obtain copies of these specimens, I will ask you to present them
to James Russell Lowell, who seems to be one of the poet's most
fervent and worthiest worshippers.  The information took me by
surprise.  I had supposed that all Keats's poetic incense, without
being embodied in human language, floated up to heaven and mingled
with the songs of the immortal choristers, who perhaps were
conscious of an unknown voice among them, and thought their melody
the sweeter for it.  But it is not so; he has positively written a
poem on the subject of _Paradise Regained_, though in another sense
than that which presented itself to the mind of Milton.  In
compliance, it may be imagined, with the dogma of those who pretend
that all epic possibilities in the past history of the world are
exhausted, Keats has thrown his poem forward into an indefinitely
remote futurity.  He pictures mankind amid the closing circumstances
of the time-long warfare between good and evil.  Our race is on the
eve of its final triumph.  Man is within the last stride of
perfection; Woman, redeemed from the thraldom against which our
sibyl uplifts so powerful and so sad a remonstrance, stands equal by
his side or communes for herself with angels; the Earth,
sympathizing with her children's happier state, has clothed herself
in such luxuriant and loving beauty as no eye ever witnessed since
our first parents saw the sun rise over dewy Eden.  Nor then indeed;
for this is the fulfilment of what was then but a golden promise.
But the picture has its shadows.  There remains to mankind another
peril,--a last encounter with the evil principle.  Should the battle
go against us, we sink back into the slime and misery of ages.  If
we triumph--But it demands a poet's eye to contemplate the splendor
of such a consummation and not to be dazzled.

To this great work Keats is said to have brought so deep and tender
a spirit of humanity that the poem has all the sweet and warm
interest of a village tale no less than the grandeur which befits so
high a theme.  Such, at least, is the perhaps partial representation
of his friends; for I have not read or heard even a single line of
the performance in question.  Keats, I am told, withholds it from
the press, under an idea that the age has not enough of spiritual
insight to receive it worthily.  I do not like this distrust; it
makes me distrust the poet.  The universe is waiting to respond to
the highest word that the best child of time and immortality can
utter.  If it refuse to listen, it is because he mumbles and
stammers, or discourses things unseasonable and foreign to the
purpose.

I visited the House of Lords the other day to hear Canning, who, you
know, is now a peer, with I forget what title.  He disappointed me.
Time blunts both point and edge, and does great mischief to men of
his order of intellect.  Then I stepped into the lower House and
listened to a few words from Cobbett, who looked as earthy as a real
clodhopper, or rather as if he had lain a dozen years beneath the
clods.  The men whom I meet nowadays often impress me thus; probably
because my spirits are not very good, and lead me to think much
about graves, with the long grass upon them, and weather-worn
epitaphs, and dry bones of people who made noise enough in their
day, but now can only clatter, clatter, clatter, when the sexton's
spade disturbs them. Were it only possible to find out who are alive
and who dead, it would contribute infinitely to my peace of mind.
Every day of my life somebody comes and stares me in the face whom I
had quietly blotted out of the tablet of living men, and trusted
nevermore to be pestered with the sight or sound of him.  For
instance, going to Drury Lane Theatre a few evenings since, up rose
before me, in the ghost of Hamlet's father, the bodily presence of
the elder Kean, who did die, or ought to have died, in some drunken
fit or other, so long ago that his fame is scarcely traditionary
now. His powers are quite gone; he was rather the ghost of himself
than the ghost of the Danish king.

In the stage-box sat several elderly and decrepit people, and among
them a stately ruin of a woman on a very large scale, with a
profile--for I did not see her front face--that stamped itself into
my brain as a seal impresses hot wax.  By the tragic gesture with
which she took a pinch of snuff, I was sure it must be Mrs. Siddons.
Her brother, John Kemble, sat behind,--a broken-down figure, but
still with a kingly majesty about him.  In lieu of all former
achievements, Nature enables him to look the part of Lear far better
than in the meridian of his genius.  Charles Matthews was likewise
there; but a paralytic affection has distorted his once mobile
countenance into a most disagreeable one-sidedness, from which he
could no more wrench it into proper form than he could rearrange the
face of the great globe itself. It looks as if, for the joke's sake,
the poor man had twisted his features into an expression at once the
most ludicrous and horrible that he could contrive, and at that very
moment, as a judgment for making himself so hideous, an avenging
Providence had seen fit to petrify him.  Since it is out of his own
power, I would gladly assist him to change countenance, for his ugly
visage haunts me both at noontide and night-time.  Some other
players of the past generation were present, but none that greatly
interested me.  It behooves actors, more than all other men of
publicity, to vanish from the scene betimes.  Being at best but
painted shadows flickering on the wall and empty sounds that echo
anther's thought, it is a sad disenchantment when the colors begin
to fade and the voice to croak with age.

What is there new in the literary way on your side of the water?
Nothing of the kind has come under any inspection, except a volume
of poems published above a year ago by Dr. Channing.  I did not
before know that this eminent writer is a poet; nor does the volume
alluded to exhibit any of the characteristics of the author's mind
as displayed in his prose works; although some of the poems have a
richness that is not merely of the surface, but glows still the
brighter the deeper and more faithfully you look into then.  They
seem carelessly wrought, however, like those rings and ornaments of
the very purest gold, but of rude, native manufacture, which are
found among the gold-dust from Africa.  I doubt whether the American
public will accept them; it looks less to the assay of metal than to
the neat and cunning manufacture. How slowly our literature grows
up!  Most of our writers of promise have come to untimely ends.
There was that wild fellow, John Neal, who almost turned my boyish
brain with his romances; he surely has long been dead, else he never
could keep himself so quiet.  Bryant has gone to his last sleep,
with the _Thanatopsis_ gleaming over him like a sculptured marble
sepulchre by moonlight.  Halleck, who used to write queer verses in
the newspapers and published a Don Juanic poem called _Fanny_, is
defunct as a poet, though averred to be exemplifying the
metempsychosis as a man of business.  Somewhat later there was
Whittier, a fiery Quaker youth, to whom the muse had perversely
assigned a battle-trumpet, and who got himself lynched, ten years
agone, in South Carolina.  I remember, too, a lad just from college,
Longfellow by name, who scattered some delicate verses to the winds,
and went to Germany, and perished, I think, of intense application,
at the University of Gottingen.  Willis--what a pity!--was lost, if
I recollect rightly, in 1833, on his voyage to Europe, whither he
was going to give us sketches of the world's sunny face.  If these
had lived, they might, one or all of them, have grown to be famous
men.

And yet there is no telling: it may be as well that they have died.
I was myself a young man of promise.  O shattered brain, O broken
spirit, where is the fulfilment of that promise?  The sad truth is,
that, when fate would gently disappoint the world, it takes away the
hopefulest mortals in their youth; when it would laugh the world's
hopes to scorn, it lets them live.  Let me die upon this apothegm,
for I shall never make a truer one.

What a strange substance is the human brain!  Or rather,--for there
is no need of generalizing the remark,--what an odd brain is mine!
Would you believe it?  Daily and nightly there come scraps of poetry
humming in my intellectual ear--some as airy as birdnotes, and some
as delicately neat as parlor-music, and a few as grand as
organ-peals--that seem just such verses as those departed poets would
have written had not an inexorable destiny snatched them from their
inkstands.  They visit me in spirit, perhaps desiring to engage my
services as the amanuensis of their posthumous productions, and thus
secure the endless renown that they have forfeited by going hence
too early.  But I have my own business to attend to; and besides, a
medical gentleman, who interests himself in some little ailments of
mine, advises me not to make too free use of pen and ink.  There are
clerks enough out of employment who would be glad of such a job.

Good by!  Are you alive or dead? and what are you about?  Still
scribbling for the Democratic?  And do those infernal compositors
and proof-readers misprint your unfortunate productions as vilely as
ever? It is too bad.  Let every man manufacture his own nonsense,
say I.  Expect me home soon, and--to whisper you a secret--in
company with the poet Campbell, who purposes to visit Wyoming and
enjoy the shadow of the laurels that he planted there.  Campbell is
now an old man.  He calls himself well, better than ever in his
life, but looks strangely pale, and so shadow-like that one might
almost poke a finger through his densest material.  I tell him, by
way of joke, that he is as dim and forlorn as Memory, though as
unsubstantial as Hope.


Your true friend,  P.

P. S.--Pray present my most respectful regards to our venerable and
revered friend Mr. Brockden Brown.


It gratifies me to learn that a complete edition of his works, in a
double-columned octavo volume, is shortly to issue from the press at
Philadelphia.  Tell him that no American writer enjoys a more
classic reputation on this side of the water.  Is old Joel Barlow
yet alive?  Unconscionable man!  Why, he must have nearly fulfilled
his century.  And does he meditate an epic on the war between Mexico
and Texas with machinery contrived on the principle of the steam-engine,
as being the nearest to celestial agency that our epoch can
boast?  How can he expect ever to rise again, if, while just sinking
into his grave, he persists in burdening himself with such a
ponderosity of leaden verses?









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of P.'s Correspondence (From "Mosses From
An Old Manse"), by Nathaniel Hawthorne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK P.'S CORRESPONDENCE ***

***** This file should be named 9230.txt or 9230.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/2/3/9230/

Produced by David Widger.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
