The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Virtuoso's Collection (From "Mosses From
An Old Manse"), by Nathaniel Hawthorne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Virtuoso's Collection (From "Mosses From An Old Manse")

Author: Nathaniel Hawthorne

Posting Date: December 8, 2010 [EBook #9235]
Release Date: November, 2005
First Posted: September 6, 2003
Last Updated: February 6, 2007

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VIRTUOSO'S COLLECTION ***




Produced by David Widger.  HTML version by Al Haines.









                     MOSSES FROM AN OLD MANSE

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne

                      A VIRTUOSO'S COLLECTION



The other day, having a leisure hour at my disposal, I stepped into
a new museum, to which my notice was casually drawn by a small and
unobtrusive sign: "TO BE SEEN HERE, A VIRTUOSO'S COLLECTION."  Such
was the simple yet not altogether unpromising announcement that
turned my steps aside for a little while from the sunny sidewalk of
our principal thoroughfare.  Mounting a sombre staircase, I pushed
open a door at its summit, and found myself in the presence of a
person, who mentioned the moderate sum that would entitle me to
admittance.

"Three shillings, Massachusetts tenor," said he.  "No, I mean half a
dollar, as you reckon in these days."

While searching my pocket for the coin I glanced at the doorkeeper,
the marked character and individuality of whose aspect encouraged me
to expect something not quite in the ordinary way.  He wore an
old-fashioned great-coat, much faded, within which his meagre person
was so completely enveloped that the rest of his attire was
undistinguishable.  But his visage was remarkably wind-flushed,
sunburnt, and weather-worn, and had a most, unquiet, nervous, and
apprehensive expression.  It seemed as if this man had some
all-important object in view, some point of deepest interest to be
decided, some momentous question to ask, might he but hope for a
reply.  As it was evident, however, that I could have nothing to do
with his private affairs, I passed through an open doorway, which
admitted me into the extensive hall of the museum.

Directly in front of the portal was the bronze statue of a youth
with winged feet.  He was represented in the act of flitting away
from earth, yet wore such a look of earnest invitation that it
impressed me like a summons to enter the hall.

"It is the original statue of Opportunity, by the ancient sculptor
Lysippus," said a gentleman who now approached me.  "I place it at
the entrance of my museum, because it is not at all times that one
can gain admittance to such a collection."

The speaker was a middle-aged person, of whom it was not easy to
determine whether he had spent his life as a scholar or as a man of
action; in truth, all outward and obvious peculiarities had been
worn away by an extensive and promiscuous intercourse with the
world.  There was no mark about him of profession, individual
habits, or scarcely of country; although his dark complexion and
high features made me conjecture that he was a native of some
southern clime of Europe. At all events, he was evidently the
virtuoso in person.

"With your permission," said he, "as we have no descriptive
catalogue, I will accompany you through the museum and point out
whatever may be most worthy of attention.  In the first place, here
is a choice collection of stuffed animals."

Nearest the door stood the outward semblance of a wolf, exquisitely
prepared, it is true, and showing a very wolfish fierceness in the
large glass eyes which were inserted into its wild and crafty head.
Still it was merely the skin of a wolf, with nothing to distinguish
it from other individuals of that unlovely breed.

"How does this animal deserve a place in your collection?" inquired
I.

"It is the wolf that devoured Little Red Riding Hood," answered the
virtuoso; "and by his side--with a milder and more matronly look, as
you perceive--stands the she-wolf that suckled Romulus and Remus."

"Ah, indeed!" exclaimed I.  "And what lovely lamb is this with the
snow-white fleece, which seems to be of as delicate a texture as
innocence itself?"

"Methinks you have but carelessly read Spenser," replied my guide,
"or you would at once recognize the 'milk-white lamb' which Una led.
But I set no great value upon the lamb.  The next specimen is better
worth our notice."

"What!" cried I, "this strange animal, with the black head of an ox
upon the body of a white horse?  Were it possible to suppose it, I
should say that this was Alexander's steed Bucephalus."

"The same," said the virtuoso.  "And can you likewise give a name to
the famous charger that stands beside him?"

Next to the renowned Bucephalus stood the mere skeleton of a horse,
with the white bones peeping through his ill-conditioned hide; but,
if my heart had not warmed towards that pitiful anatomy, I might as
well have quitted the museum at once.  Its rarities had not been
collected with pain and toil from the four quarters of the earth,
and from the depths of the sea, and from the palaces and sepulchres
of ages, for those who could mistake this illustrious steed.

"It, is Rosinante!" exclaimed I, with enthusiasm.

And so it proved.  My admiration for the noble and gallant horse
caused me to glance with less interest at the other animals,
although many of them might have deserved the notice of Cuvier
himself.  There was the donkey which Peter Bell cudgelled so
soundly, and a brother of the same species who had suffered a
similar infliction from the ancient prophet Balaam.  Some doubts
were entertained, however, as to the authenticity of the latter
beast.  My guide pointed out the venerable Argus, that faithful dog
of Ulysses, and also another dog (for so the skin bespoke it),
which, though imperfectly preserved, seemed once to have had three
heads.  It was Cerberus.  I was considerably amused at detecting in
an obscure corner the fox that became so famous by the loss of his
tail.  There were several stuffed cats, which, as a dear lover of
that comfortable beast, attracted my affectionate regards.  One was
Dr. Johnson's cat Hodge; and in the same row stood the favorite cats
of Mahomet, Gray, and Walter Scott, together with Puss in Boots, and
a cat of very noble aspect--who had once been a deity of ancient
Egypt.  Byron's tame bear came next.  I must not forget to mention
the Eryruanthean boar, the skin of St. George's dragon, and that of
the serpent Python; and another skin with beautifully variegated
hues, supposed to have been the garment of the "spirited sly snake,"
which tempted Eve. Against the walls were suspended the horns of the
stag that Shakespeare shot; and on the floor lay the ponderous shell
of the tortoise which fell upon the head of Aeschylus.  In one row,
as natural as life, stood the sacred bull Apis, the "cow with the
crumpled horn," and a very wild-looking young heifer, which I guessed
to be the cow that jumped over the moon.  She was probably killed by
the rapidity of her descent.  As I turned away, my eyes fell upon an
indescribable monster, which proved to be a griffin.

"I look in vain," observed I, "for the skin of an animal which might
well deserve the closest study of a naturalist,--the winged horse,
Pegasus."

"He is not yet dead," replied the virtuoso; "but he is so hard
ridden by many young gentlemen of the day that I hope soon to add
his skin and skeleton to my collection."

We now passed to the next alcove of the hall, in which was a
multitude of stuffed birds.  They were very prettily arranged, some
upon the branches of trees, others brooding upon nests, and others
suspended by wires so artificially that they seemed in the very act
of flight.  Among them was a white dove, with a withered branch of
olive-leaves in her mouth.

"Can this be the very dove," inquired I, "that brought the message
of peace and hope to the tempest-beaten passengers of the ark?"

"Even so," said my companion.

"And this raven, I suppose," continued I, "is the same that fed
Elijah in the wilderness."

"The raven?  No," said the virtuoso; "it is a bird of modern date.
He belonged to one Barnaby Rudge, and many people fancied that the
Devil himself was disguised under his sable plumage. But poor Grip
has drawn his last cork, and has been forced to 'say die' at last.
This other raven, hardly less curious, is that in which the soul of
King George I.  revisited his lady-love, the Duchess of Kendall."

My guide next pointed out Minerva's owl and the vulture that preyed
upon the liver of Prometheus.  There was likewise the sacred ibis of
Egypt, and one of the Stymphalides which Hercules shot in his sixth
labor.  Shelley's skylark, Bryant's water-fowl, and a pigeon from
the belfry of the Old South Church, preserved by N. P. Willis, were
placed on the same perch.  I could not but shudder on beholding
Coleridge's albatross, transfixed with the Ancient Mariner's
crossbow shaft.  Beside this bird of awful poesy stood a gray goose
of very ordinary aspect.

"Stuffed goose is no such rarity," observed I.  "Why do you preserve
such a specimen in your museum?"

"It is one of the flock whose cackling saved the Roman Capitol,"
answered the virtuoso.  "Many geese have cackled and hissed both
before and since; but none, like those, have clamored themselves
into immortality."

There seemed to be little else that demanded notice in this
department of the museum, unless we except Robinson Crusoe's parrot,
a live phoenix, a footless bird of paradise, and a splendid peacock,
supposed to be the same that once contained the soul of Pythagoras.
I therefore passed to the next alcove, the shelves of which were
covered with a miscellaneous collection of curiosities such as are
usually found in similar establishments. One of the first things
that took my eye was a strange-looking cap, woven of some substance
that appeared to be neither woollen, cotton, nor linen.

"Is this a magician's cap?" I asked.

"No," replied the virtuoso; "it is merely Dr. Franklin's cap of
asbestos.  But here is one which, perhaps, may suit you better. It
is the wishing-cap of Fortunatus.  Will you try it on?"

"By no means," answered I, putting it aside with my hand.  "The day
of wild wishes is past with me.  I desire nothing that may not come
in the ordinary course of Providence."

"Then probably," returned the virtuoso, "you will not be tempted to
rub this lamp?"

While speaking, he took from the shelf an antique brass lamp,
curiously wrought with embossed figures, but so covered with
verdigris that the sculpture was almost eaten away.

"It is a thousand years," said he, "since the genius of this lamp
constructed Aladdin's palace in a single night.  But he still
retains his power; and the man who rubs Aladdin's lamp has but to
desire either a palace or a cottage."

"I might desire a cottage," replied I; "but I would have it founded
on sure and stable truth, not on dreams and fantasies.  I have
learned to look for the real and the true."

My guide next showed me Prospero's magic wand, broken into three
fragments by the hand of its mighty master.  On the same shelf lay
the gold ring of ancient Gyges, which enabled the wearer to walk
invisible.  On the other side of the alcove was a tall looking-glass
in a frame of ebony, but veiled with a curtain of purple silk,
through the rents of which the gleam of the mirror was perceptible.

"This is Cornelius Agrippa's magic glass," observed the virtuoso.
"Draw aside the curtain, and picture any human form within your
mind, and it will be reflected in the mirror."

"It is enough if I can picture it within my mind," answered I. "Why
should I wish it to be repeated in the mirror?  But, indeed, these
works of magic have grown wearisome to me.  There are so many
greater wonders in the world, to those who keep their eyes open and
their sight undimmed by custom, that all the delusions of the old
sorcerers seem flat and stale.  Unless you can show me something
really curious, I care not to look further into your museum."

"Ah, well, then," said the virtuoso, composedly, "perhaps you may
deem some of my antiquarian rarities deserving of a glance."

He pointed out the iron mask, now corroded with rust; and my heart
grew sick at the sight of this dreadful relic, which had shut out a
human being from sympathy with his race.  There was nothing half so
terrible in the axe that beheaded King Charles, nor in the dagger
that slew Henry of Navarre, nor in the arrow that pierced the heart
of William Rufus,--all of which were shown to me.  Many of the
articles derived their interest, such as it was, from having been
formerly in the possession of royalty.  For instance, here was
Charlemagne's sheepskin cloak, the flowing wig of Louis Quatorze,
the spinning-wheel of Sardanapalus, and King Stephen's famous
breeches which cost him but a crown.  The heart of the Bloody Mary,
with the word "Calais" worn into its diseased substance, was
preserved in a bottle of spirits; and near it lay the golden case in
which the queen of Gustavus Adolphus treasured up that hero's heart.
Among these relics and heirlooms of kings I must not forget the
long, hairy ears of Midas, and a piece of bread which had been
changed to gold by the touch of that unlucky monarch.  And as
Grecian Helen was a queen, it may here be mentioned that I was
permitted to take into my hand a lock of her golden hair and the
bowl which a sculptor modelled from the curve of her perfect breast.
Here, likewise, was the robe that smothered Agamemnon, Nero's
fiddle, the Czar Peter's brandy-bottle, the crown of Semiramis, and
Canute's sceptre which he extended over the sea.  That my own land
may not deem itself neglected, let me add that I was favored with a
sight of the skull of King Philip, the famous Indian chief, whose
head the Puritans smote off and exhibited upon a pole.

"Show me something else," said I to the virtuoso.  "Kings are in
such an artificial position that people in the ordinary walks of
life cannot feel an interest in their relics.  If you could show me
the straw hat of sweet little Nell, I would far rather see it than a
king's golden crown."

"There it is," said my guide, pointing carelessly with his staff to
the straw hat in question.  "But, indeed, you are hard to please.
Here are the seven-league boots.  Will you try them on?"

"Our modern railroads have superseded their use," answered I; "and
as to these cowhide boots, I could show you quite as curious a pair
at the Transcendental community in Roxbury."

We next examined a collection of swords and other weapons, belonging
to different epochs, but thrown together without much attempt at
arrangement.  Here Was Arthur's sword Excalibar, and that of the Cid
Campeader, and the sword of Brutus rusted with Caesar's blood and
his own, and the sword of Joan of Arc, and that of Horatius, and
that with which Virginius slew his daughter, and the one which
Dionysius suspended over the head of Damocles. Here also was Arria's
sword, which she plunged into her own breast, in order to taste of
death before her husband.  The crooked blade of Saladin's cimeter
next attracted my notice.  I know not by what chance, but so it
happened, that the sword of one of our own militia generals was
suspended between Don Quixote's lance and the brown blade of
Hudibras.  My heart throbbed high at the sight of the helmet of
Miltiades and the spear that was broken in the breast of
Epaminondas.  I recognized the shield of Achilles by its resemblance
to the admirable cast in the possession of Professor Felton.
Nothing in this apartment interested me more than Major Pitcairn's
pistol, the discharge of which, at Lexington, began the war of the
Revolution, and was reverberated in thunder around the land for
seven long years. The bow of Ulysses, though unstrung for ages, was
placed against the wall, together with a sheaf of Robin Hood's
arrows and the rifle of Daniel Boone.

"Enough of weapons," said I, at length; "although I would gladly
have seen the sacred shield which fell from heaven in the time of
Numa.  And surely you should obtain the sword which Washington
unsheathed at Cambridge.  But the collection does you much credit.
Let us pass on."

In the next alcove we saw the golden thigh of Pythagoras, which had
so divine a meaning; and, by one of the queer analogies to which the
virtuoso seemed to be addicted, this ancient emblem lay on the same
shelf with Peter Stuyvesant's wooden leg, that was fabled to be of
silver.  Here was a remnant of the Golden Fleece, and a sprig of
yellow leaves that resembled the foliage of a frost-bitten elm, but
was duly authenticated as a portion of the golden branch by which
AEneas gained admittance to the realm of Pluto.  Atalanta's golden
apple and one of the apples of discord were wrapped in the napkin of
gold which Rampsinitus brought from Hades; and the whole were
deposited in the golden vase of Bias, with its inscription: "TO THE
WISEST."

"And how did you obtain this vase?" said I to the virtuoso.

"It was given me long ago," replied he, with a scornful expression
in his eye, "because I had learned to despise all things."

It had not escaped me that, though the virtuoso was evidently a man
of high cultivation, yet he seemed to lack sympathy with the
spiritual, the sublime, and the tender.  Apart from the whim that
had led him to devote so much time, pains, and expense to the
collection of this museum, he impressed me as one of the hardest and
coldest men of the world whom I had ever met.

"To despise all things!" repeated I.  "This, at best, is the wisdom
of the understanding.  It is the creed of a man whose soul, whose
better and diviner part, has never been awakened, or has died out of
him."

"I did not think that you were still so young," said the virtuoso.
"Should you live to my years, you will acknowledge that the vase of
Bias was not ill bestowed."

Without further discussion of the point, he directed my attention to
other curiosities.  I examined Cinderella's little glass slipper,
and compared it with one of Diana's sandals, and with Fanny
Elssler's shoe, which bore testimony to the muscular character of
her illustrious foot.  On the same shelf were Thomas the Rhymer's
green velvet shoes, and the brazen shoe of Empedocles which was
thrown out of Mount AEtna.  Anacreon's drinking-cup was placed in
apt juxtaposition with one of Tom Moore's wine-glasses and Circe's
magic bowl.  These were symbols of luxury and riot; but near them
stood the cup whence Socrates drank his hemlock, and that which Sir
Philip Sidney put from his death-parched lips to bestow the draught
upon a dying soldier. Next appeared a cluster of tobacco-pipes,
consisting of Sir Walter Raleigh's, the earliest on record, Dr.
Parr's, Charles Lamb's, and the first calumet of peace which was
ever smoked between a European and an Indian.  Among other musical
instruments, I noticed the lyre of Orpheus and those of Homer and
Sappho, Dr. Franklin's famous whistle, the trumpet of Anthony Van
Corlear, and the flute which Goldsmith played upon in his rambles
through the French provinces.  The staff of Peter the Hermit stood
in a corner with that of good old Bishop Jewel, and one of ivory,
which had belonged to Papirius, the Roman senator.  The ponderous
club of Hercules was close at hand.  The virtuoso showed me the
chisel of Phidias, Claude's palette, and the brush of Apelles,
observing that he intended to bestow the former either on Greenough,
Crawford, or Powers, and the two latter upon Washington Allston.
There was a small vase of oracular gas from Delphos, which I trust
will be submitted to the scientific analysis of Professor Silliman.
I was deeply moved on beholding a vial of the tears into which Niobe
was dissolved; nor less so on learning that a shapeless fragment of
salt was a relic of that victim of despondency and sinful
regrets,--Lot's wife.  My companion appeared to set great value upon
some Egyptian darkness in a blacking-jug.  Several of the shelves were
covered by a collection of coins, among which, however, I remember
none but the Splendid Shilling, celebrated by Phillips, and a
dollar's worth of the iron money of Lycurgus, weighing about fifty
pounds.

Walking carelessly onward, I had nearly fallen over a huge bundle,
like a peddler's pack, done up in sackcloth, and very securely
strapped and corded.

"It is Christian's burden of sin," said the virtuoso.

"O, pray let us open it!" cried I.  "For many a year I have longed
to know its contents."

"Look into your own consciousness and memory," replied the virtuoso.
"You will there find a list of whatever it contains."

As this was all undeniable truth, I threw a melancholy look at the
burden and passed on.  A collection of old garments, banging on
pegs, was worthy of some attention, especially the shirt of Nessus,
Caesar's mantle, Joseph's coat of many colors, the Vicar of Bray's
cassock, Goldsmith's peach-bloom suit, a pair of President
Jefferson's scarlet breeches, John Randolph's red baize
hunting-shirt, the drab small-clothes of the Stout Gentleman, and the
rags of the "man all tattered and torn."  George Fox's hat impressed
me with deep reverence as a relic of perhaps the truest apostle that
has appeared on earth for these eighteen hundred years.  My eye was
next attracted by an old pair of shears, which I should have taken
for a memorial of some famous tailor, only that the virtuoso pledged
his veracity that they were the identical scissors of Atropos.  He
also showed me a broken hourglass which had been thrown aside by
Father Time, together with the old gentleman's gray forelock,
tastefully braided into a brooch.  In the hour-glass was the handful
of sand, the grains of which had numbered the years of the Cumeean
sibyl.  I think it was in this alcove that I saw the inkstand which
Luther threw at the Devil, and the ring which Essex, while under
sentence of death, sent to Queen Elizabeth.  And here was the
blood-incrusted pen of steel with which Faust signed away his
salvation.

The virtuoso now opened the door of a closet and showed me a lamp
burning, while three others stood unlighted by its side.  One of the
three was the lamp of Diogenes, another that of Guy Fawkes, and the
third that which Hero set forth to the midnight breeze in the high
tower of Ahydos.

"See!" said the virtuoso, blowing with all his force at the lighted
lamp.

The flame quivered and shrank away from his breath, but clung to the
wick, and resumed its brilliancy as soon as the blast was exhausted.

"It is an undying lamp from the tomb of Charlemagne," observed my
guide.  "That flame was kindled a thousand years ago."

"How ridiculous to kindle an unnatural light in tombs!" exclaimed I.
"We should seek to behold the dead in the light of heaven. But what
is the meaning of this chafing-dish of glowing coals?"

"That," answered the virtuoso, "is the original fire which
Prometheus stole from heaven.  Look steadfastly into it, and you
will discern another curiosity."

I gazed into that fire,--which, symbolically, was the origin of all
that was bright and glorious in the soul of man,--and in the midst
of it, behold a little reptile, sporting with evident enjoyment of
the fervid heat!  It was a salamander.

"What a sacrilege!" cried I, with inexpressible disgust.  "Can you
find no better use for this ethereal fire than to cherish a
loathsome reptile in it?  Yet there are men who abuse the sacred fire
of their own souls to as foul and guilty a purpose."

The virtuoso made no answer except by a dry laugh and an assurance
that the salamander was the very same which Benvenuto Cellini had
seen in his father's household fire.  He then proceeded to show me
other rarities; for this closet appeared to be the receptacle of
what he considered most valuable in his collection.

"There," said he, "is the Great Carbuncle of the White Mountains."

I gazed with no little interest at this mighty gem, which it had
been one of the wild projects of my youth to discover.  Possibly it
might have looked brighter to me in those days than now; at all
events, it had not such brilliancy as to detain me long from the
other articles of the museum.  The virtuoso pointed out to me a
crystalline stone which hung by a gold chain against the wall.

"That is the philosopher's stone," said he.

"And have you the elixir vita which generally accompanies it?"
inquired I.

"Even so; this urn is filled with it," he replied.  "A draught would
refresh you.  Here is Hebe's cup; will you quaff a health from it?"

My heart thrilled within me at the idea of such a reviving draught;
for methought I had great need of it after travelling so far on the
dusty road of life.  But I know not whether it were a peculiar
glance in the virtuoso's eye, or the circumstance that this most
precious liquid was contained in an antique sepulchral urn, that
made me pause.  Then came many a thought with which, in the calmer
and better hours of life, I had strengthened myself to feel that
Death is the very friend whom, in his due season, even the happiest
mortal should be willing to embrace.

"No; I desire not an earthly immortality," said I.

"Were man to live longer on the earth, the spiritual would die out of
him.  The spark of ethereal fire would be choked by the material,
the sensual.  There is a celestial something within us that
requires, after a certain time, the atmosphere of heaven to preserve
it from decay and ruin.  I will have none of this liquid.  You do
well to keep it in a sepulchral urn; for it would produce death
while bestowing the shadow of life."

"All this is unintelligible to me," responded my guide, with
indifference.  "Life--earthly life--is the only good.  But you
refuse the draught?  Well, it is not likely to be offered twice
within one man's experience.  Probably you have griefs which you
seek to forget in death.  I can enable you to forget them in life.
Will you take a draught of Lethe?"

As he spoke, the virtuoso took from the shelf a crystal vase
containing a sable liquor, which caught no reflected image from the
objects around.

"Not for the world!" exclaimed I, shrinking back.  "I can spare none
of my recollections, not even those of error or sorrow. They are all
alike the food of my spirit.  As well never to have lived as to lose
them now."

Without further parley we passed to the next alcove, the shelves of
which were burdened with ancient volumes and with those rolls of
papyrus in which was treasured up the eldest wisdom of the earth.
Perhaps the most valuable work in the collection, to a bibliomaniac,
was the Book of Hermes.  For my part, however, I would have given a
higher price for those six of the Sibyl's books which Tarquin
refused to purchase, and which the virtuoso informed me he had
himself found in the cave of Trophonius. Doubtless these old volumes
contain prophecies of the fate of Rome, both as respects the decline
and fall of her temporal empire and the rise of her spiritual one.
Not without value, likewise, was the work of Anaxagoras on Nature,
hitherto supposed to be irrecoverably lost, and the missing
treatises of Longinus, by which modern criticism might profit, and
those books of Livy for which the classic student has so long
sorrowed without hope. Among these precious tomes I observed the
original manuscript of the Koran, and also that of the Mormon Bible
in Joe Smith's authentic autograph.  Alexander's copy of the Iliad
was also there, enclosed in the jewelled casket of Darius, still
fragrant of the perfumes which the Persian kept in it.

Opening an iron-clasped volume, bound in black leather, I discovered
it to be Cornelius Agrippa's book of magic; and it was rendered
still more interesting by the fact that many flowers, ancient and
modern, were pressed between its leaves.  Here was a rose from Eve's
bridal bower, and all those red and white roses which were plucked
in the garden of the Temple by the partisans of York and Lancaster.
Here was Halleck's Wild Rose of Alloway. Cowper had contributed a
Sensitive Plant, and Wordsworth an Eglantine, and Burns a Mountain
Daisy, and Kirke White a Star of Bethlehem, and Longfellow a Sprig
of Fennel, with its yellow flowers.  James Russell Lowell had given
a Pressed Flower, but fragrant still, which had been shadowed in the
Rhine.  There was also a sprig from Southey's Holly Tree.  One of
the most beautiful specimens was a Fringed Gentian, which had been
plucked and preserved for immortality by Bryant.  From Jones Very, a
poet whose voice is scarcely heard among us by reason of its depth,
there was a Wind Flower and a Columbine.

As I closed Cornelius Agrippa's magic volume, an old, mildewed
letter fell upon the floor.  It proved to be an autograph from the
Flying Dutchman to his wife.  I could linger no longer among books;
for the afternoon was waning, and there was yet much to see.  The
bare mention of a few more curiosities must suffice. The immense
skull of Polyphemus was recognizable by the cavernous hollow in the
centre of the forehead where once had blazed the giant's single eye.
The tub of Diogenes, Medea's caldron, and Psyche's vase of beauty
were placed one within another. Pandora's box, without the lid,
stood next, containing nothing but the girdle of Venus, which had
been carelessly flung into it.  A bundle of birch-rods which had
been used by Shenstone's schoolmistress were tied up with the
Countess of Salisbury's garter.  I know not which to value most, a
roc's egg as big as an ordinary hogshead, or the shell of the egg
which Columbus set upon its end.  Perhaps the most delicate article
in the whole museum was Queen Mab's chariot, which, to guard it from
the touch of meddlesome fingers, was placed under a glass tumbler.

Several of the shelves were occupied by specimens of entomology.
Feeling but little interest in the science, I noticed only
Anacreon's grasshopper, and a bumblebee which had been presented to
the virtuoso by Ralph Waldo Emerson.

In the part of the hall which we had now reached I observed a
curtain, that descended from the ceiling to the floor in voluminous
folds, of a depth, richness, and magnificence which I had never seen
equalled.  It was not to be doubted that this splendid though dark
and solemn veil concealed a portion of the museum even richer in
wonders than that through which I had already passed; but, on my
attempting to grasp the edge of the curtain and draw it aside, it
proved to be an illusive picture.

"You need not blush," remarked the virtuoso; "for that same curtain
deceived Zeuxis.  It is the celebrated painting of Parrhasius."

In a range with the curtain there were a number of other choice
pictures by artists of ancient days.  Here was the famous cluster of
grapes by Zeuxis, so admirably depicted that it seemed as if the
ripe juice were bursting forth.  As to the picture of the old woman
by the same illustrious painter, and which was so ludicrous that he
himself died with laughing at it, I cannot say that it particularly
moved my risibility.  Ancient humor seems to have little power over
modern muscles.  Here, also, was the horse painted by Apelles which
living horses neighed at; his first portrait of Alexander the Great,
and his last unfinished picture of Venus asleep.  Each of these
works of art, together with others by Parrhasius, Timanthes,
Polygnotus, Apollodorus, Pausias, and Pamplulus, required more time
and study than I could bestow for the adequate perception of their
merits.  I shall therefore leave them undescribed and uncriticised,
nor attempt to settle the question of superiority between ancient
and modern art.

For the same reason I shall pass lightly over the specimens of
antique sculpture which this indefatigable and fortunate virtuoso
had dug out of the dust of fallen empires.  Here was AEtion's cedar
statue of AEsculapius, much decayed, and Alcon's iron statue of
Hercules, lamentably rusted.  Here was the statue of Victory, six
feet high, which the Jupiter Olympus of Phidias had held in his
hand.  Here was a forefinger of the Colossus of Rhodes, seven feet
in length.  Here was the Venus Urania of Phidias, and other images
of male and female beauty or grandeur, wrought by sculptors who
appeared never to have debased their souls by the sight of any
meaner forms than those of gods or godlike mortals.  But the deep
simplicity of these great works was not to be comprehended by a mind
excited and disturbed, as mine was, by the various objects that had
recently been presented to it.  I therefore turned away with merely
a passing glance, resolving on some future occasion to brood over
each individual statue and picture until my inmost spirit should
feel their excellence.  In this department, again, I noticed the
tendency to whimsical combinations and ludicrous analogies which
seemed to influence many of the arrangements of the museum.  The
wooden statue so well known as the Palladium of Troy was placed in
close apposition with the wooden head of General Jackson, which was
stolen a few years since from the bows of the frigate Constitution.

We had now completed the circuit of the spacious hall, and found
ourselves again near the door.  Feeling somewhat wearied with the
survey of so many novelties and antiquities, I sat down upon
Cowper's sofa, while the virtuoso threw himself carelessly into
Rabelais's easychair.  Casting my eyes upon the opposite wall, I was
surprised to perceive the shadow of a man flickering unsteadily
across the wainscot, and looking as if it were stirred by some
breath of air that found its way through the door or windows.  No
substantial figure was visible from which this shadow might be
thrown; nor, had there been such, was there any sunshine that would
have caused it to darken upon the wall.

"It is Peter Schlemihl's shadow," observed the virtuoso, "and one of
the most valuable articles in my collection."

"Methinks a shadow would have made a fitting doorkeeper to such a
museum," said I; "although, indeed, yonder figure has something
strange and fantastic about him, which suits well enough with many
of the impressions which I have received here.  Pray, who is he?"

While speaking, I gazed more scrutinizingly than before at the
antiquated presence of the person who had admitted me, and who still
sat on his bench with the same restless aspect, and dim, confused,
questioning anxiety that I had noticed on my first entrance.  At
this moment he looked eagerly towards us, and, half starting from
his seat, addressed me.

"I beseech you, kind sir," said he, in a cracked, melancholy tone,
"have pity on the most unfortunate man in the world.  For Heaven's
sake, answer me a single question!  Is this the town of Boston?"

"You have recognized him now," said the virtuoso.  "It is Peter
Rugg, the missing man.  I chanced to meet him the other day still in
search of Boston, and conducted him hither; and, as he could not
succeed in finding his friends, I have taken him into my service as
doorkeeper.  He is somewhat too apt to ramble, but otherwise a man
of trust and integrity."

"And might I venture to ask," continued I, "to whom am I indebted
for this afternoon's gratification?"

The virtuoso, before replying, laid his hand upon an antique dart,
or javelin, the rusty steel head of winch seemed to have been
blunted, as if it had encountered the resistance of a tempered
shield, or breastplate.

"My name has not been without its distinction in the world for a
longer period than that of any other man alive," answered he. "Yet
many doubt of my existence; perhaps you will do so to-morrow.  This
dart which I hold in my hand was once grim Death's own weapon.  It
served him well for the space of four thousand years; but it fell
blunted, as you see, when he directed it against my breast."

These words were spoken with the calm and cold courtesy of manner
that had characterized this singular personage throughout our
interview.  I fancied, it is true, that there was a bitterness
indefinably mingled with his tone, as of one cut off from natural
sympathies and blasted with a doom that had been inflicted on no
other human being, and by the results of which he had ceased to be
human.  Yet, withal, it seemed one of the most terrible consequences
of that doom that the victim no longer regarded it as a calamity,
but had finally accepted it as the greatest good that could have
befallen him.

"You are the Wandering Jew!"  exclaimed I.

The virtuoso bowed without emotion of any kind; for, by centuries of
custom, he had almost lost the sense of strangeness in his fate, and
was but imperfectly conscious of the astonishment and awe with which
it affected such as are capable of death.

"Your doom is indeed a fearful one!"  said I, with irrepressible
feeling and a frankness that afterwards startled me; "yet perhaps
the ethereal spirit is not entirely extinct under all this
corrupted or frozen mass of earthly life.  Perhaps the immortal
spark may yet be rekindled by a breath of heaven.  Perhaps you may
yet be permitted to die before it is too late to live eternally.
You have my prayers for such a consummation. Farewell."

"Your prayers will be in vain," replied he, with a smile of cold
triumph.  "My destiny is linked with the realities of earth.  You
are welcome to your visions and shadows of a future state; but give
me what I can see, and touch, and understand, and I ask no more."

"It is indeed too late," thought I.  "The soul is dead within him."

Struggling between pity and horror, I extended my hand, to which the
virtuoso gave his own, still with the habitual courtesy of a man of
the world, but without a single heart-throb of human brotherhood.
The touch seemed like ice, yet I know not whether morally or
physically.  As I departed, he bade me observe that the inner door
of the hall was constructed with the ivory leaves of the gateway
through which Aeneas and the Sibyl had been dismissed from Hades.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Virtuoso's Collection (From "Mosses
From An Old Manse"), by Nathaniel Hawthorne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VIRTUOSO'S COLLECTION ***

***** This file should be named 9235.txt or 9235.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/2/3/9235/

Produced by David Widger.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
