The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sketches from Memory, by Nathaniel Hawthorne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Sketches from Memory

Author: Nathaniel Hawthorne

Posting Date: December 23, 2010 [EBook #9246]
Release Date: November, 2005
First Posted: September 25, 2003
Last Updated: February 8, 2007

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SKETCHES FROM MEMORY ***




Produced by David Widger.  HTML version by Al Haines.










                 THE DOLIVER ROMANCE AND OTHER PIECES

                         TALES AND SKETCHES

                       By Nathaniel Hawthorne


                        SKETCHES FROM MEMORY




CONTENTS:
     I.   The Inland Port.
     II.  Rochester.
     III. A Night Scene.



I. THE INLAND PORT.

It was a bright forenoon, when I set foot on the beach at Burlington,
and took leave of the two boatmen in whose little skiff I had voyaged
since daylight from Peru.  Not that we had come that morning from South
America, but only from the New York shore of Lake Champlain.  The
highlands of the coast behind us stretched north and south, in a double
range of bold, blue peaks, gazing over each other's shoulders at the
Green Mountains of Vermont.

The latter are far the loftiest, and, from the opposite side of the
lake, had displayed a more striking outline.  We were now almost at
their feet, and could see only a sandy beach sweeping beneath a woody
bank, around the semicircular Bay of Burlington.

The painted lighthouse on a small green island, the wharves and
warehouses, with sloops and schooners moored alongside, or at anchor,
or spreading their canvas to the wind, and boats rowing from point to
point, reminded me of some fishing-town on the sea-coast.

But I had no need of tasting the water to convince myself that Lake
Champlain was not all arm of the sea; its quality was evident, both by
its silvery surface, when unruffled, and a faint but unpleasant and
sickly smell, forever steaming up in the sunshine.  One breeze of the
Atlantic with its briny fragrance would be worth more to these inland
people than all the perfumes of Arabia.  On closer inspection the
vessels at the wharves looked hardly seaworthy,--there being a great
lack of tar about the seams and rigging, and perhaps other deficiencies,
quite as much to the purpose.

I observed not a single sailor in the port.  There were men, indeed, in
blue jackets and trousers, but not of the true nautical fashion, such as
dangle before slopshops; others wore tight pantaloons and coats
preponderously long-tailed,--cutting very queer figures at the masthead;
and, in short, these fresh-water fellows had about the same analogy to
the real "old salt" with his tarpaulin, pea-jacket, and sailor-cloth
trousers, as a lake fish to a Newfoundland cod.

Nothing struck me more in Burlington, than the great number of Irish
emigrants.  They have filled the British Provinces to the brim, and
still continue to ascend the St. Lawrence in infinite tribes overflowing
by every outlet into the States.  At Burlington, they swarm in huts and
mean dwellings near the lake, lounge about the wharves, and elbow the
native citizens entirely out of competition in their own line.  Every
species of mere bodily labor is the prerogative of these Irish.  Such is
their multitude in comparison with any possible demand for their
services, that it is difficult to conceive how a third part of them
should earn even a daily glass of whiskey, which is doubtless their
first necessary of life,--daily bread being only the second.

Some were angling in the lake, but had caught only a few perch, which
little fishes, without a miracle, would be nothing among so many.  A
miracle there certainly must have been, and a daily one, for the
subsistence of these wandering hordes.  The men exhibit a lazy strength
and careless merriment, as if they had fed well hitherto, and meant to
feed better hereafter; the women strode about, uncovered in the open
air, with far plumper waists and brawnier limbs as well as bolder faces,
than our shy and slender females; and their progeny, which was
innumerable, had the reddest and the roundest cheeks of any children in
America.

While we stood at the wharf, the bell of a steamboat gave two
preliminary peals, and she dashed away for Plattsburgh, leaving a trail
of smoky breath behind, and breaking the glassy surface of the lake
before her.  Our next movement brought us into a handsome and busy
square, the sides of which were filled up with white houses, brick
stores, a church, a court-house, and a bank.  Some of these edifices had
roofs of tin, in the fashion of Montreal, and glittered in the sun with
cheerful splendor, imparting a lively effect to the whole square.  One
brick building, designated in large letters as the custom-house,
reminded us that this inland village is a port of entry, largely
concerned in foreign trade and holding daily intercourse with the
British empire.  In this border country the Canadian bank-notes
circulate as freely as our own, and British and American coin are
jumbled into the same pocket, the effigies of the King of England being
made to kiss those of the Goddess of Liberty.

Perhaps there was an emblem in the involuntary contact.  There was a
pleasant mixture of people in the square of Burlington, such as cannot
be seen elsewhere, at one view; merchants from Montreal, British
officers from the frontier garrisons, French Canadians, wandering Irish,
Scotchmen of a better class, gentlemen of the South on a pleasure tour,
country squires on business; and a great throng of Green Mountain boys,
with their horse-wagons and ox-teams, true Yankees in aspect, and
looking more superlatively so, by contrast with such a variety of
foreigners.



II. ROCHESTER

The gray but transparent evening rather shaded than obscured the scene,
leaving its stronger features visible, and even improved by the medium
through which I beheld them.  The volume of water is not very great, nor
the roar deep enough to be termed grand, though such praise might have
been appropriate before the good people of Rochester had abstracted a
part of the unprofitable sublimity of the cascade. The Genesee has
contributed so bountifully to their canals and mill-dams, that it
approaches the precipice with diminished pomp, and rushes over it in
foamy streams of various width, leaving a broad face of the rock
insulated and unwashed, between the two main branches of the falling
river.  Still it was an impressive sight, to one who had not seen
Niagara.  I confess, however, that my chief interest arose from a
legend, connected with these falls, which will become poetical in the
lapse of years, and was already so to me as I pictured the catastrophe
out of dusk and solitude.  It was from a platform, raised over the naked
island of the cliff, in the middle of the cataract that Sam Patch took
his last leap, and alighted in the other world.  Strange as it may
appear,--that any uncertainty should rest upon his fate which was
consummated in the sight of thousands,--many will tell you that the
illustrious Patch concealed himself in a cave under the falls, and has
continued to enjoy posthumous renown, without foregoing the comforts of
this present life.  But the poor fellow prized the shout of the
multitude too much not to have claimed it at the instant, had he
survived.  He will not be seen again, unless his ghost, in such a
twilight as when I was there, should emerge from the foam, and vanish
among the shadows that fall from cliff to cliff.

How stern a moral may be drawn from the story of poor Sam Patch!  Why do
we call him a madman or a fool, when he has left his memory around the
falls of the Genesee, more permanently than if the letters of his name
had been hewn into the forehead of the precipice?

Was the leaper of cataracts more mad or foolish than other men who throw
away life, or misspend it in pursuit of empty fame, and seldom so
triumphantly as he?  That which he won is as invaluable as any except
the unsought glory, spreading like the rich perfume of richer fruit from
various and useful deeds.

Thus musing, wise in theory, but practically as great a fool as Sam, I
lifted my eyes and beheld the spires, warehouses, and dwellings of
Rochester, half a mile distant on both sides of the river, indistinctly
cheerful, with the twinkling of many lights amid the fall of the evening.

The town had sprung up like a mushroom, but no presage of decay could be
drawn from its hasty growth.  Its edifices are of dusky brick, and of
stone that will not be grayer in a hundred years than now; its churches
are Gothic; it is impossible to look at its worn pavements and conceive
how lately the forest leaves have been swept away.  The most ancient
town in Massachusetts appears quite like an affair of yesterday,
compared with Rochester.  Its attributes of youth are the activity and
eager life with which it is redundant.  The whole street, sidewalks and
centre, was crowded with pedestrians, horsemen, stage-coaches, gigs,
light wagons, and heavy ox-teams, all hurrying, trotting, rattling, and
rumbling, in a throng that passed continually, but never passed away.
Here, a country wife was selecting a churn from several gayly painted
ones on the sunny sidewalk; there, a farmer was bartering his produce;
and, in two or three places, a crowd of people were showering bids on a
vociferous auctioneer.  I saw a great wagon and an ox-chain knocked off
to a very pretty woman.  Numerous were the lottery offices,--those true
temples of Mammon,--where red and yellow bills offered splendid fortunes
to the world at large, and banners of painted cloth gave notice that the
"lottery draws next Wednesday."  At the ringing of a bell, judges,
jurymen, lawyers, and clients, elbowed each other to the court-house, to
busy themselves with cases that would doubtless illustrate the state of
society, had I the means of reporting them.  The number of public houses
benefited the flow of temporary population; some were farmer's
taverns,--cheap, homely, and comfortable; others were magnificent hotels,
with negro waiters, gentlemanly landlords in black broad-cloth, and
foppish bar-keepers in Broadway coats, with chased gold watches in their
waistcoat-pockets.  I caught one of these fellows quizzing me through an
eye-glass.  The porters were lumbering up the steps with baggage from
the packet boats, while waiters plied the brush on dusty travellers,
who, meanwhile, glanced over the innumerable advertisements in the daily
papers.

In short, everybody seemed to be there, and all had something to do, and
were doing it with all their might, except a party of drunken recruits
for the Western military posts, principally Irish and Scotch, though
they wore Uncle Sam's gray jacket and trousers.  I noticed one other
idle man.  He carried a rifle on his shoulder and a powder-horn across
his breast, and appeared to stare about him with confused wonder, as if,
while he was listening to the wind among the forest boughs, the hum and
bustle of an instantaneous city had surrounded him.



III.

A NIGHT SCENE

The steamboat in which I was passenger for Detroit had put into the
mouth of a small river, where the greater part of the night would be
spent in repairing some damages of the machinery.

As the evening was warm, though cloudy and very dark, I stood on deck,
watching a scene that would not have attracted a second glance in the
daytime, but became picturesque by the magic of strong light and deep
shade.

Some wild Irishmen were replenishing our stock of wood, and had kindled
a great fire on the bank to illuminate their labors.  It was composed of
large logs and dry brushwood, heaped together with careless profusion,
blazing fiercely, spouting showers of sparks into the darkness, and
gleaming wide over Lake Erie,--a beacon for perplexed voyagers leagues
from land.

All around and above the furnace, there was total obscurity.  No trees
or other objects caught and reflected any portion of the brightness,
which thus wasted itself in the immense void of night, as if it quivered
from the expiring embers of the world, after the final conflagration.
But the Irishmen were continually emerging from the dense gloom, passing
through the lurid glow, and vanishing into the gloom on the other side.
Sometimes a whole figure would be made visible, by the shirtsleeves and
light-colored dress; others were but half seen, like imperfect
creatures; many flitted, shadow-like, along the skirts of darkness,
tempting fancy to a vain pursuit; and often, a face alone was reddened
by the fire, and stared strangely distinct, with no traces of a body.
In short these wild Irish, distorted and exaggerated by the blaze, now
lost in deep shadow, now bursting into sudden splendor, and now
struggling between light and darkness, formed a picture which might have
been transferred, almost unaltered, to a tale of the supernatural.  As
they all carried lanterns of wood, and often flung sticks upon the fire,
the least imaginative spectator would at once compare them to devils
condemned to keep alive the flames of their own torments.









End of Project Gutenberg's Sketches from Memory, by Nathaniel Hawthorne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SKETCHES FROM MEMORY ***

***** This file should be named 9246.txt or 9246.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/2/4/9246/

Produced by David Widger.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
