The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cleveland Past and Present, by Maurice Joblin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Cleveland Past and Present
       Its Representative Men, etc.

Author: Maurice Joblin

Posting Date: March 22, 2014 [EBook #9328]
Release Date: November, 2005
First Posted: September 23, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLEVELAND PAST AND PRESENT ***




Produced by Distributed Proofreaders









CLEVELAND PAST AND PRESENT

Its Representative Men

Comprising Biographical Sketches of Pioneer Settlers and Prominent
Citizens

With a History of the City and Historical Sketches of Its Commerce,
Manufactures, Ship Building, Railroads, Telegraphy, Schools, Churches,
Etc., Profusely Illustrated with Photographic Views and Portraits

1869

Photographically Illustrated by E. Decker




Preface.



In many ways the story of the survey and first settlement of Cleveland has
been made familiar to the public. It has been told at pioneer gatherings,
reproduced in newspapers and periodicals, enlarged upon in directory
prefaces and condensed for works of topographical reference. Within a
short time Col. Charles Whittlesey has gathered up, collected, and
arranged the abundant materials for the Early History of Cleveland in a
handsome volume bearing that title.

But Col. Whittlesy's volume closes with the war of 1812, when Cleveland
was still a pioneer settlement with but a few families. The history of the
growth of that settlement to a village, its development into a commercial
port, and then into a large and flourishing city, with a busy population
of a hundred thousand persons, remained mostly unwritten, and no part of
it existing in permanent form. The whole period is covered by the active
lives of men yet with us who have grown up with the place, and with whose
history that of the city is inseparably connected. It occurred to the
projector of this work that a history of Cleveland could be written in the
individual histories of its representative men, that such a volume would
not only be a reliable account of the growth of the city in its general
features and in the development of its several branches of industry, but
would possess the additional advantage of the interest attaching to
personal narrative. This idea has been faithfully worked out in the
following pages, not without much labor and difficulty in the collection
and arrangement of the materials. Besides the personal narratives, an
introductory sketch to each of the departments of business into which the
biographical sketches are grouped gives a brief account of the rise and
present position of that particular industry; these, taken together,
forming a full and accurate business and professional history of the city.
An introductory sketch of the general history of Cleveland gives
completeness to the whole, whilst the numerous illustrations and portraits
add greatly to the interest and value of the work.

Numerous as are the sketches, it is not, of course, claimed that all are
represented in the volume who deserve a place in it. This would be
impossible in a work of ordinary dimensions, even were it convenient, or
even possible, to obtain the necessary materials. The aim has been to
sketch sufficient of the representative men in each leading business and
professional department to give a fair idea of the nature and extent of
that department. It is not a complete biographical dictionary of
Cleveland, but a volume of biographical selections, made, as the lawyers
say, "without prejudice."




History of Cleveland.



For the records of the first sixteen or seventeen years of the history of
Cleveland, what may be styled its pioneer history, the local historian
will hereafter be indebted to the work of Col. Whittlesey, where every
known and reliable fact connected with that period of Cleveland's history
is carefully preserved.

The city was originally comprised in lands purchased by the "Connecticut
Land Company," and formed a portion of what is termed the Western Reserve.
This company was organized in 1795, and in the month of May of the
following year, it commissioned General Moses Cleaveland to superintend
the survey of their lands, with a staff of forty-eight assistants. On the
22d of July, 1796, General Cleaveland, accompanied by Augustus Porter, the
principal of the surveying department, and several others, entered the
mouth of the Cuyahoga from the lake. Job P. Stiles and his wife are
supposed to have been with the party. General Cleaveland continued his
progress to Sandusky Bay, leaving enough men to put up a storehouse for
the supplies, and a cabin for the accommodation of the surveyors. These
were located a short distance south of St. Clair street, west of Union
lane, at a spring in the side-hill, in rear of Scott's warehouse. During
the season a cabin was put up for Stiles, on lot 53, east side of Bank
street, north of the Herald Building, where Morgan & Root's block now
stands. This was the first building for permanent settlement erected on
the site of the city, although huts for temporary occupancy had been
previously built in the neighborhood.

Upon the return of the party from Sandusky, Mr. Porter prepared the
outlines of the city. He says: "I surveyed a piece of land designed for a
town--its dimensions I do not recollect--probably equal to about a mile
square, bounding west on the river, and north on the lake. I made a plot
of this ground, and laid it off into streets and lots. Most or all the
streets I surveyed myself, when I left it in charge of Mr. Holley to
complete the survey of the lots."

The survey of the city was commenced on the 16th of September, and
completed about the 1st of October, 1796. Holley's notes state that on
Monday, October 17th, he "finished surveying in New Connecticut; weather
rainy," and on the following day he records: "We left Cuyahoga at 3
o'clock 17 minutes, for home. We left at Cuyahoga, Job Stiles and wife,
and Joseph Landon, with provisions for the Winter." Landon soon abandoned
the spot and his place was taken by Edward Paine, who had arrived from the
State of New York, for the purpose of trading with the Indians, and who
may be considered the first mercantile man who transacted business in
Cleveland. Thus, during the Winter of 1796-7, the population of the city
consisted of three inhabitants. During the Winter a child is reputed to
have been born in the cabin, which had only squaws for nurses.

Early in the Spring of 1797, James Kingsbury and family, from New England,
with Elijah Gunn, one of the surveying party, all of whom had continued
during the Winter at Conneaut, where they had endured incredible
hardships, removed to Cleveland. His first cabin was put up on the site of
the Case Block, east of the Public Square, but he subsequently removed to
a point east of the present city limits, somewhere on a line with Kinsman
Street. Here he remained until his death.

The next families who were attracted to this settlement were those of
Major Lorenzo Carter and Ezekiel Hawley, who came from Kirtland, Vermont,
the family of the Major being accompanied by Miss Cloe Inches. In the
Spring of the following year, (1798,) the former gentleman sowed two acres
of corn on the west side of Water street. He was also the first person who
erected a frame building in the city, which he completed in 1802; but an
unfortunate casualty proved fatal to the enterprise, for when he was about
to occupy the residence it was totally destroyed by fire. In 1803,
however, he erected another house on the site of the destroyed building,
but on this occasion he confined himself to hewn logs.

The fourth addition of the season was that of Nathan Chapman and his
family, who, like the patriarchs of yore, traveled with his herd, and
marched into the Forest City at the head of two yoke of oxen and four
milch cows, which were the first neat stock that fed from the rich
pasturage on the banks of the Cuyahoga.

In the Summer of 1797, the surveying party returned to the Western Reserve
and resumed their labors, with Cleveland as a head-quarters. It was a very
sickly season and three of the number died, one of whom was David
Eldridge, whose remains were interred in a piece of ground chosen as a
cemetery, at the corner of Prospect and Ontario streets. This funeral
occurred on the 3d of June, 1797, and is the first recorded in the city.
Recently, while making some improvements to the buildings now occupying
that location, some human bones were discovered.

Less than one month after the first funeral, occurred the first wedding.
On the 1st of July, 1797, the marriage was solemnized of William Clement,
of Erie, to Miss Cloe Inches, who had come to this city with the family of
Major Lorenzo Carter. The ceremony was performed by Mr. Seth Hart, who was
regarded by the surveying party as their chaplain.

In the beginning of the following year, (1798,) the population had
increased to fifteen. No other immigration is recorded until that of
Rodolphus Edwards and Nathaniel Doane and their families, in 1799, the
latter consisting of nine persons. They journeyed from Chatham,
Connecticut, and were occupied ninety-two days in their transit--a longer
period than is now allowed to accomplish a voyage to the East Indies.

In 1799, the Land Company caused a road to be surveyed and partially
worked, from Cleveland to the Pennsylvania line, about ten miles from the
lake, which was the first road opened through the Reserve. In the Spring
of that year Wheeler W. Williams, from Norwich, Connecticut, and Major
Wyatt, erected a grist mill at the falls at Newburgh, and in 1800 a saw
mill was also built by them; a substantial proof that sufficient corn and
wheat were grown and lumber required to warrant the speculation.

The desire of moral culture and education did not relax in this lonely
region, and in 1800, a township school was organized, and the children
were taught by Sarah Doane. The site of the school house was near
Kingsbury's, on the ridge road.

Cleveland received two additions in 1800, in the persons of David Clarke
and Amos Spafford, the former of whom erected a house on Water street. The
first sermon preached in Cleveland, was delivered in that year by the Rev.
Joseph Badger, an agent of the Connecticut Missionary Society.

The years of 1798, 1799 and 1800, were remarkable for the early
commencement of genial weather. Pinks were in bloom in February, and the
peach trees were also in full blossom in March.

In 1801, the first distillery was erected by David Bryant. The memorable
4th of July of the same year was celebrated by the first ball in
Cleveland. It took place at Major Carter's log house, on the slope from
Superior street to the harbor, and was attended by thirty of both sexes.

The first village school was held in Major Carter's house in 1802, and the
children were taught by Anna Spafford.

In 1803, Elisha Norton arrived in Cleveland with a stock of goods
principally adapted to the Indian trade, which he exhibited for sale in
Major Carter's house. The State of Ohio was this year admitted into the
Union, and the first election was held at James Kingsbury's.

The first Post Office was established here in 1804, when letters were
received and transmitted every seven days.

In 1805, the harbor was made a port of entry, and classed within the Erie
district. In the same year the territory on the west side of Cuyahoga was
ceded to the State by treaty. During the negotiations for that treaty, one
of the commissioners, Hon. Gideon Granger, distinguished for talents,
enterprise and forethought, uttered to his astonished associates this
bold, and what was then deemed, extraordinary prediction: "Within fifty
years an extensive city will occupy these grounds, and vessels will sail
directly from this port into the Atlantic Ocean." The prediction has been
fulfilled, though the latter portion of it required an extension of time,
of a year or two to make the fulfilment literal.

In 1806, Nathan Perry and family and Judge Walworth removed to Cleveland
the latter from Painesville. In the same year the first militia training
occurred. The place of rendezvous was Doane's corner, and the muster
amounted to about fifty men.

In 1809, the county of Cuyahoga was formed, Cleveland chosen as the county
seat, and Amos Spafford was elected representative. The same year Abraham
Hickox commenced business as a blacksmith, under the euphonious cognomen
of "Uncle Abram."

On the 5th of June, 1810, the first Court of Record was held in a frame
building erected by Elias and Harvey Murray, on the north side of Superior
Street, of which Judge Ruggles was President, assisted by three Associate
Judges. George Wallis and family arrived this year and opened a tavern.
Samuel and Matthew Williamson began business as tanners. Dr. David Long
commenced practice as a physician, and Alfred Kelley as the first attorney
in Cleveland. Elias and Harvey Murray opened a store this year in Union
lane, and may be termed the first general merchants.

In 1812, was the first trial for murder and the execution in Cleveland,
that of the Indian O'Mic, for the murder of two white trappers near
Sandusky City. In the same year the court house was built.

The first brick house erected in the city was that of J. E. and I. Kelley,
in Superior Street. It was built in 1814; but the bricks were very unlike
those of the present day, being more than twice their size. They were made
in Cleveland. This edifice was soon succeeded by another of the same
material, built by Alfred Kelley, in Water street.

In 1815, Cleveland was incorporated by the Legislature with a village
charter and Alfred Kelley was the first President.

In 1816, the first bank was established in the city, under the title
of the Commercial Bank of Lake Erie, of which Leonard Case took the
management. In that year the number of vessels enrolled as hailing
from the port of Cleveland, was but seven, and their aggregate
burthen 430 tons.

In 1817, the first church was organized, which was the Episcopal church of
Trinity; but it was not until 1828 that the edifice was erected on the
corner of St. Clair and Seneca streets.

On the 31st of July, 1818, the first newspaper was printed in this city,
"The Cleveland Gazette and Commercial Register." On the 1st of September in
the same year, the first steam vessel entered the harbor, the
"Walk-in-the-Water," commanded by Captain Fish, from Buffalo, putting in
on its way to Detroit. It was 300 tons burthen, had accommodations for one
hundred cabin and a greater number of steerage passengers, and was
propelled at eight or ten miles an hour. Its arrival and departure were
greeted with several rounds of artillery, and many persons accompanied her
to Detroit.

In 1819, Mr. Barber built a log hut on the west side of the harbor, and
may be considered the first permanent settler in Ohio City.

In 1830, was established a stage conveyance to Columbus, and in the autumn
a second proceeded to Norwalk. In 1821, these efforts were followed by
others, and two additional wagons were started, one for Pittsburgh and
another for Buffalo.

In 1825, an appropriation was made by Government for the improvement of
the harbor, being the first Government aid received for that purpose. The
water in the river was frequently so shallow that it was customary for
vessels to lie off in the lake and transfer passengers and freight by
boats. On the 4th of July in that year ground was broken at Licking Summit
for the Ohio canal, to connect the waters of Lake Erie at Cleveland with
those of the Ohio river at Portsmouth.

In 1827, Mr. Walworth, the harbor-master and Government agent, proceeded
to Washington, and after the most strenuous exertions, succeeded in
obtaining a further grant of $10,000 for the improvement of the harbor. In
the same year the Ohio canal was opened to Akron, and the first
importation of coal to Cleveland made.

In 1828, a new court-house was erected on the Public Square.

The light-house, on the bluff at the end of Water street, was built
in 1830, the lantern being one hundred and thirty-five feet above
water level.

In 1832, the Ohio canal was finished and communication between the lake
and the Ohio river opened. In the same year a new jail was built on
Champlain street.

In 1834, some of the streets were graded, and the village assumed such
importance that application for a city charter began to be talked of.

The population of the city had grown in 1835 to 5,080, having more than
doubled in two years. There was at this time an immense rush of people to
the West. Steamers ran from Buffalo to Detroit crowded with passengers at
a fare of eight dollars, the number on board what would now be called
small boats, sometimes reaching from five hundred to six hundred persons.
The line hired steamers and fined them a hundred dollars if the round trip
was not made in eight days. The slower boats, not being able to make that
time with any certainty, frequently stopped at Cleveland, discharged their
passengers, and put back to Buffalo. It sometimes chanced that the shore
accommodations were insufficient for the great crowd of emigrants stopping
over at this port, and the steamers were hired to lie off the port all
night, that the passengers might have sleeping accommodations. In that
year fire destroyed a large part of the business portion of Cleveland. At
the same period James S. Clark built, at his own expense, the old Columbus
street bridge, connecting Cleveland with Brooklyn township, and donated it
to the city. Two years later this bridge was the occasion and scene of the
famous "battle of the bridge," to be noticed in its proper place.

In 1836, Cleveland was granted a charter as a city. Greatly to the
mortification of many of the citizens, the people across the river had
received their charter for the organization of Ohio City before that for
the city of Cleveland came to hand, and Ohio City, therefore, took
precedence on point of age. This tended to embitter the jealous rivalry
between the two cities, and it was only after long years that this feeling
between the dwellers on the two sides of the river died out.

The settlement on the west side of the river had been made originally by
Josiah Barber and Richard Lord. Soon after Alonzo Carter purchased on
that side of the river and kept tavern in the "Red House," opposite
Superior street. In 1831, the Buffalo Company purchased the Carter farm
which covered the low land towards the mouth of the river, and the
overlooking bluffs. They covered the low ground with warehouses, and the
bluffs with stores and residences. Hotels were erected and preparations
made for the building up of a city that should far eclipse the older
settlement on the east side of the river. The company excavated a short
ship canal from the Cuyahoga to the old river bed, at the east end, and
the waters being high, a steamboat passed into the lake, through a
natural channel at the west end.

When it was proposed to get a city charter for Cleveland, negotiations
were entered into between the leading men on both sides of the river with
the purpose of either consolidating the two villages into one city, or at
least acting in harmony. The parties could agree neither on terms of
consolidation nor on boundaries. The negotiations were broken off, and
each side started its deputation to Columbus to procure a city charter,
with the result we have already noticed.

Ohio City was ambitions to have a harbor of its own, entirely independent
of Cleveland and to the advantages of which that city could lay no claim.
The old river bed was to be deepened and the channel to the lake at the
west end re-opened. As a preliminary to this ignoring of the Cleveland
harbor entrance of the Cuyahoga, a canal was cut through the marsh, from
opposite the entrance to the Ohio canal to the old river bed, which was
thus to be made the terminus of the Ohio canal.

In 1837, city rivalry ran so high that it resulted in the "battle of the
bridge." Both sides claimed jurisdiction over the Columbus street bridge
built by Mr. Clark and donated for public use. Armed men turned out on
either side to take possession of the disputed structure. A field piece
was posted on the low ground on the Cleveland side, to rake the bridge.
Guns, pistols, crowbars, clubs and stones were freely used on both sides.
Men were wounded of both parties, three of them seriously. The draw was
cut away, the middle pier and the western abutment partially blown down,
and the field piece spiked by the west siders. But the sheriff and the
city marshal of Cleveland appeared on the scene, gained possession of the
dilapidated bridge, which had been given to the city of Cleveland, and
lodged some of the rioters in thee county jail. This removed the bridge
question from the camp and battle-field to the more peaceful locality of
the courts.

In 1840, the population had increased to 6071, so that, notwithstanding
that the city had been suffering from depression, there was an influx of a
thousand persons in the last five years.

In 1841, the Pennsylvania and Ohio Canal was completed, Connecting the
Ohio Canal at Akron with the Ohio river at Beaver, Pennsylvania, and thus
forming a water communication with Pittsburgh.

The United States Marine Hospital, pleasantly situated on the banks of the
lake, was commenced in 1844 and not completed until 1852. It is surrounded
by eight acres of ground, and is designed to accommodate one hundred and
forty patients.

In 1845, the city voted to loan its credit for $200,000 towards the
construction of a railroad from Cleveland to Columbus and Cincinnati, and
subsequently the credit of the city was pledged for the loan of $100,000
towards the completion of the Cleveland and Erie or Lake Shore line.

In 1851, the 23d of February, the Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati
Railroad was opened for travel; and on the same day forty miles of the
Cleveland and Pittsburgh Railroad was likewise completed. These
circumstances produced great rejoicings, for during the period of their
construction the city had been almost daily adding to the number of its
inhabitants, so that it had nearly doubled in the last six years, its
population being now 21,140, and in the following year (1852) it added
eighty-seven persons per week to its numbers, being then 25,670.

In 1858, the new court house was built and the old court house on the
Public Square was taken down.

We have thus glanced at a few of the leading incidents in the history of
the city. A more full and exact account will be found in the historical
sketches prefacing each department in the body of the work, and still
further details will be found in the biographical sketches. There only
remains to be added here a few data in regard to the population,
government, and officials of the city.

The population of Cleveland commenced in 1796, with four persons. Next
year the number increased to fifteen, but in 1800, had fallen back to
seven. The subsequent figures are: 1810, 57; 1820, about 150; 1825, about
500; 1830, United States census, 1,075; 1832, about 1,500; 1833, about
1,900; 1834, city census, 6,071, or with Ohio City, 7,648; 1845, 9,573, or
with Ohio City, 12,035; 1846, Cleveland 10,135; 1850, United States
census, 17,034, or with Ohio City, 20,984; 1851, city census, 21,140;
1852, 25,670; 1860, United States census for combined city, 43,838; 1866,
67,500; 1869, not less than 100,000.

The village of Cleveland was incorporated in 1814, and the first president
of the village, elected in 1815, was Alfred Kelley. Twelve votes were cast
at the election. In the following year he resigned his position, and his
father, Daniel Kelley, was elected by the same number of votes, retaining
his position until 1820, when Horace Perry was made president. In the
following year he was succeeded by Reuben Wood. From the year 1821 to
1825, Leonard Case was regularly elected president of the corporation, but
neglecting to qualify in the latter year, the recorder, E. Waterman,
became president, ex-officio. Here the records are defective until the
year 1828, when it appears Mr. Waterman received the double office of
president and recorder. On account of ill-health he resigned, and on the
30th of May the trustees appointed Oirson Cathan as president. At the
annual election in June, 1829, Dr. David Long was elected president, and
during his presidency a fire-engine was purchased. Forty-eight votes were
cast at this election. For the years 1830 and 1831, Richard Hilliard was
president, and for the following year John W. Allen was chosen, and
retained the position until 1835, one hundred and six votes being cast at
the last named election.

The mayors of Ohio City, up to the time of the consolidation, were as
follows; 1836, Josiah Barber; 1837, Francis A. Burrows; 1838-9, Norman C.
Baldwin; 1840-41, Needham M. Standart; 1842, Francis A. Burrows; 1843,
Richard Lord; 1844-5-6, D. H. Lamb; 1847, David Griffith; 1848, John
Beverlin; 1849, Thomas Burnham; 1850-51-52, Benjamin Sheldon; 1853, Wm.
B. Castle.

The first mayor of the city of Cleveland was John W. Willey, who held the
office for two terms, namely, for the years 1836 and 1837, the term under
the old constitution being but for one year. In 1858, the term was
extended to two years, Abner C. Brownell being re-elected for the first
two-year term. Under that mayoralty the consolidation of the two cities
was effected, and the next mayor, according to the understanding, was
taken from the late municipality of Ohio City, William B. Castle being
elected for the term of 1855-6.

When Cleveland was raised to the dignity of a city, in 1836, it was
divided into three wards, each ward represented by three councilmen and
one alderman. In 1851, a fourth ward was added, the increased population
rendering the re-arrangement necessary. In 1853, under the operation of
the new constitution, the aldermen were dispensed with; the wards had
previously been restricted to two trustees, or councilmen, each. In 1854,
the two cities of Cleveland and Ohio City having been united, the
consolidated city was divided into eleven wards. This number remained
until 1868, when, by the annexation of additional territory, a re-division
was necessitated, and the city districted into fifteen wards.

As an interesting and valuable contribution to the municipal history of
the city we give the following complete record of the executive and
legislative government of Cleveland since its organization as a city:

1836. Mayor--John W. Willey. President of the Council--Sherlock J.
Andrews. Aldermen--Richard Hilliard, Joshua Mills, Nicholas Dockstader.
Councilmen--1st Ward--Morris Hepburn, John R. St. John, William V. Craw.
2d Ward--Sherlock J. Andrews, Henry L. Noble, Edward Baldwin. 3d
Ward--Aaron T. Strickland, Horace Canfield, Archibald M. C. Smith.

1837. Mayor--John W. Willey. President of the Council--Joshua Mills.
Aldermen--Joshua Mills, Nicholas Dockstader, Jonathan Williams.
Councilmen--1st Ward--George B. Merwin, Horace Canfield, Alfred Hall. 2d
Ward--Edward Baldwin, Samuel Cook, Henry L. Noble. 3d Ward--Samuel
Starkweather, Joseph K. Miller, Thomas Colahan.

1838. Mayor--Joshua Mills. President of the Council--Nicholas Dockstader.
Aldermen--Nicholas Dockstader, Alfred Hall, Benjamin Harrington.
Councilmen--1st Ward--George C. Dodge, Moses A. Eldridge, Herrick Childs.
2d Ward--Benjamin Andrews, Leonard Case, Henry Blair. 3d Ward--Melancthon
Barnett, Thomas Colahan, Tom Lemen.

1839. Mayor--Joshua Mills. President of the Council--John A. Foot.
Aldermen--Harvey Rice, Edward Baldwin, Richard Hilliard. Councilmen--1st
Ward--George Mendenhall, Timothy P. Spencer, Moses Ross. 2d Ward--John A.
Foot, Charles M. Giddings, Jefferson Thomas. 3d Ward--Thomas Bolton, Tom
Lemen, John A. Vincent.

1840. Mayor--Nicholas Dockstader. President of the Council--William
Milford. Aldermen--William Milford, William Lemen, Josiah A. Harris.
Councilmen--1st Ward--Ashbel W. Walworth, David Hersch, John Barr. 2d
Ward--David Allen, John A. Foot, Thomas M. Kelley. 3d Ward--Stephen Clary,
Charles Bardburn, John A. Vincent.

1841. Mayor--John W. Allen. President of the Council--Thomas Bolton.
Aldermen--William Milford, Thomas Bolton, Newton E. Crittenden.
Councilmen--1st Ward--Nelson Hayward, Herrick Childs, George B. Tibbets.
2d Ward--Moses Kelly, W. J. Warner, M. C. Younglove. 3d Ward--Philo
Scovill, Benj. Harrington, Miller M. Spangler.

1842. Mayor--Joshua Mills. President of the Council--Benjamin Harrington.
Aldermen--Nelson Hayward, William Smyth, Benjamin Harrington.
Councilmen--1st Ward--William D. Nott, Robert Bailey, Henry Morgan. 2d
Ward--George Mendenhall, George Witherell, Jefferson Thomas. 3d
Ward--William T. Goodwin, George Kirk, Levi Johnson.

1843. Mayor--Nelson Hayward. President of the Council--George A. Benedict.
Aldermen--William D. Nott, Samuel Cook, Samuel Starkweather.
Councilmen--1st Ward--Robert Bailey, John B. Wigman, James Church, Jr. 2d
Ward--Stephen Clary, Alanson H. Lacy, George A. Benedict. 3d Ward--William
T. Goodwin, John Wills, Alexander S. Cramer.

1844. Mayor--Samuel Starkweather. President of the Council--Melancthon
Barnett. Aldermen--Leander M. Hubby, Stephen Clary, William T. Goodwin.
Councilmen--1st Ward--Thomas Mell, George F. Marshall, E. St. John Bemis.
2d Ward--Charles Stetson, Jacob Lowman, John Outhwaite. 3d Ward--William
F. Allen, Melancthon Barnett, John F. Warner.

1845. Mayor--Samuel Starkweather. President of the Council--Flavel W.
Bingham. Aldermen--Charles W. Heard, George Witherell, L. O. Mathews.
Councilmen--1st Ward--Flavel W. Bingham, Peter Caul, Samuel C. Ives. 2d
Ward--James Gardner, Ellery G. Williams, David L. Wood. 3d Ward--Arthur
Hughes, John A. Wheeler, Orville Gurley.

1846. Mayor--George Hoadley. President of the Council--Leander M. Hubby.
Aldermen--Leander M. Hubby, John H. Gorham, Josiah A. Harris.
Councilmen--1st Ward--E. St. John Bemis. John F. Chamberlain, John Gill.
2d Ward--William Case, William Bingham, John A. Wheeler. 3d Ward--William
K. Adams Marshall Carson, Liakim L. Lyon.

1847. Mayor--Josiah A. Harris. President of the Council--Flavel W.
Bingham. Aldermen--Flavel W. Bingham, William Case, Pierre A. Mathivet.
Councilmen--1st Ward--David Clark Doan, Henry Everett, John Gill. 2d
Ward--John Erwin, Charles Hickox, Henry B. Payne. 3d Ward--Alexander
Seymour, Alexander S. Cramer, Orville Gurley.

1848. Mayor--Lorenzo A. Kelsey. President of the Council--Flavel W.
Bingham. Aldermen--Flavel W. Bingham, William Case, Alexander Seymour.
Councilmen--1st Ward--Richard Norton, John Gill, Charles M. Read. 2d
Ward--Henry B. Payne, Leander M. Hubby, Thomas C. Floyd. 3d Ward--Samuel
Starkweather, Robert Parks, William J. Gordon.

1849. Mayor--Flavel W. Bingham. President of the Council--William Case.
Aldermen--William Case, Alexander Seymour, John Gill. Councilmen--1st
Ward--David W. Cross, Richard Norton, Henry Everett. 2d Ward--Alexander
McIntosh, John G. Mack, James Calyer. 3d Ward--Arthur Hughes, Abner C.
Brownell Christopher Mollen.

1850. Mayor--William Case. President of the Council--Alexander Seymour.
Aldermen--Alexander Seymour, John Gill, Leander M. Hubby. Councilmen--1st
Ward--William Given, George Whitelaw, Buckley Stedman. 2d Ward--Alexander
McIntosh, William Bingham, Samuel Williamson. 3d Ward--Arthur Hughes,
Abner C. Brownell, Levi Johnson.

1851. Mayor--William Case. President of the Council--John Gill,
Aldermen--John Gill, Leander M. Hubby, Abner C. Brownell, Buckley Stedman.
Council-men--1st Ward--Jabez W. Fitch, George Whitelaw. 2d Ward--Alexander
McIntosh, Thomas C. Floyd. 3d Ward--Stoughton Bliss, Miller M. Spangler.
4th Ward--Marshall S. Castle, James B. Wilbur.

1853. Mayor--Abner C. Brownell. President of the Council--Leander M,
Hubby. Aldermen--John B. Wigman, Leander M. Hubby, Basil L. Spangler,
Buckley Stedman. Councilmen--1st Ward--Henry Morgan, Aaron Merchant. 2d
Ward--William H. Shell, Robert B. Bailey. 3d Ward--Stoughton Bliss, John
B. Smith. 4th Ward--Admiral N. Gray, Henry Howe.

1853. Mayor--Abner C. Brownell. President of the Council--William H.
Shell. Trustees--1st Ward--John B, Wigman, George F. Marshall. 2d
Ward--William H. Shell, James Gardner. 3d Ward--William J. Gordon, Robert
Reilley. 4th Ward--Henry Everett, Richard C. Parsons.

1854. Abner C. Brownell. President of the Council--Richard C. Parsons.
Trustees--1st Ward--John B. Wigman, Charles Bradburn. 2d Ward--William H.
Sholl, James Gardner. 3d Ward--Christopher Mollen, Robert Reilley. 4th
Ward--Henry Everett, Richard C. Parsons. 5th Ward--Chauncey Tice, Mathew
S. Cotterell. 6th Ward--Bolivar Butts, John A. Bishop. 7th Ward--W. C. B.
Richardson, George W. Morrill. 8th Ward--A. C. Messenger, Charles W.
Palmer. 9th Ward--Wells Porter, Albert Powell. 10th Ward--Plimmon C.
Bennett, I. U. Masters. 11th Ward--Edward Russell, Frederick Sillbers.

1855. Mayor--William B. Castle. President of the Council--Charles
Bradburn. Trustees--1st Ward--Charles Bradburn, E. A. Brock. 2d
Ward--William H. Sholl, William T. Smith. 3d Ward--Christopher Mollen,
Thomas S. Paddock. 4th Ward--William H. Stanley, Rensselaer R. Horrick.
5th Ward--Chauncey Tice, Irad L. Beardsley. 6th Ward--Bolivar Butts, John
A. Bishop. 7th Ward--W. C. B. Richardson, George W. Morrill. 8th
Ward--Charles W. Palmer, S. W. Johnson. 9th Ward--Albert Powell, William A.
Wood. 10th Ward--I. U. Masters, Charles A. Crum. 11th Ward Edward Russell,
S. Buhrer.

1856. Mayor--William B. Castle. President of the Council--Charles W.
Palmer. Trustees--1st Ward--E. A. Brock, A. P. Winslow. 2d Ward--Wm. T.
Smith, O. M. Oviatt. 8d Ward--T. S. Paddock, C. Mollen. 4th Ward--R. R.
Herrick, C. S. Ransom. 5th Ward--C. Tice, F. T. Wallace. 6th Ward--J. A.
Bishop, Harvey Rice. 7th Ward--G. W. Morrill, E. S. Willard. 8th Ward--S.
W. Johnson, R. G. Hunt. 9th Ward--Sanford J. Lewis, Charles W. Palmer.
10th Ward--Charles A. Crum, I. U. Masters. 11th Ward--S. Buhrer, John
Kirkpatrick.

1857. Mayor--Samuel Starkweather. President of the Council--Reuben G.
Hunt. Trustees--1st Ward--A. P. Winslow, L. J. Rider. 2d Ward--O. M.
Oviatt, Charles D. Williams. 3d Ward--C. Mollen, Charles Patrick 4th
Ward--C. S. Ransom, R. R. Herrick. 5th Ward--F. T. Wallace, W. B. Rezner.
6th Ward--Harvey Rice, Jacob Mueller. 7th Ward--E. S. Willard, John A.
Weber. 8th Ward--R. G. Hunt, B. G. Sweet. 9th Ward--C. W. Palmer, J. M.
Coffinberry. 10th Ward--I. U. Masters, Charles A. Crum. 11th Ward--John
Kirkpatrick, Daniel Stephan.

1858. Mayor--Samuel Starkweather. President of the Council--James M.
Coffinberry. Trustees--1st Ward--L. J. Rider, George B. Senter. 2d
Ward--Chas. D. Williams, O. M. Oviatt. 3d Ward--Levi Johnson, Randall
Crawford. 4th Ward--R. R. Herrick, C. S. Ransom. 5th Ward--Wm. B. Rezner,
G. H. Detmer. 6th Ward--Jacob Mueller, L. D. Thayer. 7th Ward--J. A. Weber,
Thos. Thompson. 8th Ward--B. G. Sweet, Charles Winslow. 9th Ward--J. M.
Coffinberry, John N. Ford. 10th Ward--A. G. Hopkinson, I. U. Masters. 11th
Ward--Daniel Stephan, Alexander McLane.

1859. Mayor--George B. Senter. President of the Council--I. U. Masters.
Trustees--1st Ward--L. J. Rider, James Christian. 2d Ward--O. M. Oviatt,
Wm. H. Hayward. 3d Ward--Randall Crawford, Louis Heckman. 4th Ward--C. S.
Ransom, Isaac H. Marshall. 5th Ward--G. H. Detmer, Jacob Hovey. 6th
Ward--L. C. Thayer, Jared H. Clark. 7th Ward--Thos. Thompson, James R.
Worswick. 8th Ward--Charles Winslow, C. L. Russell. 9th Ward--John H.
Sargeant, E. H. Lewis. 10th Ward--I. U. Masters, A. G. Hopkinson. 11th
Ward--A. McLane, Thomas Dixon.

1860. Mayor--George B. Senter. President of the Council--I. U. Masters
Trustees--1st Ward--James Christian, Thomas Quayle. 2d Ward--W. H.
Hayward, M. Oviatt. 3d Ward--Louis Heckman, H. S. Stevens. 4th
Ward--I. H. Marshall, E. Thomas. 5th Ward--Jacob Hovey, W. B. Rezner. 6th
Ward--Jared H. Clark, C. J. Ballard. 7th. Ward--Jas. R. Worswick, E. S.
Willard. 8th Ward--C. L. Russell, J. Dwight Palmer. 9th Ward--E. H.
Lewis, Wm. Sabin. 10th Ward--A. G. Hopkinson, I. U. Masters. 11th
Ward--Thos. Dixon, Daniel Stephan.

1861. Mayor--Edward S. Flint. President of the Council--Henry S. Stevens.
Trustees--1st Ward--Thomas Quayle, J. J. Benton. 2d Ward--O. M. Oviatt,
T. N. Bond. 3d Ward--Henry S. Stevens, A. C. Keating. 4th Ward--E. Thomas,
Henry Blair. 5th Ward--W. B. Rezner, Joseph Sturges. 6th Ward--C. J.
Ballard, William Meyer. 7th Ward--E. S. Willard, P. M. Freese. 8th
Ward--J. Dwight Palmer, Solon Corning. 9th Ward--Wm. Sabin, A. Anthony.
10th Ward--I. U. Masters, Wm. Wellhouse. 11th Ward--J. Coonrad, Thos.
Dixon.

1862. Mayor--Edward S. Flint. President of the Council--I. U. Masters.
Trustees--1st Ward--J. J. Benton, C. C. Rogers. 2d Ward--T. N. Bond. A.
Roberts. 3d Ward--A. C. Keating, H. S. Stevens. 4th Ward--Henry Blair, E.
Thomas. 5th Ward--Joseph Sturges, N. P. Payne. 6th Ward--Wm. Meyer, Jno.
Huntington. 7th Ward--P. M. Freese, E. S. Willard. 8th Ward--Solon Corning,
J. Dwight Palmer. 9th Ward--A. Anthony, A. T. Van Tassel. 10th Ward--Wm.
Wellhouse, I. U. Masters. 11th Ward--Thos. Dixon, J. Coonrad.

1863. Mayor--Irvine U. Masters. President of the Council--H. S. Stevens.
Trustees--1st Ward--C. C. Rogers, Thos. Jones, Jr. 2d Ward--A. Roberts,
T. N. Bond. 3d Ward--H. S. Stevens, A. C. Keating. 4th Ward--E. Thomas,
Henry Blair. 5th Ward--N. P. Payne, Joseph Sturges. 6th Ward--John
Huntington, Geo. W. Gardner. 7th Ward--E. S. Willard, Peter Goldrick.
8th Ward--J. D. Palmer, Jos. Ransom. 9th Ward--A. T. Van Tassel, Percival
Upton. 10th Ward--H. N. Bissett, George Presley. 11th Ward--J. Coonrad,
Stephen Buhrer.

1864. Mayor--Irvine U. Masters. Mayor--George B. Senter, President of the
Council--Thomas Jones, Jr. Trustees--1st Ward--Thomas Jones, Jr., Chas. C.
Rogers. 2d Ward--T. N. Bond, Ansel Roberts. 3d Ward--A. C. Keating, Amos
Townsend. 4th Ward--Henry Blair, David A. Dangler. 5th Ward--Joseph
Sturges, B. P. Bowers. 6th Ward--George W. Gardner, John Huntington. 7th
Ward--Peter Goldrick, E. S. Willard. 8th Ward--Joseph Randerson, Wm. H.
Truscott. 9th Ward--Percival Upton, John Martin. 10th Ward--George
Presley, Michael Crapser. 11th Ward--Stephen Buhrer, Edward Russell.

1865. Mayor--Herman M. Chapin. President of the Council--Thomas Jones, Jr.
Trustees--1st Ward--Charles C. Rogers, Thomas Jones, Jr. 2d Ward--Ansel
Roberts, Henry K. Raynolds. 3d Ward--Amos Townsend, Randall Crawford. 4th
Ward--David A Dangler, Simson Thorman. 5th Ward--B. P. Bower, Joseph
Sturges. 6th Ward--John Huntington, George W. Calkins. 7th Ward--E. S.
Willard, Charles Pettingill. 8th Ward--William H. Truscott, Joseph
Randerson. 9th Ward--John Martin, Fredrick W. Pelton. 10th Ward--John J.
Weideman, George Presley. 11th Ward--Edward Russell, Stephen Buhrer.

1866. Mayor--Herman M. Chapin. President of the Council--P. W. Pelton.
Trustees--1st Ward--Thos. Jones, Jr., Charles C. Rogers. 2d Ward--H. K.
Raynolds, Ansel Roberts. 3d Ward--Randall Crawford, Amos Townsend. 4th
Ward--Simson Thorman, Maurice H. Clark. 5th Ward--Joseph Sturges, Wm.
Heisley. 6th Ward--George W. Calkins, John Huntington. 7th Ward--Charles
B. Pettingill, Christopher Weigel. 8th Ward--Joseph Randerson, William H.
Trascott. 9th Ward--Frederick W. Pelton, John Martin. 10th Ward--George
Presley, Reuben H. Becker. 11th Ward--Stephen Buhrer, Robert Larnder.

1867. Mayor--Stephen Buhrer. President of the Council--Amos Townsend.
Trustees--1st Ward--Charles C. Rogers, Silas Merchant. 2d Ward--Ansel
Roberts, Peter Diemer. 3d Ward--Amos Townsend, J. C. Shields. 4th
Ward--Maurice B. Clark, Proctor Thayer. 5th Ward--William Heisley, Thomas
Purcell. 6th Ward--John Huntington, Edward Hart. 7th Ward--Christopher
Weigel, Charles B. Pettingill. 8th Ward--William H. Truscott, Joseph
Houstain. 9th Ward--John Martin, F. W. Pelton. 10th Ward--Reuben H. Becker,
William Wellhouse. 11th Ward--Robert Larnder, Charles E. Gehring.

1868. Mayor--Stephen Buhrer. President of the Council--Amos Townsend.
Trustees--1st Ward--Silas Merchant, C. C. Rogers. 2d Ward--Peter Diemer, H.
G. Cleveland. 3d Ward--J. C. Shields, Amos Townsend. 4th Ward--Proctor
Thayer, Maurice B. Clark. 5th Ward--Thos. Purcell, Nathan P. Payne. 6th
Ward--Edwin Hart, John Huntington. 7th Ward--Charles B. Pettingill, George
Angell. 8th Ward--Joseph Houstain, Patrick Carr. 9th Ward--F. W. Pelton,
John Martin. 10th Ward--William Wellhouse, John J. Weideman 11th
Ward--Charles E. Gehring, George L. Hurtnell. 13th Ward--E. C. Gaeckley,
Benj. R. Beavis. 13th Ward--George Rettberg, Major Collins. 14th Ward--John
Jokus, A. E. Massey. 15th Ward--B. Lied, John A. Ensign.

1869. Mayor--Stephen Buhrer. President of the Council--Amos Townsend.
Trustee--1st Ward--C. C. Rogers, Silas Merchant. 2d Ward--H. G. Cleveland,
Peter Diemer. 3d Ward--Amos Townsend, Charles Coates. 4th Ward--R. R.
Herrick, Proctor Thayer. 5th Ward--Nathan P. Payne, Thomas Purcell. 6th
Ward--John Huntington, W. P. Horton. 7th Ward--George Angell, Horace
Fuller. 8th Ward--Patrick Carr, Patrick Smith. 9th Ward--John Martin, L.
L. M. Coe. 10th Ward--John J. Weideman, Wm. Wellhouse. 11th Ward--George L.
Hartnell, John G. Vetter. 12th Ward--Benj. R. Beavis, Eugene C. Gaeckley.
13th Ward--Major Collins, J. H. Slosson. 14th Ward--A. E. Massey, A. A.
Jewett, 15th Ward--John A. Ensign, C. W. Coates.

[Illustration: With Respect, Levi Johnson]




Trade and Commerce.



The commercial history of the early years of Cleveland does not differ
from that of most western settlements. When the white population numbered
from a few dozen to a few hundred, it is difficult to define what was
commerce and what mere barter for individual accommodation. Every man did
a little trading on his own account. The carpenter, the tailor, the judge
and the preacher were alike ready to vary their customary occupations by a
dicker whenever an opportunity offered. The craftsman purchased what
necessities or comforts he needed, and paid in the work of his hands. The
possessor of one article of daily use traded his superfluity for another
article, and for all articles furs and skins were legal tender, as they
could be sent east and converted into money or merchandise.

The first strictly commercial transactions were with the Indians. They
needed powder and lead for hunting, blankets for their comfort, beads for
the adornment of the squaws, and the two great luxuries--or
necessities--of frontier life, salt and whisky. In payment for these they
brought game, to supply the settlers with fresh provisions, and skins, the
currency of the West. In course of time the opening up of the country
beyond made a new market for the salt, whisky, and salt provisions
collected at Cleveland, and with these staples went occasionally a few
articles of eastern made goods for the use of the frontiermen's wives. As
the country became more settled the commercial importance of Cleveland
increased, until it divided with Detroit and Buffalo the honors and
profits of the commerce of the lakes.

Cleveland was settled in 1796. PFiveyears later the first commercial
movement was made by the erection of a distillery for the purpose of
providing an adequate supply of the basis of early western
commerce--whisky. The trade operations were of a promiscuous and desultory
character until about the year 1810, when a log warehouse was built by
Major Carter, on the bank of the lake, between Meadow and Spring streets,
and this was speedily followed by another, built by Elias and Harvey
Murray, which became the centre of business and gossip for the village
and the country round about. Of course a full supply of the great
staple--whisky--was kept.

In 1813 Cleveland became a lively and prosperous place, it having been
chosen as a depot of supplies and rendezvous for troops engaged in the
war. A good business was done in selling to the army, in exchanging with
the quartermasters, and in transporting troops and supplies. This was a
flourishing time for Cleveland, and its inhabitants in many cases made
small fortunes, realizing several hundred dollars in hard cash.

The close of the war brought the usual reaction, and the commerce of the
embryo city lagged, but gradually improved under the stimulus of
increasing emigration to the West. In 1816 it had reached such a point
that a bank was deemed necessary to the proper transaction of trade, and
the Commercial Bank of Lake Erie was opened, with Leonard Case as
president. It had the misfortune of being born too soon, and its life
consequently was not long. At the same time, the projectors of the bank
were not wholly without warrant for their anticipations of success, for
Cleveland was doing a good business and owned an extensive lake marine of
seven craft, measuring in the aggregate four hundred and thirty tons.

The harbor facilities of Cleveland at this time were very few. The river
mouth, to the westward of the present entrance, was frequently choked with
sand, and sometimes to such an extent that persons could cross dry shod.
Vessels of any considerable size--and a size then called "considerable"
would now be held in very slight estimation--made no attempt to enter the
river, but came to anchor outside, and were unloaded by lighters. In 1807
a scheme was set on foot for opening a line of communication for trading
purposes between Lake Erie and the Ohio river, by cleaning out the
channels of the Cuyahoga and Tuscarawas riverspretentiousssage of boats
and batteaux; a wagon road, seven miles long, from Old Portage to New
Portage, making the connection between the two rivers. It was supposed
that twelve thousand dollars would suffice for the purpose, and the
Legislature authorized a lottery by which the funds were to be raised.
There were to be twelve thousand eight hundred tickets at five dollars
each, with prizes aggregating sixty-four thousand dollars, from which a
deduction of twelve and a half per cent, was to be made. The drawing never
came off, and the money paid for the tickets was refunded some years
afterwards, without interest. In 1816 an attempt was made to improve the
entrance to the harbor by means of a pier into the lake. A company was
organized for the purpose, a charter obtained from the Legislature, and
something done towards building the pier, but the storms soon washed the
slight construction away.

Ten years later, the work of improving the harbor under the direction of
the National Government was begun, the first appropriation being of five
thousand dollars. A new channel was cut, piers commenced, and the work
entered upon which has been carried on with varying energy to the present
time. The opening of the river gave considerable impetus to the commerce
of the place, which was then carried on wholly by lake.

The opening of the Ohio canal was the first grand starting point in the
commercial history of Cleveland. It brought into connection with the lake
highway to market a rich country rapidly filling up with industrious
settlers, and the products of dairies, grain farms, and grazing lands were
brought in great quantity to Cleveland, where they were exchanged for New
York State salt, lake fish, and eastern merchandise. Two years after the
opening of the canal, which was completed in 1832, the receipts amounted
to over half a million bushels of wheat, a hundred thousand barrels of
flour, a million pounds of butter and nearly seventy thousand pounds of
cheese, with other articles in proportion. Business went on increasing
with great rapidity; every one was getting rich, in pocket or on paper,
and Cleveland was racing with its then rival, but now a part of itself,
Ohio City, for the distinction of being the great commercial centre of the
West. At that moment, in the year 1837, the great crash came and business
of all kinds was paralyzed.

Cleveland was one of the first places in the West to recover. Its basis
was good, and as the interior of Ohio became more peopled the trade of the
canal increased and, of course, Cleveland was so much the more benefited.
The opening of the Pennsylvania and Ohio canal, in 1841, opened
communication with Pittsburgh and added a trade in iron, nails, and glass
to the other branches of business. In 1844 the commerce of Cleveland by
lake had reached an aggregate of twenty millions for the year.

The opening of the railroad to Columbus in 1851 marked the second step in
the business history of the city. The canals brought business from the
south-east, and by a slow and uncertain route from Cincinnati. The
completion of the railroad gave direct and speedy connection with
Cincinnati, with the rich valleys of the Miami, and with lands hitherto
undeveloped or seeking other markets for their produce. Other railroads
were rapidly built, and developed new avenues of commerce and new sources
of wealth. The population increased rapidly. The streets were extended and
lined with new buildings. Additional stores were opened and all
departments felt the rush of new life. The lake commerce of the port, in
spite of the business drawn off by competing railroads, increased in 1853
to a total of eighty-seven million dollars, more than four times the
amount reached nine years before, after the canal System had been
completed and was in full operation. The grain trade which once was the
foundation of the commerce of the city, had fallen away owing the gradual
removal of the wheat producing territory westward. It was asserted, and
generally believed, that the canals had done all they could for the
prosperity of the city, and that unless something new turned up for its
benefit, Cleveland would remain at a stand-still, or increase only by very
slow degrees. Business was extremely dull, the prospect looked dubious,
many business men moved to other cities and more were preparing to follow.
Just then two things occurred. The war broke out, and the Atlantic and
Great Western railway was extended to Cleveland. The latter event opened a
new market for trade in north-western Pennsylvania, and soon after, by
sending a large proportion of the product of the oil regions to this point
for refining or shipment, built up an immense and lucrative department of
manufacture and commerce, whose effect was felt in all classes of
business. The war stimulated manufactures, and by a sudden bound Cleveland
set out on the path of permanent prosperity long pointed out by some
far-seeing men, but until the time referred to strangely neglected. In a
very few years the population more than doubled the existing facilities
for business were found totally inadequate for the suddenly increased
demands, and the most strenuous exertions of the builders failed to meet
the call for new stores. Manufactory after manufactory came into
existence, and with each there was an influx of population and a
consequent increase in all departments of trade. And the work still goes
on, every manufactory started creating some need hitherto unfelt, and thus
rendering other manufactories necessary to supply the need.

A careful census of population and business, made towards the close of
1868, in compliance with a request from one department of the Government
at Washington, showed that the population had increased to ninety
thousand; the value of real estate was valued at fifty millions of
dollars, and of personal property at thirty millions. The commerce,
including receipts and shipments by lake, canal, and railroad, was taken
at eight hundred and sixty-five millions of dollars; the value of
manufactures for the year at nearly fifty millions; the lake arrivals and
clearances at ten thousand, with an aggregate tonnage of over three
millions of tons; and the number of vessels and canal boats owned here at
nearly four hundred. Seventy years ago Major Carter resided here in lonely
state with his family, being the only white family in the limits of what
is now the city of Cleveland. The cash value of the entire trade of
Cleveland at that time would not pay a very cheap clerk's salary
now-a-days.




Levi Johnson



The biography of Levi Johnson is, in effect, the history of Cleveland, and
a sketch of the more active period of his life involves the narrative of
life in Cleveland during the earlier years of its existence. It is,
therefore, of more than ordinary interest.

Mr. Johnson is a native of Herkimer county, New York, having been born in
that county April 25th, 1786. He commenced life in a time and place that
admitted of no idlers, young or old, and in his tenth year it was his
weekly task to make and dip out a barrel of potash, he being too young to
be employed with the others in wood-chopping. Until his fourteenth year he
lived with an uncle, working on a farm, and laboring hard. At that age he
determined to be a carpenter and joiner, and entered the shop of Ephraim
Derrick, with whom he remained four years. At eighteen, he changed masters
and worked with Laflet Remington, and at twenty-one changed again to
Stephen Remington, with whom he worked at barn building one year.

It was whilst he was with Stephen Remington that an event occurred that
shaped Levi Johnson's future life. Considerable interest had been excited
in regard to Ohio, towards which emigrants were frequently seen taking
their way. A brother of Stephen Remington was sent west to spy out the
land and report on its desirableness as a home. This committee of one, on
lands, came to Newburgh, and was so strongly impressed with the advantages
of the place from which Cleveland was afterwards said to be but six miles
distant, that he allowed his imagination to run away with his veracity. He
wrote back that he had struck the richest country in the world; that the
soil was marvelously fertile, and that corn grew so tall and strong that
the raccoons ran up the stems and lodged on the ears out of the way of the
dogs. Great was the excitement in Herkimer county when this report was
received. Such wonderful growth of corn was never known in York State, but
Ohio was a _terra incognita_, and Munchausen himself would have had a
chance of being believed had he located his adventures in what was then
the Far West. Stephen Remington quit barn-building, shut up his shop,
packed up his tools and started in the Fall of 1807 for the new Eden, on
Lake Erie. In the succeeding Spring, Johnson followed in his footsteps as
far as East Bloomfield, near Canandaigua, where he worked during that
Summer, building a meeting-house.

In the Fall of 1808, he shouldered his pack and set out on foot for the
West. At Buffalo he found work and wintered there until February, when his
uncle came along, bound also for the land of promise. There was room in
the sleigh for Levi, and he was not loth to avail himself of the
opportunity of making his journey quicker and easier than on foot. On the
10th of March, 1809, the sleigh and its load entered Cleveland.

By that time it had come to be hard sledding, so the sleigh was abandoned
and the two travelers, determining to put farther west, mounted the horses
and continued their journey to Huron county. Here they fell in with Judge
Wright and Ruggles, who were surveying the Fire Lands. They wanted a
saw-mill, and Johnson's uncle contracted to build one at the town of
Jessup, now known as Wakeman. Levi turned back to Cleveland, and was
fortunate in finding a home in the family of Judge Walworth. The Judge
wanted an office built, and Johnson undertook to make it. Hitherto, all
the houses were of logs; but the Judge, having a carpenter boarding in his
family, aspired to something more pretentions. The building was to be
frame. At that time Euclid was a flourishing settlement, and rejoiced in
that important feature--a saw-mill. The lumber was brought from Euclid,
the frame set up on Superior street, about where the American House now
stands, and every day the gossips of the little settlement gathered to
watch and discuss the progress of the first frame building in Cleveland.
The work occupied forty days, and when it was completed, there was great
pride in this new feature of Cleveland architecture. The erection of the
first frame building marked the commencement of a new era.

That job done, Levi turned back to Huron to fulfill the contract made by
his uncle for the erection of a saw-mill. This was a heavy job for so
small a force, and between three and four months were spent in it.
Slinging his kit of tools on his back, he then turned once more towards
Cleveland, in which he settled down for the remainder of his life, the
next two or three years being spent in building houses and barns in
Cleveland, and in the more flourishing village of Newburgh. A saw-mill
also was put up on Tinker's creek.

When Mr. Johnson was building the saw-mill at Jessup, he fell in with a
young lady, Miss Montier, who enjoyed the distinction of being the first
white girl that landed in Huron, where she lived with a family named
Hawley. The young carpenter fell in love with the only pretty girl to be
found in the neighborhood, and she was not unkindly disposed to the young
man. When he returned to Cleveland she was induced to come also, and lived
with Judge Walworth, at that time the great landed owner, and consequently
prominent man in the thriving village of sixty inhabitants. In 1811, the
couple were married.

In the Fall of 1812, Johnson made a contract with the County
Commissioners, Messrs. Wright, Ruggles and Miles, to build a Court House
and Jail on the Public Square, opposite where the First Presbyterian
Church now stands. The material was to be logs, laid end-wise for greater
security. The work was pushed forward rapidly the next Summer, and towards
noon of September 12th, Johnson and his men were just putting the
finishing touches to the building, when they were startled by what seemed
the roar of distant thunder. On looking out of the windows not a cloud
could be seen in the sky, but the reverberations continued, and at once
the conviction that the noise was of cannons seized them. Throwing down
their tools they ran to the bank of the lake, where nearly all the
villagers at home to the number of about thirty, were already gathered,
stretching their eyes to the westward, whence the sounds came. Now the
reports of the cannon could be plainly distinguished. They knew that
Perry's fleet had passed up the lake, and that, consequently, a battle
could be at any moment expected. The louder reports told when the
Americans fired, for their guns were of heavier caliber than the English.
At last the firing ceased for a while. Then three loud reports, evidently
American, were heard, and the little crowd, convinced that their side had
won, gave three hearty cheers for Perry.

About two days afterwards, Johnson and a man named Rumidge picked up a
large flat-boat that had been built by General Jessup for the conveyance
of troops, and then abandoned. Each of the finders purchased a hundred
bushels of potatoes, took them to the army at Put-in-Bay, quadrupling the
money invested, and giving Johnson his first financial start in life.

As General Jessup needed the boat to transfer his troops to Malden, he
retained it, taking Rumidge also into service, and leaving Johnson to
return to Cleveland on the gunboat Somers, of which he was made pilot for
the voyage. Shortly afterwards Rumidge returned with the boat and brought
news that the American forces had fought a battle with the British at
Moravian Town. Johnson resumed command of the flat-boat, and with his
associate freighted it with supplies for the army at Detroit. The
speculation was successful, and Johnson engaged with the quartermaster of
the post to bring a cargo of clothing from Cleveland to Detroit. The
season was far advanced, and the voyage was cut short by the ice in the
upper part of the lake, so that the boat was headed for Huron, where the
cargo was landed and the freight for that distance paid.

Johnson was now a man of means, the successful transactions with the army
having given him more money than he had ever possessed at one time before.
His voyages and trading success had given him a taste for similar
occupations in the future, and his first step was to build a vessel for
himself. His first essay in ship-building was something novel. The keel
was laid for a ship of thirty-five tons, to be named the Pilot. There was
no iron for spikes, but wooden pins supplied their place. Other devices of
similar primitiveness were resorted to in the course of the work, and at
last she was finished. Now came the question of launching, and it was not
lightly to be answered. Modern builders sometimes meet with a difficulty
owing to the ship sticking on the "ways," but this early ship-builder of
Cleveland had a greater obstacle than this to overcome. He had built his
ship with very slight reference to the lake on which she was to float. For
convenience in getting timber, and other reasons, he had made his
ship-yard about half a mile from the water, near where St. Paul's Church
now stands on Euclid avenue, and the greasing of the "ways" and knocking
out of the blocks would not ensure a successful launch. Here was a
dilemma. Johnson pondered and then resolved. An appeal for aid was
promptly responded to. The farmers from Euclid and Newburgh came in with
twenty-eight yoke of cattle. The ship was hoisted on wheels and drawn in
triumph down the main street to the foot of Superior street hill, where
she was launched into the river amid the cheers of the assembled crowd.

This was not the first of Cleveland ship-building. About the year 1808,
Major Carter built the Zephyr, used in bringing goods, salt, &c., from
Buffalo. After good service she was laid up in a creek, a little below
Black Rock, where she was found by the British during the war and burned.
In 1810, the firm of Bixby & Murray built the Ohio, an important craft of
somewhere about sixty tons burden, the ship-yard being lower down the
river than the point from which Johnson's craft was subsequently
launched. Towards the close of the war she was laid up at Buffalo, when
the Government purchased her, cut her down, and converted her into a
pilot boat.

Whilst Johnson was building his vessel another was under construction on
the flats near the present location of the works of J. G. Hussey & Co. This
craft, the Lady of the Lake, about thirty tons, was built by Mr. Gaylord,
brother of the late Mrs. Leonard Case, and was sailed by Captain Stowe,
between Detroit and Buffalo.

Johnson was now literally embarked on a sea of success. His little ship
was in immediate requisition for army purposes. Cargoes of army stores
were transported between Buffalo and Detroit. Two loads of soldiers were
taken from Buffalo to the command of Major Camp, at Detroit, and on one of
the return voyages the guns left by Harrison at Maumee were taken to Erie.
The absconding of a quarter-master with the funds in his possession, among
other sums three hundred dollars belonging to Johnson, was a serious
drawback in the Summer's operations.

In the Spring of 1815, he recommenced carrying stores to Malden, reaching
there on his first trip March 20th, and on this voyage Irad Kelley was a
passenger. His second trip was made to Detroit. When passing Malden he was
hailed from the fort, but as he paid no attention, Major Putoff fired a
shot to make the vessel heave-to and leave the mail. The shot passed
through the foresail, but was not heeded. A second shot was fired and then
Johnson considered it prudent to heave-to and go ashore. He was sternly
questioned as to his inattention to the first orders to heave to, and
replied that being a young sailor he did not understand how to heave-to.
The officer told him to bring the mail ashore, but was met with a refusal,
it being contrary to instructions. Johnson started back to his craft and
was followed by a party of men from the fort, who manned a boat and gave
chase. Johnson, on boarding his vessel, spread sail, and being favored
with a good breeze, drew away from his pursuers and reached Detroit, where
he placed the mail in the post-office.

During the early part of the war, whilst Johnson was building his vessel
and in other ways kept busy, he was chosen coroner of Cuyahoga, being the
first to hold that office in the county. The sparseness of the population
rendered his duties light, the only inquest during his term of office
being over the body of an old man frozen to death in Euclid.

Samuel Baldwin was the first sheriff of the county, and Johnson was his
first deputy. His first experience in office was noticeable. Major
Jessup, in command of the troops, had brought to Cleveland from
Pittsburgh a Mr. Robins, who built from thirty to forty flat bottomed
boats, or batteaux, to be used in the transportation of the troops. The
Major ran short of funds and left a balance unpaid in the cost of
construction. Robins brought suit, and the Major, thinking the deputy
sheriff probably had some unpleasant business for him, studiously avoided
an interview with Johnson, and whenever they met by chance, pulled out
his pistols and warned Johnson to keep his distance. It so happened,
however, that no legal documents had been put in his hands for execution,
so that the Major was alarmed without cause.

But the groundless scare of the impecunious Major was a trifling affair
compared with the grand scare that overtook the whole people along the
lake in the autumn of 1812, at the time of Hull's surrender One day a
fleet of vessels was seen bearing down upon the coast. It was first
noticed in the vicinity of Huron by a woman. No sooner had she seen the
vessels bearing down towards the coast from the westward, than she rushed
into the house, emptied her feather bed and placed the tick on a horse as
a pack-saddle; then catching up one child before her and another behind,
she rode at the top of the animal's speed, thinking torture and death lay
behind her. Whenever she passed a house she raised an alarm, and at two
o'clock in the morning, more dead than alive with terror and fatigue, she
urged her jaded horse into the village of Cleveland, screaming at the top
of her voice, "The British and Indians are coming! The British and Indians
are coming!" Men slept lightly at that time, with their senses attent to
every sound of danger. The shrieks of the woman and the dreaded notice of
the approach of the merciless foe awoke the whole village and curdled the
blood of the villagers with horror. In that brief announcement, "The
British and Indians are coming," were concentrated possibilities of
frightful outrage, carnage and devastation. Wild with the terror of her
long and agonized night ride, the woman reiterated her piercing warning
again and again, filling the air with her shouts. A chorus of voices, from
the childish treble to the deep bass of the men, swelled the volume of
sound and added to the confusion and alarm. In a few minutes every house
was empty, and the entire population of the village swarmed around the
exhausted woman and heard her brief story, broken by gasps for breath and
by hysterical sobs. She insisted that a fleet was bearing down upon the
coast with the purpose of spreading carnage and devastation along the
whole lake frontier, that the vessels were crowded with British troops and
merciless savages, and that before long the musket bail, the torch and the
scalping knife would seek their victims among the inhabitants of
Cleveland.

At once all was hurry; the entire population prepared for speedy flight.
The greater part took to the woods in the direction of Euclid, the women
and children being guarded by some of the men, the others remaining to
reconnoiter, and, if possible, defend their property. As soon as the
non-fighting portion of the settlement was cared for, a picked force of
twenty-five men, contributed by Cleveland, Euclid and Newburgh, marched to
the mouth of the river and kept guard. It was evening when this little
army reached the river, and for hours after dark they patrolled the banks,
listening intently for the approach of the enemy. About two o'clock in the
morning a vessel was heard entering the river; the guards hastily gathered
for the attack, but before firing, hailed the supposed foe; an answering
hail was returned. "Who are you, and what have you on board?" shouted the
river guards. "An American vessel loaded with Hull's troops!" was the
reply. The astounded guard burst into laughter at their absurd scare. The
alarm spread with greater swiftness than the report of the facts, and for
days armed men came pouring into Cleveland from so far as Pittsburgh,
prepared to beat back the enemy that existed only in their imagination.

It was during this year that the Indian, Omic, was hung for participating
in the murder of the trappers, Gibbs and Wood, near Sandusky, in return
for the shelter given by the trappers to their two murderers. After
committing the murder, the Indians set fire to the hut, and the flames
became the instrument of their capture, for some boys returning from Cold
Creek Mill saw the fire, went to it, and discovered the partly consumed
bodies of the murdered men. The murderers were demanded from the Indians,
and Omic was captured by them and surrendered.

The prisoner was lodged in Major Carter's house until the trial which was
held under a cherry tree at the corner of Water and Superior streets.
Alfred Kelly prosecuted for the State, and Johnson was one of the jury.
Omic was convicted and sentenced to be hung. Johnson, who sat on the jury
that condemned him, was now employed to build the gallows to hang the
criminal. When Omic was led out by Sheriff Baldwin to execution, he
remarked that the gallows was too high. He then called for whisky and
drank half a pint, which loosened his tongue, and he talked rapidly and
incoherently, threatening to return in two days and wreak his revenge on
all the pale-faces. More liquor was given him, and he asked for more, but
Judge Walworth denounced the giving him more, that he might die drunk, as
an outrage, and his supply of liquor was therefore stopped.

Time being up, Sheriff Baldwin was about to cut the drop-rope, when he
saw that the condemned man had clutched the rope over his head to save
his neck from being broken. The Sheriff dismounted from his horse,
climbed up the gallows and tied the prisoner's hands more firmly behind
his back. The gallows was braced, and Omic contrived to clutch one of
the braces with his hands, fastened behind his back as they were, as he
fell when the drop-rope was cut. He hung in that position for some time,
until his strength gave way and he swung off. When he had hung
sufficiently long, the by-standers drew him to the cross-beam of the
gallows, when the rope broke and the body of the wretched murderer fell
into his open grave beneath.

In the same year Mr. Johnson was path-master of Cleveland, and he retains
in his possession the list of names of those who did work on the roads in
that year, armed with good and sufficient shovels according to law.

Mr. Johnson's success as a ship-builder encouraged him to persevere in
that business. In the autumn of 1815, he laid down the lines of the
schooner Neptune, sixty-five tons burden, not far below the neighborhood
of the Central market. In the following Spring she was launched, and run
on Lake Erie, her first trip being to Buffalo, whence she returned with a
cargo of merchandise for Jonathan Williamson, of Detroit. In the Fall of
that year a half interest in the Neptune was sold to Richard H. Blinn,
Seth Doan, and Dr. Long. In 1817, she made a trip to Mackinac, for the
American Fur Company, and remained in that trade until the Fall of 1819.

In the Summer of 1818, Major Edwards, Paymaster Smith, and another army
officer came to Mackinac on the Tiger, and engaged Mr. Johnson to take
them to Green Bay, agreeing to pay him three hundred dollars for the trip.
The same vessel, under Johnson's command, took the first load of troops
from Green Bay to Chicago, after the massacre, Major Whistler engaging the
ship for the purpose.

In 1824, Johnson left the Neptune, and in company with Turhooven &
Brothers, built the steamer Enterprise, about two hundred and twenty
tons burden. This was the first steam vessel built in Cleveland, and her
hull was made near the site of the Winslow warehouse. The engine, of
sixty to seventy horse power, was brought from Pittsburgh. Johnson ran
her between Buffalo and Detroit until 1828, when hard times coming on
and business threatening to be unprofitable, he sold his interest in
her, and left the lakes. In company with Goodman and Wilkeson, he built
the Commodore, on the Chagrin river, in the year 1830, and that closed
his ship-building career.

By this time he had accumulated about thirty thousand dollars, a
respectable fortune in those days, with which he invested largely in real
estate, and waited the course of events to make his investments
profitable.

In 1831, he contracted with the Government officers to build the
light-house on Water street. In 1836, he built a light-house at Sandusky.
In the following year he constructed seven hundred feet of the stone pier
on the east side of the Cuyahoga river mouth. The first thing done in the
latter work was the driving of spiles. Mr. Johnson became dissatisfied
with the old system of driving spiles by horse-power, and purchased a
steam engine for four hundred dollars. Making a large wooden wheel he
rigged it after the style of the present spile-drivers, and in the course
of two or three weeks, had the satisfaction of seeing the spiles driven
with greatly increased speed and effect by steam-power.

About 1839, he took his new spile-driver to Maumee Bay and drove about
nine hundred feet of spiling around Turtle Island, filling the enclosed
space with earth to the height of three feet, to protect the light-house.
In 1840, he built the Saginaw light-house, sixty-five feet high, with the
adjoining dwelling. In 1842-3, he built the light-house on the Western
Sister Island, at the west end of Lake Erie. In 1847, he completed his
light-house work by building the Portage River light-house.

Besides his light-house building, Mr. Johnson erected in 1842 his stone
residence on Water street, and in 1845, the Johnson House hotel on
Superior street. The stone for the former was brought from Kingston,
Canada West. In 1853, he built the Johnson Block, on Bank street, and in
1858, he put up the Marine Block at the mouth of the river. This completed
his active work.

Since 1858, Mr. Johnson's sole occupation has been the care of his
property and occasional speculations in real estate. By a long life of
activity and prudence, and by the steady rise in real estate, he is now
possessed of personal and landed property to the value of about six
hundred thousand dollars, having come to the city with no other capital
than his kit of tools, a strong arm, and an energetic purpose. Though
eighty-three years of age, his health is good, his memory remarkably
active, and all his faculties unimpaired. He has two sons and one daughter
yet living, having lost two children. He has had nine grandchildren, and
five great-grandchildren.




Noble H. Merwin.



In classifying the early commercial men of Cleveland, the name of Noble H.
Merwin is justly entitled to stand among the first on the list. In fact he
was the founder and father of her commerce, and a man not only noble in
name, but noble in character.

He was born in New Milford, Ct., in 1782, received a good common school
education, and married Minerva Buckingham, of that town. Soon after the
war of 1812, he went to Georgia and there engaged in mercantile pursuits,
having established a store at Savannah and also at Milledgeville. He came
to Cleveland in 1815. His family rejoined him at Cleveland in February,
1816. In coming from Georgia they crossed the Alleghanies, and were six
weeks in accomplishing the journey, having traveled all the way in wagons.
The two elder children were born at New Milford, the other four at
Cleveland. The oldest son, George B. Merwin, of Rockport, is now the only
surviving member of the family.

After the family arrived at Cleveland, Mr. Merwin engaged in keeping a
public house or tavern, as it was then designated, on the corner of
Superior street and Vineyard lane, and about the same time established a
warehouse at the foot of Superior street and commenced his career in the
commerce of the lakes. He built the schooner Minerva, which was the first
vessel registered at Washington, from the District of Cuyahoga, under the
U. S. Revenue Laws. For many years Mr. Merwin, under contracts with the
Government, furnished the supplies required at the U. S. Garrisons on the
western frontiers, at Fort Gratiot, Mackinaw, Sault St. Marie, Green Bay
and Chicago, as well as the Hudson Bay Company at the Sault St. Marie.

In a commercial point of view his business became extensive for those
times, and he enjoyed the entire confidence of the Government and of
business men generally throughout the lake country. He succeeded in
accumulating a handsome fortune, which consisted mostly in vessel stocks
and in lands. He owned a large breadth of lands, extending from the south
side of Superior street to the river, which, since his time, has become
exceedingly valuable.

But owing mainly to over-work in the various departments of his
increasing business, while he was yet in the noon of manhood, his
health became seriously impaired, and with a view to recruit it he
sailed for the West Indies in 1829, and on the 3d day of November, of
that year, died of consumption, at the Island of St. Thomas, in the 47th
year of his age. He was a gentleman of fine personal appearance,
measuring six feet and four inches in height, erect and well
proportioned. In a word, he was a man of heart, and of generous
impulses, honest, frank and cordial. In the circle in winch he moved, he
was the friend of everybody and everybody was his friend.




John Blair.



The race of men who remember Cleveland in the day of its small beginnings,
is fast passing away. Of those who were residents of the little village on
the Cuyahoga fifty years ago, only about half a dozen now live in the
flourishing city that occupies its site and inherits its name. One of
these is John Blair, well known to all the Clevelanders of ante-railroad
days, but who is probably a mere name to a large proportion of those who
have crowded into the city of late years. Mr. Blair is one of the few
remaining links that connect the rude village in the forest with the
modern Forest City.

John Blair was born in Maryland on the 18th of December, 1793. His early
years were spent in farming, but at the age of twenty-three he dropped the
hoe and turned his back to the plow, resolving to come west and seek his
fortune. From the time that he shook from his feet the dirt of the
Maryland farm, he says, he has never done a whole day's work, at one time,
at manual labor.

In 1819, he reached Cleveland, then an insignificant village of about a
hundred and fifty inhabitants, who dwelt mostly in log houses, grouped at
the foot of Superior street. At the corner of Water street and what is now
Union lane, stood the pioneer hotel of Cleveland, the tavern of Major
Carter, where good accommodations for man and beast were always to be
found. The young Maryland adventurer was not overburdened with wealth when
he landed in his future home, his entire cash capital being three dollars.
But it was no discredit in those days to be poor, and three dollars was a
fine capital to start business upon. In fact sonic of the then "old
settlers," would have been glad to possess so much capital in ready money
as a reserve fund.

But even in those days of primitive simplicity, three dollars would not
support a man for any great length of time if there were no other sources
of supply. Mr. Blair recognized the fact that no time must be wasted, and
at once turned his attention to a chance for speculation. An opportunity
immediately offered itself. An old Quaker, with speculation in his eye,
entered Cleveland with two hundred and fifty fat hogs, expecting to find a
good market. In this he was mistaken, and as hogs on foot were expensive
to hold over for a better market, he determined to convert them into salt
pork. Mr. Blair offered to turn pork-packer for a proper consideration;
the offer was accepted, and this was Mr. Blair's first step in business.

Pork-packing, as a steady business, offered but little inducement, so Mr.
Blair decided on establishing himself on the river as produce dealer and
commission merchant. The capital required was small, and the work not
exhaustive, for the facilities for shipping were slight and the amount to
be shipped small; warehouses were of the most modest dimensions, and
docks existed only in imagination. When the shipping merchant had a
consignment to put on board one of the diminutive vessels that at
intervals found their way into the port, the stuff was put on a flat boat
and poled or rowed to the vessel's side, Business was conducted in a very
leisurely manner, there being no occasion for hurry, and everybody
concerned being willing to make the most of what little business there
was. The slow moving Pennsylvania Dutch who had formed settlements in
northeastern Ohio, and drove their wide wheeled wagons along the
sometimes seemingly bottomless roads to Cleveland, plowed through the mud
on the river bank in search of "de John Blair vat kips de white fishes,"
and after much chaffer, unloaded the flour and wheat from their wagons,
and loaded up with fish and salt, sometimes giving three barrels of flour
for one barrel of salt.

In 1827, the Ohio Canal was partially opened to Cleveland, and a
revolution in trade was effected. The interior of the State was soon
brought into communication with the enterprising merchants on Lake Erie
and the Ohio river. Mr. Blair was prompt to avail himself of the
opportunity to increase his trade. He built the first canal boat
constructed in Cleveland, and launched her in 1828, near the site of the
present Stone Mill, amid the plaudits of all the people of the village,
who had turned out to witness the launching. As soon as the craft settled
herself proudly on the bosom of the canal, Mr. Blair invited the
spectators of the launch to come on board, and, with a good team of horses
for motive power, the party were treated to an excursion as far as Eight
Mile Lock and return, the whole day being consumed in the journey.
Subsequently Mr. Blair became interested, with others, in a line of twelve
boats, employing nearly one hundred horses to work them.

From this time Cleveland continued to grow and prosper. The products of
the interior were brought in a steadily increasing stream to Cleveland by
the canal, and shipped to Detroit, then the great mart of the western
lakes. A strong tide of emigration had set towards Northern Michigan, and
those seeking homes there had to be fed mainly by Ohio produce, for which
Michigan fish and furs were given in exchange. But the opening of the
Erie Canal placed a new market within reach, and Mr. Blair was among the
first to take Ohio flour to New York, selling it there at fourteen
dollars the barrel.

In 1845, Mr. Blair, then in the prime of his vigor, being but fifty-two
years old, resolved to quit a business in which he had been uniformly
successful, and spend the remainder of his life in enjoying what he had
acquired by diligence and enterprise. He was then the oldest merchant in
the city, having been in business over a quarter of a century. For the
past twenty-four years he has taken life easy, which he has been able to
do from the sensible step he adopted of quitting active business before it
wore him out. At the age of seventy-five he is still hale, hearty and
vigorous, looking younger than his actual years, and possessing that great
desideratum, a sound mind in a sound body.




Philo Scovill.



Familiar as is the name of Philo Scovill, but few of our citizens are
aware that he was one of Cleveland's earliest merchants. It appears that
circumstances, not altogether the choice of Mr. Scovill, induced him to
come to Cleveland with a stock of drugs and groceries. His father was a
millwright, and had brought up his son to the use of tools. He had no
taste for his new calling, and so worked out of the store-keeping as
speedily as possible, and commenced the erection of dwellings and stores
in the then new country, being only second in the trade here to Levi
Johnson. He continued in the building business until 1826, when he erected
the Franklin House, on Superior street, on the next lot but one to the
site of the Johnson House. Mr. Scovill at once became the landlord, and
continued as such for twenty-three years, excepting an interval of a five
years' lease.

About 1849, he left the hotel business to attend to his real estate
interests. He was successful in his hotel business; and from time to time
invested his surplus capital in lands adjacent to the city, which, within
the last few years have become exceedingly valuable. Streets have been
laid out upon his property, and inducements offered to settlers that
insured a ready sale, and materially aided the growth of the city.

Mr. Scovill, as a man, has enjoyed the confidence of his fellow citizens
to an unusual degree. He was hardworking, resolute, and exactly fitted by
nature for the pioneer life of his choice, a life that, though toilsome,
has left him still hale and vigorous, with the exception of the fruits of
overwork, and perhaps exposure, in the form of rheumatism.

Mr. Scovill was born in Salisbury, Ct., November 30, 1791. He lived at
that place until he was nine years of age, when his father moved to
Cornwall, in the same county; thence to Shenango county, and from thence
to Seneca county, N. Y. Here he lived on the banks of Seneca Lake nine
years. After that he lived in Buffalo one year, from which point he came
to Cleveland, as before stated.

Mr. Scovill was married February 16, 1819, to Miss Jemima Beebe. Mrs. S.
is still living and enjoying excellent health.




Melancthon Barnett.



He who has had occasion to traverse Bank street many times, or to pass
along Superior at the head of Bank, must have become familiar with the
figure of a hale old gentleman, to be seen frequently on sunny days,
standing on the steps of the Merchants Bank, or passing along Bank street
between the bank and his residence, beyond Lake street. His clothes are
not of showy material or fashionable cut, one hand is generally employed
in holding a clay pipe, from which he draws comfort and inspiration, and
which rarely leaves his lips when on the street, except to utter some bit
of dry humor, in which he especially delights. That is Melancthon Barnett,
one of the "oldest inhabitants" of the Forest City, and whose well known
figure and quaint jokes will be missed by his many friends out of doors,
as will his wise counsels within the bank parlor, when death shall at
length summon him to leave his wonted haunts.

Mr. Barnett was born in Amenia, Dutchess county, New York, in 1789. At six
years old he was taken with the remainder of the family to Oneida county,
where he remained until 1812, when he removed to New Hartford, near Utica,
and remained two years as clerk in a store. From that place he went to
Cherry Valley, Otsego County, where he went as partner in the mercantile
business, and continued there until 1825. In that year Mr. May came west
to Cleveland for the purpose of opening a store, and Mr. Barnett came with
him as clerk. In course of time he was advanced to the position of
partner, and continued in business until 1834, when May and Barnett wound
up their affairs as merchants, and became speculators in land. Their real
estate business was carried on successfully for many years, the steady
growth of the town making their investments profitable.

In 1843, Mr. Barnett was elected Treasurer of Cuyahoga county, and proved
himself one of the most capable and scrupulously honest officers the
county has ever had. He held the position six years, and the business not
occupying his entire time, he also filled the office of Justice of the
Peace, continuing his real estate transactions at the same time.

At the close of his career as a public officer he was elected Director of
the City Bank, with which he has remained to the present time, rarely, if
ever, being absent during the business hours of the bank.

Mr. Barnett was married May 15, 1815, to Miss Mary Clark, at Cherry
Valley. Mrs. Barnett died April 21, 1840, in Cleveland, having borne five
children. Only two of these yet live, the oldest, Augustus, being in the
leather business at Watertown, Wisconsin, and the younger, James, in the
hardware business in Cleveland. The latter is well known for his brilliant
services at the head of the Ohio Artillery during the war, in Western
Virginia and Tennessee, and no name is cherished with greater pride in
Cleveland than that of General James Barnett.




Joel Scranton.



Joel Scranton, whose name is associated with much of the history of
Cleveland, during the period when it grew from a small village to a city
well on the way to permanent prosperity, was born in Belchertown, Mass.,
April 5, 1792. Whilst yet a child his parents removed with him to Otsego
county, N. Y., where a considerable portion of his early life was spent.
About the year 1820 he removed to Cleveland, where he engaged in business
and remained until his death, of apoplexy, on the 9th of April, 1858,
having just completed his sixty-sixth year.

In the later years of the village of Cleveland and the early days of the
city, Mr. Scranton's leather and dry goods store, at the corner of
Superior and Water streets, was a well known business landmark. In the
prosecution of his business he succeeded in saving a comfortable
competence, which was increased by his judicious investments in real
estate. These last have, by the rapid growth of the city, and increase in
value since his death, become highly valuable property.

Mr. Scranton was industrious, economical, and judicious in business
transactions; of strong mind and well balanced judgment; a kind parent and
a firm friend.




Orlando Cutter.



Orlando Cutter first beheld the harbor and city of Cleveland on the 30th
of June, 1818, having spent nine dismal days on the schooner Ben Franklin,
in the passage from Black Rock. He was landed in a yawl, at the mouth of
the river, near a bluff that stood where the Toledo Railroad Machine Shops
have since been built, about seventy-five rods west of the present
entrance to the harbor. In those days the river entrance was of a very
unreliable character, being sometimes entirely blocked up with sand, so
that people walked across. It was no uncommon thing for people to ride
over, or jump the outlet with the help of a pole.

[Illustration]

Mr. Cutter walked along the beach and on the old road to Water street,
and thence in a broiling sun to the frame tavern of Noble H. Merwin, on
Vineyard lane, near Superior street. Here he was first introduced to Philo
Scovill, a robust young carpenter, who was hewing timber for Merwin's new
brick tavern, afterwards called the Mansion House.

Mr. Cutter had experienced what our city boys would regard as a rough
beginning in life. At sixteen he went into a store at Royalton,
Massachusetts, at a salary of _four dollars a month_ and board; and at the
end of a year had saved one dollar and a half. His pay being increased to
one hundred dollars for the next year, he ventured upon the luxury of a
pair of boots. In September, 1815, having proven his mettle as an active,
capable and honest young man, he was translated to a large jobbing house,
on Cornhill, Boston, the salary being board and clothing. Having been born
at Jeffrey, New Hampshire, June 5, 1797, at the end of three years
apprenticeship in the Boston establishment, he arrived at the age of
twenty-one, and became his own master. The firm offered him a credit for
dry goods to the amount of $10,000, with which to go west and seek his
fortune, but before accepting the offer he concluded to go and see if he
could find a suitable place for trade, but as he had no money, it was
necessary to borrow $400 for the expenses of the trip. With a pair of well
filled saddlebags as an outfit, he started, and in due time arrived at
Black Rock, and from thence proceeded, as above narrated, to Cleveland, on
a tour of examination.

Cleveland had then about two hundred inhabitants, and four stores. Water
street was cleared out sufficiently for the purposes of travel to the
lake. It was also prepared for a race course--for which purpose it was
used for a number of years.

Twenty or thirty German teams from Pennsylvania, Stark, Wayne and other
counties, laden with flour, each team having from four to six horses,
encamped in Superior street at night, and gave Cleveland such a business
appearance that Mr. Cutter took a fancy to it.

After two weeks, Mr. Cutter set sail in the schooner Wasp for Sandusky,
where there was a natural harbor, and from thence in the Fire Fly, for
Detroit. But his thoughts reverted to Cleveland, and forming a partnership
with Messrs. Mack & Conant, of Detroit, the firm purchased twenty
thousand dollars worth of dry goods, groceries, and a general assortment
for an extensive establishment here.

In February, 1820, he married Miss Phelps, of Painesville, Ohio, who died
in 1829, two of whose children are now living. His competitors in business
were Nathan Perry, J. R. & I. Kelly, S. S. Dudley and Dr. David Long. It
was only about a year after he opened in Cleveland when Mack & Conant
failed, throwing the Cleveland purchase entirely upon him. After ten years
of hard work, and close application, he paid off the whole, but at the
close it left him only five hundred dollars in old goods. Ohio currency
was not exactly money in those days. It was at a discount of twenty-five
to thirty per cent. for eastern funds. There was, moreover, little of it,
and there were stay laws, and the appraisal of personal, as well as real
estate, under execution, rendering collections almost impossible. To
illustrate: a man in Middleburg, Cuyahoga county, Ohio, owed Mr. Cutter
seventy-five dollars. He went to attend the constable's sale, and found
among the effects a dog appraised at ten dollars; rails ten cents each,
and a watch worth five dollars valued at twenty dollars, so he left the
place in disgust and hurried home, through the woods, in no placid frame
of mind. Of four new shoes put on his horse that morning, three had been
torn off by the mud, roots, and corduroy between Cleveland and Middleburg.

After closing up the old business, he posted books or turned his hand
to whatever employment presented itself. Inactivity and despondency
formed no part of his character. About 1827, there was a temporary
business connection between himself and Thos. M. Kelly, after which he
started again alone, adding the auction and commission business to that
of a merchant.

Mr. Cutter, in November, 1832, was married to Miss Hilliard, sister of the
late Richard Hilliard. Of this marriage there are seven children now
living, most of them settled in the city. William L. is cashier of the
Merchants National Bank; Edwin succeeded his father two years since at the
old auction store in Bank street, and R. H. is the principal partner of
Cutter & Co., upholsterers.

Going east in the Fall of 1821, Mr. Cutter, on his return, preferred the
staunch steamer Walk-in-the-Water, to the Wasps, Fire Flies and Franklins,
on board of which he had experienced so many buffetings. George Williams
and John S. Strong were also of the same mind. These three old settlers,
and about seventy others, went on board at Black Rock, in the afternoon.
Eight yoke of oxen were required to assist the engines in getting her over
the rapids into the open lake. In the night a furious gale arose, Capt.
Rogers put back, but not being able to get into Buffalo Creek, came to
anchor near its mouth. Being awfully sea sick, Mr. Cutter lay below,
little caring where the Walk-in-the-Water went to. Her anchor, however,
parted before morning, and she went ashore sidewise, on an easy sand
beach, without loss of life.

This year completes his semi-centennial as a citizen of Cleveland, yet he
is still hale and vigorous. He has gone through revulsions, and has
enjoyed prosperity with equal equanimity, never indulging in idleness or
ease, and has now come to a ripe old age possessed of an ample competence.




Peter Martin Weddell.



One of the most noted historical and topographical landmarks of Cleveland
is the Weddell House. Its builder was one of the most valuable citizens of
the Forest City.

Mr. P. M. Weddell was born in Westmoreland county, Pennsylvania, in 1788.
His father died before his birth, and his mother, marrying again, removed
to Paris, Bourbon county, Kentucky, the State at that time deserving its
sobriquet of the "dark and bloody ground," as the contest with the native
savages was carried on with relentless fury on both sides. Under such
circumstances it may well be supposed that he grew up with few educational
or other advantages, and that his youth was one of vicissitudes and
hardships.

At the age of fourteen he applied at a store for employment, what surplus
clothing and effects he then possessed being carelessly flung over his
shoulders. He promised to do any work they were pleased to set him at, and
he thought he could satisfy them. This broad pledge was so well kept that
at the age of nineteen he was made a partner. This partnership was soon
closed by the death of the old member.

Young Weddell, with a vigorous body, good habits, a clear judgment, and
some money, removed to Newark, Ohio, during the war of 1812. While he was
successfully trading there, Miss Sophia Perry, of Cleveland, was sent to
her friends at Newark for greater safety, and to acquire an education.
She was but little past fifteen when she consented to be Mrs. Weddell, and
they were married in November, 1815.

In 1820, Mr. Weddell removed from Newark to Cleveland and established
himself in business on Superior street, taking a stand at once among the
leading merchants of the place, a position he retained as long as he
continued in business.

In 1823, Mrs. Weddell died, leaving three children, of whom H. P. Weddell
is the only survivor. A portrait of her, by Peale, still remains in the
family house, which confirms the remembrances of her friends that she
possessed many charms both of person and of disposition. In the
following year Mr. Weddell married Mrs. Eliza A. Bell, of Newark, who is
still living, and whom every old citizen of Cleveland well knows and
sincerely respects.

In 1825, he formed a partnership with Mr. Edmund Clade, from Buffalo, and
retired from active participation in business. In 1828, the partnership
was dissolved. Three years afterwards he took into partnership with him
his two clerks, Greenup C. Woods, his half brother, and Dudley Baldwin,
the firm name being P. M. Weddell & Co. The firm lasted but four years,
when Mr. Woods established himself in Newark, and Messrs. Weddell and
Baldwin continued the business together until 1845.

When Mr. Weddell commenced his mercantile life it was no child's play.
At that time there were no canals or railroads to facilitate
commerce--scarcely were there any roads at all--specie was the only
currency west of the mountains, and that had to be carried across the
mountains from Pittsburgh on the backs of mules, and the merchandise
returned in the same way. Long after, when traveling over the
Alleghanies with a friend, Mr. Weddell frequently pointed to places on
the road which he remembered, and of which he related interesting
anecdotes. Several merchants would travel together and sometimes they
would have guards, as the lonely uninhabited mountains were not
altogether safe even in those days.

In 1823, Mr. Weddell built what was regarded as a princely brick residence
and store on the corner of Superior and Bank streets, afterwards the site
of the Weddell House. His surplus funds were invested in real estate,
which soon began to increase in value at an astonishing rate, as the city
grew in population and importance. On one of his lots upon Euclid street
he built the stone cottage which he designed as a country retreat, and
after his taking his clerks into partnership, he left the store mainly to
their management, devoting his attention to the purchase and improvement
of real estate, being generally regarded as a gentleman of wealth.

In the Spring of 1845 he began work upon the Weddell House, tearing away
the store and mansion, where his fortune had been made. It was finished in
two years. He then made a journey to New York to purchase furniture. On
the way home he was attacked by typhoid fever, and in three weeks was in
his grave.

As a merchant, Mr. Weddell had few superiors. His urbanity, industry,
and care made him popular, successful, and safe, while his integrity and
his liberality were well known to his correspondents and to all the
religious and benevolent institutions of the times.

He was always willing and ready to aid and assist his young men; when he
found one correct and capable he never refused a helping hand. Very few of
his day were so liberal in this respect, or could point to so many who
became prominent merchants by their aid as could Mr. Weddell.

At his death, Mr. Weddell was a man of such personal energy and business
capacity, that he had promise of twenty more years of active life. Soon
after the Rev. S. G. Aiken became pastor of the old Stone Church, Mr.
Weddell became a communicant, and he died in the Christian faith. He
bequeathed to the American Board of Foreign Missions the sum of five
thousand dollars; to the Home Missionary Society five thousand dollars,
and several other bequests amounting to some thousands to other benevolent
institutions.




Dudley Baldwin



In 1819, Dudley Baldwin came to Cleveland from Ballston, New York, having
as his principal capital a fair common school education. In course of time
be found employment in the mercantile store of Mr. Weddell, and became one
of his trusted clerks, being, after a few years, taken into partnership.
The death of Mr. Weddell in 1847, terminated a connection that had existed
pleasantly for over twenty years.

For the next few years Mr. Baldwin was chiefly engaged in closing up the
affairs of Mr. Weddell, after which he engaged for a time in the
manufacture of agricultural implements, until, from ill heath, he was
compelled to relinquish business and seek restoration of health by travel
and in quiet retirement.

Mr. Baldwin was identified with the Cleveland and Mahoning Railroad from
its inception, and during the darkest days of the undertaking he stood
firmly by it, in connection with the other directors, never losing faith
in its ultimate success--a success he has lived to see perfected. He has
also, for a number of years, been a director of the Commercial Bank of
Cleveland.

In religious principles Mr. Baldwin is a Presbyterian, and has long
been connected with the Euclid street Presbyterian Church. He is known
to all his acquaintances as a man of quiet unassuming manners, and of
sterling worth.




Norman C. Baldwin.



Very many of those who settled on the Western Reserve, in the early days
of its history, came from Connecticut, and the fact of so many Connecticut
families being already here induced considerable emigration from that
State long after the first rush was over. Among others of Connecticut
birth who found their way eventually to Cleveland, was Norman C. Baldwin,
born at Litchfield, July 29th, 1802, and spending his early years in the
struggles which so many of the New England families of limited resources
had to pass through in the early portion of the present century.

Whilst yet but a mere child he assisted his father in the work of the
farm, but being left fatherless at the age of eight, he was sent two years
afterwards to work in his cousin's store, where he remained four years. In
his fourteenth year he left Litchfield for New Haven, where he found
employment for a year with a provision packer.

At that time his mother joined the stream of emigration setting towards
the Ohio, and with her came her children. Stopping at Hudson, Summit
county, young Baldwin commenced trading on his own account, and built up
a good business, which he managed alone for eighteen months and then
formed a partnership with two of his brothers, the partnership lasting
eight years. Then the firm was dissolved and Norman C. came to
Cleveland, where he formed a partnership with Noble H. Merwin in the
general produce business.

In 1830, the firm of Giddings, Baldwin & Co., which had succeeded that of
Merwin & Baldwin, contained seven partners, of whom Mr. Baldwin is the
only survivor. The business was mainly forwarding and commission, the
forwarding being mostly by canal. The firm was one of the most important
on the lakes, owning a line of boats, the Troy and Erie, from Portsmouth,
on the Ohio river, to New York In those days the canal lines carried
passengers as well as freight, the boats usually taking about thirty
passengers and one thousand bushels of wheat. For emigrants, of whom many
were pouring into the West, special boats were fitted up with
accommodations, such as they were, for about a hundred and fifty
passengers. In 1836, Mr. Baldwin left the mercantile business altogether,
and thereafter devoted his attention to operations in real estate.

As illustrating the growth of the city and the consequent increasing value
of city property, Mr. Baldwin relates having purchased in 1833 three
parcels of land, neither of which cost over two thousand dollars, which
are now estimated to be worth half a million of dollars each. In 1831, he
was offered, in the course of his operations, a strip of land fronting on
Superior street and running back to the canal, with a comfortable frame
house thereon, for one thousand dollars. The price looked high and Mr.
Baldwin, distrusting his own judgment, consulted 'Squire Cowles, then a
prominent attorney. Mr. Cowles hesitated, thought the investment somewhat
risky, although they might live to see the land worth thirty dollars a
foot front. Heeding his own fears, which were not abated by the doubtful
opinion of his adviser, Mr. Baldwin refused to purchase. That same land is
worth now not merely thirty dollars a foot, but equivalent to three or
four thousand dollars a foot front.

As showing the condition of the roads around Cleveland, and the mode of
traveling in the early days of its history, it is narrated by Mr. Baldwin,
that when living in Hudson he was fond of good horses and kept a team of
which he was proud. The distance between Hudson and Cleveland was but
twenty-four miles, but that distance had never been done in one day by any
team. Mr. Baldwin thought the time had come for performing the feat, and
accordingly set out on the journey. Just at tea time he drew rein in front
of Merwin's tavern, at the corner of Superior street and Vineyard lane,
and shouted to the landlord. The guests had just seated themselves to tea
when Mr. Merwin rushed into the room in a state of great excitement,
exclaiming, "For God's sake, gentlemen, come out and see a team that has
been driven from Hudson to-day!" The guests left the table in a hurry and
rushed to the door, scarcely crediting their own eyes.

Mr. Baldwin was married in 1829, and lost his wife in the Spring of 1867.
Of this marriage there are now six children living and three dead. One
son, Norman A., is engaged in agriculture in the neighborhood of the city.




Leverett Alcott.



Leverett Alcott was born in Walcott, New Haven county, Connecticut, in
1820. From early boyhood his taste was for mercantile pursuits. At the age
of seventeen he obtained a position in an extensive country store at
Bristol Basin, on the Farmington Canal, (now Plainville.) By diligence and
perseverance, he was soon promoted from the duties of errand boy to a
responsible position, and in course of time stood at the head of all the
clerks in the establishment.

For the benefit of neophytes in commercial life, it may not be
uninteresting to state how boys were made merchants in those days, and the
remuneration they received for services. They were not (as is too often
the case at the present time) transformed in a few months from crude green
boys to merchants, but were obliged to learn the business by actual
experience. An arrangement was made in this case for three years, on the
following conditions: fifty dollars for the first year, seventy-five
dollars for the second year, and one hundred dollars for the third and
last year, with board in his employer's family. With this modest salary it
required the utmost care and rigid economy to clothe and keep himself; but
where there's a will there's a way, and the economy thus practiced in
early life was no detriment in laying the foundation for a sound business
career in after life. After having fulfilled his engagement with his
employer, he spent some three years of mercantile life at the South, but
the customs of the country, and the barbarous system of slavery were so
repulsive to his feelings that he abandoned that field for the more
congenial and prospectively profitable activities of the West, and in
December, 1842, landed at Medina, in this State. In the Spring of 1845, a
mercantile copartnership was formed with Mr. Augustus W. North, under the
firm name of North & Alcott. During the subsequent Fall he married Miss
Mary A. Williams, with the view of permanently settling at that place, but
the mercantile prospects, and the growth of the town not appearing
satisfactory to his views, the firm of North & Alcott was dissolved and
the business discontinued, to be reconstructed and opened in a wider field
and on a broader basis. Accordingly, in the Spring of 1849, (just twenty
years ago,) a business arrangement was entered into with his present
partner, Mr. Burrett W. Horton, a former school mate, under the firm name
of Alcott & Horton. The business was to be the retailing of dry goods, and
located at 177 Superior street, in Harrington's Block. The beginning was a
moderate one, with a very limited capital, but what was lacking in capital
was made up in energy, industry and perseverance. At first a retail trade
only was contemplated, which was continued some four years, when the rapid
growth of the city and increase of business induced them to open a
wholesale department in the lofts of their store. Subsequently they closed
their retail business and occupied the whole building for their jobbing
trade; but their apartments were soon found to be too strait for their
rapidly growing trade, and in August, 1855, they removed to the large new
store, No. 141, in Clark's Block.

Mr. Alcott has a knowledge of human nature that imparts a keen perception
of the character and motives of men, and hence, almost instinctively knows
whom to trust. He is also quick in forming his judgment, ready in the
adaptation of means to secure an end, vigorously prosecutes his plans, and
seldom fails of a successful issue.

In a young and vigorous country like the United States, where so many
opportunities are offered to ambition and laudable enterprise, and where
too often, everything else but gold is lost sight of, it is refreshing to
find some among our heaviest merchants, who recognize the fact, that man
"cannot live by bread alone." Mr. Alcott, through all his active life has
found time to attend to his religious duties. He has been for a long time
connected with the Second Presbyterian Church, and for many years one of
its elders. He was formerly President of the Young Men's Christian
Association; actively engaged in missionary Sunday School work in the
city--taking a lively interest in all Christian labor; a ready and willing
giver toward public improvements, and all benevolent enterprises.




Richard Winslow.



On the evening of Sunday, August 9th, 1857, died, at nearly the ripe age
of eighty-eight, Richard Winslow, the father of the Winslow family that
have filled so important a place in the commercial and shipping history of
Cleveland.

Mr. Winslow was born in Falmouth, Maine, September 6th, 1769, being
descended in a direct line from Knelm Winslow, brother of Governor Edward
Winslow, who played so important a part in the early history of Plymouth
colony. In 1812, Mr. Winslow removed to North Carolina, where he lived
for fourteen years, at Ocracoke, becoming largely interested in commerce,
both internal and marine. Soon after his removal to that State, he
married Miss Mary Nash Grandy, of Camden, N. C., who became the mother of
eleven children, of whom but four, N. C., H. J., R. K., and Edward, are now
alive. Mrs. Winslow died October, 1858, having survived her husband a
little over one year.

In 1830, he decided to leave North Carolina and try his fortune in the
West. A preliminary tour of observation brought him to Cleveland, then
lively with business, and more lively still with expectancy of business to
come from the completion of the canal, then in partial operation. Like
many who preceded, and more who followed him, Mr. Winslow was struck with
the natural advantages of Cleveland and concluded to try his fortunes
here. The site of what is now known as the "Winslow warehouse," on the
river, was owned by C. M. Giddings and Captain Belden, and a building was
then in course of erection on it. Mr. Winslow purchased the property. He
had strong faith in the growth of the city, but others did not have it to
the same extent, and he was strongly urged not to attempt business so far
down the river, where it was impossible that trade would ever reach him.

Immediately on concluding his purchase, he went to the eastern cities,
where he purchased a large stock of teas and groceries, which he sent with
his son, N. C., to Cleveland in the Fall. The stock arrived in December and
was at once opened on Superior street, opposite Union lane. In the
following May, Mr. Winslow followed with his family, purchased a lot on
the south-east corner of the Public Square, and contracted with Levi
Johnson for the erection of the house that was occupied by the Winslow
family until the death of Mr. Winslow.

Unlike most of the early settlers in Cleveland, Mr. Winslow came with
capital to invest at once in business, and by prudent management and far
seeing enterprise that capital rapidly increased. He soon became agent for
a line of vessels between Buffalo and Cleveland, and also of a line of
canal boats. The first step toward his own shipping interests here, which
subsequently assumed such proportions, was commenced by building the brig
North Carolina. A few years later he was interested in building the
steamer Bunker Hill, of 456 tons, which at that time was considered a very
large size. To these were added, by himself and his sons, so many other
lake craft that the family ranked among the foremost, if not the very
foremost ship-owners on the chain of lakes, their sail vessels, propellers
and steam-tugs being found everywhere on the western lake waters.

In 1854, Mr. Winslow retired from business, leaving his interest to be
carried on by his sons, who inherited their father's business qualities.
In his retirement, as in his active business life, he enjoyed the
friendship of a very large social circle, to whom his frank, generous
manners, warm attachments, and spotless honor commended him. He was a
favorable specimen of the old school gentleman, warm and impulsive in his
nature, quick to conceive and prompt to act, cordial in his greeting,
strong in his attachments, and courteous to all.

His death was accelerated by an accident which seriously injured a leg he
had badly injured several years before. To the last he preserved his
faculties and his cheerfulness, and but for the injuries he had received
would probably have lived for many years longer.

He was no politician, never sought office, but at the same time took a
keen interest in public affairs, and did not neglect his duties or
privileges as a citizen.

The three brothers in active conduct of the large marine interests known
as the Winslows', are distributed as follows: N. C. at Buffalo, H. J. at
New York, and R. K. at Cleveland, all of whom have been eminently
successful.




Richard Hilliard.



Amongst Cleveland's earliest merchants who have already passed away, none
deserve more honorable mention than Richard Hilliard. Like nearly all our
men of mark, in early life he was obliged to sail against wind and tide.
He was born at Chatham, New York, July 3, 1797. His father, David
Hilliard, died when Richard was 14 years of age, he being at the time
serving an apprenticeship with a hatter named Dore, at Albany. He was a
lad of superior organization, and so, although obedient and obliging, had
an extreme distaste for drudgery. A son of Mr. Dore one day threw down a
pair of boots, saying, "Clean those boots Dick," when the lad concluded he
would not do it, and at once prepared to leave for parts unknown. None of
his friends knew of his whereabouts for several months, but at length
learned he was at Skaneateles, with an older brother. Here he remained
until he was about 18 years of age, being employed at clerking and school
teaching, and ever mindful of his widowed mother and fatherless sisters.

From Skaneateles he removed to Black Rock and engaged himself as clerk to
Mr. John Daly, a general merchant at that place. The young man soon gained
the confidence of his employer and was admitted as a partner without
capital. After a year or two, the firm moved to Cleveland, as a place of
greater promise for trade. This occurred in 1824. They at once commenced
business in the same line here on the site of the present Atwater Block,
in a frame building of two compartments, one of which was used for dry
goods, and the other for groceries. Mr. Daly was not an active partner in
the business here, having given the entire management to Mr. Hilliard.

In 1827, Mr. Hilliard purchased Mr. Daly's entire interest, and continued
alone for several years, till at length the demands of trade making it
desirable to have a resident partner in New York to make purchases, he
associated with himself Mr. William Hays, of that city. This partnership
existed till the close of Mr. Hilliard's life.

As soon as business prospects warranted the investment, Mr. Hilliard
secured a lot on Water street, and erected the block now occupied by
Raymond & Lowe, and on taking possession of the new place of business,
commenced the wholesale branch, and continued the same until 1856, when,
being on his way home from New York, he took a severe cold, which was soon
followed by congestion, and after one week's illness, died, deeply
regretted by all who knew him.

He was a man of great business ability, and of strict integrity. He was
not always appreciated, because his accurate foresight led him to advocate
projects which the public generally were not ready to adopt. He labored
most indefatigably for the construction of our Water Works, because he saw
what the future wants of the city would be. The scheme was strongly
opposed by many on account of the debt it would involve. But it was
finally accomplished, and we are more indebted to Richard Hilliard for its
achievement than to any other man.

Shortly after coming to Cleveland he became engaged to Miss Mary Merwin,
daughter of Noble H. Merwin, who died before the marriage. He then brought
his sister Sarah A. (now Mrs. O. Cutter) to live with him. In about a year
from this time he was married to Miss Catharine Hays, of New York, who
died about four years before Mr. Hilliard, leaving seven children.




S. H. Sheldon.



The lumber trade has grown to be a very important branch of the commerce
of Cleveland, and some of its best and most enterprising citizens have
been, or are now, engaged in it. Among these the name of Mr. Sheldon holds
honorable prominence as one of the earliest in the trade, and who has
always held place among the foremost engaged in it.

Mr. Sheldon's birth place was in Clinton, Oneida county, N. Y., where he
was born August 12th, 1813. His early days were not passed among thornless
roses. His father, a hard working farmer, died when the future lumber
merchant was but eight years old. Young Sheldon remained on the homestead
until he was sixteen years old, working hard, as did the others of the
fatherless family, and snatching such crumbs of knowledge as could be
obtained in the winter days, when time could be spared for schooling. On
nearly reaching his sixteenth year, he went to Troy, N. Y., where he was
received as an apprentice to the drug business, and served seven years in
that capacity. As soon as his term of apprenticeship expired he set his
face westward in search of fortune, as so many hundreds had done before
him, and hundreds of thousands have done since.

In the year 1835, he reached Cleveland and at once started in trade as a
druggist on Detroit Street, then in Ohio City, but now the West Side of
Cleveland. At that time the West, generally, was enjoying seeming
prosperity; everything was inflated and everyone was growing rich, on
paper. Ohio City was then the city of the future, and fortune smiled on
all its residents, and particularly on those who held real estate within
its borders.

Four years later the commercial earthquake came and toppled over the whole
fabric of trade and commerce in the West, reducing it to ruins. The entire
West was devastated, and Ohio City received a blow from which, as a
separate municipality, it never recovered. Among the others who suffered
greatly by the disaster was Mr. Sheldon.

In 1842, he sold out his drug business, and went into the employ of
another firm as an accountant, continuing in that position about two
years. From this he went into business on his own account once more, this
time dealing in groceries and provisions, which he continued to trade in
until 1846, when he was attracted to the lumber trade, which he entered,
in partnership with S. H. Fox. Four years later he disposed of his
interest in the firm, and operated in lumber on his own account, not
keeping a yard, but buying and selling by the cargo. In 1852, the firm of
Sheldon & French was formed, a lumber yard opened, and the firm continued
until the failure of the health of Mr. C. French. For a year after this
event Mr. Sheldon carried on his business alone, and then took into
partnership his son, Edward P. Sheldon, the firm becoming Sheldon & Son.

In April, 1869, the firm of Sheldon & Son merged into that of S. H.
Sheldon & Co., being comprised of S. H. Sheldon & Son, and Sears &
Holland, of East Saginaw, Mich.

The lumber trade of the city has been, generally, one of steady growth,
and Mr. Sheldon's share in it has been of that character. It developed
gradually, as the city grew in size and importance, and as the demand from
the interior increased with the growth of towns and villages on the lines
of canal and railroads. The beginning was small, and the earlier years of
its progress full of difficulties, but in the end the trade reached large
and lucrative proportions. Its highest point of prosperity was during the
war, when the establishment of permanent camps through the State created a
sudden and extensive demand for lumber, to build the numerous camp
buildings. At that time the only perplexity of the lumber dealer was to
find a supply sufficient for the demands pressing in from all quarters,
for certain qualities.

[Illustration: Yours Truly, S. H. Sheldon]

From lumber to ship building is an easy transition, and Mr. Sheldon, five
or six years since, became interested in lake craft, and added a fine
three masted schooner to the lake marine. With the growth of manufactures
in the city, he became interested in that direction also, connecting
himself with the Etna Iron and Nail Works enterprise. He also took a deep
interest in the formation of the People's Gas Company, for the supply of
the West Side with gas, being one of the original supporters of the
organization, and at present one of its directors.

In all his undertakings Mr. Sheldon has kept steadily in view the
necessity of industry and economy, and it is the practice of these two
mercantile virtues that has brought about his success. One trait of his
business character is peculiar. He has, so far as possible, avoided
recourse to law, holding the doctrine that, in most cases, when a debt
could not be collected without the aid of a lawyer, it was not worth
spending money for. In religious principles Mr. Sheldon is a
Congregationalist, and has been connected for more than thirty years with
the First Congregational Church, and during most of this time has
discharged the duties of deacon, serving the church with fidelity and
acceptance, in this official position. He has been identified with Sabbath
school labors, as teacher and superintendent, and to his zeal and
liberality the Detroit street Mission Sabbathe school largely owes its
prosperity, and its present commodious chapel. In every Christian
enterprise Deacon Sheldon has been among the foremost. No benevolent
cause, whether local or general, has appealed to him in vain for pecuniary
support, or Christian sympathy and countenance.

In 1836, Mr. Sheldon was married to Miss Cordelia H. Buxton, of Cleveland,
a descendent of the English Buxtons, of philanthropic memory. Of the
family of six children, one, the eldest, Henry A. Sheldon, died in 1842.
The only surviving son became a partner with his father in 1866.




Charles Hickox.



Whether the conversion of wheat into flour can more properly be classed
among manufactures or trade and commerce is a question for casuists to
determine. There can be no question, however, that Charles Hickox takes
his place, by right, among the merchants and commercial men of Cleveland,
whether the grinding of wheat be a manufacture or not, for it is not alone
by the milling business that Mr. Hickox has identified himself with the
commerce of the city. He has gone through all the phases of Cleveland
commercial life, having been connected with the produce and commission
trade, owned lake vessels, and otherwise qualified himself for a place
among the merchants and "river men," aside from the business in which he
is widely known--that of an extensive mill owner.

Mr. Hickox came to Cleveland in 1837, from the state of New York, making
his debut in the Forest City in the year of its greatest depression. For
the first two years he engaged as clerk, and served his employers
faithfully. Then, gaining confidence, and seeing an opening he struck out
boldly for himself, setting up, as was usual in those days, in the
commission and produce business. The constantly growing commerce of the
place increased his business and made it lucrative. With far-seeing
enterprise Mr. Hickox pushed his operations so that his trade rapidly
increased and his consignments steadily grew in number and quantity. To
accommodate it he purchased interests in shipping on the lake, and
eventually became a large ship owner.

Seeing his opportunity, Mr. Hickox turned his attention to milling, and
commenced operations at a mill in Akron, which he soon made known to the
commercial world by the excellence and reliability of its brand. To this
was, in time, added the water mill, on the canal, in Cleveland, near the
weigh lock, which he held for five years and then sold. After the sale of
the latter mill, he purchased the Cleveland Steam Mills on Merwin street,
with a capacity of about three hundred and fifty barrels per day, and in
1867, he added the National Steam Mills, with a capacity of from five
hundred to six hundred barrels daily. Whilst a large capital is invested
in these mills, the number of men employed is less than in establishments
where labor saving machinery has not been brought to such a pitch of
perfection. About fifty men are directly employed in the mills, and a
large number additional in the manufacture of barrels and sacks. A very
large proportion of the flour from these mills is sold in sacks, from the
fact that the entire product is sold in the home market, which speaks well
for the estimation in which the brands are held. Mr. Charles W. Coe is in
active partnership with Mr. Hickox, in the milling interests, the firm
name being Coe & Hickox.

Mr. Hickox has taken deep interest in the railroad affairs of the city,
and has been for some time a director of the Cleveland, Columbus &
Cincinnati Railroad Company. He is still as active and energetic as ever,
well preserved in body and mind, and making his positive influence felt in
all departments of business in which he becomes interested. He never tires
of work, and, as he says of himself, he "holds his own well, at
fifty-five."




Alexander Sackettt.



Alexander Sackett, son of Augustus Sackett, of Sackett's Harbor, N. Y.,
was born August 17th, 1814. He received a good mercantile education in New
York City, and came from thence to Cleveland in 1835, and at once engaged
in the wholesale and retail dry goods line, in the old block of Mr.
Weddell, on Superior street. He continued with success in this business
until 1854, when he went into commercial business on the river, and in
which he remained until 1868, when he retired from trade circles to devote
his whole attention to his real estate interests.

Mr. Sackett was married in 1836, to Harriet, daughter of Levi Johnson,
Esq., of this city. They have five children living, and have lost two. The
eldest daughter is the wife of Mr. Virgil T. Taylor, of this city, and the
son is in his father's office.

Mr. Sackett is still hale, and may reasonably expect, without accident, to
long enjoy the fruit of his labor.




George Mygatt.



Mr. Mygatt is a genuine pioneer of the Western Reserve, having come with
his father, Comfort S. Mygatt, at the age of ten years, to the new
settlement at Canfield, Mahoning county, Ohio, in the year 1807. He was
born at Danbury, Ct., on 14th of June, 1797, when that village had not
recovered from its conflagration by the British, during the Revolution.
There were then visible, and for many years during his boyhood, buildings
which were charred by fires kindled by English soldiers.

Mr. Mygatt's father was a merchant and farmer, at Canfield. He was an
active, honest and successful man. The year previous to his emigration,
his daughter, Polly, was married, at Danbury, to the late Elisha
Whittlesey, who removed at once to Canfield, Ohio. Mr. Whittlesey, his
son-in-law, took the contract to clear a piece of ground for Mr. Mygatt,
laboring on the job with his axe and team.

At Danbury, George had as good an opportunity in school as any Connecticut
lad could have, under the age of ten years. At Canfield there was little
opportunity for gaining book knowledge. He was engaged with his father as
clerk and general helper, until he was twenty years old. In 1818, he
became clerk in the Western Reserve Bank, at Warren, and remained in that
position two years, when he engaged in mercantile business in connection
with his father-in-law, Mr. A. Adams. This partnership lasted five years,
after which he carried on the business alone until 1833.

From 1829 to 1833, he was sheriff of Trumbull county, and had the
disagreeable office of executing the murderer, Gardner.

In 1834, Mr. Mygatt became a financier, which may be said to be his
profession. He was then appointed cashier of the Bank of Norwalk, Ohio. In
1836, he was appointed cashier of the Bank of Geauga, at Painesville,
Ohio; and in 1846 he became President of the City Bank of Cleveland,
holding the last named office until 1850. The firm of Mygatt & Brown was
then formed, for private banking, and continued until 1857.

In 1855, he was elected a member of the House of Representatives, from
Cuyahoga county, serving two sesssion.

[Illustration: Very Respectfully, George Mygatt]

The Merchants Bank of Cleveland, in 1857, became deeply involved, by the
failure of the Ohio Life and Trust Company, of Cincinnati. Mr. Mygatt was
appointed cashier at this time, when a memorable panic in finances was
sweeping over the country. The bank sank a large part of its stock, but
maintained its integrity, and continued to redeem its notes.

In 1861, he retired from active business, but, with his long habits of
employment, it soon became irksome to him to be out of work, and in 1865
he became Secretary of the Cleveland and Mahoning Railroad Company, a
position he still retains, for the sake of being employed.

A large portion of Mr. Mygatt's time and means have always been devoted to
benevolent purposes; Sunday schools, the annual contributions for the
poor, the church, industrial schools, and, in fact, all charitable
movements have found in him a ready response; he will long be remembered
for his work's sake.

As a business man he was characterized by the strictest integrity, always
preserving a quiet, considerate policy, and by incessant industry
accomplished a great deal. For one who has reached the age of seventy-two,
he possesses remarkable vigor, and we should judge, from the position he
occupies, that his mental faculties are little impaired.

Mr. Mygatt was married in March, 1820, to Miss Eliza Freeman, of Warren,
who is still living. Of their six children, four of whom arrived at mature
age, and were married, only Mrs. F. T. Backus now survives.




Martin B. Scott.



Among the names of those who have done business on the river during the
past quarter of a century, that of M. B. Scott, until his retirement a few
years since, held a foremost place. Mr. Scott is a native of New York,
having been born at Deerfield, near Utica, in that State, in March, 1801.

Mr. Scott is of Quaker stock; a lineal descendent in the sixth generation
from the first American Quaker, (Richard Scott, one of the first settlers
of Providence, R. I.,) and in the nineteenth generation from William
Baliol Scott, of Scotts-Hall, Kent, England, in the line of Edward I. His
Quaker ancestors suffered persecution at the hands of the Boston Puritans
in 1658. The daughters of Richard Scott were cast into prison by Endicott,
for avowing their Quaker faith, and his wife Katharine (_n�_ Marbury,
youngest sister of the famous Mrs. Anne Hutchinson) was publicly scourged
in Boston by order of court, for visiting and sympathizing with her Quaker
brethren in prison.

One of the maxims of Mr. Scott's life, was to despise no honest
employment, however laborious; if he failed to obtain such business as he
desired, he took the next best opportunity that offered, a principle that
might be profitably practiced by many young men of the present day.
Deprived of a liberal education, by the pecuniary embarrassments of his
father, who had a large family to support, he left the Utica Academy in
1820, and made an effort to learn a mechanical trade, with only partial
success. He, for a time, alternately taught a country school in winter,
and was engaged for the remainder of the year in internal commerce, as
master of a boat, or as forwarding clerk, in the then prominent houses of
De Graff, Walton & Co., and Cary & Dows, on the Mohawk river and Erie
canal. This early training in the elements of commerce and navigation was
the nucleus of his subsequent pursuits, and the foundation of his
commercial success, although his operations were not on the gigantic scale
of many others, who either amassed great fortunes, or sank into
bankruptcy; he managed his affairs with such prudence, sagacity and
integrity, that he never had occasion to compound with his creditors, or
even ask for an extension.

Mr. Scott was interested in the first line of canal boats that ran through
from Utica to New York. In the outset of Erie canal operations it was
supposed that canal boats could not sail down the Hudson, and the freight
was consequently transhipped at Albany. Experiment proved the fallacy of
this belief, and thenceforward canal boats ran through to New York. A new
line of steam tow-boats on the North river, called the Albany & Canal
Tow-Boat Company, was formed, and Mr. Scott was appointed principal
manager, first at Albany and then at New York.

In 1836, his health failed, owing to his close application to business,
and under medical advice he performed a horseback journey through
Michigan, Indiana, Illinois and Wisconsin. On his way westward he stopped
at Cleveland and was favorably impressed with what was then a small but
flourishing town. In 1837, he returned from his western journey and
resumed business, but again his health failed, and he was ordered to
permanently abandon Albany and seek a more favorable climate. Remembering
the advantages of Cleveland both for business and residence, he concluded
to remove to that point.

Here he continued his connection with the forwarding business by opening
an agency for the American Transportation Line of canal boats on the Erie
canal, his office being at the foot of Superior street. In 1841, he
engaged in the purchase and shipment of staves, the markets for which
were Albany and New York. This branch of business he continued for about
five years.

In 1844, he built a steam elevator on River street, near his old stand, it
being the first brick building erected on the river front. With the
completion of this building he turned his attention more particularly to
grain, receiving it by canal from the interior. On the opening of the
Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati railroad, his elevator was easily
connected with that line, and the first load of railroad wheat stored in
Cleveland was received into his elevator.

About the year 1840, Mr. Scott became interested in the lake marine by
the purchase of the brig Amazon, of 220 tons, then considered a craft of
good size. At the time of the purchase, the West was flooded with wild-cat
money, and specie was very scarce. The brig was sold by order of the
Chancellor of Michigan, and specie demanded from the purchaser, a
condition that made buyers shy. In 1842, Mr. Scott purchased the schooner
John Grant, of 100 tons, and in the following three years added to his
little fleet the schooner Panama, of 100 tons, and the brig Isabella, of
over 300 tons, the latter being something highly respectable in the way of
lake shipping.

Prudence, foresight, and careful enterprise made all his ventures
reasonably successful. In 1865, he resolved to quit business and enjoy the
competence he had acquired, first in foreign travel, to free himself more
thoroughly from business cares, and then in lettered ease at home. In
pursuance of this purpose he spent six months in Europe, returning with
recruited energies to the enjoyment of the well stocked library of rare
volumes collected during his years of active business, and largely added
to during his foreign travels.

A few facts in Mr. Scott's life, exhibiting his thorough confidence in the
Government and the cause of the Union, should not be passed over. The
first investment in the original War Loan taken in Cleveland, if not in
Ohio, was made by Mr. Scott, August 12th, 1861. He still retains and
exhibits with justifiable pride, a certificate from the Acting Secretary
of the Treasury, dated August 29th, 1861, stating that five thousand
dollars had been received from him on account of the three years'
treasury notes, and promising that they should be sent him as soon as
prepared. From that time to the present he has invested freely in
Government securities, being fully convinced of their safety.

Since his retirement from business and return from European travel, he has
employed his leisure in literary pursuits, especially in genealogical and
historical studies, and has frequently contributed to the journals of the
day curious and interesting facts relating to the early settlers in New
England, in correction of erroneous beliefs regarding them.

In 1840, Mr. Scott was married to Miss Mary Williamson, by whom he has had
seven children, of whom three still live.




J. P. Robison.



Among the soldiers present at Braddock's defeat at Fort Duquesne, near
Pittsburgh, was John Decker Robison, an American of Scotch descent, who
also did good service during the Revolutionary war. When the war was over
he married a Hollander living on the North River, and when a young family
grew up about him, moved to western New York, where, building the first
house in Canandaigua, he received a patent of six hundred acres of land and
settled down as a farmer in Vienna, N. Y. One of his family was a boy,
Peter Robison, who stuck to the farm until the ex-Revolutionary soldier
had gone down to the tomb, and until he himself had reached several years
beyond the meridian of life, when he obeyed the general law of American
human nature, and moved toward the setting sun. Years before this step was
taken he had married Miss Hetty H. Havens, of Lyons, N. Y., and raised a
family of children, among them J. P. Robison, the subject of this sketch,
who was born in Ontario county, on the 23rd of January, 1811.

Like his father, young Robison spent the earlier years of his life in
working on the farm, and it was not until his sixteenth year that it was
decided to give him a good education. He was then sent to Niffing's High
School, at Vienna, N. Y., where he attained considerable proficiency in
his studies, including Latin and Mathematics. Having developed a taste for
medical studies he was admitted as a private pupil of Professer Woodward,
of the Vermont College of Medicine, and graduated in November, 1831.
Immediately on the completion of his studies he moved into Ohio and
commenced practice in Bedford, Cuyahoga county, in February, 1832. He soon
succeeded in building up a good practice, and for eleven years continued
in the exercise of his profession.

[Illustration: Yours Truly, J. P. Robison]

Then Dr. Robison concluded to change his business. In company with W. B.
Hillman he engaged in mercantile business at Bedford, opening a store and
at the same time carrying on other descriptions of trade, such as milling,
packing provisions, dealing in land, and other operations such as the
speculative American is always ready to engage in. Among other things he
started a chair factory and a tannery, and his active mind was always
revolving projects for the increase of business, and, of course, of
business profits.

But, whilst his hands were full of all kinds of business enterprises, Dr.
Robison found abundant leisure for a different kind of occupation. He was
an intimate friend and associate of Alexander Campbell, the leader of the
Disciple movement, and organized a congregation of this faith in Bedford,
which he preached to for sixteen years. When he commenced his ministerial
labors in Bedford, (from whom, at no time, did he receive fee or reward,)
his congregation numbered less than a dozen, but when he closed his term
of service as a voluntary minister he left for his successor a
congregation numbering four hundred and forty, showing conclusively that
his ministering had not been in vain. Nor was his zeal for the faith as
understood by the Disciples content with preaching during this long term
of service. His purse was always ready for the calls of the church, and,
in company with Alexander Campbell, he traveled from place to place
throughout a great part of Ohio, addressing the vast concourses called
together by the fame of the Disciple leader, then in the plenitude of his
power and influence as a preacher and teacher. In these gatherings and in
such company Dr. Robison enriched his mind and developed a great talent
for extemporaneous address and discussion. Of a positive nature he brought
strong earnestness and unflagging energy to the work in which he was
engaged, and carried his hearers with him, as he himself was frequently
borne away by the enthusiasm of his subject. The same earnestness and
energy which made him so successful as a preacher served to make him
popular and effective on the political platform, and in the cause of the
soldiers of the Union in recent years. During the war he was active in
procuring volunteers for the Union army, and whenever an effort was made
to aid the cause of the Union Dr. Robison was among the foremost in the
work. In politics Dr. Robison was an old Clay Whig. After the demolition
of that party he voted with the Democrats. In 1861, he was chosen to the
State Senate by the union of the War Democrats and Republicans, receiving
the largest vote for any senator from this county. Since that time he has
voted with the Republican party. His Senatorial career was highly
honorable to himself and of value to his constituents, who found in him a
faithful, active and intelligent representative.

It is as a packer of provisions that Dr. Robison has been for many years
chiefly known. For twenty-five years he had been associated with General
O. M. Oviatt in the packing business at Cleveland, and the brand of the
firm had grown to be recognized everywhere as thoroughly reliable. In
1865, this partnership was dissolved, and Dr. Robison continued the
business at first alone and afterwards in company with Archibald Baxter of
New York. The scarcity of fat cattle in this vicinity compelled him in
1866 to remove his principal packing house to Chicago, where he continues
to operate heavily, the amount paid out for cattle during the last season
being over $300,000. In addition to the Chicago packing he has continued
the work in Cleveland, and also for several years did something in that
line at Lafayette, Indiana. The firm's brand, "The Buckeye", is well known
and highly esteemed both in the United States and England, to which
provisions bearing that mark are largely shipped.

Had Dr. Robison continued his practice as a physician he would undoubtedly
have attained eminence in his profession, a leading physician having
frequently borne testimony to his extraordinary skill in diagnosing
disease, and urged him to devote his entire attention to his profession.
But he preferred curing beef and pork to curing human bodies, and, so far
as financial results are concerned, probably made a wise choice, though
the judgment of human nature and insight into men's motives to which he
attributes his success, would have served him in good stead in either
line. At the age of fifty-eight, Dr. Robison is found in possession of a
handsome competency, although he has all through life dealt with marked
liberality toward all worthy objects of charity and patriotism. He is
still in possession of much of the vigor that has characterized his
business career, and we trust his life of usefulness may yet be long.




[Illustration: Yours Truly, T. P. Handy]

Truman P. Handy.



The oldest banker in Cleveland, and probably the oldest active banker in
the State, is Truman P. Handy, now president of the Merchants National
Bank. He has been identified with the banking business of Cleveland from
his first arrival in the city, thirty-seven years ago, and throughout the
whole time has been a successful financier, managing the institutions
under his charge with unvarying skill and good fortune.

Mr. Handy was born in Paris, Oneida county, New York, January 17th, 1807.
He had the advantage of a good academical education, and made preparation
for entering college, which, however, he did not do, and at the close of
his school term, spent the remaining time, until his eighteenth year,
upon his father's farm, with the exception of two winters in which he
taught school.

On reaching his eighteenth year it was decided that he should enter on a
commercial life, and a year or two were spent in stores in Utica and New
Hartford, N. Y., leaving the latter place in October, 1826, to take a
position in the Bank of Geneva, Ontario county, N. Y., of which the Kev. H.
Dwight was president. With this commenced Mr. Handy's long banking career.
Five years were spent in this bank and then he accepted an invitation to
remove to Buffalo, for the purpose of assisting in the organization of the
Bank of Buffalo, of which he was made teller, and remained one year in
that position. In March, 1832, the young banker married Miss Harriet N.
Hall, of Geneva, and with his bride set out on the wedding tour, which was
also one of business, to Cleveland.

Under other circumstances the journey would scarcely be deemed a pleasant
one. It was in early Spring, and the weather was still inclement. The
roads were bad, and the lumbering stage floundered heavily through mud,
and amid obstructions that made the way one of discomfort, not unmixed
with peril, for six weary days, between Geneva and Cleveland. But in
addition to the fact that it was a bridal tour, the young couple were
cheered by the prospect before them. The charter of the old Commercial
Bank of Lake Erie, established in 1816, and which had gone under, had been
purchased by the Hon. George Bancroft and his family in Massachusetts, and
it was designed to resuscitate it under better auspices. Mr. Handy had
been invited to become the cashier, and in pursuance of his acceptance of
the invitation, was, with his bride, on his way to Cleveland.

The bank was organized on his arrival and commenced business on the lot
now occupied by the Merchants National Bank, at the corner of Superior
and Bank streets, the bank lot running back to the present site of the
Herald building. Leonard Case, the president of the old Bank of Lake
Erie, was president of the resuscitated bank, with T. P. Handy as cashier.
It did a thriving business until 1842, when the term of its charter
expired, and the Legislature refused to renew it, compelling the bank to
go into liquidation. When the great crash of 1837 occurred, the bank had
been compelled to take real estate in settlement of the liabilities of
its involved customers, and thus the corporation became one of the
greatest landholders of the city. Had the property been retained by the
bank owners, it would by this time have been worth to them many millions
of dollars.

The close of the bank and the winding up of its affairs necessitated the
disposal of the real estate for the purpose of dividing the assets among
the stockholders. Messrs. T. P. Handy, H. B. Payne, and Dudley Baldwin were
appointed commissioners to close up the affairs of the bank and discharge
its liabilities. This being done, the remaining cash and real estate were
divided among the stockholders, who appointed Mr. Handy their trustee to
dispose of the property. This was accomplished in 1845, when Mr. Handy
made his final settlement. During the time subsequent to the close of the
bank, he had been carrying on a private banking business under the name of
T. P. Handy & Co.

In the Winter of 1845, the State Legislature passed a law authorizing the
establishment of the State Bank of Ohio, and of independent banks. In
November of that year, Mr. Handy organized the Commercial Branch of the
State Bank of Ohio, with a capital of one hundred and seventy-five
thousand dollars, and took position in it as cashier, the president being
William A. Otis, and the directors, additional to Messrs. Otis and Handy,
being John M. Woolsey, N. C. Winslow, and Jonathan Gillett. Mr. Handy was
the acting manager of the institution, and so successful was his conduct
of its affairs that the stockholders received an average of nearly twenty
per cent. on their investment through nearly the whole time until the
termination of its charter in 1865, a period of twenty years. His policy
was liberal, but with remarkable judgment he avoided hazardous risks, and
whilst the bank always had as much business as it could possibly
accommodate, the tightest times never affected its credit.

Whilst the Commercial Branch Bank was having such uninterrupted success,
the Merchants Branch of the State Bank of Ohio, on the same street, was
experiencing a run of bad fortune. The failure of the Ohio Life and Trust
Company embarrassed it for a time, and other causes conspired with this to
cripple its resources. In 1861, the stockholders invited Mr. Handy to take
charge of its affairs as president, and he accepted the trust. His usual
success followed him to his new position, and the affairs of the bank were
suddenly and permanently improved.

In February, 1865, in common with most of the State banking institutions,
the Merchants Branch Bank stockholders decided to wind up the concern as a
State institution, and avail themselves of the provisions of the National
Banking Act. The Merchants National Bank was organized with an authorized
capital of one million of dollars, of which six hundred thousand dollars
was paid in, Mr. Handy assuming the presidency, and having associated
with him in the management, Messrs. T. M. Kelley, M. Barnett, William
Collins, James F. Clark, Samuel L. Mather, and William Bingham. Under this
management the bank has thus far had an uninterrupted tide of prosperity,
with every prospect of its continuance.

It is not alone as a banker that Mr. Handy has made himself prominent
among the citizens of Cleveland, He has been intimately connected with
other enterprises tending to increase the prosperity of the city, and it
is remarkable that all the undertakings he has been connected with have
proved profitable, to himself to a greater or less extent, as might be
expected, but in a far greater degree to others, the stockholders, for
whose interests he was laboring. Few, if any, men in Cleveland have made
more money for others than has Mr. Handy.

In addition to his banking duties, he filled the position from 1850 to
1860, of treasurer of the Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati railroad, and
managed its finances with that skill and ability which were peculiarly
needed in the earlier portion of that period, when the road was an
experiment, carried on under the heaviest difficulties. In 1860, he
resigned his position as treasurer, and is now a director in that company.
He has also been interested in other railroads centering in Cleveland.

In 1856, a Cleveland built schooner left the lakes for the ocean, and
crossed the Atlantic to Liverpool, thus commencing the direct trade
between the lakes and European ports. In 1857, another Cleveland built
vessel was sent across, loaded with staves and lumber, and returned with
crockery and iron. The success of these Tentures attracted the attention
of the enterprising business men of the lakes, and in the Spring of 1858,
a fleet of ten vessels left Cleveland, all but one loaded with staves and
lumber, for European ports. Their departure was marked by demonstrations
on the part of the authorities and leading men of business, and with a
fair breeze and good wishes the fleet bore away for salt water. Of the ten
vessels, three were sent by Mr. Handy, the R. H. Harmon, bound for
Liverpool, the D. B. Sexton, for London, and the J. F. Warner, for Glasgow.
All of the vessels made quick and profitable trips, and the trade thus
begun has been carried on with profit to the present time, although at the
breaking out of the war American vessels were compelled to withdraw from
it, leaving the enterprise wholly in the hands of English parties, who
purchased vessels for the trade.

Whilst his vessels were in Europe, Mr. Handy availed himself of the
opportunity to visit Great Britain and the Continent, to attend to his
interests, and at the same time to study some of the institutions of the
old world, especially the financial, religious and educational. In
educational matters he had always taken a deep interest, having watched
with a careful eye the growth of the public schools of Cleveland, and for
some time was associated with Mr. Charles Bradburn in their management, as
members of the Board of Education. And this, which was wholly a labor of
love, with no remuneration but the consciousness of having done some good
by hard work, was the only public office ever held by Mr. Handy, or ever
desired by him. At the same time he was deeply interested in the growth
and management of the Sunday schools of the city, and for many years has
taken a leading part in all movements calculated to extend their field of
usefulness and increase their efficiency. In Great Britain he visited the
Sunday schools and was warmly welcomed by teachers and scholars, who were
greatly interested in his account of the working of Sunday schools here,
whilst the narration of his experiences on that side of the Atlantic
frequently delighted the scholars at home on his return.

Although rapidly approaching the period allotted by the psalmist to man as
his term of life, Mr. Handy is still as full of vigor and business energy
as much younger men, and is as earnest as of old in managing large
financial undertakings, or in teaching his class in Sunday school. His
heart is as young at sixty-two, as at twenty-seven, and the secret of his
continued health and vigor undoubtedly lies in his temperate and upright
life, his kindly disposition, and that simple cheerfulness of spirit that
makes him thoroughly at home in the society of children, who, in their
turn, are thoroughly at home with him. One of the most energetic and
successful of business men, he has never allowed business to so engross
his time and attention as to leave no opportunity for religions or social
duties or enjoyments. In this way he has won the confidence and esteem of
all classes of citizens as a successful financier, a good citizen, a man
of the strictest probity, a warm friend, and a genial acquaintance.

Mr. Handy has but one child living, a daughter, now the wife of Mr. John
S. Newberry, of Detroit. His only other child, a boy, died in infancy.




[Illustration: C. Bradburn]


Charles Bradburn.



That Charles Bradburn is a merchant long and honorably known in the
commercial history of Cleveland, and that he still retains a prominent
place in the business circles which he entered thirty-three years ago, are
undeniable facts. And yet, the great feature of Mr. Bradburn's busy life,
and that of which he is justly most proud, is not his business successes,
but his connection with the public schools of this city. His money, made
by anxious care in his warehouse and among business men, was freely spent
to promote the cause of education, and the labor, solicitude and anxiety
with which he prosecuted his business, great as they necessarily were,
must be counted small compared with his sacrifices of time and labor in
the effort to extend and improve the school system and make the school
houses of the city a source of gratulation and pride to the citizens. But
whilst his hardest labor was in the service of the schools, it was purely
a labor of love, whilst his work on the river was a labor of business, and
therefore he must, in this record of Cleveland's noted men, take rank
among his commercial brethren.

Mr. Bradburn was born at Attleborough, Massachusetts, July 16th, 1808. His
father was a cotton manufacturer when that great industrial interest was
in its infancy. The first manufacture in this country of several articles
of twilled fabrics was in his factory.

At the age of seven years Charles Bradburn had the misfortune to lose his
mother, a lady highly esteemed by all who knew her. This loss was a
serious one, as it left him almost entirely to his own resources. When
sixteen years old he entered the Lowell machine shop as an apprentice, and
after a service of three years, graduated with a diploma from the
Middlesex Mechanics Association. He served as a journeyman for two years,
when, feeling that his education was not adequate to his wants, he left
the mechanic's bench for the student's desk, entering the classical school
of Professor Coffin at Ashfield, in the western part of the same State.
Subsequently he resumed his mechanical labors, which he continued until
1833, part of the time as a journeyman, but during the greater part as a
manufacturer on his own account. At that date he changed his business from
manufacturing to commerce, opening a store in Lowell.

In 1836, he decided to remove to the West, and in that year brought his
family to Cleveland, where he commenced the wholesale and retail grocery
business in the wooden building now standing, adjoining the old City
Buildings, which were not then finished. The next year he rented the two
stores adjoining in the then new City Buildings, of which but a portion
now remains. In 1840, he built the warehouse now standing at the foot of
St. Clair street and moved his business to that place, abandoning the
retail branch. At the same time he established a distillery on what was
then known as "the island," on the west side of the river. In 1854, he
removed to the spacious warehouses, 58 and 60 River street, now occupied
by him and his partners under the same name, "C. Bradburn & Co.," that
graced the walls of the City Buildings in 1836. During his long
commercial life Mr. Bradburn has enjoyed largly theturnpikesnce and esteem
of the commercial community and is now one of the most energetic business
men of the city.

But it is in his devotion to the cause of knowledge and popular education
that Mr. Bradburn appears especially as a representative man. He was one
of the first officers of the Mercantile Library Association, and in its
early history took much interest in its prosperity. His great work,
however, lay in the schools. In a letter to a friend recently written, he,
with characteristic modesty, writes: "After a life almost as long as is
allotted to man, the only thing I find to glory in is having been able to
render some service to the cause of popular education; to be called by so
many of our ablest educators the father of our public schools, was glory
enough, and ample compensation for many years of hard labor and the
expenditure of much money in the cause."

Mr. Bradburn was in 1839 elected to the City Council from the Third ward.
As chairman of the Committee on Fire and Water he reorganized the Fire
Department, which was then in a wretched condition, and, with the
assistance of Mr. J. L. Weatherly, who was made Chief Engineer, and the
aid of new laws, made it one of the most efficient of any at that time
existing in the country. As chairman of the Committee on Streets, at that
time an office of much responsibility and labor, he rendered the city
valuable service.

In 1841, he was elected a member and made chairman of the Board of School
Managers. This body was merged into the Board of Education, and for
several years he filled the office of president. For thirteen consecutive
years he served as member of the Board of School Managers and of the Board
of Education, during much of which time he had almost unaided control of
the educational affairs of the city. Mr. Bradburn succeeded in getting
through the Legislature a bill authorizing the establishment of a High
School, the first institution of the kind, connected with the public
schools, in the State of Ohio. A school of this character was started in
June, 1846, and maintained in spite of fierce opposition. But there was no
building to receive it, and its earlier years were spent in the basement
of a church on Prospect street, the room being fitted up by Mr. Bradburn
and rented by the city for fifty dollars per annum.

Feeling strongly that he could render better service to the cause of
popular education in the City Council than he could in the Board of
Education, in 1853 he resigned his seat in the latter body and was elected
to the City Council. When Ohio City was united with Cleveland, he was
chosen president of the united Councils.

Having, on taking his seat in the Council, been appointed to a position on
the Committee on Schools, his first and continuous efforts were directed
to bringing the Council to provide suitable buildings, not only for the
High School, but for all the schools of the city. In consequence of his
earnest and persistent labors an ordinance was passed authorizing a loan
for school purposes of $30,000. The loan was negotiated at par without
expense to the city. Mr. Bradburn, and the Building Committee, of which he
was chairman, immediately made plans for the Central High School, and the
Mayflower, Eagle and Alabama street Grammar schools, all of which were put
under contract without delay, and finished under their supervision to the
entire satisfaction of the Council and Board of Education. The teachers
of the public schools in gratitude for his services in the cause of
education, induced Mr. Bradburn to sit to Allen Smith, Jr., for his
picture, which was then hung in the hall of the Central High School. At a
subsequent date the High School teachers presented him with a massive
gold-headed cane, engraved with a complimentary inscription, but this
highly prized token was unfortunately lost, together with a number of
other cherished mementoes and all the family pictures, in a fire which
destroyed his residence in February, 1868. In the fire also perished a
valuable library of over four hundred volumes, the result of a lifetime's
collection, and Mr. Bradburn barely escaped with his own life from a third
story window, being badly injured in the descent.

In public matters he has done but little during the past few years,
devoting himself entirely to his business, but he may be seen on all
occasions where the cause of popular education can be benefited by his
presence. In 1848, he was the Whig candidate for Mayor, but, being ill at
the time, gave the canvass no personal attention, and was defeated by a
few votes, the opponents of the High School, of whatever party, voting
against him.

To Mr. Bradburn the credit belongs of procuring, after a hard battle
against parsimony and prejudice, the establishment of the first free High
School in the West.




Samuel Raymond.



Samuel Raymond was born in Bethlem, Connecticut, March 19, 1805. Like most
of the sons of New England, his boyhood was passed in plowing among the
rocks on one of the stony farms of that rocky and hilly State. At the age
of sixteen he commenced teaching the village school, and continued
teaching for six years, a portion of that time being spent in New York
State, in one of the many pretty towns that are scattered along on either
side of the Hudson. Returning to Connecticut at the end of his six years'
trial of teaching, he was employed to keep the books of the old and
wealthy firm of Messrs. A. & C. Day, dry goods commission merchants, at
Hartford. The late Governor Morgan, of New York, was, at the same time, a
salesman in the house.

In 1833, Mr. Raymond married Mary North, daughter of James North, of New
Britain, Conn.

In the Spring of 1835, he determined to try his fortune in the Far West,
away out in Ohio. With Kansas as the present geographical centre of the
Union, it is difficult for us to conceive of the New Englanders' idea of
the West at that time. It was something of an undertaking. It was a
journey of weeks, not a ride of twenty-three hours in a sleeping coach or
palace car. It meant long and tedious days of staging--a monotonous ride
along the Erie canal from Schenectady to some point a little farther west,
and finally, when the lake was not frozen over, the perils of lake
navigation. In 1835, Cleveland, Erie and Sandusky were all struggling for
supremacy. When Mr. Raymond got as far west as Erie, he thought that might
be a good place for him "to drive a stake," but the number of newly made
graves suggested to him, on second thought, the propriety of getting out
of the place as speedily as possible. Cleveland at that time was beginning
to put on city airs--Kellogg's great hotel (the American) was slowly going
up. The only vacant store to be had by Mr. R. was a little wooden building
on the site of the present Rouse block--a location at that time about as
far out of town as it would be safe for a prudent merchant to venture.
Henry W. and Marvin Clark were associated with him in business, under the
firm name of Raymond & Clark.

Mr. Raymond was a merchant of more than ordinary business ability, a man
of scrupulous exactness in his business dealings. His extreme conservatism
in business management carried him safely through every commercial crisis.

Like most business men Mr. Raymond had but little time to devote to
political discussions. He voted the Whig ticket as long as the old Whig
party had an existence. In religions principles he was a Presbyterian, and
united with the First Presbyterian Church in 1840, at that time under the
pastoral charge of Rev. Dr. S. C. Aiken.

In the Winter of 1866, in compliance with his physician's advice, he took
a journey south for the benefit of his health, which had been impaired by
his unremitting devotion to business. In company with a party of friends
from Cincinnati, he and his wife left Louisville for Havana, in January.
On the 2d of February a telegram was received by the remaining members of
his family in Cleveland, informing them that Mr. Raymond was among the
missing on the ill-fated steamer Carter, which was burned when within a
few miles of Vicksburg.

When the alarm was given, Mr. Raymond and his wife were asleep. Hastily
dressing themselves and providing themselves with life-preservers, they
jumped through the cabin window, Mr. Raymond having a state-room door
which he had wrenched from its hinges. Mrs. Raymond clung to a floating
bale of hay and was saved after an hour of peril and suffering in the icy
water. Nothing was seen of Mr. Raymond after he floated away from the
wreck, clinging to the door. His death was mourned by a large circle of
friends who appreciated his worth.

By diligence and economy he accumulated a valuable estate, leaving to his
family property valued at two hundred and fifty thousand dollars.




Richard T. Lyon.



The first secretary of the Cleveland Board of Trade, and its president for
the year 1869, Richard T. Lyon, is probably the oldest established
merchant now doing business on the river. He arrived here in 1823, when
there were but a few hundred people in the village, and for some time
resided with his father-in-law, Noble H. Merwin, on the lot now occupied
by Bishop's Block, about where M. Heisel's confectionary store now stands.
In 1838, he entered as clerk in the forwarding house of Griffith, Standart
& Co., at the foot of Superior street, continuing in that position until
the Spring of 1841, when he formed a partnership with I. L. Hewitt, and
carried on a forwarding and commission business on River street, under the
firm name of Hewitt & Lyon. The partnership continued until 1847, when Mr.
Hewitt retired, and Mr. Lyon continued the business in his own name at 67
Merwin street, where he has remained until the present time. In the Spring
of 1868, his son, R. S. Lyon, was taken into partnership, the firm name
being changed to R. T. Lyon & Son. For a number of years Mr. Lyon has been
the largest dealer of salt in the city, having had the agency of the salt
works in western New York.

Mr. Lyon has held, from his first entry into commercial life to the
present time, the esteem and confidence of the business men of Cleveland,
and that confidence has been shown by the fact, that for many years he was
the treasurer of the Board of Trade, having been elected to that position
on the organisation of the Board; was subsequently made vice-president,
and in the Spring of 1869, was elected president. This compliment was well
merited, for he is now one of the very few remaining members of the Board
who took part in its organization, and has never flagged in his interest
in its affairs.




[Illustration: Yours Truly, H. M. Chapin]


H. M. Chapin.



In the commercial, political, patriotic, and literary history of Cleveland
for the past fifteen or twenty years, the name of H. M. Chapin will always
have honorable prominence. In all these departments his persistent energy
and unshaken faith, even in the darkest hours, have been potent for good.

Mr. Chapin was born in Walpole, N. H., July 29th, 1823, and received a good
common school education. When fifteen years old, he removed to Boston, and
entered a dry goods importing house, in which he remained nearly ten
years. In the Spring of 1848, he left Boston for Cleveland, where he
became a partner in the wholesale grocery warehouse of Charles Bradburn &
Co., with whom he remained four years. In 1852, he commenced business as a
provision dealer and packer of pork and beef. For a time it was up-hill
work, but his native perseverance overcame all difficulties, and in the
season of 1862-3, his business had grown to seven hundred and fifty
thousand dollars. From that time there was a steady decline in the amount
of packing done in Cleveland, the supply of cattle and hogs decreasing
until but a very small quantity, in proportion to the facilities for
packing, could be depended on. The slaughter-houses of Chicago arrested
the great stream of live stock, and what escaped them went forward to the
Atlantic cities for immediate consumption. In the Winter of 1867-8, Mr.
Chapin, therefore, resolved to remove his packing business to Chicago, and
commenced operations there with gratifying success. He intended abandoning
Cleveland altogether as a packing point, but, contrary to his
expectations, he has been able to resume the business here to a moderate
extent. From 1862 to 1867, he carried on, in connection with the packing
business, a very extensive coopering establishment, employing about fifty
men, besides a large amount of machinery. Over a hundred and twenty-five
men were at the same time employed in slaughtering and packing.

In addition to his ordinary business, and partly in connection with it,
Mr. Chapin turned his attention to the question of insurance. It was a
favorite maxim with him that the West was able to do its own insurance,
and with this idea ever present, he was favorable to the establishment of
home insurance companies. Of the Sun Fire Insurance Company, of
Cleveland, he was for some years the vice-president, and labored earnestly
for its success. Being a thorough believer in the principles of
Homoeopathy, as well as an enthusiast on the subject of western insurance,
he was a willing co-worker with a number of prominent citizens engaged in
the organization of the Hahnemann Life Insurance Company, of Cleveland.
The novel character of this company--it being the first of the kind in the
United States--is sufficient warrant for a brief statement of its history.
It was established in 1865, and numbered among its stockholders such
leading business men and substantial capitalists as Wm. A. Otis, George
Worthington, William Bingham, Stillman Witt, Selah Chamberlain, Dudley
Baldwin, D. P. Eells, M. G. Younglove, and the Hon. B. F. Wade. The
leading feature was the offer to insure those whose medical belief and
practice were exclusively Homoeopathic, at lower rates than those
subjecting themselves to Allopathic treatment. The theory on which this
offer is based is, that all the evidence goes to show a lower rate of
mortality under Homoeopathic than under Allopathic treatment. The
Honorable William Baines, Insurance Commissioner of New York, in speaking
of this company in his report, says: "The Hahnemann Life Insurance
Company, of Cleveland, Ohio, is the first western company admitted into
this State. It starts with a paid up capital of $200,000, one-half of
which is deposited with the State Treasurer of Ohio, for the protection of
policy holders. The company is organized on a basis of strength and
capital, even larger than that required of New York corporations; it
reduces the rate of premium to Homoeopathic members."

Of this company Mr. Chapin was made president, and in the management of
this, as in everything which he undertakes, he infused a large amount of
his energy, and made the company a complete success. During the present
year his almost undivided attention has been given to the company's
affairs, with marked effect on its rapidly increasing business.

In 1865, Mr. Chapin was elected Mayor of the city of Cleveland. The honor
was not only unsought, but he was in entire ignorance of the whole affair
until after his election. His name had not been mentioned in connection
with that or any other office when he left the city on a business trip
that kept him absent for several days. In the meantime the nominating
convention of the Union Republican party was held, and there was some
difficulty as to a choice between the persons named for the nomination as
Mayor. In casting around for a way out of the difficulty, the name of Mr.
Chapin was mentioned and instantly met with favor. He was nominated,
elected by a strong majority, and the first intimation he received of the
movement was reading the election returns in the Cleveland Herald, on his
homeward journey.

He accepted the office in the spirit in which it had been conferred upon
him. He understood that the people believed he was disposed and able to
manage the affairs of the city vigorously and honestly, and he was not
disposed to evade the responsibilities of the office. His time was devoted
to the duties of his position, the different departments under his charge
were carefully scrutinized, and whilst his strictness and vigorous
execution of the laws made the offenders complain of his severity, there
was no question raised as to his ability, integrity, or honest zeal for
the city's interest. He discharged the duties of his office with
scrupulous exactness, and he endeavored to make others do the same. During
his administration it was no longer a reproach that the ordinances of the
city stood

  "Like the forfeits in a barbers shop,
  As much in mock as mark."

At the breaking out of the war, Mr. Chapin took an early and active part
in stirring up the people to defend the Government of the Union. Wherever
his money, influence, or active energy could be made serviceable, there he
was always to be found. Having obtained the appropriation for the
Twenty-Ninth Regiment, he worked diligently in raising, equipping, and
sending it to the field, and spent much of his own time at the front in
various capacities. The ladies who worked diligently for the comfort of
the soldiers and the care of the sick and wounded, through the medium of
the Ladies' Aid Association, found in Mr. Chapin an indefatigable
assistant. He was ever ready with suggestion, active aid, and money,
laboring day and night, either at the front, in the hospitals, or at
home, in behalf of the soldier.

The Cleveland Library Association was another field in which Mr. Chapin's
energy and business tact were manifested. In 1854, he was elected
president of the Association, which had struggled along, a feeble
organization, contending against numerous difficulties. Under his vigorous
management the Association was brought to a higher degree of prosperity
then it had ever witnessed; the income was largely increased, the number
of books increased one-half, and a lively interest excited in the public
mind concerning it. Mr. Chapin retired at the close of his term of office,
and the affairs of the Association gradually lapsed into their former
unsatisfactory condition. In 1858, an attempt was made to save it by
revolutionizing its constitution and management. A new constitution was
adopted, and under it Mr. Chapin was again elected president. The result
was even more marked than in the previous instance. The number of members
was nearly doubled, a load of debt that had accumulated through a number
of years was removed, a large number of books added to the library, and
the reading-room enlarged and improved. Again, after the lapse of ten
years, Mr. Chapin has been called to the presidency of the Association,
under circumstances precisely similar to those under which he had twice
before assumed the duties of the position.

Mr. Chapin was married October 15th, 1849, to Matilda, daughter of John
Fenno, of Boston. Of this marriage have been born six children, the oldest
of whom, a son now nineteen years of age, is in the wholesale grocery of
Edwards, Townsend & Co.; the others are all attending school.




Moses White.



Moses White, now one of the very few remaining early citizens of
Cleveland, was born at Warwick, Hampshire county, Mass., February
25th, 1791. His father's name was Jacob White, a native of Menden,
Mass., who traces back his ancestors as natives of that town, to as
early a date as 1665.

Moses White, the subject of this memoir, being deprived, at a very early
age, of his mother, by death, went to live in Mendon, with his maternal
grandfather, Peter Penninian. Afterwards he went to Boston, where he
learned the merchant tailor business, with one John Willson. From Boston
he went to Providence, R. I., where he remained about two years, and where
he became acquainted with Miss Mary Andrews, whom he afterwards married.

In 1813, being desirons of settling further west, he first went to Utica,
N. Y., and after remaining there a few months, he proceeded, with a horse
and buggy, to Cleveland, where he arrived in October, 1816, the population
of the place then being only about 150.

He established himself here as a merchant tailor, and pursued the business
steadily about twenty years, and with success. He afterwards established a
store at Chillicothe, Ohio, which, not being under his own care, did not
prove successful.

From his arrival in Cleveland, he was forward in all the moral and
religious enterprises of the place, first in union with all the religious
denominations represented, and afterwards he was more particularly
identified with the Baptist Church, in which he has been for nearly forty
years a deacon.

He now enjoys more than usual health and vigor for one of his age, and has
the respect, confidence and esteem of every person who knows him.

His wife having died in 1858, he has since that date made it his home with
his daughter, Mrs. J. P. Bishop, of Cleveland, with whom he now resides.

In many respects Deacon White's history furnishes an example worthy of
imitation. In the times of his boyhood, in New England, when a boy did not
possess the means for establishing himself in business, or of educating
himself for some professional calling, and particularly if he was an
orphan, he was required to learn some trade. In his case, his friends not
only recommended this, but he was desirous himself, of doing it. He
accordingly went from Mendon to Boston, a distance of about forty miles,
where, alone and among strangers, he sought a place where he might serve
as an apprentice. For days he wandered about seeking such an opportunity
and finally fell in with John Willson, the merchant tailor before
mentioned, who received him as an errand boy, and finally as an
apprentice, in which position he continued, passing through all the grades
incident to such employment, till he was twenty-one years of age.

Without father or mother, or friends to look up to for counsel and advice,
he persevered, and preserved his integrity, having the confidence of all
with whom he was associated.

In those early days, nothing was more common than to emigrate to the
West, leaving the principles of New England education, in religion and
morality, behind. Judging from accounts of society in Cleveland in very
early times, such must have been the case of some, at least.

But such was not the case with the youthful Moses White. Though he found
not many congenial spirits in this far-off western region, yet whenever,
in the little village of Cleveland, he heard of a place of prayer, or a
meeting, or association for the promotion of temperance or morality,
thither he bent his footsteps. Now in a ripe and happy old age he enjoys,
not only the retrospect, but also the present--and not only these, but he
is constantly looking for a consummation of perfect happiness, beyond what
either the past has, or the present life can afford.

Finally, so far as accumulating wealth is concerned, he has not been as
fortunate as some, and yet less unfortunate than many others, and now
enjoys a competence abundantly sufficient to provide for all his wants and
to transmit something to his children. Well may worldly ones say, "O that
my last days might be like his!"




David H. Beardsley.



Mr. Beardsley does not claim to be a pioneer, but an early settler of the
second class, having arrived in Cleveland with his family in June, 1826.
Cleveland is supposed to have then had about five hundred people. He was
of Quaker origin, and lived at New Preston, Connecticut, before he removed
to Ohio. He was of course anxious to obtain employment, and being a
beautiful penman, a contract was soon made with the late Judge Willey, who
was the county auditor, to serve as his clerk, at one dollar per day. He
was employed about thirty days in making the county duplicate. The taxable
property of the county at that time amounted to the sum of two hundred and
sixty-eight thousand, seven hundred and seventy-one dollars. When Mr.
Beardsley was deputy auditor, all the public business centered in the old
log court house, on the northwest quarter of the Square.

On the fourth of July, 1827, the Ohio canal was opened to lock seventeen,
near Akron, and the canal commissioners, prominent among whom was his
friend Alfred Kelley, were in need of a scrupulously honest man, and a
good clerk, for the purpose of collecting tolls. They found all the
necessary qualifications of integrity, assiduity, and accuracy in Mr.
Beardsley, who was therefore appointed, the day not having arrived when
qualification for office should be the last of recommendations. The
collectorship may be said to have been Mr. Beardsley's profession. He
spent in the office most of the period of active life, in twenty-three
years, undisturbed by the changes of administration. To our ears this may
sound incredible.

Mr. Beardsley's salary was at first three hundred dollars per annum,
increasing to twelve hundred before the close of his services. He
collected the sum of one million, three hundred and ninety-eight thousand,
six hundred and forty-two dollars and sixty-eight cents. His accounts were
models of nicety as well as accuracy, errors and discrepancies being
equally unknown.

Being a gentleman of simple tastes and habits, with few wants, he has
acquired a comfortable competence, without acquiring a thirst for gold,
and without withholding his substance from charitable and public purposes.
He is highly esteemed by all who know him, for a life-long consistency of
character, and sterling qualities as a man and a friend. The writer
occasionally sees him on our crowded streets, although quite feeble, with
a mind perfectly serene, and well aware that his race is almost run. His
record is worthy of emulation.




Thomas Augustus Walton.



When the genial countenance and kindly voice of T. A. Walton were missed
from the customary gatherings of the river merchants, it was felt that
something had been lost which not even a lucky speculation, or a good run
of trade, could not restore. When the news of his sudden death, whilst on
a foreign tour for the restoration of his health, was received, there was
genuine sorrow among his old business associates, and poignant grief with
many who had learned to look on him not merely as a successful merchant,
but as a man of tender heart and open hand when suffering and distress
appealed to him for sympathy and aid.

Mr. Walton was born in London, and to the last he looked with affection to
the city of his birth. His education was gained at the City of London
School. After leaving school he was brought up to mercantile pursuits, and
in 1830, concluding that there was a better opening in that line in
America, he came to this country, bringing with him a considerable amount
of money. For a few years he remained in New York, loaning his capital,
for which he always found ready customers, but unfortunately they were not
all as ready to pay as to borrow. He lost large sums, and was driven to
the conclusion that for a man of his openness of character and confiding
honesty, New York was an unprofitable location. The representations of a
friend, combined with dissatisfaction with his experience in the
commercial metropolis, determined him to seek his fortune in the West.
Evansburg, Ohio, had been represented to him as a desirable place in which
to live, a thriving business point, and adjacent to good hunting ground.
This combination of attractions determined him, and he set out for
Evansburg with what remained of his capital.

But the attractions of Evansburg soon wearied him. Neither his social,
commercial, nor sportsmanlike hopes were fulfilled by the facts, and Mr.
Walton speedily turned his back on the place of so much promise and so
little realization. Cleveland was the rising place of the West, and to
Cleveland he came, and established himself, as was the custom with new
comers of a commercial turn, in the produce and commission trade.
Following the old maxim, he stuck to his business and his business stuck
to him. The old frame warehouse in front of which he hung out his sign in
1838, was occupied by him for twenty-five years, until January, 1863,
when he retired from active business and was succeeded in the same
building by his nephew, Thomas Walton, who still retains the business and
the old location.

Mr. Walton's nice sense of honor commended him to a large circle of
customers in the interior and in Michigan, whilst nearly all the Canadian
business with Cleveland passed through his hands. His Canadian customers
relied implicitly on his word, and the fact that he always retained his
old friends, and received constant accessions of new, sufficiently proved
that their confidence was not misplaced.

In the Spring of 1863, soon after his retirement from business, he went to
England with the intention of staying a year or two and then returning to
enjoy the remainder of his life in ease in this country. Whilst in
England he paid a visit to some friends in Southampton, and whilst taking
a bath in a movable bathing-house on the beach, probably was seized with
cramp and suffocated by water getting into his lungs. The news of his
death caused a painful shock in business, social, and religious circles,
where he had been so well known and so highly esteemed.

For a long term of years Mr. Walton was the presiding officer of the St.
George's Society of Cleveland, and that benevolent institution owed its
usefulness in great measure to his indefatigable zeal in the cause, and to
his unstinted liberality. To the distressed of any nation he never turned
a deaf ear, but to the needy and suffering of his native country he was
ever liberal, and accompanied his unostentatious charities with kind words
and manifestations of sincere interest that were frequently as beneficial
to the recipient as the money itself. He was also a valued member of the
Masonic Order.

In religious belief he was an Episcopalian, and was long one of the
leading members of Trinity Church. His devotion was unaffectedly sincere,
and though he made no vaunt of his religious principles or hopes, there
could be no question of his deep, earnest convictions. Kind, courteous,
ever thinking of the good of others, and wholly unselfish, Mr. Walton was
a good specimen of the true Christian gentleman.

Although of English birth, and clinging affectionately to all that
reminded him of his native land, he was a thorough supporter of American
institutions, and an admirer of the American character. Deeply and warmly
as he loved the land of his birth, his affection was even stronger for the
land of his adoption, and it was his purpose to have returned from his
visit to his boyhood's home and settle down in peaceful content in the
chosen home of his manhood, until death should lay him in an American
grave. When the war broke out he was an earnest and unshrinking supporter
of the Government, and his means were freely used for its support, and for
the comfort of the soldiers who were fighting its battles. Though alien
born, and associated intimately with people of like birth, there was no
native American that could surpass him in love for the Union, and few that
exceeded him, in proportion to his means, in contributions to the defence
of the Union.

In the language of his favorite Shakespeare, it might be said of him

  His life was gentle, and the elements
  So mixed in him, that nature might stand up
  And say to all the world, _This was a man_!




George Worthington.



Prominent among the business firms of Cleveland, is that of George
Worthington & Co., a house which stands in the front rank both on account
of the business done, and of its integrity and honorable dealing.

Mr. Worthington, the founder and head of the firm, was born in
Cooperstown, N. Y., September 21st, 1813. He received a good common school
education, and then entered on a business career by becoming clerk in a
hardware store in Utica, in 1830, remaining in that position until 1834,
when he came to Cleveland and commenced business as a hardware dealer on
his own account. His first store was on the corner of Superior and Union
lane, on the site of the clothing store of Isaac A. Isaacs, and the first
goods received by him were drawn by oxen owned by a man who did all the
carting at that time. Cleveland was then but a small town, and most of the
trading was done with the teamsters that came from Wooster and other
points south, bringing pork, grain, and other products, and taking back
merchandise. Trade was brisk, but cash scarce, nearly all the operations
being more in the nature of barter than of purchase and sale.

After remaining three years in his first store, he removed to the corner
of Water and Superior streets, on the site of the present National Bank
building, and in that location he remained thirty years, during which time
he witnessed the growth of Cleveland from a small town to a large and
prosperous city.

When he had been established about fifteen years, Mr. Worthington began
rapidly to enlarge his business, and he associated with him Mr. James
Barnett and Mr. Edward Bingham, at present members of the firm. About that
time they commenced wholesaling, and gradually built up a business from
five thousand dollars the first year, to a million dollars. This, however,
involved a vast amount of labor, and an indomitable determination to
succeed by driving business. Mr. Worthington, in the absence of railroads
or other public conveyance, traveled through the adjacent townships and
counties on horseback, introducing his wares, and obtaining orders which
would be filled by the carriers' wagons.

[Illustration: Yours Truly, G. Worthington]

Railroads revolutionized trade and gave an impetus to everything, and
establishments that were on a firm footing before were prepared to take
advantage of circumstances. This was the case with Mr. Worthington. His
wholesale business has grown enormously, especially since 1860.

About 1862, Mr. Worthington projected the Cleveland Iron and Nail Works,
and, in connection with Mr. W. Bingham, matured the plans and got the
works into successful operation in about one year from broaching the
project, the work turned out being of the best quality. The owners of the
works can sell readily all they make, and furnish active and steady
employment for about two hundred men.

Mr. Worthington has also been extensively interested in blast furnaces and
coal mining, in the vicinity of Cleveland, and has been very successful in
them also.

At the present time the Cleveland Iron and Nail Company is erecting the
first blast furnace within the city limits, calculated for a capacity of
about three hundred tons per week. The firm have also built works on their
grounds for the manufacture of gas pipe, which have been in successful
operation for about a year, with the exception of a delay caused by a
fire. This is an important work in a city so rapidly growing as Cleveland,
and will retain many thousand of dollars formerly sent to Philadelphia and
other points.

On the passage of the National Bank Law, Mr. Worthington and a number of
other capitalists of the city, organized the First National Bank of
Cleveland, with a capital of four hundred thousand dollars, which has
been very successful. Mr. Worthington was elected president on its
organization, and still retains the office. He is a director of the Ohio
Savings and Loan Bank, of this city. He is also largely interested in
the local Insurance interests; vice-president of the Sun, and also
interested in the Cleveland and Commercial, and is a director of the
Hahnemann Life Insurance Company. He is also president of the Cleveland
Iron Mining Company, one of the most successful organizations of the
kind in the country.

No one man, probably, has done more towards building up the business
portion of the city than has Mr. Worthington. His first building was
erected on the corner of Ontario and St. Clair streets, now occupied by H.
Johnson. Since that time he has erected fifty dwelling-houses, and
fourteen stores.

In 1840, he was married to Miss Maria C. Blackmar, of Cleveland, by the
Rev. Dr. Aiken. Of the marriage six children have been born, two sons
and four daughters, all living. The oldest son, Ralph, is now a member
of the firm.

In 1862, Mr. Worthington became interested in the wholesale dry goods
business in New York City, and has been quite successful in the
enterprise.

Mr. Worthington is a good specimen of a self-made man, who was not
spoiled in the making. Hard work did not harden his character, nor has
prosperity turned his head. Coming to Cleveland without a dollar, he has
built up a large fortune by sheer hard work, close application to
business and strict business habits. He at the same time built up a fine
reputation by his integrity of character and scrupulous honesty in his
dealings. At fifty-six years of age, his health is now, as it has always
been, remarkably good; he has never been detained from business on
account of sickness.




N. E. Crittenden.



One of the best known names in this city, to new as well as old citizens,
is that of N. E. Crittenden. For very many years his jewelry establishment
has been a landmark in the business district "on the hill," and the
greater part of the population, for about forty years, have taken their
time from his clock.

Mr. Crittenden is a Massachusetts Yankee in birth and pedigree, having
been born at Conway, July 25th, 1804. In his earlier years he received a
good common school education, and at the age of eighteen was bound
apprentice to the jewelry and watch-making business, serving four years at
Geneva, N. Y., and then removing to Batavia, where he was employed two
years at the trade, and in Albany one year. In the latter city he married
Miss Mary A. Ogden, soon after the ceremony moving to Batavia, where,
however, he made but a short stay. He had determined on setting up on his
own account, and Batavia presented no opening for him. That land of hope
and promise, the West, tempted him as it had tempted others, and with five
hundred dollars in jewelry, purchased on credit, he started westward in
search of a place in which to turn his jewelry into cash.

Taking vessel at Buffalo he came to Cleveland, but there was no harbor,
and the vessel stopped outside to land any passengers for that place, and
then resumed her trip. Mr. Crittenden concluded not to end his voyage
until he had gone farther, and stuck by the ship until he reached Detroit,
where he landed and investigated with a view to settling. The prospect was
not inviting. In order to do business there it was necessary to understand
and speak Canadian French, and Mr. Crittenden's acquirements in that
direction were not extensive. Detroit was clearly no place for him.

Whilst roaming around the place he fell in with Mr. Walbridge, who was
seeking a location to open a dry goods business. He too was dissatisfied
with the inducements Detroit offered, and had almost resolved to abandon
the attempt and go home. Mr. Crittenden had reached the same conclusion,
and the two took the boat on the return trip, thoroughly disenchanted with
the business prospects of the West. When the boat reached Cleveland they
concluded to land and take a look at the place before they utterly turned
their backs on the western country.

It was in September, 1826. The village was pleasantly situated, and the
location impressed the strangers favorably. The houses had an appearance
of thrift and comfort, and there was an air of New England enterprise
about the settlement that confirmed the good impression formed at the
approach. Mr. Crittenden turned to his companion and announced his
determination to go no farther; he had found the object of his search.
That he might satisfy himself of the probable future of the settlement he
got a conveyance and rode into the country to see what were the
surroundings of the embryo city. As he passed up through the street his
ears were saluted with drum and fife, the people were all out in their
holiday clothes, and teams, loaded with old folks and young folks, were
coming into town, for it was "general training." The farther he rode and
the more he saw, the more firmly he became convinced that here was to be
his future home, and before long his five hundred dollars' worth of
jewelry found purchasers among the lads and lasses, and some of the older
folks, of Cleveland.

His first store occupied the site of his present store on Superior street,
and here, in a little building, he opened his original stock. The land he
subsequently purchased of Levi Johnson, through the medium of Leonard
Case, the purchase money being one thousand dollars for twenty-eight
feet, with three years' time in which to make the payments. The exorbitant
price horrified some of the old settlers, and one of them gravely shook
his head, announcing his firm belief that such a sum of money for such a
bit of land would turn Levi Johnson's head with unlooked for prosperity.
The price would scarcely be called high in the present day, when land then
considered far away in the distant country sells readily at higher rates.
In the spring of 1827, having secured his store and sold out most of his
original stock, he started East to make his first purchases and to bring
his wife to Cleveland. His friends were surprised and gratified at his
early return on such an errand. With his wife he brought some housekeeping
articles, among other things the third carpet ever brought to the
settlement.

In 1833, he had so far succeeded in business as to warrant his tearing
down the old store and building in its stead a store and dwelling
combined. Great was the admiration of the people at this building and it
was considered a just source of pride by the people of Cleveland, for to
the store was an open front, the first seen in the place, and to the
private entrance to the dwelling was attached the first door-bell in
Cleveland. The glass front and the tingling bell were unfailing sources of
attraction until others adopted the novelty and public curiosity became
sated. The building was well known to all who lived in the city previous
to 1865, for it remained until, at that date, it had to give way to the
larger, more elegant, and far more costly structure.

In 1843, Mr. Crittenden purchased the Giddings place, on the north side of
the Public Square, with the stone residence on it, then considered an
elegant mansion. The price paid for the lot, house and furniture was ten
thousand dollars--a high price as rates then were, but marvellously cheap
now. To that house he removed his family from over his store, and lived
there twenty-five years, when it was turned over to business purposes.

About the year 1853, he erected the fine business block on Water street,
now occupied by Stillson, Leek & Doering, at a cost of fifteen thousand
dollars. In 1868, he put up the handsome block on the same street that is
occupied by Childs & Co. The cost of this was not less than forty thousand
dollars, and it is a decided ornament to the street. The purchase of the
land and the erection of those elegant blocks, in addition to the one
occupied by his own business, furnish sufficient evidence of the
prosperity of his jewelry business, the regular stock of which has grown
from an investment of five hundred dollars to one of more than a hundred
and twenty-five thousand dollars.

[Illustration: Yours Truly, N. E. Crittenden]

But it must not be supposed that this prosperity was uninterrupted
throughout Mr. Crittenden's business life. There were dark storms which
threatened disastrous wreck, and nothing but stead-fastness of purpose and
force of character brought him through. In 1836 the financial tornado
swept over the land and stripped nearly every business man bare. When the
storm was at its height Mr. Crittenden found himself with fifty thousand
dollars of New York debts past due, and without the money to pay them.
Collections were cut off, and whilst he was thus unable to raise the means
from his debtors, his creditors were likewise stopped from pouncing upon
him. Other men in like condition were compounding with their creditors,
and thus getting out of their difficulties by partial repudiation. Mr.
Crittenden declined to avail himself of the opportunity, and, in course of
time, his creditors were paid in full, though that result was brought
about by years of toil, of steady, persistent application to business, of
shrewd financiering, and of rigid economy.

In his early days in Cleveland he was chosen one of the village
trustees. In 1828, when he held that office, and Richard Hilliard was
president of the Board of Trustees, the members gathered one afternoon
in an office and voted an appropriation of two hundred dollars to put
the village in proper order. Great was the outcry at this wastefulness,
on the part of some of the tax payers. One of the old citizens, who yet
lives, met Mr. Crittenden and wanted to know what on earth the trustees
could find in the village to spend two hundred dollars about. At a later
date, when Cleveland was a city and Mr. Crittenden a member of the
Council, it was voted to appropriate ten thousand dollars to protect the
lake front from encroachments by the lake. Again was Mr. Crittenden met
and upbraided for his extravagance in municipal affairs, such conduct
tending to bankrupt the city.

It is Mr. Crittenden's pride that he has had no serious litigation, his
care in making contracts having saved him the unpleasant necessity of
resorting to legal means to compel his debtors to fulfil their
obligations. But whilst looking thus sharply after his own interests,
avarice or parsimony has formed no part of his character, and he has been
liberal according to his means.




William A. Otis.



William A. Otis was one of those pioneer business men, who settled in Ohio
during the dark times which followed the war of 1812. He was one of those
to whom we owe much, but of whom the present generation know little; who
without capital or education gave an impetus to the Western settlement, by
integrity, personal energy, economy, and good sense. By force of character
alone, which was their only capital, they wrought such wonders that the
wilderness was literally transposed into fruitful fields.

Mr. Otis left his paternal home in Massachusetts, about the year 1818, on
foot, to seek a home in the West. Having reached Johnstown, in the
Allegheny Mountains, he hired for a few months as man of all work, in an
iron establishment, and thence set forward, travelling as before, by way
of Pittsburgh, to the township of Bloomfield, in Trumbull county, Ohio.
His physical constitution was equal to the labors of a new country, which
had nothing to recommend it but a rich soil, and which required above all
things perseverance and hard work. He cleared land, furnished the settlers
with goods, for which they paid in ashes, or wheat, and kept a comfortable
tavern for the accommodation of travelers. The ashes were manufactured by
himself into "black salts" or impure potash, more often styled "Pots,"
which was the only strictly cash article in the country. It was necessary
to haul the casks of potash to the mouth of Beaver river, or to
Pittsburgh, from whence they drifted on flat boats down the Ohio and
Mississippi to New Orleans, and from thence were shipped to New York. Much
of the teaming he did himself.

The "Pots" were exchanged at Pittsburgh for goods, or if shipped furnished
a credit for the purchases, with which his wagon was loaded, on the return
to Bloomfield. Currency did not in those days enter into the course of
trade, because there was barely enough of it in the country to pay taxes.
Mr. Otis was frequently obliged to furnish his customers with cash for
this purpose. When the Erie Canal was finished to Buffalo, the wheat of
the settlers on the Reserve, for the first time, became a cash article.
They had an abundance of grain, which they were glad to dispose of at
twenty-five cents a bushel, payable principally in goods. The canal
furnished a better outlet for potash than the river. Mr. Otis determined
to try a venture in flour at New York, which he considered the first lot
sent there from the Reserve.

There were no flour barrels, and no coopers, at Bloomfield, but a few
miles north towards the lake there was a good custom grist mill. He went
into the woods, cut an oak tree, set his men to saw it into blocks of the
right length, from which the rough staves were split. The wheat which his
customers brought in, was stored at the mill and ground. When the cooper
stuff was seasoned, the barrels were made, rough enough, but strong, and
his stock of flour and potash hauled through the mud thirty-five miles to
the mouth of Ashtabula creek. A schooner was at anchor outside, and as
soon as his venture was on board, he took passage with it to Buffalo, and
by canal to New York. The New York dealers were surprised and gratified,
for they perceived at once the capacity of a new country on the shores of
Lake Erie, of which they had hitherto only known in theory, not in
practical results. In quality the flour was not behind that of the Genesee
country, which seemed a wonder in their eyes. They purchased it readily
and offered every encouragement to the trade and the trader. In process of
time, wool and pork were added to the staples for the New York market. It
was by this course of incessant activity during near twenty years of
country business, coupled with a sure judgment, that Mr. Otis gradually
acquired a moderate money capital. In 1835 or 1836, he came to this city,
with his hard earned experience in traffic, and with more ready cash than
most of our produce dealers then possessed, and entered upon a wider field
of enterprise. He continued to purchase and sell the old class of
articles, pork, flour and potash, to which iron soon became an important
addition. His capital and experience brought him at once into connection
with many public enterprises, which became necessary to an expanding
country, especially such as relate to transportation. One of the earliest
tumpikes in northeastern Ohio was made through Bloomfield, from Warren to
Ashtabula. Steamers made their appearance on Lake Erie, and the Ohio canal
extended navigation into the interior. In all these auxiliaries to trade
in the heavy products of the country, Mr. Otis had a friendly interest,
and when railways began to be discussed he saw their value at once.
Finally, after his usual deliberation, he decided that the manufacture of
iron was a safe and profitable business at Cleveland; he became the
pioneer iron master of the place, with the usual result of his
operations--a large profit on his investment.

This example and success laid the foundation of iron manufactures here.
It required something more than the talents of a shrewd country merchant,
or of a mere money lender, to foresee the coming wants of trade in a
growing State, to invest in its banks, railroads and manufactures, and to
render all these investments profitable. With his increase in wealth there
was in Mr. Otis no increase of display, and no relaxation of the economy
of early life, but an increasing liberality in public charities,
particularly those connected with religion. When compared with the
briskness of modern traffic he was slow and cautious; but having finally
reached a conclusion he never flagged in the pursuit of his plans. He
belonged to a past generation, but to a class of dealers whose judgment
and perseverance built up the business of the country on a sure basis. In
the midst of a speculative community in flush times, he appeared to be
cold, dilatory, and over cautions, but he saw more clearly and further
into the future of a business than younger and more impulsive minds, who
had less experience in its revulsions.

For a number of years previous to his death Mr. Otis was largely
interested in the banking business of the city. He took a prominent part
in the organization of the State Bank of Ohio, was the originator of the
Society for Savings in Cleveland, and was for thirteen years its
president, and at the time of his death was president of the Commercial
National Bank. He was also connected with the banking firm of Wicks, Otis
& Brownell.

In connection with a notice of the originator of the Savings Bank in
Cleveland it is appropriate to briefly sketch the history of that
organization, which has worked so much good and which ranks to-day among
the most important and most valued institutions in the city. The
suggestion was first made by Mr. Otis in the Winter of 1848-9, and its
organization was advocated on the ground of public benevolence. At the
request of several prominent persons, Mr. S. H. Mather, the present
secretary and treasurer, examined the character and practices of several
eastern institutions of a similar character. A charter was drafted,
principally from those of two well known institutions of the kind then in
operation at Boston and Hartford. In the New England States every city and
many villages and country towns have organizations of this character.

In March, 1849, the Legislature granted corporate powers to W. A. Otis, H.
W. Clark, L. Handerson, J. Lyman, M. L. Hewitt, N. Brainard, Ralph Cowles,
J. H. Gorham, A. Seymour, D. A. Shepard, James Gardner, J. A. Harris, J.
H. Bingham, J. A. Briggs, S. H. Mather, J. A. Foot, and C. J. Woolson, and
their successors, to be appointed by themselves, the corporate powers to
continue thirty years. The corporators appointed John W. Allen president,
S. H. Mather secretary, and J. F. Taintor treasurer, and commenced business
in August, 1849, at the rear of the Merchants Bank, on Bank street. Mr.
Taintor was at the time teller in the Merchants Bank, and it was supposed
that he could attend to all the business of the Savings Society outside of
banking hours. This was soon found to be impracticable, and at the end of
about two years Mr. Taintor withdrew, leaving to Mr. Mather the joint
office of secretary and treasurer.

At the end of three years the deposits were only $100,000. In the latter
part of the year 1856, the society became able to have a better office,
and moved into 118 Bank street, corner of Frankfort, under the Weddell
house. The deposits in 1859, after ten years of business, were only about
$300,000, but the concern had been so closely managed that a surplus was
accumulating from the profits on investments over the six per cent.
interest paid to depositors. From that time the business of the
institution steadily increased until on the 1st day of January, 1869, its
deposits considerably exceeded two and a half millions of dollars, and out
of a large surplus had been built one of the finest and most substantial
buildings in the city, on the north side of the Park. Such have been the
fruits of the suggestion of Mr. Otis; such the success of the organization
in which he took so deep an interest during his life.

On the announcement of the death of Mr. Otis, a meeting of bankers was
immediately called for the purpose of taking some action in testimony of
their respect for the deceased. All the banks were fully represented, as
were the private banking firms. T. M. Kelly, of the Merchants National
Bank, was called to the chair, and J. O. Buell, of the Second National
Bank, appointed secretary. Appropriate remarks were made by the chairman
and others, after which a committee, composed of T. P. Handy, H. B. Payne,
Joseph Perkins, Henry Wick, and E. B. Hale, reported the following
resolutions, testifying to the respect and esteem felt for Mr. Otis as a
man of business, as a good citizen, and as a Christian:

  It having pleased God to remove from our midst, on the morning of the
  11th inst., Wm. A. Otis, who, for more than 22 years, has been
  associated with many of us in the business of banking, and has occupied
  a prominent position both in the early organization of the State Bank of
  Ohio, and of the Society for Savings of Cleveland, of which latter
  Society he was for thirteen years president, and at the time of his
  death was the president of the Commercial Bank of this city, and who by
  his wise counsels, his high regard for integrity and mercantile honors as
  well as by an exemplary Christian life, had secured the esteem and
  confidence of his associates and fellow citizens, and who, after a good
  old age, has been quietly gathered to his rest, therefore,

  _Resolved_, That while we deeply mourn the loss of our departed brother,
  we commend his virtues, and especially his high standard of Christian
  integrity, for the imitation of the young men of our city as the most
  certain means to a successful business life, and a fitting preparation
  for its final close.

  _Resolved_, That we deeply sympathize with the family of our deceased
  friend in the loss that both they and we are called to sustain, feeling
  assured that after so long a life of Christian fidelity this loss, to
  him is an infinite gain.

  _Resolved_, That a copy of these resolutions, signed by the Chairman and
  Secretary, be furnished the family of the deceased and be duly published
  in our city papers.

  J. C. Buell, Secretary. T. M. Kelly, Chairman.
  Cleveland, May 12, 1868.




E. P. Morgan.



"He who works most achieves most," is a good motto in business, and in
pursuits of all kinds. This has been the principle on which E. P. Morgan
has acted throughout life, and a faithful persistence in carrying it out
has resulted in building up a mammoth business and the consequent
possession of a handsome fortune.

Mr. Morgan was born in New London, Connecticut, in 1807. His early years
were spent at home and in attending school, where a good common education
was gained. In his fifteenth year he was taken from school and placed in a
store, where he acquired those business habits which have made him a
successful and wealthy merchant. At the age of twenty-one, he set up in
business for himself, at Middlefield, Massachusetts, carrying on a store,
and at the same time engaging in the manufacture of woolen goods. In this
store he continued twelve years, doing the whole time a thriving and
profitable business.

In 1841, he bade adieu to Massachusetts and came west to Ohio, taking up
his future home in Cleveland. He plunged into business immediately on
arriving, opening a store on the north side of Superior street, in the
place now occupied by the store of Mould & Numsen. In 1857, he saw what he
believed to be a more eligible site for business in the corner of Superior
and Seneca streets, and to that point he removed in 1858. At the same
time the firm of Morgan & Root was formed by admitting to partnership Mr.
R. R. Root. To the retail dry goods business was now added a wholesale
department, as also a millinery department, and subsequently a grocery.
The business was vigorously pushed and every department grew with
remarkable rapidity, until store after store was added to the
establishment. The "corner store" became known far and wide, and a very
large country trade was built up in the jobbing department. During the
last three years of the war, the business of the firm reached an amount
greater than had ever been anticipated by its members, and the old
quarters, capable no longer of extension, became too strait for the
expanding operations. A number of lots on the east side of Bank street,
between the Herald building and Frankfort street, being purchased by
Morgan & Root, were speedily disencumbered of the drinking saloons and
petty shops that covered them, and on their site soon arose one of the
finest business blocks in the city, estimated to cost sixty thousand
dollars in addition to the cost of the land. When the block was finished
the wholesale department of the business was removed to the new building,
leaving the retail department to be carried on in the old store. In
February, 1869, the retail business was sold out to new parties, and
thereafter the firm of Morgan & Root confined itself exclusively to the
wholesale trade.

That Mr. Morgan is one of the best business men of the city is proved by
the fact that he has failed in no one of his undertakings; not that he
has always sailed on a smooth current of success, but that when
difficulties arose his indomitable perseverance enabled him to overcome
them. He engaged in no enterprise without its having been based on good
evidence and sound judgment; he never wavered in his adherence to it, nor
slackened for a moment his endeavors to prove his faith sound; nor has he
once been disappointed as to the result. Few men have shown a like
perseverance. His habits of keen investigation and strict attention to
his affairs, enabled him to do a very safe, though a very enterprising
business, and consequently he had little occasion for professional
acquaintance with lawyers.

In addition to his mercantile business, Mr. Morgan has interested himself
in insurance matters, being president of the State Fire Insurance Company,
of Cleveland, which position he has held since the organization of the
company in 1863. Under his presidency the company has done a safe and
successful business, and has extended its operations so that it has
offices in Connecticut and other parts of New England. He is also
connected with the banking affairs of the city. In the earlier years of
his business in Cleveland, he became interested in the construction of the
canal around the rapids of Saut St. Marie, and during the progress of the
work had a store open at the Saut.

In 1864, he built his residence on Euclid street, near the corner of
Huntington street, where he has resided since that time. Though sixty-two
years of age, he is still as active and vigorous as ever, and bids fair to
long be an active member, in fact as well as in title, of the firm of
Morgan & Root.

In religious principles Mr. Morgan is a Presbyterian. For a long time he
was a member of the Second Presbyterian Church, but of late has been
connected with the Euclid street Presbyterian Church.

In 1832, he was married to Miss Laura Nash, of Middleford, Mass., by whom
he has had seven children, all but one of whom still live. The oldest son,
William Morgan, now thirty-one years old, is engaged in the manufacture
and sale of lubricating oils. The second son, Edmund N. Morgan, is an
assistant in his father's store. A daughter, Helen, is the wife of Mr.
J. B. Merriam, of Cleveland.




Robert Hanna.



The commercial interests of Cleveland and of the Lake Superior mineral
region have for many years been intimately connected, several of the now
prominent citizens of Cleveland having been attracted to Lake Superior by
the reports of its mineral riches at the time those riches were first made
generally known, and Cleveland being found a convenient base of supplies
for the mining enterprises on the shores of the "father of lakes."

One of the earliest to take an interest in this trade was Robert Hanna.
Whilst living in Columbiana county, Ohio, where he had been brought up, he
was attracted by the representations of the mineral riches of the far off
northern lakes, and in 1845 he started off to see for himself what was
truth in these reports, and what exaggeration. Traveling and exploration
in the wilds of the Lake Superior country were very difficult in that day,
and those who were anxious to make a fortune out of the bowels of the
earth had to rough it, pretty much as the seekers of gold have to now in
the tangled wilderness to the west of Lake Superior. Mr. Hanna spent four
months in careful exploration, and at length becoming satisfied that there
was something in the rumors of mineral riches, obtained from the
department, in whose charge the territory then was, a permit to locate
three square miles of copper lands. This being accomplished, he returned
to set about the organization of a company to work the prospective mines.

Whilst at Marquette, on his return from exploring the copper region, Mr.
Hanna fell in with a man who had been exploring the country back of that
place, and who brought in a specimen of iron ore which he had come
across in his search. The ore was so heavy, and apparently rich in iron,
that it was taken to a blacksmith, who, without any preparatory
reduction of the ore, forged from it a rude horseshoe. The astonishment
of those hitherto unacquainted with the existence of raw iron so nearly
pure metal, can be imagined.

But Mr. Hanna's attention, like those of most of the searchers after
minerals in that region, was absorbed in copper, and as we have seen, he
located his copper tract and returned home to provide means for working
it. A company was formed, materials purchased and miners engaged, and the
work pressed forward vigorously. The question of forwarding supplies being
now an important one, Mr. Hanna removed to Cleveland, that being the most
favorable point for the purchase and shipment of the articles needed, and
opened a wholesale grocery establishment in 1852, combining with it a
forwarding and commission business. At that time the wholesale grocery
business was in its infancy, there being but two or three establishments
of the kind in Cleveland.

For some time after the establishment of Mr. Hanna in the wholesale
grocery business, the carrying trade between Cleveland and Lake Superior
was mostly in the hands of the Turner Brothers, whose one steamer, the
Northerner, was able to do all the business that offered, both in freight
and passengers. Mr. Hanna's firm, then composed of himself, his brother,
Leonard Hanna, and H. Garretson, under the firm name of Hanna, Garretson &
Co., decided on the bold step of competing for the trade by building a
steamer of their own. The City of Superior, a screw steamer, was built in
Cleveland, under the especial supervision of Dr. Leonard Hanna, and the
most scrupulous care was exercised to make her in all respects a model
boat for the trade. Great strength of hull and power of machinery were
insisted on, in order to withstand the dangers of the formidable coast
when the fierce storms of the Fall season rendered navigation hazardous.
Accommodation for passengers on the voyage, which took several days for
its full extent, had to be provided, and great care was taken in this
respect to make the voyage as attractive as possible, attention having
been somewhat turned to the Lake Superior country as a Summer resort,
where the sultry beats of the "lower country" could be exchanged for pure
air and cooling breezes. When launched, the City of Superior proved a
complete success, and her first voyage up was a perfect ovation, a new era
having been opened in the history of travel between the upper and middle
lakes. But, unhappily, this fine steamer was lost in a storm after a few
voyages, although the great strength of her hull kept her intact, though
lying across a rock, until she could be completely stripped of her cargo,
furniture and machinery.

No time was spent in fruitless lamentations over the destruction of the
work of which they were so proud, and about which so many anticipations
for the future had been indulged in. No sooner had the news been
confirmed, than a contract was made for the construction of another
steamer, larger and better in all respects than her unfortunate
predecessor, and the result was the Northern Light, which proved a great
favorite, and is still running. Other steamers were chartered to run in
connection with her, and their success caused rival lines to be run, thus
building up the Lake Superior trade to dimensions exceeding the most
sanguine expectations of the pioneers in it. To this house belongs a very
large share of the credit due for bringing such an important proportion
of this trade to Cleveland. When Mr. Hanna first endeavored to interest
the people of Cleveland in Lake Superior matters, he was frequently met
with inquiries as to the whereabouts, not only of the copper region of
Lake Superior, but of Lake Superior itself, about which very confused
notions existed.

The copper company organized by Mr. Hanna expended over half a million
dollars in developing the deposit, and produced several hundred tons of
ore, but it was not a financial success, the fine copper not being in
paying proportion in the ore. After a few years Mr. Hanna sold out his
interest in this company, but has retained interests in other enterprises
in that region, some of which have been very remunerative.

By the death of Dr. Leonard Hanna, and the withdrawal of Mr. Garretson,
the firm of Hanna, Garretson & Co. became dissolved, and was changed to
Robert Hanna & Co., the younger members of the Hanna families taking
interest in the firm. Recently Robert Hanna has retired from active
participation in its affairs, having turned his attention in other
directions. During the past four years he has been engaged in the oil
refining business, having a refinery with a capacity of a hundred and
sixty barrels a day, which has proved very successful. He is also
president of the Cleveland Malleable Iron Works, the first of the kind in
this part of the country, and which at present promises well. The
gentlemen associated with Mr. Hanna in this enterprise have united with
him in the determination to make it a successful enterprise, and have such
management for it that it can scarcely fail to meet their expectations.

In 1868, Mr. Hanna projected what resulted in the organization and
establishment of the Ohio National Bank, of Cleveland, on January 1st,
1869, with an authorized capital of one million dollars, and with a paid
up capital of six hundred thousand dollars. It was organized with more
especial reference to the interests of merchants, mechanics and
manufacturers, and men representing these respective interests are the
principal owners of its stock. The institution thus far gives promise of
complete success. Mr. Hanna is the president; A. Cobb, vice-president;
John McClymonds, cashier.

Still in the prime of life, Mr. Hanna has the satisfaction of knowing that
he has been very successful, has built up a large fortune for himself and
done a very important work in building up the material interests of the
city, both commercial and manufacturing. Although well able to retire from
active life, and live in ease at his fine residence on Prospect street, he
prefers to do what yet lies in his power to build up the prosperity of
Cleveland still higher.




S. F. Lester.



Samuel F. Lester was born in Albany county, New York, in 1818. His youth
was spent under advantageous circumstances, and he obtained a good
education. At the age of fifteen he left the Academy where he had been
studying and entered on his commercial education by becoming clerk in a
country store, where he remained five years. Having reached his twentieth
year, he bade adieu to home, and came west to seek his fortune. His
first stay was at Clinton, Michigan, where he carried on business
successfully for three years, and married Miss Cornelia Eliza Brown, of
Tecumseh, daughter to General Joseph W. Brown, and niece of Major General
Jacob Brown, of Brownville, N. Y., the hero of Chippewa, Fort Erie and
Sackett's Harbor.

At the expiration of the three years Mr. Lester's health gave way, through
his assiduous devotion to business, and he returned to his father's house
in Albany county, New York, remaining there a year, unable to engage in
business of any kind. For the two succeeding years he worked on his
father's farm, and in this way succeeded in regaining his health.

In March, 1845, he again turned his face westward, and landed at
Cleveland, where he became a member of the firm of Hubby, Hughes & Co.,
remaining in it until its dissolution. The house of Hubby, Hughes & Co.
carried on a very extensive business on the lakes and canal. The firm, in
connection with J. C. Evans, of Buffalo, projected the first line of
propellers between Buffalo, Cleveland and Toledo, and the line was a
decided financial success. It continued to do a steadily increasing
business until the consolidation of most of the independent lines into the
American Transportation Co.'s line. A number of lake vessels also belonged
the house, and a line of canal boats belonging to the firm ran between
Cleveland and Portsmouth, and between Cleveland and Pittsburgh.

In connection with the firm of William A. Otis & Co., the firm built the
first elevator for railroad business in the city, the elevator, at the
foot of River street, being now occupied by W. F. Otis & Son. Subsequent to
this the firm erected the National Mills, at the heavy cost of seventy
thousand dollars, it being then, and now, one of the finest and most
costly mills in the State of Ohio.

In 1858, the firm of Hubby, Hughes & Co. was dissolved, and the business
was carried on under the firm name of Hughes & Lester, which was continued
successfully until 1862. In January of that year, Mr. Lester went to New
York on the business of the firm. Whilst there he was suddenly stricken
with paralysis, and lay unknown and helpless for sometime. He was at
length identified and cared for, but for a long time was in great danger,
and for a still longer time utterly unable to do business of any kind. His
serious and continued illness necessitated the breaking up of the firm,
and accordingly on the first of January, 1863, the firm of Hughes & Lester
was dissolved. On the following March, his health having been partially
restored, Mr. Lester once more entered into business, opening a produce
commission warehouse, and meeting with success.

It is the just pride of Mr. Lester that he has always escaped litigation
It is also a fact worthy of notice and imitation, that Mr. Lester has
always given strict personal attention to all the details of his business
knowing them all from the cellar to the counting-room, in the latter of
which places he is most thoroughly at home.

Mr. Lester was one of the original stockholders of the Commercial
Insurance Company, and a director and member of the executive committee
for several years. He has twice been elected Commissioner of Water Works.
Mr. Lester has, all through his commercial life enjoyed to an unusual
degree, the confidence and esteem of his fellow citizens.





[Illustration: "Yours Truly, A. Bradley"]


Alva Bradley.



To the very many who see for the first time the name of Alva Bradley, the
question will naturally arise, "Who is he?" and some wonder may be
expressed at finding a name so little known to the general public on the
list of those who have contributed largely to the commercial prosperity of
Cleveland. And yet Alva Bradley is one of the largest ship-owners of the
city, and his name is well enough known among those interested in the
shipping of the western lakes. That he is no better known outside of his
peculiar circle of business men is owing solely to his modest and
unostentatious character, he preferring to pursue the even tenor of his
way and confine himself strictly to his own affairs.

Captain Bradley was born in Connecticut in the year 1814, and lived in
that State until his ninth year. Then his father emigrated to Ohio, taking
his family with him, and settled in Lorain county. Young Bradley had few
advantages in early life. He earned his first pair of boots by chopping
wood, and when the first suspenders, knitted by his mother, were worn out,
the next pair were paid for by chopping hoop-poles.

Until his twenty-first year he worked with his father on a farm, and
then left to seek his fortune in the world, with all his effects carried
under his arm, wrapped in a cotton handkerchief. His first entry on
independent life was as a deck-hand, before the mast of the schooner
Liberty. In that capacity he remained two years, and then, having acquired
a good knowledge of seamanship, was made mate, holding that rank two
years. In 1839, he rose a step higher, and for two seasons was master of
the Commodore Lawrence.

Captain Bradley now commenced his career as an owner as well as master of
vessels. In 1841, he had built for him, in company with Mr. A. Cobb, then
a merchant at Birmingham, Ohio, the schooner South America, of 104 tons.
When she was completed he took command of her and sailed her for three
seasons. In 1844, in company with Mr. Cobb, he had built the schooner
Birmingham, of 135 tons burden, and taking command of her himself, sailed
her three years. In 1848, the same parties built the Ellington, of 185
tons, which Capt. Bradley sailed for one year. The following year he
shifted his command to the propeller Indiana, 350 tons burden, which he
and his associate, Mr. Cobb, had built for the Buffalo and Chicago trade.
Capt. Bradley ran her himself three years and then returned to a sailing
vessel, having late in the season of 1852, turned off the stocks a smart
new schooner, the Oregon, of 190 tons burden, which he ran to the end of
her first season, and then bade adieu to sea-faring life. During his many
years' life on the lakes, in various craft and under all kinds of
circumstances, it is remarkable that he never met with a serious casualty;
he was enterprising, active, vigorous in mind and body; a prudent business
man and at the same time a thorough sailor.

In the spring of 1853, he resumed his work of increasing his lake navy by
building the Challenge, of 238 tons, followed by one or more vessels
yearly. In 1854 was built the Bay City, 190 tons; in 1855 the C. G.
Griswold, 359 tons; in 1856 the schooners Queen City, 368 tons, and
Wellington, 300 tons; in 1858 the schooner Exchange, 390 tons. At this
point he rested three years and then resumed work.

In 1861 was built, in company with other parties, the S. H. Kimball, 418
tons; in 1863 the Wagstaff, 412 tons; in 1864 the J. F. Gard, 370 tons; in
1865 the schooner Escanaba, 568 tons; in 1866-7, the schooner Negaunee,
850 tons, a splendid vessel, costing over $52,000, which has been running
in the Lake Superior iron ore trade, and which has proved a very
profitable investment; in 1868 he built the schooner Fayette Brown, 713
tons, and the tug W. Cushing, for harbor towing; in 1869 the S. F. Tilden,
1,000 tons, was launched from the yard of Quayle & Martin, completing the
list of vessels built by or for Captain Bradley, making a list of nineteen
vessels, and a tug, besides a number of vessels purchased. The present
fleet is composed of nine vessels, with an aggregate tonnage of nearly
five thousand tons, besides two tugs, one plying in Cleveland harbor and
the other, in which he has half interest, at the Sault.

The record of the vessels built for Captain Bradley, and their respective
tonnage, given above, shows at a glance the gradual development of the
lake shipping commerce. The first of his fleet, the South America, 104
tons, built in 1841, was a very respectable craft in her day. From that
time there was a steady increase in the tonnage of the vessels built,
until it culminates in the S. F. Tilden, with carrying capacity of a
thousand tons burden, but just launched from the stocks.

Though owning at one time or another such a large fleet of vessels, the
casualties to them were very few, and the enterprise has proved steadily
remunerative. The schr. Dayton, Maria Cobb, Oregon, South America, and
Queen City, is the complete list of vessels lost.

Though shipping absorbed the greater portion of Captain Bradley's
attention, his interest was not wholly confined to this branch of
business. His time, means, and energy were largely employed in the
manufacture of iron, and in other commercial interests. It is his pride
that though so largely interested in business of different kinds, he has
had but one case of litigation, and that with an insurance company. His
record needs no eulogy; it speaks for itself as the record of a man of
energy, enterprise and prudence.

Captain Bradley's health had for some years not been good, but is now
improving, and there is a reasonable prospect that one who has done so
much to develop the shipping interest of the port will live for some time
yet to enjoy the fruits of his energy and industry.

Mr. Bradley was married in August, 1849, to Ellen Burgess, of Milan, Ohio,
who is still living. Of the marriage, four children have been born, three
girls and one boy.




Wellington P. Cooke.



The history of W. P. Cooke is an instance of what can be
accomplished under the most adverse circumstances, when to
persistent energy and laudable ambition are added the patience and
faith born of religions training.

The parents of Mr. Cooke were pioneer settlers in Otsego county, New
York, where his father died whilst Wellington was quite a small boy. His
mother removed to a still newer country, Macomb county, Michigan, and
there died, leaving the lad to fight his own way through the world
without the advantages of either money or education. In the year 1838,
being then but thirteen years old, he became a printer's apprentice.
Subsequently he removed to Chagrin Falls, Ohio, where he secured some
educational privileges at a seminary, obtaining the money for his
necessary expenses by working early in the morning, at night, and on
Saturday. He found employment in the village and among the neighboring
farmers. But with all his efforts his lot was a hard one. He often needed
the necessaries, to say nothing of the comforts of life, frequently
making his morning and evening meal out of potatoes and salt, the former
being of his own cooking, as he boarded himself. These articles were
purchased in many instances by money received for sawing wood on the
school holiday of Saturday.

In 1843, he came to Cleveland, tramping in from Chagrin Falls on foot, and
having half a dollar as his sole capital with which to commence life in
the city. His first attempt to gain work was in a printing office, where
he succeeded in getting a case, receiving his pay, according to the custom
of the times, in orders on grocery and clothing stores. After this he was
foreman and compositor in the office of a monthly publication, called the
Farmers' Journal, where he continued to devote his spare time to reading
and study. Subsequently he became a clerk in a grocery store at a salary
of ninety-six dollars a year. With this small sum he not only supported
himself, but gave pecuniary aid to a sister, and something to the church.

In 1848, he obtained an interest in the business, and the partnership thus
continued for three years. His reputation as a moral and religious man,
together with a great spirit of enterprise, rapidly enlarged his business,
and pointed out new channels for money-making.

[Illustration: W. P. Cooke]

In 1850, he disposed of the grocery business, and directed his whole
efforts to the hide and leather trade. In this he showed much judgment,
for the business he selected has proved to be one of the most extensive
and profitable of the West. A nephew, since deceased, about this time
became a partner. The premises occupied became too small, and a lot on
Water street was purchased, where a fine store was erected, which is the
present place of business.

The firm, which for some time existed as W. P. Cooke & Co., has been
changed to Cooke & Denison, the junior partner being a former clerk, and
under that name it is well known throughout the country, and especially in
the West, as one of the largest establishments in the West dealing in
leather, hides, wool, pelts and oil.

Mr. Cooke joined the Methodist Church at a very early age, and to the
religious influences with which he was thus surrounded, he attributes much
of his success in life. As a Church-member he was led to avoid all places
of doubtful morality, and thus escaped the temptations and vices which
destroy so many young men. He has always been strictly temperate, and does
not use tobacco in any form. He is now prominently connected with the
First Methodist Episcopal Church of Cleveland, and is noted as a zealous
laborer in the Sunday School cause.

Mr. Cooke's religion is not of that kind that is left in the church pew
on Sunday night, to remain undisturbed until the next Sunday morning, but
is carried into all his relations of life and influences all his
movements. The principles of justice and charity taught by the Christian
faith are by him carried into his business dealings and social relations.
Strictly just in business transactions, liberal in his charities to
worthy objects, and generous to the church, he exemplifies in his life
the fact that true Christian principles are not incompatible with strict
business habits, and conduce to commercial success. Remembering his early
difficulties, he takes particular interest in young men, sympathizing
with them in their struggles, and aiding them with counsel and timely
assistance where needed.




Hiram Garretson.



The firm of Hanna, Garretson & Co. has already been mentioned. The second
member of the firm, while it existed under that name, Hiram Garretson,
came like the others from Columbiana county, where he had been brought up,
although not a native of the county. Mr. Garretson was born in York
county, Pennsylvania, his parents being respectable members of the Society
of Friends. When he was very young the family removed to Columbiana
county, Ohio, where the senior Garretson opened a country store in New
Lisbon. Hiram was sent to school, receiving a good district school
education, and was then taken into his father's store as clerk, in which
occupation he remained until he was nineteen years old. At that age he
left home and engaged in trade on the rivers, taking charge of a trading
boat running from Pittsburgh to New Orleans. This class of boats has not
yet entirely passed away from the Ohio and Mississippi rivers. The
villages along the river banks were small and badly supplied with stores,
depending mainly for their supplies on the coasting boats. These are
rudely constructed craft, well stocked with merchandise of all kinds, that
drop leisurely down the river, tying up at every village or place where
there is probability of a trade, and remaining there as long as the stay
can be made profitable, then passing on to the next. When New Orleans has
at last been reached, the boat is sold to be broken up for its materials,
and the trader returns by steamer to get ready for another voyage down. It
was in business of this description that Mr. Garretson engaged for a time,
and in his voyages down the river and dealings with all sorts of people in
different States, he acquired a valuable knowledge of business and men
that has stood him since in good stead.

At length he tired of this kind of trading and returned to New Lisbon, and
carried on a moderately successful business until the Winter of 1851. At
that time a marked change came over the fortunes of New Lisbon. Up to that
period it had been a flourishing business place, its advantages of
location on the canal in a fertile district, making it one of the best
places of trade in that portion of the State. But the construction of Fort
Wayne and Cleveland and Pittsburgh Railroads effected a great and
disadvantageous change in the business of New Lisbon. The Fort Wayne road
passed it a few miles north, and the Cleveland and Pittsburgh road ran
about an equal distance west. Thus New Lisbon was cut off from all the
commercial cities, and found its sources of supply tapped at every point
by the railroads. Realizing the fate that had overtaken the town, Mr.
Garretson, at the opening of the year 1852, closed up his affairs in
Columbiana county and removed to Cleveland. There he became associated in
business with Messrs. Leonard and Robert Hanna, and the firm of Hanna,
Garretson & Co. was established.

The successful operations of that firm have already been chronicled in
these pages, and it only remains in this place to note the fact, that to
the success achieved, the energy and uprightness of Mr. Garretson
contributed in full proportion. The partnership lasted nine years.

On its dissolution Mr. Garretson established the house of H. Garretson &
Co., on Water street, with a shipping house on the river. The business of
the new firm was exactly similar to that of the old one, including a
wholesale grocery trade, with a Lake Superior commission and shipping
business. A line of fine steamers was run to Lake Superior, and the high
reputation Mr. Garretson enjoyed among the people of that section of
country, enabled him to build up a very large business in supplying their
wants. In addition, the new firm found customers rapidly increasing in
northern and western Ohio, in Michigan, and in other adjoining States. The
operations of the firm extended rapidly until it stood, at the close of
the year 1867, among the very foremost in the amount of its annual sales,
whilst the business was eminently a safe and solidly successful one.

On the first of November, 1867, Mr. Garretson sold out his wholesale
grocery business, and thus closed a mercantile career extending in this
city over sixteen years. His attention was then turned to banking. No
sooner had he retired from mercantile life than he projected and
organized the Cleveland Banking Company, which went into operation under
his presidency February 1st, 1868, with a capital of three hundred and
twenty-five thousand dollars. It immediately found all the business it
was able to do, and under the skillful management of Mr. Garretson it
has become one of the most reliable and important financial institutions
of the city.

It can truthfully be said of Mr. Garretson, that his success in business
has been owing not more to his shrewdness and foresight than to his
mercantile honor and social qualities. He made personal friends of his
business customers, and by courteous attention, as well as by scrupulous
regard for their interests, retained their good will and secured their
custom. In all the relations of business and social life, Mr. Garretson
has uniformly borne himself in such manner as to win the respect and
confidence of those brought into contact with him.




John Barr.



John Barr was born in Liberty township, Trumbull county, (now Mahoning,)
Ohio, June 26th, 1804. His ancestors, on both sides, were from
Westmoreland county, Pennsylvania, though on his father's side they
originally came from the north of England, in the days of William Penn;
and his mother's, from Germany.

His grandfather, Alexander Barr, was killed by the Indians, in 1785, on
the Miami, a short distance below, where Hamilton, in Butler county, now
stands. His parents removed from Westmoreland county, Pa., to Youngstown,
in 1800; and his father settled as the Presbyterian pastor of a church in
that place, and resided there till 1820, when he removed to Wooster, Wayne
county, in this State. The subject of this sketch was raised on a farm,
literally in the woods, and experienced the usual privations and
vicissitudes attendant on pioneer life. The new country and poverty of his
parents prevented his receiving a common English education, and it was not
until after he was of age that he mastered Murray's syntax and Daboll's
arithmetic.

On leaving home in 1825, he repaired to the Ohio canal, (then in process
of construction,) where he labored for two years, at various points
between Boston and Tinker's creek; where, with hundreds of others, he was
prostrated by the malaria of that unhealthy valley.

In 1828, he settled in Cleveland, and acted as deputy for the late Edward
Baldwin, sheriff. He took the census of the county in 1830, and was
elected sheriff that year, which office he held till 1834. Cleveland city
at that time, contained one thousand and seventy-one inhabitants; its
northern boundary was the lake, Erie street on the east, and the Cuyahoga
river on the west.

In 1835, when the idea of connecting Cleveland with other places by means
of railroads, was conceived by John W. Willey, James S. Clarke, T. P.
Handy, Edmund Clark, R. Hilliard, O. M. Gidings, H. B. Payne, Anson Haydn,
H. Canfield and others, Mr. Barr joined in and spent a good deal of time
in furthering the project. Late in the Fall of that year, he visited
Cincinnati, distributing petitions along the line of a proposed route to
Cincinnati from Cleveland, and spent most of the Winter at Columbus,
during the session of the Legislature. A charter for that road, and one
for a road to Pittsburgh, being granted, Mr. Barr brought the first copies
of them, duly certified under the seal of the State, to this city.

During 1836 and 7, Mr. Barr devoted a good deal of time in collecting
statistics of this port, the business of the city, its population, &c.,
&c., and also of the west generally, and laying them before the public in
the papers of Philadelphia and other eastern cities. In company with Mr.
Willey and the late Governor Tod, he visited Baltimore, Philadelphia, New
York and Boston, endeavoring to enlist the attention of capitalists to
aid in those enterprises. But the crash of 1837, and the general
prostration of business, that followed all over the country, rendered it
unavailing. In the Winter of 1838, Mr. Gidings, S. Starkweather,
Frederick Whittlesey, Wm. B. Lloyd and Mr. Barr were appointed a
committee to attend a railroad convention at Harrisburgh, Pa., to promote
the project of the railroad from Cleveland to Philadelphia, by way of
Pittsburgh. In 1838 and 9, at the request of John W. Willey, he still
spent much of his time in sending a series of articles on the importance
of the project, that were published monthly in the North American, a
paper in Philadelphia devoted to such projects.

Through the disastrous state of the times, these various measures had to
yield, and become, for the time being, failures; but time has shown that
those who were engaged in them were only in advance of the spirit and
means of the age.

In 1844, when this subject again arrested the attention of the Cleveland
public, Mr. Barr, although crushed by the storm of 1837, again resumed
the subject with his pen, and gave to the public in the National
Magazine, published in New York, quite a history of the city, its early
settlement, &c., together with a full description of the shipping on
their lakes, tonnage, trade, &c., that cost weeks of hard labor and
patience, more particularly to place our city in a favorable view before
the eastern public.

In 1846, a friend of Mr. B. sent him a petition to circulate and send to
the Hon. Thomas Corwin, one of Ohio's Senators, asking Congress for aid to
survey and establish a railroad to the Pacific.

In circulating this petition, Mr. Barr was gravely inquired of by one of
our citizens, "if he expected to live to see such a road built?" Mr. Barr
replied, "if he should live to the usual age of men, he did expect to see
it commenced, and perhaps built." The reply was, "If you do, you will be
an older man than Methusalah!" Both have lived to know that great work has
been achieved.

Mr. Barr procured over six hundred names to his petition, which was duly
presented by Mr. Corwin. Cleveland has now reason to be proud of the
interests she manifested in that great work, at so early a day.

In 1857, Mr. Barr brought the first petroleum to this city, made from
cannel coal, to be used as a source of light. This was new and regarded as
utopian. The article was very odorous, and failed to be acceptable to the
public, but as time rolled on, improvements in refining were made, and now
the largest manufacturing business in our city is that of petroleum.

Few, if any, of citizens have spent more time and pains in collecting and
giving to the public reminiscences of early days and early settlers--those
who located in this region, and who under such privations, trials,
hardships and sufferings commenced levelling these mighty forests,
erecting log cabins, and in due time made this formidable wilderness "bud
and blossom as the rose." In that respect Mr. Barr has done much to
preserve and lay before the public from time to time, brief histories of
many of those brave men and women who left their homes and friends in the
east, and comparative comforts, to settle in the western wilderness, to
build up homes for their children and future generations. Howe's history
of Ohio, and Col. Chas. Whittlesey's history of the city of Cleveland,
bear witness that his generous heart and gifted pen have furnished
tributes of respect to the memory of the noble pioneers, after the battle
of life with them was over, and thus supplying links to our historic chain
that makes it comparatively perfect.

Among the many reminiscences of early times related to us by Mr. Barr,
there is one we cannot deny ourselves the pleasure of relating, and
preserving: William Coleman, Esq., came to Euclid in 1803, selected a lot
of land and with his family settled upon it in 1804. For several years the
few settlers experienced a good deal of inconvenience in having only the
wild game of the country for meat, and which, at certain seasons of the
year, was unfit for the table. In the Spring the streams that put into the
lake abounded with excellent fish, and the season lasted about four weeks.
The question arose, "could these fish be preserved in salt for future
use?" The universal answer was No! The idea of preserving _fresh water_
fish in salt seemed incredible; the red man was appealed to, but he shook
his head in contempt at the idea, and in broken English said, "put him on
pole, dry him over smoke." One Spring Mr. Coleman repaired to Rocky River,
famous for its fine pike and pickerel, and laid in his stock, carefully
laid them down in salt, which cost him over thirty dollars a barrel, (at a
great risk, as his neighbors thought,) and watched them carefully from
time to time till harvest. Much to his own and his neighbors'
satisfaction, he found it a success, and proved not only a happy change of
diet for health, but also a luxury, unknown before. From this
circumstance, small at that time, originated a new source of comfort,
which proved, in time, a mine of wealth to the West, and a luxury to the
persons who located in the interior of the State. Well was it said by the
school boy of Massachusetts about those days, "Tall oaks from little
acorns grow, large streams from little fountains flow."

Mr. Barr says he made this circumstance a matter of much research and
inquiry, and fully believes that to William Coleman belongs the credit for
so useful and important a discovery.




J. B. Cobb.



The oldest bookselling house in Cleveland is that of the Cobbs, now
existing under the firm name of Cobb, Andrews & Co. It has grown with
the growth of the city, from a small concern where a few books and a
limited stock of stationery were kept as adjuncts to a job printing
office, to a large establishment doing an extensive business throughout
the northern half of Ohio and north-western Pennsylvania, and in parts of
Michigan and Indiana, and which has planted in Chicago a branch that has
grown to be equal in importance with the parent establishment. Through
financial storm and sunshine this house has steadily grown, without a
mishap, and now ranks as one of the most important and staunchest
business houses in the city.

The head of the firm, Junius Brutus Cobb, was born in 1822, received a
good common school education, and was then sent to learn the trade of a
cabinet-maker. When his apprenticeship expired he worked for a short time
as a journeyman, but was dissatisfied with the trade, and for a year or
two taught school. In 1842, he decided to try his fortune in the West, and
reached Cleveland, where he found employment as clerk in the store of M.
C. Younglove. Mr. Younglove was then doing a job printing business, and
kept in addition a stock of books and stationery. Opportunity sometime
after offering, two younger brothers of Mr. Cobb followed him, and were
employed by Mr. Younglove. In 1848, the three brothers united in the
purchase of an interest in the establishment, and the firm of M. C.
Younglove & Co. was formed, the store being located in the American House
building. Here the firm remained some years, the book trade steadily
increasing, until the old quarters were too strait for its accommodation.

In April 1852, Mr. Younglove parted with his entire interest in the
concern to his partners, and the firm name of J. B. Cobb & Co. was
adopted. Before this the printing department had been abandoned, and the
concern was run as a book and stationery store, with a bindery attached.
The old store being too small, new and more commodious quarters were found
further up Superior street on the opposite side, and with the change the
business increased with greater rapidity than previously.

In February, 1864, it was decided to open a similar house in Chicago. A
store was engaged, and Mr. J. B. Cobb went up to open it, taking with him a
relative of the firm who had formerly been their clerk, Mr. Daniel
Pritchard. The business of the new establishment instantly became large
and remunerative, the jobbing trade commencing auspiciously, and rapidly
increasing to extensive dimensions. At the same time the parent house in
Cleveland added a wholesale department to its former retail trade, and
this grew rapidly, the need of such an establishment being keenly felt by
the numerous small stores throughout the country that had hitherto been
dependent on Cincinnati or the dealers at the East. The rapid growth of
business in the two establishments necessitated a new arrangement of the
firm, and Cobb, Pritchard & Co. took charge of the Chicago house, whilst
Cobb, Andrews & Co. manage the Cleveland establishment. The latter firm
was made by the accession of Mr. Theodore A. Andrews, who had been brought
up as a clerk in the house, taking his place as a partner in April, 1865.
Mr. J. B. Cobb took up his residence in Chicago, leaving his brothers, C.
C. and B. J., in Cleveland.

The Cobbs have maintained for themselves a high reputation for honesty,
fair dealing, and courtesy in business, and in this way have secured
prosperity. The trade that, when they first took it, amounted to about
$25,000 a year, had grown, in 1868, to over $200,000. The qualities that
gained for the head of the firm so many valuable business friends, was
shared in by his brothers, and these again impressed them on the young men
brought up under their control. The result is seen in the large number of
customers frequenting the store daily, and in the extensive wholesale
trade done.




A. G. Colwell.



Mr. Colwell is a native of Madison county, New York, and came to Cleveland
in 1852, soon after the opening of the different railroads had given the
city an important start in the road to prosperity. Mr. Colwell immediately
engaged in the hardware trade, on Ontario street, where he has continued
to the present day. As the city grew in size, and its area of commerce
extended, the business of Mr. Colwell steadily increased. The retail trade
gradually developed into wholesale, and this grew into important
proportions, pushing its ramifications through northern Ohio, Michigan,
and north-western Pennsylvania.

Mr. Colwell has attended closely to his business, taking no other interest
in public affairs than is the duty of every good citizen. But whilst
carefully conducting his business he has found time for the gratification
of a cultivated taste in literature, and has taken pleasure in
participating in every movement designed to foster a similar taste in
others. In a recent tour in Europe, undertaken for the benefit of his
health, he visited the principal points of literary and artistic interest,
and brought back with him many rare and curious souvenirs of travel.




William Bingham.



Whilst few men, if there are any, in the city of Cleveland are more highly
respected than William Bingham, there are none less desirous of notoriety
in any form. To do his duty to himself, his family, and his fellow men,
and to do it quietly and unobtrusively, is the extent of Mr. Bingham's
ambition, so far as can be judged by the whole tenor of his life. Did the
matter rest with him, no notice of him would have appeared in this work,
but to omit him would be a manifest injustice, and would at the same time
render the volume imperfect.

Mr. Bingham is a native of Andover, Connecticut, and on his arrival here
from the East, became a clerk in George Worthington's hardware store.
After a few years' service in this capacity, he set up in the same line
for himself, and for about a quarter of a century has carried on
business with marked success. The operations of the firm of William
Bingham & Co., though at first small, have grown to large proportions,
and Mr. Bingham has grown rich, not through lucky operations, but by
steady, persistent application to business, aided by sound judgment and
powerful will. In addition to his hardware business, he is interested
with Mr. Worthington in the Iron and Nail works, and has furnace
interests in the Mahoning Valley.

In all his dealings, commercial or otherwise, he has been strictly
conscientious, and this has secured for him the esteem of all with whom he
has come in contact, and the respect and confidence of the general public.
His word is inviolable, and no one has ever uttered a whisper against his
unsullied integrity. In all works of genuine charity, his aid is
efficaciously, though unobtrusively given, whenever required. To the young
men in his employ, he is as much a father in his care of their interests
and conduct, as he is an employer.

In politics, Mr. Bingham has steadily acted with the Republican party, but
he is in no degree a politician. He has been chosen by the people to
places of municipal trust, but always without any desire on his part, and
solely because those selecting him considered his services would be
valuable to the city; and whenever selected as a candidate, he has been
elected, the opposing party having full confidence in his ability and
integrity. In his case, the place invariably sought the man, and not the
man the place; and it has always been with great reluctance, and because
it seemed the good of the people required it, that he consented to hold
public office. It would be better for the people were there more men like
William Bingham, and sufficient wisdom among political managers to invoke
their services on behalf of the public.




William J. Gordon.



A history of the leading commercial men of Cleveland, with no mention of
W. J. Gordon, would be not much unlike the play of Hamlet with the part of
the Danish prince omitted. Few men in the city have occupied so prominent
a position in its mercantile history as has Mr. Gordon; but, from a
natural distaste of public notice of any kind, on the part of Mr. Gordon,
we are comparatively without data, and obliged to depend upon what we know
of his history in general.

Mr. Gordon was brought up on a New Jersey farm, on which the battle of
Monmouth was fought, and that had remained for generations, and still
is, in the possession of his family. His earliest recollections were of
rural life, its boyish enjoyments and boyish tasks. He obtained a good
common school education, such as could be obtained in that neighborhood.
Whilst yet a lad he manifested a strong taste for business pursuits; and
to gratify and develop that taste he was sent to New York, where he
became a clerk.

But, young as he was, he reasoned that there was a better chance for a
successful struggle in the new West than in the already crowded marts of
the East, and that for the young man of energy and enterprise, there was
every prospect of achieving distinction and fortune in assisting to build
up the business of the new western cities. With this impression he bade
adieu to New York in 1838, and started westward on a tour of observation,
he being then in his twentieth year. He reached Erie without stopping, and
remained there for some time, carefully observing its commercial
facilities and its prospects for the future. Not altogether satisfied
with these, he moved farther west, and made his next stay in Cleveland.
Here he speedily became convinced that a great future was before that
city, and he determined to remain and share in its benefits. A wholesale
grocery establishment was opened, small at first, as suited his means and
the limited requirements of the place, but which more than kept pace with
the progress of the city.

Mr. Gordon believed that to shrewdness and persistence all things are
possible. His constant endeavor was to discover new avenues of trade, or
new modes of doing business, and then to utilize his discoveries to the
full extent, by persistent energy and unwearied industry. He was always on
the alert to find a new customer for his wares, and to discover a cheaper
place to purchase his stock, or a better way of bringing them home. Whilst
thus securing unusual advantages in supplying himself with goods, Mr.
Gordon was losing no opportunity of pushing his business among the buyers.
His agents were diligently scouring the country, looking up new customers,
and carefully observing the operations of old customers, to ascertain how
their trade could best be stimulated and developed, to the mutual profit
of the retailer and the wholesale dealer from whom he obtained his
supplies. Men of pushing character and large business acquaintance were
sought out and engaged, that they might aid in developing the business of
the establishment. As these withdrew, to set up in business for
themselves, others took their place. It is a noticable fact that no house
has sent out more young men who have achieved success for themselves; and
that success was undoubtedly in large measure due to the training received
under Mr. Gordon.

He tolerated no sluggards around his establishment. A hard worker himself,
those around him were stimulated to hard work. He was at the warehouse
with the earliest clerk and left it with the latest. He demanded
unflagging industry from his employees, but asked no more than he
manifested himself. It was through this persistent energy that he achieved
success where others might have failed.

When Mr. Gordon's capital had increased to such an extent as to warrant
his employment of some of the surplus in investment outside of his regular
business, he made some highly profitable operations of this kind. Among
them was his uniting with some others of like foresight in the purchase of
a tract of mineral land on Lake Superior, and the formation of iron mining
companies which, though not immediately profitable, eventually yielded an
enormous percentage on the original outlay, and bids fair to be equally
profitable for many years to come, besides being a source of immense
wealth to the city.

In 1857, Mr. Gordon's health failed, and since that time he has paid but
little personal attention to business, but by an extended tour to Europe,
it has been in a great measure restored, and being still in the meridian
of life, he has the prospect, unless some mishap occurs, of long enjoying
the fruits of his far-sighted intelligence and unwearied industry.




Henry Wick



Lemuel Wick, the father of Henry, was among the early settlers of
Youngstown. The Rev. William Wick, his uncle, preached from time to time
as a missionary of the Presbyterian church, in the settlements on the
border of Pennsylvania and Ohio, as early as 1779. Henry's father was a
merchant, in whose store be became a clerk at the age of fifteen. At
twenty-one he engaged in the project of a rolling-mill at Youngstown,
which proved successful. In company with a brother, his father's interest
in the store was purchased, and, having a successful future in prospect,
Mr. Wick married, about that time, Miss Mary Hine, of Youngstown, whose
father was a prominent lawyer of that place. In 1848, he became a citizen
of Cleveland, disposing of the rolling mill to Brown, Bonnell & Co., who
have since become leading iron men of the Mahoning Valley.

After a few years of mercantile business at Cleveland, the banking house
of Wick, Otis & Brownell was formed, and was successfully managed for two
years, when the brothers Wick purchased the interest of the other
partners, and continued together until 1857, when the firm name was
changed to Henry & A. H. Wick, father and son, and has thus continued
until the present time.

Mr. Wick is a man of more than ordinary business ability, and has,
throughout his long commercial life, so directed his talent as to preserve
an unsullied character, and enjoy the unlimited confidence of his fellow
citizens, in addition to a handsome competence. Speculations were always
avoided by him, because he believed that, in a young and healthy country
like this, men may accumulate property fast enough in the legitimate
channels of trade, coupled with frugality, temperance and industry. Many
of his employees, by following his example, have become eminently
successful in business.

Mr. Wick was born February 28, 1807, and, consequently, is in his
sixty-third year, although he has lost little of the elasticity of his
step or his business faculty.




William Edwards



The firm of Edwards, Townsend & Co. now ranks among the leading houses in
the city, doing an enormous business, and respected everywhere for its
enterprise and integrity. The head of the firm, William Edwards, was born
in Springfield, Massachusetts, June 6, 1831. At the age of fifteen, he
entered mercantile life as a clerk, and remained in that position in
Springfield six years. In 1852, he came to Cleveland, that year having
brought many New Englanders here on account of the recent opening of the
railroads. His first year was spent in clerking for W. J. Gordon, who then
had by far the most important wholesale grocery establishment in the city.

At the end of the year Mr. Edwards, having two thousand five hundred
dollars capital, resolved on setting up a jobbing grocery establishment
for himself, and in company with Mr. Treat, opened a store on Canal
street, doing business in a small way, and being their own accountants,
salesmen and porters. The first year's business footed up sales to the
amount of thirty-seven thousand dollars only, but the young firm was not
discouraged. The next year opened with brighter prospects. The first
year's customers were pleased with the firm, and satisfied that they were
honest, as well as active and energetic, they returned to buy again and
brought new customers. Orders came in rapidly, and by the middle of the
third year the sales had grown to the rate of sixty thousand dollars per
year. At that point, Mr. Edwards purchased the interest of his partner and
looked about for a new associate in business.

Mr. Hiram Iddings, of Trumbull county, became partner, and with his
accession, the business increased more rapidly than before. Both members
of the firm used every honorable means to push their business, and with
almost unvarying success. New fields were sought out and the old ones
carefully canvassed. As before, nearly every new customer became a
constant purchaser, being thoroughly satisfied with the treatment
received, and new customers were added. The territory served widened, and
the reputation of the house for enterprise and fair dealing spread. In
1862, the sales had grown to two hundred and forty thousand dollars. More
aid was necessary to attend to the business of the firm, and on the first
of October, in that year Mr. Amos Townsend was added to the firm, which
then became Edwards, Iddings & Co. A year from that time Mr. Iddings died,
and on the first of January, 1864, a change was made in the title of the
firm to Edwards, Townsend & Co., Mr. J. B. Parsons being admitted as the
third partner. Under that title and organization it still continues.

The business of the firm has kept fully abreast with the progress of the
city. The members are shrewd, enterprising, always on the lookout for new
openings for trade, and ready to take instant advantage of them. They each
have a happy faculty of making friends, and still happier faculty of
retaining them. The proof of this is seen in the increasing sales, which
now amount to one million dollars a year, the customers being scattered
through northern Ohio, Pennsylvania, and a portion of Michigan. Their
extensive stores on Water street are constantly busy with customers and
with the receipt and shipment of goods.

Mr. Edwards has attained prosperity, not by the favor of others, but by
fighting his own battle of life with indomitable perseverance and
imperturbable good humer. He has worked hard and persistently, but at the
same time acted on the belief that "care killed a cat," and that "a light
heart makes work light." His hearty good humor has had no small share in
attracting and retaining customers, and has at the same time enabled him
to rationally enjoy the prosperity his labors have brought him. But his
good humor never leads him to abate a jot of his shrewd watchfulness in
business matters, and to his prudence and keen observation are owing the
fact that he has almost wholly escaped litigation. At thirty-eight years
old he takes rank among the foremost and most successful marchants of
Cleveland, whilst his frank, hearty manners, his warm friendship, and his
liberal unselfish benevolence which distributes charity with an
unstinting, though intelligent hand, rank Mr. Edwards among the most
valued and most valuable of citizens.




Amos Townsend



Amos Townsend was born near Pittsburgh in 1831, and received a good common
English education. At fifteen years old, he left school and entered a
store at Pittsburgh, in which he remained three years, and then removed to
Mansfield, Ohio, where, young as he was, he set up in business for
himself, retailing goods, and remaining a citizen of that town during the
greater part of nine years.

During his residence in Mansfield, the Kansas troubles broke out and
arrived at such a pitch that a Congressional committee, comprised of
Messrs. John Sherman of Ohio, W. A. Howard of Michigan, and W. A. Oliver
of Missouri, was appointed to proceed to Kansas and investigate the facts
in regard to General Stringfellow's opposition to Governor Reeder's
administration. Mr. Sherman procured the appointment of Mr. Townsend as
United States Marshal, and he accompanied the commission to the scene of
disturbance. He was on a hill near Lawrence when he saw the _passe
comitatus_ of the United States Marshal of the Territory batter down the
Free State Hotel, it having been indicted as a nuisance by the Grand Jury.
Shortly afterwards, Mr. Townsend was taken prisoner by General
Stringfellow, but on ascertaining his position he was released.

In 1858, he came to Cleveland, having been engaged by Gordon, McMillan &
Co. In that establishment, he remained nearly five years, and then became
partner in the firm of Edwards, Iddings & Co., which, on the death of Mr.
Iddings, became Edwards, Townsend & Co. The operations of that firm have
already been spoken of.

Mr. Townsend has served a full apprenticeship to the business in which he
is now engaged, and is familiar with all its details from the cellar to
the counting-room. As a skillful financier, he has few superiors, and the
large operations of the firm bear evidence to this in the regularity and
safety with which they are conducted.

In 1866, the Republicans of the Third Ward chose him as their candidate
for member of the City Council, of which he was afterwards chosen
president. He not only polled the full vote of the party, but drew a large
number of Democratic votes, and was elected by a good majority, although
the ward has generally been considered Democratic, and has retained his
seat to the present time, his personal popularity among all classes,
combined with the unexceptionable record he made in the Council,
overcoming all opposition. At the organization of the new Council for
1869, he was unanimously re-elected president, a fact as complimentary as
it is rare, it being the almost invariable custom for each party to vote
for its own candidate, even where the result of the election is a foregone
conclusion. He was in the same year suggested as the Republican candidate
for Mayor, and would undoubtedly have been chosen to that office had he
not considered it incompatible with proper attention to the large and
rapidly increasing business of his firm.




[Illustration: Your Friend, D. A. Dangler]


David A. Dangler.



David A. Dangler, like scores of other successful men in Cleveland, is a
conqueror of adverse circumstances. In taking a cursory glance at the
early history of representative Clevelanders, noticed in this volume, it
will be readily seen that our business firms are largely composed of men
who, in early life, were compelled to divide their time between work on
the farm and attendance at the district school. Much of the debilitating
dissipation common in cities has been escaped by them; and hence, they
have both sound minds to project, and vigorous bodies to execute.

Mr. Dangler found it necessary, at the early age of seven years, to do
something towards carrying on his father's farm in Stark county, Ohio.
During the Winter months, he had the benefit of a district school until
1838, when, at the age of fourteen, he was employed in a dry goods store
at Canton, as boy of all work. Here, he won the confidence of his
employers, and by closely saving his limited wages, was able to attend
school six months more, which completed his education. With this
exception, he continued to serve in the same store until 1845, when, with
a very limited capital, the savings from his wages, he commenced on his
own account, in the same business.

In 1850, he left the trade in dry goods and took up that in hardware. The
late Mr. John Tennis, who was also a Stark county man, and Mr. Dangler, in
1853, formed a partnership for jobbing in this line at Cleveland. The
success of the concern was all that reasonable men could expect. Their
connection continued until 1867, when it expired by limitation. They were
among the first wholesale firms on Water Street, and this enlarged field
of commercial operations gave full exercise to the talent and energy of
Mr. Dangler. Trade was pushed in all directions, and in a remarkably short
time they succeeded in building up a lucrative business.

Success did not make a miser of Mr. Dangler. On the breaking out of the
rebellion, he entered with all his native enthusiasm into the home duties
of the war. In August, 1862, he took a prominent part in the organization
of ward committees for raising recruits and providing for the familles of
soldiers. A large part of his time during the war was devoted to this
work, and will ever be remembered with gratitude by scores of families for
timely assistance rendered during that trying ordeal. In the Fourth ward,
where he lives, there never was a man drafted to fill its quota.

In 1864, he was elected a member of the City Council, and in 1865, a
member of the House of Representatives for Cuyahoga County, by the
Republican party. These public trusts were so well filled that in 1867, he
was returned to the Senate, representing the most important commercial
district of the State except one, and at all times being watchful and
active in the interests of his constituents. Among the important measures
originated by him in the Legislature, are the Metropolitan Police, State
Charities, State Gas Inspection, and the Building and Loan Association
Acts. The last mentioned act has been very extensively taken advantage of
among his immediate constituents. No less than ten societies have been
organized in this city, under it, and have already been productive of much
good among the laboring class, by enabling them to obtain homesteads on
easy terms. The capital stock of these societies amounts to over three
million dollars, and if the act is as highly appreciated throughout the
State as it is here, the benefit accruing therefrom will be almost
incalculable, inasmuch as the monthly payments would, in many cases, be
squandered; whereas, now, they are not only saved, but secure a share of
the profits of the association in proportion to the stock held. The
successful working of these institutions must be exceedingly gratifying to
Mr. Dangler. He is an active, energetic and impulsive member, though not
without considerable tact, and generally successful in putting his
measures through. As a speaker he is clear-headed, terse and forcible, and
on subjects appealing to patriotism, really eloquent.

Mr. Dangler is liberal with his means, with broad plans, not for himself
alone, but for the public; indeed, we have few men among us more public
spirited than he. To this new element of self-made and successful men, the
city owes much of the unparalleled development of the few past years.
Their energy and commercial intelligence have inaugurated a new order of
things here, placing Cleveland in the front rank of western cities.

Mr. Dangler has recently formed a new partnership, and is again engaged in
the hardware business, having established the new firm of Dangler &
Bowman, on Superior Street. He is still young and vigorous, and has it yet
in his power to accomplish much.




T. S. Beckwith.



In speaking of the mercantile interests of Cleveland as developed by her
prominent operators, it is with pleasure we produce a brief notice of Mr.
T. S. Beckwith, one of our well known and most successful merchants. He
was born in Lyme, CT, Jan. 11, 1821. Until he was fourteen, he remained
on the farm with his father, at which time he commenced clerking in a
store in Brownville, Jefferson Co., N. Y., and remained four years. He
then came to Cleveland and at once engaged as a clerk with Alexander
Sacket, who was then carrying on business on Superior Street, precisely
where Mr. Beckwith's carpet store now stands. After two years with Mr.
Sacket, he went as clerk with P. M. Weddell & Co., in which capacity he
served four years, when he was taken into partnership with P. M. Weddell,
Dudley Baldwin and W. E. Beckwith, his brother, and in this firm did
business in the dry goods line for about four years, when he and his
brother, alone, carried on business several years, and finally Mr. Henry
Wick became associated with them and another store was started. Both
stores were continued about four years, when the firm dissolved, and
another formed under the name of Beckwith, Sterling & Co., composed of T.
S. Beckwith, F. A. Sterling and G. Clayes. This firm was dissolved after
two or three years and the subject of this sketch left the dry goods
business and opened the first store for the exclusive sale of carpets in
Cleveland. After five or six years, his former partner, F. A. Sterling,
again became associated with him. The firm of Beckwith & Sterling existed
three years when they admitted two young men in their employ, O. Baker
and W. R. Havens.

Mr. Beckwith is a thorough business man, quick to form judgment and quick
to act upon it. He is among our best financiers, nearly always makes an
investment pay. When he was regularly employed as a salesman, he was hard
to match, and one great secret of his success as such was his courteous
demeanor to all, whether rich or poor, and an industrious effort to
please. We recommend those of our young men who desire to succeed in
business to study one of the principal keys to T. S. Beckwith's success--a
polite attention to all. It will pay.

Mr. Beckwith's business has grown with the city, and the profits with it,
and although he has only attained to the meridian of life, and in the full
enjoyment of mental and physical energy, he has acquired a handsome
competency.

Besides his mercantile interest, Mr. B. has aided in giving to Cleveland
the character of a manufacturing city, having invested largely in the
white lead factory of this city, which is under the management of Mr. J.
H. Morley, an account of which will be seen in the Manufacturing
Department of this work.

Business has not, however, engrossed the whole of Mr. Beckwith's time and
talents. He is as thorough a worker in the cause of religion, morality and
benevolence as in trade. For a number of years, he has been an active
member of the Second Presbyterian church of this city, always taking a
lively interest in the Sunday school connected with the church. He was
also as indefatigable in the interests of the Bethel Church and Sunday
school of this city, and which is now doing a noble work in the city.

Mr. B. was married in 1849, to Miss Sarah Oliphant of Grandville,
Washington Co., N. Y. Two children of this marriage are living and a
third dead.




[Illustration: Yours Truly, Elias Sims]


Elias Sims.



Although Mr. Sims has not been strictly a man of commerce among us, his
life labor has been one wholly devoted to enterprises that are strictly
conducive to that foundation of a commonwealth. Properly placed, he would
be with general contractors, but as we have not material sufficient for a
department under that head, he must take rank among the men whose trade
has been facilitated by his enterprise.

Elias Sims was born at Onondaga, New York, August 4. 1818, and is another
striking instance of the value of early dependence on one's own
resources. Until he was fifteen years of age, Elias worked on a farm,
when he concluded to leave it, and strike out for himself on another
line. He worked as a laborer on the New York canal for some time, and
being a lad of great force of character with a keen eye to business, he
was very soon selected as an overseer. He held this situation for about
two years when he became deputy superintendent of the works, being at the
time only in his eighteenth year. After considerable experience in this
business, he concluded there was an opportunity to make more money by
contracting than by working on a salary, and consequently resigned his
office and commenced on a work for which he was eminently adapted by
nature, and one in which he subsequently became remarkably successful,
as, indeed, was his first contract, for it resulted in a profit of
several thousand dollars. Men did not become millionaires in such short
order then as now, and so much money so easily obtained almost unbalanced
the young contractor. It made him less careful in his estimates, and, as
may be easily judged, his next job swallowed the whole of his capital,
and compelled him to become overseer again.

The next speculation he engaged in was the building of a tug, in
connection with two others, and which proved a success. After some time,
he obtained a dredging contract at Port Stanley, Canada, and being very
successful in this he entered into it as a permanent business, and
appeared among the live men of Cleveland in 1856, as a contractor for
dredging the "old river bed". From year to year, this contract for
dredging at Cleveland has been continued, and in addition to this, he has
executed some immense jobs at Grand Haven, Mich., Erie, Pa., and
Milwaukee, Wis., in which he has been uniformly successful. He also
contracted largely in the construction of the Great Western Rail Road, in
Canada, and canal locks in Iowa. He is interested in propellers on the
lakes, and has two tugs and three dredges in this harbor.

Mr. Sims may well be styled a pioneer in the system of dredging, by means
of which all the lake harbors have been able to receive vessels of double
the old tonnage. Although of a quiet, he is not by any means of an
indolent temperament, and has exhibited business energy in a way that did
not make much noise, but which led to sure results. Mr. Sims was one of
the contractors and one of the proprietors of the Rocky River Rail Road
and Hotel. He is also interested in the People's Gas Company of the West
Side, and we are driven to the conclusion that such a long series of
successes in such undertakings cannot be due to accident; there must be
for foundation, a clear, calculating mind, and the ability to execute well
what is well planned. Projects in which others had failed became
profitable under his management. He is still in the vigor of life going on
as usual with his contracts.

In 1838, Mr. Sims married Miss Fosburgh, of Onondaga Co., N. Y.; of the
marriage three children were born, Mrs. Sloane of Buffalo, Mrs. Evatt of
Cleveland, deceased, and Mrs. Wm. Starkweather of Cleveland.




Joseph Perkins.



One of the most noticeable mansions on the north side of Euclid Avenue is
the tasteful and substantial stone building a little west of Sterling
Avenue, which, from its general style of architecture and its handsome
surroundings of lawn and shrubberies, resembles the comfortable country
home of a family of wealth and taste in England. This is the residence of
Joseph Perkins, and in its neat, home-like beauty, gives at once a good
idea of the character of its owner, and a perpetual invitation to repose.

Mr. Perkins was born July 5, 1819, in Warren, Ohio, his father being Simon
Perkins of that place. His educational advantages were food, and after
leaving school he entered his father's office. Born to comfortable
circumstances he never had occasion to struggle for an existence as have
so many of the now wealthy citizens of Cleveland, but, on the other hand,
the acquisition of riches without hard labor for it did not, as in so many
other cases, prove his ruin, nor did he spend his days in idleness. On his
father's death, he was one of his executors and gave his whole attention
to the task of closing up the estate. That duty performed, he came to
Cleveland and found abundant occupation in managing his own estate and in
executing the duties devolving upon him through his appointments to places
of trust in banks, railroads, and other organizations. For several years,
he was a director of the Cleveland and Mahoning Railroad Company and took
an active part in its affairs. On the death of Governor Tod, he was chosen
president of the company, a position he still retains and the duties of
which he performs with scrupulous fidelity. He is also president of the
Second National Bank. During the building of the Euclid Street
Presbyterian Church, he was a member of the building committee, and has
taken an active interest in the affairs of that church for many years. He
was also a member of the building committee of the Savings Bank Society
and of the building committee of the National Bank Building.

In 1837, Mr. Perkins united with the Presbyterian Church, of which he has
since remained an active and influential member, the scene of his
profession being in Marietta, where he listened to the teachings of the
Rev. Mr. Bingham.

In October, 1840, he married Miss Martha E. Steele, of Marietta, by whom
he has had six children, four of whom still survive.

Mr. Perkins is a man of no ordinary character, and it is unfortunate for
the world that there are so few of his mould in comparison with the whole
number of people. The governing principle of his life is religion, his
actions are directed by his conscience. Although rich and controlling large
means, he is utterly free from the sin of avarice, and, though fully
appreciating the value of money, he respects it mainly for the power of
doing good it gives the possessor. His liberality is great, but is guided
by a wise caution instead of being squandered indiscriminately. He
dislikes being imposed upon by unworthy petitioners, and therefore
narrowly investigates alleged cases of distress before relieving them.
When satisfied that the object is worthy, his aid is generous and
ungrudging. His ear is ever open to the tale of distress, his hand ever
open when the distress is found to be real instead of simulated to impose
upon the charitable. He has been known to leave his mails untouched all
day that he might trace out and relieve cases of genuine affliction or
suffering. His time and best judgment are given to the widow and
fatherless, nor is his counsel empty-handed. In business matters, the rule
of his life is not to claim the lion's share, although furnishing the
means for an enterprise, but to deal with others as he would have done by
him under similar circumstances. He believes that by pursuing this policy,
he has reaped greater material advantages than if he had pursued a
grasping policy, whilst his conscience is the easier for his forbearance.
His firm determination to do right in every transaction and under all
circumstances has in his case given fresh proof of the truth of the adage
that "honesty is the best policy."

Nor, though among the wealthy of the city, is he an aristocrat in feeling.
To him, the poor soldier's widow, the laborer's wife, and the wife of the
millionaire are equal in their claims upon his courtesy and his attention.
He is in feeling one of the people, yet utterly innocent of the arts of
the demagogue, and repudiating with firmness any attempt to bring him
forward into political life, against the heats and confusion of which his
modest and quiet character revolts.

Although not of robust health, he is enabled to get through a large amount
of work by methodical habits and by a strict avoidance of injurious haste
and worry. His leisure is spent in the enjoyments of his beautiful home
and in the cultivation of a fine artistic taste which has been developed
and gratified by a tour among the principal art centers of Europe.




Hinman B. Hurlbut.



Himnan B. Hurlbut, a lineal descendant of Governor Hinman, of Connecticut,
was born in St. Lawrence County, New York, July 29, 1818. In his boyhood,
he received such education as the common schools provided, and the time
not spent in the school room was employed on his father's farm, he being
the youngest of a large family and required to help along with the others.

At the age of fifteen, he left the farm and engaged as clerk in the
mercantile business in Washington, St. Lawrence County, where he remained
about three years.

In 1836, he removed to Cleveland and commenced the study of law with his
brother, H. A. Hurlbut, then practicing law here. On August 7th, 1839, he
was admitted to practice, and at once went to Massillon, Stark county,
where he opened an office for the practice of his profession. His cash
capital when he started for his prospective field of labor, consisted of
three dollars and twenty-five cents. The disbursement of this sum was as
follows: three dollars for his packet fare to Massillon; twenty-five cents
for three sheets of paper and two packets of tobacco. His worldly goods
were all contained in a hair trunk; the most valuable item of which was
his law library, comprising two volumes, Blackstone and Kent's
Commentaries. Our readers may well be assured that Mr. Hurlbut was
dreadfully in earnest about that time to commence business. He soon
succeeded in making a commencement; his talent and industry were rewarded
by one of the largest and most lucrative practices in that section,
extending through Wayne, Holmes, Tuscarawas, Carroll, Columbiana, and
Summit counties. As a lawyer he was very successful. He continued the
practice of his profession until 1850, four years of which time he was the
law partner of Hon. D. K. Cartter.

Some three years before retiring from his law practice, he became
interested in banking at Massillon, and in 1850, organized the Merchants
Bank, of Massillon, with a capital of $100,000. This was in connection
with Dr. I. Steese, who is still president of the bank, with the capital
increased to $200,000. It was and is a very successful enterprise.

In 1852, still retaining most of his interest in the bank at Massillon, he
came to Cleveland, and commenced a private banking business, under the
firm name of Hurlbut & Go., under the American House, and continuing about
one year, when he purchased from the directors of the Merchants Bank the
charter of the Bank of Commerce, and at once commenced business under it,
with Mr. Parker Handy as president, and himself as cashier. About a year
afterwards Mr. Handy resigned, and Mr. Joseph Berkins became president.
The stock was increased from time to time till it reached $250,000, and
then reorganized under the name of the Second National Bank of Cleveland,
with the same officers, and nearly the same board, with a capital stock of
$600,000, and its success may be judged when we say that it has a reserve
fund of over $400,000, and it may well be characterized as one of the
strongest, if not the strongest bank in Ohio.

Mr. Hurlbut was cashier from the commencement, and labored assiduously in
its interests, so that the Second National Bank of Cleveland is eminently
the fruit of his labor and skill. Mr. Hurlbut was obliged to resign his
position January 1, 1866, on account of failing health, induced by
excessive mental application, and was succeeded by the assistant cashier,
J. O. Buell, who still retains the office. On resigning, he was made vice
president, which position he still retains. He took a trip to Europe,
where he remained two years, returning much improved.

Besides his official duties here, in 1864, in connection with Messrs. J.
Perkins, A. Stone and S. Witt, he purchased of the Board of Control, the
charter of the Toledo Branch of the State Bank of Ohio, which also proved
a great success, paying in the neighborhood of twenty-five percent per
annum. It was reorganized under the National Bank Law. Mr. Hurlbut held no
official position in this bank, but assisted in its management.

For some years, he has been a director of the Bellefontaine Railroad
Company, and on the consolidation of that company with the Cleveland,
Columbus and Cincinnati Railroad Company, was made a director of the
consolidated line. He has added to his interests in banks and railroads
some important investments in the iron interests of the city, and through
his shrewd observation and extensive business knowledge, has managed to
make his investments profitable. For fifteen years, he was a member of the
State Board of Control of the State Bank of Ohio. From the organization of
the Protestant General Hospital of Cleveland, he has been its president.

Mr. Hurlbut's sole official connection with politics was his serving as a
delegate from the Seventeenth Ohio District in the Philadelphia Convention
that nominated General Taylor. He is in no degree a politician, but always
takes an active interest as a private citizen and voter, in the discussion
of political questions. His tastes are elegant and refined, and since his
virtual retirement from the pressing duties of business, he has found
enjoyment in the cultivation of those tastes. His manners are affable and
genial, his disposition frank and generous. In business matters, he has
always been prompt, and has never allowed his engagements to lie
unfulfilled or be postponed.




[Illustration: "Yours truly, E. I. Baldwin"]


Elbert Irving Baldwin.



The dry goods establishment of E. I. Baldwin & Co. is one of the best
known business houses of Cleveland. Its reputation extends widely beyond
the limits of the city, and throughout a large portion of the State it is
known as one of the places to be visited whenever a shopping excursion is
made to Cleveland.

Elbert Irving Baldwin, the founder and head of the firm, was born in New
Haven, Connecticut, May 13, 1829. He received excellent early educational
advantages, in preparation for a literary life, but as his health was not
equal to this, he turned his attention to mercantile pursuits, when about
eighteen years of age, by engaging as clerk in the dry goods house of
Sandford & Allen, in his native town. With the firm he remained several
years, and then engaged for about two years with a dry goods firm in New
York city.

In October, 1853, Mr. Baldwin came to Cleveland, and on the completion of
Northrup & Spangler's Block, commenced the retail branch of the dry goods
business, his father, S. I. Baldwin, being a partner in the business for
the first three years. Mr. Baldwin opened out with a stock of goods
costing sixteen thousand dollars, and at the close of the first year had
made sales to the amount of forty-three thousand dollars. This was an
encouraging result for those times, and he correctly judged that it was
but the foundation of a large and lucrative business. Each succeeding
year, without any exception, has brought an increase of business, till the
annual sales of the firm are in the vicinity of a million dollars, which,
in a retail business, in a city of Cleveland's size, is very large; and
fairly entitles him to be regarded as the most successful dry goods
merchant Cleveland has ever had. Having from the first conducted business
in a strictly honorable manner, selling only good articles at reasonable
profits, and allowing no misrepresentations, the result is, that many of
the customers of the house are of fifteen years' continuance. This, in
conjunction with the natural growth of the trade growing out of an
increase in the population, now gives his house the appearance of a
central dry goods market.

Besides endeavoring to deal faithfully with customers, he inaugurated the
one price and cash system of trade, so as to be faithful to himself and
his creditors, and the result of all is--immense success.

To meet the demands of trade, in 1868, his firm purchased a piece of land
whereon stood part of the well known City Buildings, on Superior street,
and erected the elegant store now occupied by them, at an expense of over
one hundred thousand dollars. It has been selected by us as a symbolic
title page, representing Cleveland present, and is at once an ornament to
the city, and a monument to untiring industry and integrity. The building
has a frontage of forty-two and a half feet, a depth of one hundred and
fifty feet, and a height of eighty feet, overtopping all the blocks in the
city. The front is of Amherst sandstone. The building is divided into five
stories, with a basement; the ground floor, occupied by the store, having
five hundred feet of counter-room. Without, the architectural taste
displayed was unexceptionably good, the building having an appearance of
lightness and elegance, whilst at the same time conveying an idea of
strength and solidity. The store is fitted up in the most sumptuous
manner, and is of itself an attraction to visitors, to say nothing of the
rich wares always there displayed.

On the retirement of his father, Mr. Baldwin associated with himself his
brother-in-law, H. R. Hatch, and in 1863, Mr. W. S. Tyler, an employee, was
admitted to an interest in the business, and in 1866, Mr. G. C. F. Hayne,
another employee, became a partner. This is an excellent custom, and we
are glad to see so many of our heavy merchants acknowledging the integrity
and ability of their clerks in the same way.

Mr. Baldwin has now the general superintendence of the whole business;
and, although he is not, nor ever has been, physically strong, is very
active, and there is little that escapes his observation.

He was married, August, 1855, to Miss Mary Janette Sterling, of Lima,
Livingston county, New York. The fruits of the marriage were three
children now living, and one daughter who died.

Mr. Baldwin has been connected with the Second Presbyterian church about
thirteen years, and has taken an active interest in the Sunday school. He
was trustee of the church for several years, and has always been found
ready to aid in the furtherance of every good work.




[Illustration: Yours Truly, G. N. Abbey]


Grove N. Abbey.



The trade in stoneware is a very important branch of the business of
Cleveland, and this lies in the hands of one firm, of which Grove N. Abbey
is the leading member. As the West generally is supplied from the parent
house of the Abbeys, or from one or other of the branch establishments
through the West, in which Mr. Abbey holds an interest, it would be
manifestly out of place to omit, in a work of this character, a reference
to him and his operations.

Mr. Abbey was born in Portland, Connecticut, August 19th, 1818. He was the
eleventh of a family of thirteen, of whom seven yet live. The father,
Asaph, died at the age of fifty-five. The mother, Ruth Hollister, survived
her husband thirty years, the last twenty-two of which were spent in the
family of her son Grove N., and died February 20th, 1868, at the advanced
age of eighty-six. As before said, she had thirteen children, twelve of
whom married, and thus enabled her to remark, as she repeatedly did, that
she had had twenty-four children. Before her death she had seventy-one
grandchildren added to the list of her descendants, besides fifty-seven
great-grandchildren, and one of the fourth generation, making in all one
hundred and forty-two descendants.

At the age of sixteen, G. N. Abbey bade adieu to his New England home and
set out for the West. A good portion of his first year after leaving home
was spent in Pittsburgh, which he then left for Ohio, where he has since
resided; twenty-one years in Akron, and the remainder of the time in
Cleveland. His first experience in Akron was as a clerk, from which he
rose to the position of merchant on his own account, carrying on business
until 1856. In the Spring of the preceding year he commenced business on
River street, Cleveland, in the sale of Akron stoneware, in which he had
become interested, and in 1856, removed his family to Cleveland, where he
has since that time resided, retaining his mercantile interests in Akron
until 1858.

When Mr. Abbey was carrying on a mercantile business in Akron, his
attention was called to the growing importance of the manufacture and
trade in stoneware, made from the clay of the Springfield clay-bed, which
has since become famous for the superior quality of stoneware made from
it. The pioneer in the business was David Abbey, a brother of Grove, who
died in Chicago, in 1856. The extension of railways to Akron rapidly
developed the trade in stoneware, and the Abbey family turned their
exclusive attention to it. The trade grew to importance wherever the
articles found their way. To obtain greater facilities for sale and
distribution, Mr. Grove N. Abbey came to Cleveland and obtained storage
privileges in a warehouse on River street, at the foot of St. Clair hill.
Soon the increase of business justified the engagement of the whole
building, and from that time the growth of the trade has been rapid and
permanent. Brandi houses were established in Chicago, Indianapolis, and
St. Louis, and the parent houses in Akron and Cleveland have been kept
busy in supplying the needs of these branches as well as of their own. The
character of the article dealt in became known throughout the West, and
wherever introduced the trade soon increased in importance. The result has
been a gratifying success to the Abbeys, and the addition of a large
revenue to the county of Summit.

In all their various ramifications of business, Mr. Abbey has occupied an
important position. In addition to providing for the home trade, he has
exercised constant personal supervision over the supplying of the western
branches. The negotiations between dealers and manufacturers have mostly
been managed by him, and the importance of these negotiations may be
judged from the fact that the requirements of the customers of Abbey & Co.
regulate the amount of stoneware manufactured in Summit county, and thus
affect the business and revenues of the county.

The business of the Cleveland house of G. N. Abbey & Co. has gradually
been increased by the introduction of other articles of a kindred nature,
such as the brown and yellow ware, manufactured at East Liverpool, Ohio,
glassware from Pittsburgh and New York, and fire-brick and fire-clay. The
position of Cleveland renders it the natural distributing point for those
wares, and the extensive facilities possessed by Mr. Abbey, and his long
experience in the business, place the monopoly of the trade in his hands.
That nothing but good has grown out of this virtual monopoly, is seen in
the fact that the business is steadily increasing, that no dissatisfaction
is expressed by the customers, and that no litigations have taken place
during the long business career of the house, extending over a hundred
years in Cleveland.

During the last six years the firm has had some interest in vessels on the
lakes, and these interests have been carefully watched by Mr. Abbey, who
has entire control.

It will be rightly inferred from what has already been said, that Mr.
Abbey has achieved success in business. That success is due to no lucky
accident or extraneous circumstances, but is the natural result of devoted
attachment to business, keen insight, and a determination to follow, as
far as practicable, the golden rule of doing as you would be done by, and
of a desire to avoid all misunderstandings.

If there be one business faculty more than another, prominent in Mr.
Abbey, it is that of ability to do a large business, on a small capital;
having, like nearly all of our merchants, commenced business with nothing
that his own hands had not earned, and passing through all the trials
incident to mercantile life in a young country, he has become an excellent
financier. Naturally of a genial temperament, and inclined to look on the
bright side of things, he glides over reverses and difficulties easier
than some people, yet he has always keenly felt, and often deplored, the
want of such early advantages as children of the present day possess.

Being early interested in the cause of temperance, he has persistently
endeavored to spread its beneficial effects by means of temperance
organizations, and in April, 1869, he was nominated as temperance
candidate for Mayor on the first strictly temperance municipal ticket ever
put in nomination in Cleveland. The result was the polling of a temperance
vote of about ten per cent, of the whole vote cast.

Twenty-seven years since, whilst in business at Akron, he was induced to
make a profession of faith and be received into the Congregational church.
The faith then professed has never been renounced, and he is now an active
member of Plymouth Congregational church in Cleveland.

On November 4th, 1844, Mr. Abbey married Miss Sarah Goodale, of Kent,
Ohio, but who came originally from Massachusetts. Of this marriage there
were four children, three of whom are still living; the oldest being
married to Charles H. White, of Chicago, Illinois. The other daughter and
a son remain with the family at home.




B. W. Jenness.



Mr. Jenness was born in Deerfield, New Hampshire, July 14, 1806, received
a good academical education and in 1823 removed from Deerfield to
Strafford, in the same State, where he engaged in merchandizing,
continuing in that occupation for thirty years, and finding it reasonably
remunerative. In addition to keeping his store he filled the position of
postmaster of the town for fifteen years, being appointed under several
successive administrations. He represented the town in the lower branch
of the State Legislature, and held the office of High Sheriff for over
five years, the county which he officiated in having since been carved
out into several counties. On leaving that office he became Probate
Judge, which position he retained five years and then resigned, although
the terms of office were such that he could have retained his position
until he was seventy years of age. He was nominated by the Breckenridge
party for Governor of the State, but declined. In 1845-6, he was
appointed to the Senate of the United States, to fill out the unexpired
term of the Hon. Levi Woodbury, who was appointed to the Supreme Court of
the United States. In 1850, he was a member of the Constitutional
Convention to revise the constitution of New Hampshire, after which he
retired to private life, and has allowed politics to take their own
course without his aid.

Mr. Jenness came to Cleveland seven years ago, but immediately after his
arrival started into the lumber business here with vigor, and has followed
it up in the same way, until now he has become so intimately connected
with Cleveland commerce that he seems like an old settler who has grown up
with the city. He superintended the whole business here from the first,
whilst his partners attended to the manufacturing department at their
mills in Michigan, until May 1st, 1869, when Mr. Jenness bought out their
entire interests. He has succeeded in building up a business equal to the
best in that line in the short space of seven years, which speaks well for
the energy and business ability displayed.

In addition to his lumber business Mr. Jenness, in connection with three
others, built the propeller B. W. Jenness, for carrying lumber and trading
from Buffalo to Chicago and intermediate ports. She carries about 330,000
feet of lumber, and cost $50,000. He has also been part owner of several
other vessels since he has resided here.

[Illustration: Very Truly Yours B. W. Jenness?]

Mr. Jenness is a man of the most active temperament, he no sooner decides
that a thing has to be done than he does it with all his might. One may
form an idea of him by seeing him write his name; as quick as the pen
touches the paper it is off like a flash of lightning, with the signature
complete. He is broad and powerfully built, and to all appearance can
endure as much as most men, although sixty-three years of age. Like other
successful men, he attributes his success to strict attention to business
in person. In politics he has always been a Democrat. In religion he is
very liberal, favoring Baptists, Presbyterians, Congregationalists and
Unitarians when occasion serves. He is held in esteem by all who know him,
and we trust he may have many years of usefulness before him.

Mr. Jenness was married in 1827 to Miss Nancy Shackford, of Strafford,
New Hampshire, whom it was his misfortune to lose in May, 1868, leaving
two daughters the sole survivors of a family of five, the three sons
being dead.




John Fletcher Warner.



The late J. F. Warner was a native of Burlington, Vermont, on the border of
Lake Champlain. His parents were poor, and his early advantages were
limited. At an early age he became a sort of cabin boy on one of the Lake
Champlain steamers. Mr. Warner came to Cleveland in 1833 or 1834, and went
into the employ of Wellman, Winch & Co., who then kept a warehouse near
the present site of the Erie elevator. Mr. Warner often related to his
friends with much glee, a little incident that occurred in connection with
his engagement to labor for this firm. It appears that it was represented
to him that he was desired to travel for the house; and he, with visions
of a span of white horses, elegant outfit, and an easy time, readily
accepted the proposition to travel for them. But his bright expectations
were soon clouded; his horse was shown him and his course of travel was
the circle around a horse power used for elevating grain from vessels,
prior to the erection of any steam grain elevators in the city. He saw he
had been the victim of a practical joke, and commenced his travel with as
good a grace as possible, under the circumstances.

Mr. Warner remained with this firm for about two years, and then became
warehouseman for Ransom, Baldwin & Co., which was composed of John G.
Ransom, now residing in Hamilton, Canada, Stephen A. Baldwin, deceased,
Charles M. Giddings, deceased, and William H. Bruce, then residing at
Green Bay, and, we believe, now deceased. In 1838 or 1839, this firm was
dissolved, and merged into Ransom, McNair & Co. Mathew McNair, Jr., the
junior partner of this firm, whom the older residents will recollect, is
now residing in California. Mr. Warner continued with this firm until
they retired from business, and then he formed a business connection with
Augustus Handy and Ralph H. Harmon. We do not know whether it was prior
or subsequent to this partnership that he lived for a year or two at
Tonawanda, but are under the impression that it was prior; but at the
time of the Tonawanda speculation, gotten up by Clevelanders, he was
induced to go there.

After about two or three years, the firm with which Mr. Warner was
connected, moved to Chicago, but being all Clevelanders, and Chicago not
being congenial to them, the firm soon dissolved, and the members of it
moved back to Cleveland, since which time Mr. Warner was employed in no
active business. At intervals he had made investments that proved
profitable, and not being in very robust health, had but little
ambition, and lived in comparative retirement. He was one of those who
loved to talk over old times, and never forgot old faces. He was as
charitable as his means would permit towards worthy objects, and
preserved through all his business relations a character for strict
integrity. He was a man of strong friendships, frank in his avowals, and
left a circle of business and social friends who will remember him as an
upright, warm-hearted, and public spirited man, who lived in good
report, and died sincerely lamented.

For many years Mr. Warner had been more or less an invalid, though not
often confined to his house, with Bright's disease of the kidneys. In
November, 1868, it assumed a more serious phase, and on December 19th,
1868, terminated his life. About eight months previously, he suffered the
loss of his beloved wife, while spending the colder months in Florida,
which had a very depressing effect upon him, and took from him a very
necessary incentive to life.




A. V. Cannon.



On the 10th of July, 1867, died, after a very short illness, A. V. Cannon,
one of the most promising of the young business men of Cleveland, beloved
by his intimate associates, and esteemed by the whole business community
brought in contact with him, and thus able to learn his worth.

Mr. Cannon was a native of the Western Reserve, having been born in
Streetsboro', Portage county, in 1834. On leaving school he entered the
store of Babcock & Hurd, in Aurora, in that county, and when those
gentleman removed to Cleveland he accompanied them and remained in their
establishment some time, making a twelve years' stay with them altogether.

He then went into the produce and commission business, and one year later
formed a partnership with Mr. J. F. Freeman, which existed until dissolved
by death. For two years before his death his health had been impaired, and
he had been confined to his house for about eighteen months with an
affection of the leg, but had recovered sufficiently to attend to
business, and was in a fair way of perfect recovery. As a relaxation from
business, he visited some friends in the West. On his return he was seized
with inflammation of the bowels and died after a very brief illness.

Mr. Cannon was one of the kindest of men, universally respected in
business circles for his integrity and probity, and in the social circle
for his mild and gentle manners and Christian spirit. He died at the early
age of thirty-three, without an enemy, and with the confidence, the esteem
and the love of all who knew him. On the announcement of his death the
Board of Trade passed resolutions of respect and sorrow, paying high
tributes to his business, social, and Christian qualities. He was buried
with full Masonic honors, being a valued member of that order.

Mr. Cannon was married June 8th, 1863, to Mary, daughter of the late David
Morris, and left one child, a daughter, now five years of age, very bright
and promising.

At the meeting of the Board of Trade, the announcement of Mr. Cannon's
death was made by Mr. H. S. Davis, in the following terms:

  It is with feelings of profound sorrow that I announce the decease of
  A. V. Cannon, Esq., a much respected member of this Board. He has been
  stricken down suddenly, in the hour of his manhood, and in the midst of
  his usefulness. I have known Mr. Cannon from his early manhood, and can
  bear testimony to his untiring industry, strict integrity, and the
  purity of his character in all the relations of life. He was earnest in
  business, pleasant and affable in his demeanor, beloved by all who knew
  him, and it is not too much to say that in his death the Board has met
  with an irreparable loss.

  We cannot lose such men without feeling that it comes very close to
  ourselves, and let us pause in the midst of our daily avocations to pay
  our parting respects to the memory of one who, were he living, would be
  first to recognize it as being due to others, and I would therefore
  suggest to the meinbers of this Board, that so far as possible they
  attend his funeral.

Mr. R. T. Lyon offered the following resolutions, which were
unanimously adopted:

  _Resolved_, That we learn with much regret and sorrow the death of our
  esteemed friend and member of this Board of Trade, Mr. A. V. Cannon,
  noted for his modesty, honesty, business qualifications, strict
  integrity and moral principles, and worthy of the imitation of us all;
  and in these manifestations of our respect and regard we sympathise with
  the family and friends of the deceased in their sorrow and affliction.

  _Resolved_, That we will make it our duty to attend the funeral of the
  deceased at the appointed time.

  _Resolved_, That the daily session of this Board be suspended on the day
  of the funeral of the deceased.

  _Resolved_, That a copy of the above resolutions be transmitted to the
  family of the deceased, by the Secretary.




H. F. Brayton.



If there be a business man in Cleveland without an enemy, we think it must
be H. F. Brayton. He has been connected with various branches of business
in this city for thirty-three years, and enjoyed to an unusual degree the
confidence of his fellow citizens.

H. F. Brayton was born in Jefferson county, New York, November 22, 1812.
He obtained a good academical education, and at the age of eighteen went
to New York city and engaged as a clerk in a dry goods store, where he
remained six years. During that time he became secretary of the first
total abstinence society ever organized in that city. He was also
treasurer of the Young Men's Anti-Slavery Society in that city, so far
back as 1834, when Abolition doctrines were very unpopular. He it was that
engaged the noted Theodore D. Weld and sent him out to the Western Reserve
to lecture on the subject, and who succeeded in a very marked degree in
bringing the masses over on to Abolition ground, and from which, in this
section, they never receded until every bondman's fetter was broken. John
Jay, our present minister to Austria, was, at the same time, one of the
directors of the Society. He also connected himself with the Liberty
party, being associated with Salmon P. Chase, in its early history. He
next glided into the Free Soil party, and from that to the Republican.

In 1836, Mr. Brayton left New York and came to Cleveland, and very soon
became book-keeper of the old Bank of Cleveland, and remained in the same
position three years. He then went to Columbus and became cashier of a
bank. After one year he resigned and came back to Cleveland, where he
engaged in private banking, and continued the same for about ten years.

In 1850, Mr. Brayton became the first agent of the Continental Insurance
Company, in this city, and still retains the office. This has been one of
the most successful companies in the country. He is also the agent of the
Washington Insurance Company, and the peculiarity of the two companies is,
that the assured participate in the profits.

In January, 1869, his son, H. G. Brayton, became interested in his
father's business, under the firm name of H. F. Brayton & Son. H. F.
Brayton is also a partner in another insurance agency in the city. About
six years since he went to New York and took charge of the agency
department of the Columbia Insurance Company, and continued in the
discharge of the duties of the office for one year, when the agency
business was discontinued in that company, and Mr. Brayton accepted a like
situation in the Resolute Insurance Company, where he remained about two
years, and then returned to Cleveland, where his business had been carried
on as usual during the three years of his absence.

Mr. Brayton has not devoted his entire attention to banking and insurance
since his residence in Cleveland. From 1854 to 1857, he was connected with
the firm of I. C. Pendleton & Co. in the coal trade, and previous to this
he was the secretary of the Ohio Coal Company, which dealt principally in
Pittsburgh coal for gas purposes. He is also at present engaged in the
foreign passenger and real estate business.

Mr. Brayton was for a number of years president of the Cleveland Board
of Underwriters, but resigned on leaving the city for New York, as
already narrated.

On coming to Cleveland Mr. Brayton united with the First Presbyterian
church, and has continued his connection with that denomination in the
various societies in the city until the present time, and has been a
worthy and consistent member.

The first impression a stranger receives of H. F. Brayton is, that he is a
high toned gentleman, and every subsequent interview is certain to confirm
it. He is a man of strict business habits, and expects his dues, and yet
his large benevolence and goodness of heart not only prevents the
slightest approach to meanness, but often causes him to suffer wrong
rather than be thought to be doing wrong himself. Were it otherwise, he
would have been one of the richest men in Cleveland to-day, for he
posseses both the ability and energy.




O. A. Childs.


Among our most energetic firms is that of O. A. Childs & Co., manufacturers
and wholesale dealers in boots and shoes, Water street. It was commenced
by Messrs. Seymour & Crowell near twenty years since. It became Crowell &
Childs in 1856, and so continued until 1864, when, by the death of Mr.
Crowell, it became O. A. Childs & Co. The business of this firm has
steadily increased from the first and their yearly sales now amount to
about $700,000.

In 1857, they commenced manufacturing a portion of their own goods, and
since 1860 have manufactured all their leading lines, i.e., those they
depend upon for service. Their trade extends through Ohio, Michigan,
Indiana, Pennsylvania, a large amount being annually transacted in the
Lake Superior region.

Although born in Massachusetts, Mr. Childs has lived in this city from
boyhood and may with propriety be called a Clevelander. He is still a
young and active merchant and one who has made himself a thorough,
competent business man in all its details, from the cellar to the counting
room. This, with unlimited energy, has brought him success.




James McDermott.



Among the mercantile interests, having their headquarters at Cleveland,
which during a comparatively few years have grown into prominent sources
of wealth and are yearly expanding in value and adding to the material
prosperity of the city, the Building Stone and Grindstone interest is
worthy of especial mention. Only a very few years since this trade was in
its infancy, and as late as 1863 had not come to be recognized as worthy
of special efforts for its development. That it then became so is in great
measure owing to the sagacity and enterprise of the firm of James
McDermott & Co.

James McDermott was born in the village of Whitby, county of Ontario,
Canada West, on the 19th of September, 1836. His father, who is still
living, is by birth an Irishman and a native of the city of Dublin. His
mother, who is also living, was born in the county of Ontario, Canada
West. The father of Mr. McDermott is a man of considerable culture, and in
all the relations of life has been distinguished for great energy and the
strictest probity. His mother is no less distinguished for her uprightness
and her clear perception of moral duty, and especially for the energy and
determination of her character.

James McDermott is the oldest of a family of eleven children, and as not
unfrequently happens to an oldest son, where the parents are in moderate
circumstances, James found himself at an early period of his life clothed
with important duties connected with the care of the family. When in his
twelfth year the family moved from the village of Whitby to a farm in the
same township, and here came a change in the relations of the young lad,
in the new duties he was required to assume, which laid the foundation of
those correct business habits which have given him his present honorable
position in the business community. His father occupied the post of United
States Consul and Harbor Master (the latter embracing all the functions of
a Collectorship) at the port of Whitby, together with several local
offices which required his whole attention on every day of the week except
Sunday. During the week, therefore, much of the business connected with
the working and care of the farm was devolved upon James. The farm, being
a new one, required to be cleared, and in this labor the young lad did his
full share, manifesting always the most indefatigable industry. The family
remained on the farm some seven or eight years, during which time James
became an adept in all kinds of farm work.

Young McDermott's opportunities for obtaining an education, at best
limited, were still further restricted by his farm life, and during the
years thus spent his progress in mental attainments was very moderate,
embracing only what he could gather during a few weeks of winter from a
country school in the elementary branches.

A change at last came when the family quit the farm and removed to Whitby,
in the year 1856. James was now twenty years of age, and being thrown into
intimate contact with a larger number of his fellow men than ever before,
the ambitions and impulses of his young manhood were more keenly stirred.
He entered the office of his father, who still occupied the position of
Harbor Master, and, though entirely ignorant of the duties, he quickly
acquired a knowledge of the entire business and fulfilled all its
requirements with entire satisfaction. He here realized, however, more
fully, his defective education, which he determined to improve with the
least possible delay. Only a few months were spent in his new position
when he decided to set out in the world to seek his own fortune.
Accordingly on the 10th of June, 1856, having packed all his personal
property in a diminutive trunk, he bade adieu to his old home. Two days
after his departure from home young McDermott arrived in Cleveland and
went thence to Berea, where, as the sequel shows, was to be the scene of
his future enterprise. He had acquired some knowledge of carpenter work,
and so obtained a situation on the Methodist Episcopal church, then in
course of erection. Here he worked until harvest time, when he went into
the harvest field, working for one dollar per day. He worked through
harvest and upon its conclusion took the first step in fulfillment of his
design to improve his education, and entered school at Baldwin University.
He had no money to pay for tuition, but this he provided for by sweeping
the chapel, laboratory and halls of the college, earning sufficient money
to meet his other wants, which were of course kept down to a very modest
scale (as he boarded himself), by working in the stone quarries and
cutting wood for the students. He studied hard and earnestly, and made
good progress, finishing his first term with very satisfactory results.
Among his acquirements during this period was a knowledge of the art of
Oriental pearl painting, and during the Fall vacation he turned this
accomplishment to advantage by teaching the art in Cleveland, going from
house to house for this purpose, and obtaining fifty cents per lesson. In
this way he earned sufficient to pay his tuition at the University during
the next term, provide himself with necessary books, and furnish his means
of living. Having concluded another term at the University, in the Fall of
1857, young McDermott came to Cleveland and took a course of writing
lessons at a Commercial College. He attained considerable proficiency in
penmanship, and in the winter of 1857-8 taught writing classes at
Loweville and Youngstown, Mahoning county, and at the Female College at
Poland, Ohio, meeting with good success and giving entire satisfaction. In
February, 1858, Mr. McDermott got his first introduction to the grindstone
business, having received an appointment from a firm at Berea to travel in
Canada and solicit orders on commission. He visited Canada and worked
hard, often walking twenty miles a day, from station to station, to save
time, carrying his satchel on his back, and paying his expenses by
teaching the process of pearl painting. The trip was entirely successful,
and Mr. McDermott returned to Berea in the Summer with a handsome sum in
pocket. Still anxious regarding his education, he again entered Baldwin
University, attending through the Fall term. In November of this year he
came to Cleveland, passed an examination and received a certificate to
teach school, and upon this opened a school in Middleburgh township,
Cuyahoga county, making his evenings available by teaching writing and
spelling classes. At the conclusion of the first term, in February, 1859,
he started upon a second trip to Canada, to solicit orders for stone, this
time on his own account. The venture was prosecuted with his usual
industry, and was highly successful. He returned to Berea in the Summer
considerably better off financially than when he left it, and having,
meanwhile, placed a brother and two sisters at school in the University at
his own expense, he once again entered upon a course of study. He
remained, however, but two months, in consequence of the illness of his
father calling him to Whitby to assume the duties of his father's office.
Here he remained some two months, when his father's recovery enabled him
to return to Berea. He commenced a commercial course, but was permitted to
pursue it barely a month when he was prostrated by a severe attack of
typhoid fever from which he did not recover for nearly four months, his
life being several times despaired of. As soon as his health was
sufficiently restored, Mr. McDermott again identified himself with the
grindstone trade and made two trips to Canada, both very successful,
between May and September, 1860, and then finished his commercial course.
On the 19th of September, his twenty-fourth birthday, Mr. McDermott was
married at East Townsend, Huron county, Ohio, to Miss Henrietta Scott, who
had been a teacher in the Baldwin University, and a lady of superior
accomplishments.

In this year he met with the most serious misfortune of his business life.
He shipped a cargo of stone for Canada, and the vessel encountering a
storm which disabled her, a large portion of the cargo was thrown
overboard. The cargo was insured in the Quaker City Insurance Company of
Philadelphia, but before the claim could be adjusted the Company failed,
and Mr. McDermott was rendered a considerable sum worse off than nothing.
This misfortune, however, only served to stimulate his energy, and having
established a good credit by the promptitude with which he had always met
his business engagements, and at the same time created a high impression
of his business qualifications, those with whom he had traded, and in
whose debt he had been brought, encouraged him to continue business by
allowing him all the time he should require to repair his losses and make
himself whole. He soon made another trip to Canada with the most
gratifying result, taking orders for upwards of three hundred tons of
stone, the returns from which paid off all his indebtedness and left him
something more than even with the world.

From January to August, 1862, was spent by Mr. McDermott in Lower Canada,
chiefly among the French population, and was one of the most successful
periods of his business experience thus far. Returning to Berea, we next
find him on his way to Cincinnati as one of a company of "Squirrel
Hunters" in response to a well-remembered call of Gov. Tod for a force to
resist the threatened invasion of the State by the Confederate forces
under Kirby Smith. Arriving at Cincinnati it was found that the patriotic
citizens of Ohio had so freely answered the demand upon them that more
than enough to protect the State against several times the menacing army
were already on the ground, and the Berea company was permitted to return
home. The remaining months of the year were passed by Mr. McDermott in
making preparations and perfecting plans for the ensuing year's business.

[Illustration: Yours Respectfully, James McDermott]

On the 30th of January, 1863, Mr. McDermott formed a copartnership with
John Worthington, who was engaged in the building stone trade at
Brownhelm, Lorain county, Ohio, the firm taking the title of Worthington &
McDermott. The firm immediately erected works for turning large
grindstones for manufactories, and distinguished their first Spring's
business by sending to New York city the first cargo of building stone
ever shipped there from Ohio. During this year they furnished the stone
for all the trimmings and carved work on the Government buildings at
Ottawa, the capital of the Dominion of Canada, and also for a number of
buildings in Montreal and other cities and towns of Canada. The year's
business was heavy, and the result was largely due to the energy and
enterprise of Mr. McDermott. In the latter part of the year Mr. McDermott
took up his residence in Cleveland, where he had purchased a house, and in
the spring of 1864 the office of the firm was removed to Cleveland.

The business of the firm was now growing vigorously, the result of the
year 1864 being in the highest degree satisfactory, not alone in the
pecuniary returns, but in the wider extension of the trade and the
introduction of the Ohio stone to markets where it had previously been
unknown, and where it has since been in steady and large demand. Near the
close of the year the firm of Worthington & McDermott was dissolved, and
Mr. McDermott purchased of the Wallaces the old quarry at Berea originally
opened by John Baldwin over forty years ago. He took into partnership his
brother William and established the firm of J. McDermott & Co. The new firm
went actively to work in developing its quarry, mining and manufacturing
block and grindstones, and succeeded rapidly in establishing valuable
business connections and enlarging the stone trade of this section. Among
the first improvements introduced was the building of a railroad track
Connecting the quarry with the Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati track,
and other facilities for the expeditions handling and getting out stone
were added as promptly as practicable. In the spring of 1865 the firm
filled a contract with the Cleveland and Toledo Railroad Company for stone
with which to replace the wooden bridges along the line of the road.
During the year the firm made extensive progress in developing its quarry,
trenching to a greater depth than had yet been reached in any of the
quarries, and obtaining a quality of building stone superior to any
produced up to this time in Ohio, which very soon became, and is still, in
large demand. In the spring of 1866, the firm sold the first five hundred
tons of Berea rock block stone that ever went to New York city, and
succeeded in so far interesting several of the largest builders of the
metropolis in this stone as to induce them to visit the Berea quarries.
During the year 1867, the firm sent to New York all the clear rock block
stone they could get out, and also filled several large contracts for
block stone with the Cleveland and Toledo and Lake Shore Railroad
Companies, doing this year a very large business. On the 1st of January,
1867, the firm was increased by taking in another brother, Mr. Michael
McDermott, the firm name remaining unchanged.

The house of J. McDermott & Co. occupies at this time a leading position
in the stone trade of Ohio, and indeed of the West, not alone in the
amount of its annual business, but in credit, character and influence, and
in these latter respects it is hardly surpassed by any mercantile house in
Northern Ohio. The trade of the house not only extends to nearly every
State of the Union and the Dominion of Canada, but the product of its
quarries finds a market in Mexico, South America and other parts of the
world. During 1867, this house furnished the stone for fourteen blocks and
fronts in New York city, and a number of buildings in Boston, New Haven
and other cities, and in 1868, the business was largely increased. A
single firm of builders in New York city erected during that year fifteen
buildings and fronts for which J. McDermott & Co. furnished the stone.

The quarries owned by this firm embrace twenty-five acres of land of which
less than an acre has been worked out. In 1867, they turned out 106,200
cubic feet of block stone, 46,000 feet of flagging, 119 car loads of rough
block stone, and 1,510 tons of small grindstones. These quarries are
valued at $200,000, and the excellent quality of the stone produced is
amply attested by the large and increasing demand for it.

The business of the house of J. McDermott & Co. is under the immediate
personal supervision of Mr. James McDermott, to whose experience,
enterprise and business capacity its marked success is due. Mr. McDermott
has taken an active interest in all that relates to the stone business,
and also to whatever tends to build up the prosperity of Cleveland. In
1866 and 1867, he visited Washington to procure the modification of the
internal tax and import duty on stone, and was successful in his
endeavors. He also brought about the organization of the "Association of
the Grindstone and Block Stone Manufactures of Northern Ohio," a work
which was not accomplished without much difficulty, in spite of the fact
that it was for the mutual benefit of all engaged in the trade. It should
be mentioned in this connection that the firm issued a valuable series of
tables of weights of grindstones, and rules for computing the same, now in
general use by manufacturers, and which was chiefly compiled by Mrs.
McDermott. The most recent public work of Mr. McDermott was his active
labor in organizing the Cleveland, Wooster and Zanesville Railroad
Company, to which he has devoted time, money and labor.

Mr. McDermott is still young, being but thirty-two years old, of fine
physical proportions, a robust constitution, and clear, comprehensive
mind. His healthfulness, and also his success in business, he attributes
in large measure to his habit of strict temperance. In business matters he
is prompt, scrupulously conscientious, and holding a verbal engagement to
be as binding as the most carefully drawn contract. In private and social
circles he is warm-hearted, cheerful, and every way a pleasant companion.




J. A. Redington.


J. A. Redington is son of Captain John Redington, formerly of Saratoga
county, New York, who, when nineteen years of age, ran away from his
stepfather, who abused him, and volunteered into the Revolutionary army,
where he served seven years, and was taken prisoner by the British, and
incarcerated in the Sugar House, New York. There the privation that fell
to his lot in the great struggle for freedom, nearly killed him. Had Capt.
Redington lived till the present time he would have been one hundred and
twelve years old. J. A. Redington, the subject of this sketch, was born
June 4, 1818, when his father was sixty-one years old, and there were five
children born to the old soldier afterwards. At the birth of the last, he
was seventy-two years of age.

Ten years of the boyhood of J. A. was spent with an uncle in Vermont, where
he received a good common school education. While living at that place his
father died, and at the age of sixteen he had a keen realization of the
situation. He had nothing, and could not mend matters where he was, so he
determined to go home to his mother and see if he could be of service
there. After remaining with his mother a year, he engaged with a
ship-chandler at Oswego, for twenty-five dollars per year and board. After
a few months his employer closed up, leaving him out of employment. About
a year from this time, his former employer, who had gone to Cleveland,
wrote him that if he would come to Cleveland he would employ him again. He
worked his passage on a canal boat from his home to Oswego, where he took
passage on board a vessel just leaving for Cleveland.

The late Chester Deming was the gentleman who had engaged his services. He
received two hundred dollars the first year, three hundred the second
year, and four hundred the third, on which handsome salary, for those
times, he concluded to marry.

Mr. Deming closed up his business here in 1841, and Mr. Redington
commenced on his own account, dealing in oats, wheat and other grains.
This continued about a year when he formed a partnership for the purpose
of opening a general furnishing house for vessels. He did a successful
business, but as it was only during the summer months, he established a
dry goods store in connection with it on the West Side. This enterprise
was only partially successful, and so he closed it up, and for several
years was employed as clerk on board a steam boat.

In 1856, he, in connection with Mr. Bacon, commenced the shipping and
forwarding business, built the vessel E. C. Roberts, which was a
profitable investment, and also ran the propeller Manhattan. This
partnership was dissolved after two years, Mr. Redington retaining his
vessel interests. He is now engaged in mercantile pursuits on the river,
dealing principally in pig metal.

By dint of hard work and a determination to succeed in spite of adverse
circumstances, and by strict integrity, he has accomplished his purpose
and acquired a comfortable competency.




Samuel Sage Coe.



S. S. Coe has been favorably known in the business circles of Cleveland
for over thirty years, and, although he has not succeeded in amassing as
much wealth as some of his competitors, yet his fortitude has enabled him
to glide over reverses easily, and enjoy somewhat of life as it came.

Mr. Coe was born in Oswego, New York, October 6th, 1819. He obtained all
the education a widowed mother could give him before he was twelve years
of age, when he entered a country store and remained five years. The only
recreation he had during that time was a trip to Niagara, on the schooner
Saratoga, with Capt. Dolph. Howe, with whom some of our citizens are well
acquainted. In 1836, he went to New York and clerked in the hardware store
of Wolf, Bishop & Co., and returned to Oswego in June, 1837. Not being
able to find employment there, he concluded to try his fortune in the
West, and at once took the schooner Charles Crooks, bound for Cleveland.
Mr. Coe landed in this city July 19th, 1837, his cash capital being at the
time one dollar and twenty-five cents. After a few days a situation was
obtained in the office of Ransom, McNair & Co., with a salary of thirty
dollars per month, out of which he had to board himself. He remained with
this firm until about 1841, when he went into the employ of B. F. Smith &
Co., composed of B. F. Smith, now residing at Buffalo, as superintendent of
the Buffalo and Erie Railroad, and George Woodward, now residing at
Milwaukee, with whom he remained until 1845, when he engaged in business
for himself, in the firm of Doddridge & Coe, in the forwarding and
commission line. In about one year this firm dissolved, and Mr. Coe went
into the same business with his brother, Chas. W., under the style of S. S.
Coe & Co. This firm was unfortunate, and existed only one year.

In 1848, while doing a small commission business alone, he was offered,
and accepted, the agency of the Merchants' Insurance Company, of
Milwaukee, and labored faithfully for them one year, and, at its close,
his premiums amounted to less than two hundred dollars. This was the first
insurance company with which he was ever connected.

In 1851, Mr. Coe organized and got into operation the Commercial Mutual
Insurance Company, of this city, acting as its Secretary for about one
year and a half, when he resigned, and went into the insurance agency
business, with which he has ever since been identified.

In 1865, Mr. Henry F. Clark desired him to reorganize the Cleveland
Insurance Company, the charter of which was granted by the State of Ohio
in 1830, and which was successfully managed by his father, Mr. Edmund
Clark, until his death. Mr. Coe undertook and completed the task, and
operations re-commenced April 1st, of the same year, on a paid up cash
capital of one hundred thousand dollars, increased in 1866, to one hundred
and fifty thousand; and in 1867, to two hundred thousand dollars, and now
increased to its limit, five hundred thousand dollars, making it the
largest cash capital company in the State of Ohio, a credit to the city
and to the State at large.

Mr. Coe is the right man in the right place, as the successful workings of
this company fully demonstrate. He, as secretary, devotes his whole
attention to the interest of the company. H. B. Payne is the president,
and S. D. McMillan, vice-president.

In looking over a correspondence of about twenty years ago, in search of
some data connected with Mr. Coe's history, we came on the following
letters, which will be read with amusement by old Clevelanders, as
reminiscences of the ante-railroad period, and for the allusions to public
and political events of that day, as well as for the contrast between the
irascible tone of one letter, and the cool humor of the other:

  Messrs. S. S. Coe & Co., Cleveland, Ohio:

  Gentlemen,--No one dislikes, more than we do, to grumble or find fault,
  but we hate just as bad to have our boats detained beyond a reasonable
  time, at your place; and when our boats leave here for your place, we
  look for them back at a certain time; and if they do not get here soon
  after that time, it disarranges all our calculations and proves a great
  loss to us. All our boats were detained a week on account of a break in
  our canal, and then to be detained beyond a reasonable time in port,
  makes it worse. Mr. Wheeler, at Akron, is the only man on the Ohio
  canal, that we know of, that has been in the business longer than we
  have on our canal, and we defy you to find a boatman on our canal or
  river that will say we ever detained them beyond a reasonable time; and
  there is no need of it if men do as they would be done by, and the
  situation our river has been in this geason has been vexatious enough
  for any one. Time is money, and eight or ten boats being detained a day
  or two counts up. The J. Larkin left for your place to-day.

  Tours truly,

  S. Adams & Co.


  Cleveland, July 29th, 1848. Messrs. Sam'l Adams & Co., Dresden, O.:

  Gentlemen,--Your esteemed favor of the 25th inst. is at hand.

  It has been a matter of some considerable interest to us to ascertain,
  if possible, as to which city takes precedence in age, Zanesville or
  Cleveland.

  As, which incident is first in date, the cutting of the bridle path from
  Wheeling to the Muskingum by Old Zane, or the coasting of our lake to
  the Cuyahoga of the exploring party under Old Stow. Your Mr. Adams, we
  are quite sure, can give us the much desired information.

  We see it stated that our good Democratic candidate for President once
  resided at or near your beautiful village. You may be familiar with
  his early history--we wish to know, if such a thing is possible,
  whether he commenced his political career as a Federalist or a
  Democrat, and whether he did or did not break his sword at the
  disgraceful surrender of that old coward Hull; but more than all, as
  we think it most important of all, is, did he, or did he not, when at
  the age of nineteen, wear that emblem of Federalism, the black
  cockade. To this last question we beg you will give us an answer if
  such a thing be possible.

  While troubling you in this manner, for which we beg your kind
  indulgence, may we also ask you as to the condition, moral and physical
  of your returned volunteers? Report says they have been badly treated;
  we are anxious to know as to this, for if so, and commanded by Whig'
  officers, we can make political capital out of it against the Whig
  party; if not, we can make capital against the administration; we do not
  care which, as our object is to do justice to both parties. Can you tell
  us which candidate they will support. They are important in numbers, and
  from their high character, will carry a great, moral force with them;
  and on this last account we have supposed they would oppose General
  Taylor, as it has been said he used profane language at the battle of
  Buena Vista.

  We are erecting here a new and beautiful theater, it opens Aug. 21. We
  hope we may see you here at that time.

  Your ob't serv'ts,

  S. S. Coe & Co.

  P.S. You are right as to the _unnecessary_ detention at this place of
  canal boats; it is an evil of great turpitude. _We never do so_. Aside
  from the great loss to owner, it affects the morals of the crews, and
  in this we know the oldest forwarder on the canal, Mr. Wheeler, will
  agree with us.




John Long Severance.



Conspicuous among those former residents of Cleveland who have passed away
and left only a pleasant memory behind them, is John Long Severance, who
died about ten years ago, mourned by a wide circle of friends, whom his
many lovable qualities had brought around him.

Mr. Severance was born in 1822, his father being Dr. Robert Severance, of
Shelburne, Massachusetts. His parents dying within a few months of each
other, when he was but nine years old, young Severance was adopted by the
late Dr. Long, of Cleveland, who gave him every advantage in the way of
education that could be procured in the city. A college course was
intended but his delicate health forbade this, and in his sixteenth year
he was taken into the old Commercial Bank of Lake Erie, and then into the
reorganized institution, remaining there twenty years.

His health, never good, broke down entirely under the fatiguing duties of
the bank, and he was compelled to resign his connection with that
institution and seek a restoration of his wasted vigor by a voyage to
Europe. At Southampton, England, he died on the 30th August, 1859, at the
age of thirty-seven, surrounded by every attention which kind friends and
sympathizing strangers could bestow upon him.

Mr. Severance was a man of many rare and sterling attractions. His social
qualities, passion for music, and love for little children, as well as
sincere attachment to a large circle of friends, caused general mourning
for his death. He was one of the founders of the Second Presbyterian
church, and by the members of that body his loss was keenly felt. He had
always felt a deep interest in the prosperity of the church, contributing
largely through his rare ability as a musician, both in the choir and in
the Sunday schools, to the welfare of the congregation, until he was
obliged to abandon those services on account of advancing disease. With
rare energy and many reasons for desiring to live, he was slow to believe
that he must fall in early manhood before the destroyer. And while he was
not afraid to die, and expressed a firm confidence in God in whatever
event, he felt it to be his duty to struggle for a longer life, and no
doubt prolonged his days in this manner. He was consistent, uniform,
earnest, stable, both in faith and practice; always punctual in the
discharge of his business and Christian duties, his attendance in the
church, and his labors in the mission and Sunday schools. His last letter
before death, written to an intimate personal and business friend, said:
"I feel quite sure the disease is making rapid progress, but this gives me
no uneasiness or alarm, nor have I experienced any feeling but that I am
hastening home. The prospect would be dark indeed with no hope in Christ,
no deep and abiding trust in God's pardoning love. This trust in him has
sustained me through every trial, and this hope in Christ and his
all-atoning blood grows brighter every day, taking away the fear of death,
and lighting up the pathway through the dark valley, through which so many
of my loved ones have already passed."




[Illustration: D. Sanford]


Daniel Sanford.



The late Daniel Sanford, whose name is held in esteem by old Clevelanders,
was born in Milford, Connecticut, in 1803. At a very early age he left his
home and went to New York where he learned the trade of a ship joiner, one
of his first jobs being upon the cabins of the Fairfield, the first
steamer on the East River.

In 1834, he came to Cleveland and worked for some time at his trade as a
journeyman ship joiner. In coming time he aspired to build ships on his
own account, and for this purpose formed a partnership with Luther Moses.
The first work done by the firm was on the steamer New York, and
subsequently the steamers Ohio and Saratoga were built by them. In
addition to these a very large number of propellers and sailing vessels
were built, and canal boats almost without number. The mere list of crafts
of one description and another, built by this firm, would take
considerable space in our pages.

In 1849, the firm, which had done so much important work in the ship
yards, was dissolved and Mr. Sanford changed his business from
ship-building to dealing in lumber, which he entered upon on a large scale
and continued under the title of D. Sanford, and subsequently Sanford &
Son, until his death, which occurred on Sunday morning, September 22,
1864, after an illness of about four weeks, the disease being inflammation
of the bowels.

Mr. Sanford came to Cleveland with but five hundred dollars in his pocket,
but he worked his way with prudence and economy till he had acquired a
handsome property. His business on his death descended to his third son,
Nelson Sanford, who has conducted it prudently and with success.

He was earnestly patriotic, and on the outbreak of the war for the
Union he took a lively interest in everything pertaining to it.
Becoming satisfied that the rebels never intended submission to the
lawful authorities until they were flogged into submission, he strongly
urged their severe punishment, and contributed liberally to send men
into the field.

Mr. Sanford was a strong advocate of the consolidation of Ohio City and
Cleveland, and in his position of member of the Ohio City Council aided
materially in bringing about the result. He was no politician, but was not
one of those who make that fact an excuse for taking no interest in public
affairs. He had decided views on public matters, and never avoided his
duties as a citizen.

In whatever concerned the welfare of the city he took strong interest, and
was one of the first stockholders of the Cleveland, Columbus and
Cincinnati Railroad Company, as he was also of the Cleveland and Mahoning
Railroad Company.

Every dollar of Mr. Sanford's money was honestly earned; not a hard,
mean, or wrongful action tarnished a single penny passing into his
hands. Had he been avaricious he might have died worth half a million
dollars, but he was infinitely richer in the blessings of hundreds of
poor people who were the secret recipients of his bounty. He had "a hand
open as day for melting charity." Yet in his good deeds he never let his
left hand know what his right hand did. His last words on earth were of
a character in keeping with his whole life. Calling his youngest son to
his bedside he said, "Benjamin, be honest in all your transactions." On
the tomb of David Sanford can with truth be written: "An honest man--the
noblest work of God."




Charles W. Coe.



Charles W. Coe, so long and favorably known in our business circles, was
born in Oswego, New York, March 19th, 1822. His grandfather, Col. Eli
Parsons, was a soldier in the Revolution, and prominent in the Shay's
Rebellion, in Massachusetts. His father was a physician of much note in
Oswego, and died about 1828, leaving two children; Charles, the younger,
is the subject of this sketch. Like a great many other physicians, he left
a number of old accounts of no value, and not a great deal besides, so
that Charles and his brother had to strike out early in life to do
something towards getting a living, and hence educational matters did not
receive all the desired attention.

Charles came to Cleveland in 1840, and at once engaged as clerk with N. E.
Crittenden, jeweler. He remained in that situation about a year, when he
returned to Oswego, and after the lapse of two years, came back to
Cleveland, and entered into the employ of Pease & Allen, produce and
commission merchants, with whom he remained until 1849. At that time, he
went into the employ of Mr. Charles Hickox, and continued with him until
1855, when he took an interest with Mr. Hickox in the milling business,
already referred to in this work, and in which he still continues.

Mr. Coe has won his present prominent position among the business men of
Cleveland by shrewd foresight and close attention to business. He is a
hard worker and a keen observer of the fluctuations of business, mingling
prudence with enterprise to such a degree that, whilst he has driven a
profitable business, it has always been a safe one. He is frank,
unselfish, and free hearted. Whilst having had reason to appreciate the
value of money, he esteems it not so much on its own account as on account
of the domestic comforts and enjoyments its judicious expenditure brings.




S. M. Strong



The drug establishment of Strong & Armstrong stands foremost in that
branch of the business of Cleveland and has achieved a wide reputation,
having an extensive trade not only through Northern Ohio, but in Indiana,
Michigan and Pennsylvania, drawing custom away from Pittsburgh, Cincinnati
and Detroit in territory previously considered naturally tributary to
those places.

S. M. Strong, the leading partner of the firm, is a native Buckeye, having
been born in Lorain County, Ohio, in 1833. His boyhood was spent in
acquiring a good common school education, after obtaining which he became
clerk in a drug store at Elyria, entering it at the age of sixteen and
remaining about two years when, in 1850, he accompanied his employer, who
removed to Cleveland, and remained with him there three years more.

At the end of that time, he entered Gaylord's drug store, in which he
continued about two years, when he turned his attention to pushing a
fever and ague remedy which he had been at work on for several years
previous. Four years he devoted to this work, finding a partial success,
and then he formed a partnership with A. C. Armstrong, of Medina county,
for the purpose of building up a wholesale and retailing business. The
business of Henderson & Punderson, which was established in 1836, was
purchased, and the new firm of Strong & Armstrong opened business in the
old place, No. 199 Superior street. At first the business was carried on
in a limited way, the total of jobbing and retail sales for the first year
amounting to but $75,000. But the partners were young, energetic, and full
of hope. They pushed their trade vigorously, attended closely to the
details of the business, and mingled enterprise with prudent economy so
well that they were soon gratified at finding their business annually
growing larger and more profitable. In less than ten years their trade has
grown from about $75,000 in a year to over $600,000, and their limited
establishment so enlarged as to require the services of twenty-four
assistants. The business, though large, has been managed with such care
and prudence as to render losses very light and litigation almost wholly
unnecessary.




Ship Building



For years Cleveland has been the principal ship building port on the
lakes. Of late the ship building interest here has shared the depression
felt by it throughout the Union, but it is still an important interest,
and before long will probably resume its activity.

The first vessel reported built in the vicinity of Cleveland was the
Zephyr, thirty tons burthen, built by Mr. Carter, in 1808, for the trade
of the village. The precise spot of her building is not recorded. She was
burned at Conjocketa Creek, near Black Rock. The next was the Ohio, of
sixty tons, built by Murray and Bixby, in 1810, and launched from the East
bank of the river near the spot now occupied by Pettit & Holland's
warehouse. She was sailed by John Austen and afterwards became a gunboat
in Perry's fleet, but took no part in the battle of Lake Erie, being
absent on special service.

In 1813, Levi Johnson built the Pilot. The story of her construction and
launch has already been told in the sketch of Levi Johnson's life. In that
sketch also will be found the account of most of the early ship building
of Cleveland, he being the principal ship builder of the pioneer days.

In 1821, Philo Taylor built the Prudence, which was launched on the river
opposite where the New England block now stands.

In 1826, John Blair built the Macedonian, of sixty tons, and in the same
year the Lake Serpent, forty tons, was built by Captain Bartiss and
sailed by him.

The first steamboat built in Cleveland was the Enterprise, built by Levi
Johnson in 1826, but not floated into the lake until the following year.

The enterprise of ship building pursued a steady course in Cleveland for a
number of years, a few vessels being added annually, until about the year
1853, when the business took a sudden start and made rapid progress. For
the next few years the ship yards were busy and the ship building interest
was one of the most important branches of the business of the city. In
1856, a total of thirty-seven lake crafts, sail and steam, was reported
built, having a tonnage of nearly sixteen thousand tons. During the past
twenty years, nearly five hundred vessels of all kinds, for lake
navigation, have been built in the district of Cuyahoga, and of these all
but a small proportion were built in Cleveland. The description of vessels
built has greatly altered during that time, the size of the largest class
having more than trebled. During the year 1868, there were built in this
port four propellers, one steamer and three schooners, with an aggregate
of 3,279 tons. This is much less in number and tonnage than in some
previous years, but still gives Cleveland the lead in the ship building of
the lakes. The absorption of the flats on the lower part of the river for
railroad and manufacturing purposes, and for lumber yards, has seriously
incommoded the ship building interests by restricting the space available
for ship yards.

In the division of the ship building business of the lakes in past years,
the construction of large side-wheel steamers was principally carried on
at Buffalo, whilst in first class propellers and sailing vessels Cleveland
immeasurably distanced all competitors, both in the quantity and quality
of the craft turned out. As the demand for side-wheel steamers lessened,
the site of their construction was removed from Buffalo to Detroit.
Cleveland-built propellers, however, take front rank, and Cleveland-built
sail vessels have found their way over every part of the lake chain,
sailed down the Atlantic coast from the Gulf of St. Lawrence to South
American ports, and crossing the Atlantic, have penetrated nearly every
European sea. Everywhere they have done credit to their builders by their
speed, sea worthiness, and excellent construction.

Just here it is proper to place, on record the history of an attempt to
establish a direct trade with Europe, which gave abundant promise of good
results, both to the commercial and ship building interests of the city.
It has already been referred to in this work, but it appropriately falls
within the scope of this sketch.

In the year 1856, the schooner Dean Richmond, of 379 tons, was built by
Quayle & Martin in Cleveland, for C. J. Kershaw, of Chicago. This vessel
was loaded with wheat and under the command of Capt. D. C. Pierce, sailed
from Chicago to Liverpool. She arrived in good time, having made a quick
passage, and astonished the English people by her rig, and from the fact
of her having come from the inland lakes of America to Europe. The
schooner was sold in Liverpool, and her new owners changed her name to
the Belina, and placed her in the trade between Liverpool and Brazil, on
which route she made quick and successful trips.

In 1857, the same builders turned out the barque c.J. Kershaw, of 380 tons
burthen, having built her for Capt. D. G. Pierce, who was the pioneer
captain in the trade. The Kershaw was loaded with staves, cedar posts and
black walnut lumber. In the Fall, she started on her return with a load of
crockery and iron, but was twice driven back by terrific gales and had to
go into dock for repairs. This brought her into St. Lawrence river so
late, that she was frozen in the Lachine Canal. Early in 1858, she arrived
in Cleveland with her cargo in excellent order and to the perfect
satisfaction of the consignees.

About the time that the Kershaw was launched, a small British schooner,
the Madeira Pet of 123 tons, came from Liverpool through the rivers and
lakes to Chicago, with a cargo of hardware, cutlery, glass, &c., on
speculation. The enterprise was not successful, and no more attempts were
made to establish a direct trade between Chicago and European ports.

During the Spring and Summer of 1858, several of the leading business men
of Cleveland entered with vigor into the trade, and a respectable fleet of
vessels was dispatched to European ports. A new barque, the D. C. Pierce,
was built for Messrs. Pierce & Barney and sent to Liverpool with a cargo
of staves and black walnut lumber. The same parties sent the C. J. Kershaw
to London with a similar cargo, and the Chieftain and Black Hawk, with the
same kind of freight. Mr. T. P. Handy sent the R. H. Harmon with staves and
black walnut lumber to Liverpool, the D. B. Sexton with a similar cargo to
London, and the J. F. Warner with a cargo of the same kind to Glasgow. Mr.
H. E. Howe sent the new barque H. E. Howe to London with a cargo of staves
and lumber. Col. N. M. Standart sent the Correspondent to Liverpool with a
load of wheat, and Mr. C. Reis freighted the Harvest to Hamburgh with a
cargo of lumber, staves and fancy woods. This made a fleet of ten vessels,
owned and freighted by Cleveland merchants, with a total tonnage of about
3,600 tons. Two vessels were sent out from Detroit with similar cargoes,
but the enterprise was pre-eminently a Cleveland one.

All of the Cleveland fleet disposed of their cargoes to good advantage.
Six of them returned with cargoes of crockery, bar iron, pig iron, and
salt. This part of the trip also proved successful. It was the intention
of the owners to sell some of the vessels in England, but the shipping
interests were so prostrated that it was impossible to dispose of the
ships at anything like a fair price. They therefore still remained in the
hands of Cleveland owners, but four of them did not return to the Lakes.
The D. B. Sexton went up the Mediterranean; the H. E. Howe went on a
voyage to South America, the Harvest to the West Indies, and the C. J.
Kershaw was employed in the Mediterranean trade. Wherever any of the
Cleveland vessels went, they called forth complimentary remarks by their
fleetness and steadiness in heavy weather.

In the following year, other vessels were sent out and made successful
trips. The remarkable sea-going qualities exhibited by these lake-built
crafts, outsailing, as they did, ocean clippers and weathering gales that
sent sea-going ships flying helpless before the storm, attracted the
attention of Eastern ship-owners, and orders were received for vessels to
be built for the Atlantic coasting trade. The outbreak of the war gave a
severe check to the direct trade, which passed into the hands of an
English firm who still continue to run vessels between Cleveland and
Liverpool, and in the depressed condition of the American carrying trade
on the ocean there was no longer a demand for new vessels for the coasting
trade. With a revival of business in that line, and an enlargement of the
canals between Lake Erie and tidewater, so as to allow the passage of
larger vessels, there is a probability that a brisk demand for Cleveland
vessels for the salt water will yet spring up.




[Illustration: Respectfully, S. W. Johnson]


Seth W. Johnson.



The name of Seth W. Johnson has for more than thirty years been closely
and prominently identified with the ship building interests of
Cleveland. He saw the business in its infancy, was largely accessory to
its growth into the important proportions it at last assumed, and though
no longer engaged in the business, his withdrawal from it is so recent
that the mention of his name suggests, to those familiar with the
affairs of the city for a number of years, the incessant tapping of the
shipwrights' hammers and visions of skeleton ships gradually assuming
the form and substance in which they are to carry the commerce of the
great West to market.

Mr. Johnson was a native of Middle Haddam, Middlesex County, Connecticut,
his mother, who died October 17, 1868, being formerly Miss Mary Whitmore,
born at Middletown, Middlesex County, Connecticut, in 1780, and his
father, Henry Johnson, born in 1776, and died July 6, 1869. Seth W.
Johnson was the second son and third child of a family of nine, all of
whom, with both father and mother, were alive on the 16th of October,
1868, the oldest child being then about sixty-one years old, and the
youngest over forty.

Young Johnson worked with his father a short time as a farmer, but not
feeling in his element in the plow field or in the cow yard, he followed
the bent of his mechanical tastes, and engaged himself to work in a ship
yard. He commenced work in this line when about fourteen years old, and
served out his full apprenticeship of seven years, when he set up in
business for himself, taking full charge of the work of finishing ships.
This he carried on for three years with considerable success.

But New England, he rightly judged, was too narrow a field for the young
man who wished to improve his prospects and with narrow means lay the
foundation of a liberal competence. The West offered the most promise, and
to the West he accordingly came, taking his kit of tools with him. Landing
in Cleveland in the Fall of 1834, he satisfied himself that here was the
proper place for the exercise of his knowledge and abilities, and here,
accordingly, he prepared to make his home. Before settling down to steady
business in Cleveland he made a trip to Perrysburgh, on the Maumee, where
he assisted in finishing the Commodore Perry. This work done he returned
to Cleveland in the Spring of 1835, and opened his ship yard, at first
confining himself to the repair of vessels. But soon he was called on to
build as well as repair. The steamboat Constellation was completed by him
at Black River, and the steamboat Robert Fulton, built at Cleveland by
Griffith, Standart & Co.

In 1844, Mr. Johnson associated with him Mr. E. Tisdale, and the firm of
Johnson & Tisdale acquired honorable fame as ship builders along the
entire chain of lakes and beyond. The copartnership lasted nineteen years.
Before the formation of this partnership, Mr. Tisdale had commenced the
building of a railway for docking vessels, and this was the first firm to
lift vessels for the purpose of repairing them. With his first work, in
1835, in Cleveland, he commenced the acquisition of vessel property, and
steadily pursued the policy of taking this kind of stock, until he became
a large ship owner as well as ship builder.

The discovery of the mineral resources of the Lake Superior region
attracted a large number of people to that locality, the only feasible
means of communication with which was by lake. The Saut rapids prevented
the assent of vessels from the lower lakes, and to meet the requirements
of the trade that suddenly sprung into existence two vessels were built on
Lake Superior, the freights being carried across the portage around the
rapids. These vessels being insufficient for the needs, it became a
question whether others could not be taken across the portage from below
and launched on the waters of the upper lake. Messrs. Johnson & Tisdale
thought it could be done, and took the contract for thus transporting the
schooner Swallow and steamer Julia Palmer. They were hauled two miles on
greased slides or ways and safely launched on the bosom of the "father of
lakes." The undertaking was considered one of great difficulty, if not of
absolute impossibility, and its success gave Messrs. Johnson & Tisdale
widespread notoriety.

When the first considerable fleet of Lake-built vessels left Cleveland for
European ports direct--as already described in this volume--Mr. Johnson
took one of his vessels, loaded with staves. She made a successful voyage,
remained in Europe two years, engaged in the coasting trade, and then
returned. His strange looking craft attracted considerable attention among
the skippers of about forty sea-going vessels wind bound at the same time
at the Land's End, and much ridicule was thrown on her odd looks, so
unlike the English salt water shipping. But the laugh came in on the other
side when her superior sailing qualities enabled her to run so close to
the wind as to quickly double the point, make her port, unload and reload,
and sail for another voyage before one of the others could beat around the
Land's End and get in. Since that time he has sold two vessels, the
Vanguard and Howell Hoppeck, to be placed by other parties in the direct
line between Cleveland and Liverpool.

Mr. Johnson has taken considerable interest in matters outside of the
ship building business, but which aided in developing the trade and
increasing the prosperity of Cleveland. He aided in the formation of
some of the railroad enterprises of the city although he has now
withdrawn his interests from all but one. He also was interested in the
Commercial Insurance Company, but has retired from active business and
devotes his whole care to the management of his property, which has been
added to by large investments in real estate in various portions of the
Southern States.

He was married July 15, 1840, to Miss A. S. Norton of Middle Haddam, Conn.,
the native place of both, and by the marriage has had three children. The
oldest, a daughter, died when seven years old; the two sons are still
living, the oldest being engaged in the coffee and tea business in
Buffalo, N. Y., with his father; the other at present being in North
Carolina engaged in the lumber trade.

With commendable prudence Mr. Johnson has known when to quit active
business and enjoy the fruits of his labor while he has a healthy mind
and body capable of enjoying it, and which, without accident, he
undoubtedly will have for many years to come. Hard work and close
attention to business have been the cause of his success, and hence he
will be able to appreciate the blessings of an ample competency. In
social life Mr. Johnson is looked upon as a man of genial temperament,
kindly disposition, and strong social qualities. He is universally
respected by all who know him.




Thomas Quayle.



The names of Quayle and Martin are as familiar in the mouths of vessel men
on the lakes as household words. The firm attained honorable prominence in
the ship building records of Cleveland, and their work is among the best
that floats upon the western waters.

Thomas Quayle, the senior member of the firm of Quayle & Martin, was born
in the Isle of Man, May 9th, 1811, and came to America in 1827, coming
straight to Cleveland, where he has remained ever since. He learned his
trade of ship building from Mr. Church, of Huron, Ohio, who enjoyed an
excellent reputation in that line. After working as journeyman till 1847,
he formed a copartnership with John Codey, and at once started business.
This firm lasted about three years, during which time, among other work,
they built a vessel named the Caroline, and another, the Shakespeare. When
the last named was completed, the California fever had just broken out.
Mr. Codey caught the disease, the firm dissolved, and he went off to the
land of gold. Mr. Quayle soon after associated himself with Luther Moses,
with whom he did business for about two years, during which time they did
an almost incredible amount of business, considering the short space of
time, having from six to seven vessels on the stocks at once, and turning
out two sets a year. One year after Mr. Moses left the firm a
copartnership was formed with John Martin.

The new firm at once went into business on a large scale. From the time of
their organization to the present, the firm built seventy-two vessels,
comprising brigs, schooners, barques, tugs, and propellers. In one year
they built thirteen vessels, and eight vessels, complete, in a year has
been no unfrequent task successfully performed. Among others, they built
the barque W. T. Graves, which carried the largest cargo of any fresh water
vessel afloat. The propeller Dean Richmond is another of their build, and
is also one of the largest on the lakes; besides these, four first class
vessels built for Mr. Frank Perew, deserve mention as giving character to
Cleveland ship building. They are named the Mary E. Perew, D. P. Dobbin,
Chandler J. Wells, and J. G. Marston. Besides the building of vessels, they
have for some years been owners of vessels, and are at present interested
in several large craft. The firm of Quayle & Martin recently finished a
new tug of their own, the J. H. Martin intended to be used by them in the
port of Erie.

[Illustration: Yours Respectfully, Thomas Quayle]

Mr. Quayle was married in 1835, to Eleanor Cannon, of the Isle of Man, by
whom he has had eleven children, of whom seven are living. The eldest son,
Thomas, is ship builder by trade, and is still connected with the vessel
interests, though not building them. W. H. is also of the same trade as his
father, and engaged with him, as is also Geo. L. Chas. E. has been a
number of years with Alcott & Horton.

Mr. Quayle stands high among the citizens of Cleveland for integrity and
sterling character generally. He always fulfills his obligations, whether
to employer or employed. He has worked hard with his own hands, and given
personal supervision to all his work, believing that the eye of the master
and the hand of the workman combined assure good work. He is strict in
fulfilling all his contracts, and in this way has acquired a fine
reputation and a handsome fortune. But that point has not been reached
without a severe and continuous struggle against adverse circumstances,
which were overcome only by a determined will and patient labor that
conquered all.

Mr. Quayle's first wife died in September, 1860. He was married again
February 8th, 1867, to Miss Mary Proudfoot, of this city.




Elihu M. Peck.



Another of the ship builders who have assisted greatly in building up the
commerce and reputation of the port of Cleveland, is Elihu M. Peck. The
vessels built by him, or by the firm of Peck & Masters, which existed
about nine years, are known over the lakes. A large proportion of the work
done, especially in the later years, was in the construction of
propellers, of which several of the finest specimens afloat were made in
that yard.

Mr. Peck was born in Otsego county, New York, in 1822, and on reaching his
sixteenth year, came west and learned the art of ship building in this
vicinity. On completing his education in this business, he worked for a
time as a journeyman. In 1847, he set up for himself, and his first work
was the construction of the schooner Jenny Lind, of 200 tons. When she was
finished he ceased building new vessels for some years, and turned his
attention exclusively to the repair of old vessels, at which he found
abundant occupation. His yard was always busy, for the growing lake marine
demanded a large and steadily increasing amount of annual repairs.

In 1855, a partnership was formed with I. U. Masters, and the new firm
immediately entered upon the construction of new vessels. The first craft
launched from their stocks was the Ocean Wave, the first of a fleet of
fifty built by the firm previous to its dissolution and the death of Mr.
Masters. They form a fleet of which the builders had good reason to be
proud, for a glance at their names will recall the whole history of the
lake marine for the past fourteen years. What strides have been made in
the improvement of the lake marine is plainly shown by the increase in the
tonnage of the vessels built, whilst to those familiar with the lake
trade, the names will call up recollections of the crafts that will give a
yet better idea of the progress made.

The barque Ocean Wave, the first built by the new firm, was followed by
the Julia Dean, of 460 tons. These were followed in rapid succession by
the Kenosha, schooner Iowa, 370 tons, barque B. S. Shephard, 500 tons,
schooners Ralph Campbell, 240 tons, A. H. Stevens, 240 tons, David Tod, 460
tons, and Ellen Williams, 380 tons; barque De Soto, 570 tons; schooners
John S. Newhouse, 370 tons, W. B. Castle, 230 tons, Baltic, 360 tons,
Midnight, 370 tons, and J. T. Ayer, 380 tons. At this time they undertook
the construction of propellers, and the first two built were at once
remarked for their correct proportions, beauty of finish, and strength of
hull. They were the Evergreen City, 612 tons, and the Fountain City, 820
tons. The schooner Ellen White, 160 tons, was built, and then the firm
resumed work on propellers. The Cornet, 624 tons, and Rocket of the same
size, were built and put into the railroad line running from Buffalo
westward. These were models of beauty and strength. Next came the
schooners Metropolis, 360 tons, Mary B. Hale, 360 tons, and E. M. Peck, 168
tons; barque Colorado, 503 tons; propeller Detroit, 398 tons; barques
Unadilla, 567 tons, C. P. Sherman, 568 tons, Sunrise, 598 tons, Golden
Fleece, 609 tons, and Northwest, 630 tons; tugs W. B. Castle, 219 tons and
I. U. Masters, 203 tons; barque S. V. R. Watson, 678 tons; propeller
Toledo, 621 tons; tug Hector, 204 tons; propellers Winslow, 920 tons,
Idaho, 920 tons, Atlantic, 660 tons, Meteor, 730 tons, Pewabic, 730 tons,
Metamora, 300 tons, and Octavia, 450 tons. This ended the operations of
the firm of Peck & Masters, in 1864. The firm was dissolved and Mr. Masters
died.

[Illustration: Truly, E. M. Peck]

Mr. Peck now carried on his ship yard alone, and his first work was the
filling of a contract to build two steam Revenue cutters for service on
the lakes. The John Sherman, of 500 tons, and the A. P. Fessenden, of the
same size, were turned out, and no better work could possibly be found.
The Government officers promptly accepted the vessels and declared them
more than up to the requirements of the contract. They were pronounced
models of beauty, strength, and speed.

The cutters were followed by the schooner Oak Leaf, 390 tons; propellers
Messenger, 400 tons, and Nebraska, 1,300 tons, the latter, one of the
finest steamers put on the lakes; schooner David Stewart, 675 tons;
propellers Manistee, 400 tons, and City of Concord, 400 tons. Two other
propellers, one of 1,000 tons, and one of about 300 tons, were added in
the season of 1869.

It will be seen that nearly all the vessels, whether sail or steam, built
by Mr. Peck, were of the first class, being mainly barques and large
propellers. They will be recognized by those familiar with lake commerce,
as models in size, beauty, and strength, whilst several have made
unusually quick trips.

Mr. Peck has enjoyed an unusual measure of success. The work of his hands
has prospered, and he has earned his reward, not only in reputation but in
substantial prosperity. He has aimed not only to equal the best work done
by others, but studied how to improve on his own work. The result has been
a constant improvement in the style and quality of his vessels, so that
excellent as the last new hull may have been, it was almost sure to be
excelled by the next one that left the stocks. And whilst thus giving
close attention to the mechanical details of his business, he was skillful
in managing the financial part of it so as to secure the rewards honestly
won by industry and skill. He always kept his affairs in such order that
no serious financial difficulty ever troubled him.

Nor was he an avaricious, though a prudent man. A working man himself, he
was in thorough sympathy with his workmen, and in the slack season,
instead of discharging his men and thus entailing want upon them, he built
vessels on speculation, merely that he might keep the men busy and their
families from suffering. Providentially these speculations were always
successful, thus illustrating the proverb, that "there is he that
scattereth, and yet increaseth."

Mr. Peck took an active part in the formation of the People's Gas Light
Company, and is now president of that organization. He is also a director
of the Savings Loan Association.




John Martin.



John Martin, of the firm of Quayle & Martin, was born in the county of
Antrim, Ireland, December 15th, 1824, of poor parents, with whom he came
to Canada when but nine years of age. At the age of fourteen he commenced
working in a ship yard in Montreal, by turning grindstone. He soon
attracted the attention of the proprietor by his using handily the tools
of the workmen while they were at dinner, and he was furnished tools and
set to work at the trade. He continued in this employ for about two years,
and during the time, with a view to fitting himself for the business of
life, he attended school in the evenings. He then worked his passage to
French Creek, New York, having at the time of leaving only a dollar and a
half in money. At French Creek he engaged with G. S. Weeks, one of the best
ship builders on the lakes, and remained with him at French Creek two
years, when Mr. Weeks moved to Oswego, Mr. Martin accompanying him to that
place, and continuing in his employ two years longer. Mr. Martin then went
to Detroit, where he worked a year on the steamboat Wisconsin.

In 1843, he came to Cleveland and commenced work for G. W. Jones, on the
steamboat Empire. This work finished, he commenced sub-contracting,
wrecking, planking, and jobbing generally, until 1846, when he went into
the employ of another firm, with whom he worked two years.

At the end of that time his employers were owing him more than they could
pay, so, to square the matter, he bought an interest in their business.
But this did not mend the matter, as it proved to be an interest in their
debts, more than in their business, they being deeply involved. The firm
owned the brig Courtland, and one of the members had sailed her for some
time at a great loss. Young Martin took his place and proved himself
master of the situation, by reducing the liabilities of the firm to about
$2,500. That done he sold the vessel, dissolved partnership, and commenced
planking and general jobbing again. After a time he built a vessel for
Moses & Quayle. He found frequent employment in wrecking jobs, being very
successful at such work.

[Illustration: Yours truly, John Martin]

The three years thus occupied gave him a start in life. He cleared off
the indebtedness of the old firm and had $3,000 ahead. He then took the
contract for building the brig John G. Deshler, for Handy, Warren & Co.
This was a very successful contract, and gave Mr. Martin a handsome lift,
and enabled him to take an interest with Mr. Quayle, under the firm name
of Quayle & Martin, a brief mention of its operations being made in the
sketch of Mr. Quayle's life.

In 1858, Mr. Martin loaded the John G. Deshler and D. C. Pierce with staves
and made a successful trip to England, and on the return brought one of
the spans for the Victoria bridge at Montreal. In 1859, he took over two
more cargoes in the same vessels, selling one in Cork, and the other in
Glasgow. Nor was this the only connection of the firm with the direct lake
and ocean trade. They have built vessels for Liverpool parties, for ocean
service, and also two vessels for New York parties for the same purpose.
Six of these vessels have also been sold out of the lake service for ocean
navigation, and have been used on the ocean for five or six years with
great success. The John G. Deshler, which had been transferred to the
ocean, as previously mentioned, was sunk by the rebels at the outbreak of
the war, and was a total loss to the firm. The latest work of the firm is
a fine vessel for A. Bradley, that will carry a thousand tons of iron ore.

Mr. Martin has proved himself admirably adapted to the line of business it
was his fortune to learn, and this, of course, together with close
attention to business, furnishes the clue to his success. He is
emphatically a self-made man, and can therefore appreciate the handsome
competence that has crowned his labors so early in life, he being now but
45 years of age.

During the war Mr. Martin was actively and earnestly on the side of the
Government. He was never idle, and always ready to furnish his share, and
far more than his share, to the work of suppressing the rebellion. He
furnished three substitutes for the army, and was active in promoting
volunteering.

Mr. Martin was married to Miss Mary Picket, of Devonshire, England, whose
father and grandfather were both Episcopal clergymen. Three children were
born of this marriage; a son, who is now book-keeper for the firm, and two
daughters.

Mr. Martin has enjoyed the confidence of his neighbors to so high a
degree, that he has represented the Ninth Ward in the City Council for six
successive years.




The Bench and Bar



The leading points in the history of legal affairs in Cleveland have
already been noticed with sufficient fullness in the sketch of the
history of Cleveland, especially so far as relates more immediately to
the earlier portion of that history. The following biographical sketches
give a good general idea of the progress of affairs in relation to the
Bench and Bar of the city within the active life of the present
generation. It is therefore unnecessary at this place to detail more than
a few incidental facts.

The township of Cleveland, of the county of Trumbull, was organized in
1800. The first justice of the Quorum, for the new township, was James
Kingsbury, and the first Justice, not of the Quorum, was Amos Spafford.
The first constables were Stephen Gilbert and Lorenzo Carter.

In 1810, the county of Cuyahoga was organized and Cleveland made the
county seat. The court-house, of logs, was two years afterwards built on
the Public Square, as narrated in previuos portions of this work. The
county was organized on the 9th May, and on 5th of June a County Court was
held with the following officers:

  _Presiding Judge_.--Benjamin Ruggles
  _Associate Judges_.--Nathan Perry, Sen., Augustus Gilbert, Timothy Doan.
  _Clerk_.--John Walworth.
  _Sheriff_.--Smith S. Baldwin.

The first lawyer in Cleveland, under the county organization, arrived here
the same year and put out his shingle with the name of "Alfred Kelley"
inscribed thereon. Previous to this the law business had all been done by
Samuel Huntington, who arrived in 1801. At the time of the organization of
the court, the court-house had not been built, and the first session was
held in Murray's store, which had just been built. The first business was
the finding of a bill by the grand jury for petit larceny, and several for
the offence of selling whisky to Indians, and selling foreign goods
without license.

The first execution was that of the Indian Omic, which took place June
24th, 1812, as previously narrated.

In March, 1836, Cleveland was incorporated as a city, and henceforth to
the ordinary courts of the county was added a city court for cognizance of
offences against the ordinances.

In the year 1848, a Superior Court was organized, with Sherlock J. Andrew
as judge, and G. A. Benedict as clerk. This court existed but a short time,
when it expired by reason of the adoption of the new constitution of the
State, which made no provision for its continuance.

In 1855, Cleveland was selected as the seat of a District and Circuit
Court of the United States.

As a matter of curiosity, the following list of Attorneys and Counsellors
in Cleveland, in 1837, is taken from McCabe's Cleveland and Ohio City
Directory, those not practising at that time being marked with an
asterisk: Joseph Adams, John W. Allen, Sherlock J. Andrews, Oliver P.
Baldwin, John Barr, Phillip Battell, George A. Benedict, Henry W.
Billings, Elijah Bingham,* Flavius Bingham, Thomas Bolton, James A.
Briggs, Varnum J. Card, Leonard Case,* Richard M. Chapman, Alexander L.
Collins, James L. Conger, Samuel Cowles,* Henry H. Dodge, John Erwin,
Simeon Ford, John A. Foot, James K. Hitchcock, George Hoadly, James M.
Hoyt, Seth T. Hurd, Moses Kelley, George T. Kingsley, William B. Lloyd,
George W. Lynde, Samuel Mather, Daniel Parish, Henry B. Payne, Francis
Randal, Harvey Rice, O. S. St. John, Wyllys Silliman, George W. Stanley,
Samuel Starkweather, John M. Sterling,* Charles Stetson, Charles
Whittlesey, Frederick Whittlesey,* John W. Willey,* Samuel Williamson,
Hiram V. Wilson.




[Illustration: Alfred Kelley]


Alfred Kelley.



Alfred Kelley was born at Middletown, Conn., Nov. 7th, 1789. He was the
second son of Daniel and Jemima Kelley. His mother's maiden name was Stow.
She was a sister of Judge Joshua Stow, and also of Judge Silas Stow of
Lowville, N. Y. The latter was the father of Judge Horatio Stow, of
Buffalo, N. Y., and of Alexander Stow, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court
of Wisconsin, both of whom were men of great talents and distinction. In
the winter of 1798, Alfred Kelley removed with his father's family to
Lowville, N. Y. His father was President Judge of the Court of Common
Pleas of Lewis county, N. Y., was one of the founders of Lowville Academy
and President of its Board of Trustees.

Alfred Kelley was educated at Fairfield Academy, N. Y. He read law at
Whitesboro, N. Y., three years, in the office of Jonas Platt, a judge of
the Supreme Court of that State.

In the Spring of 1810, in company with Joshua Stow, Dr. J. P. Kirtland, and
others, he removed to Cleveland,--traveling on horseback. At the November
term 1810, on motion of Peter Hitchcock, Alfred Kelley was admitted as an
attorney of the Court of Common Pleas for Cuyahoga county. On the same
day, being his 21st birth day, he was appointed Public Prosecutor as the
successor of Peter Hitchcock, late Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of
Ohio. Mr. Kelley continued Prosecutor till 1821, when he resigned. In
October 1814, he was elected from Cuyahoga county a member of the Ohio
House of Representatives, being barely old enough under the Constitution
when the Legislature met to take his seat in that body and being the
youngest member. Chillicothe was then the temporary State capital.

On the 25th of August, 1817. Alfred Kelley was married to Mary S. Welles,
oldest daughter of Major Melancthon Wolsey Welles, of Lowville, N. Y.
They had eleven children of whom six are now living.

He continued, with intervals, a member of the Ohio Legislature from
Cuyahoga county, from 1814 until 1822, when he was appointed, with
others, State Canal Commissioner, by an act of the General Assembly,
empowering the Commissioners to make examinations, surveys and estimates,
to ascertain the practicability of connecting Lake Erie with the Ohio
River, by canal.

The Ohio Canal is a monument to the enterprise, energy, integrity and
sagacity of Alfred Kelley. He was acting Commissioner during its
construction and the onerous and responsible service was performed with
such fidelity and economy that the _actual cost did not exceed the
estimate!_ The dimensions of the Ohio Canal were the same as those of the
Erie Canal of N. Y., but the number of locks was nearly double. The Erie
Canal was 363 miles in length, its total cost was $7,143,789, and cost per
mile $19,679. The Ohio Canal is 307 miles in length, its total cost was
$4,695,824, and cost per mile $15,300, being less than that of any other
canal constructed on this continent. The Ohio Canal was finished about
1830. The labor in the then facilities for conducting important public
enterprises was Herculean, but Mr. Kelley's indomitable will, and iron
constitution and physique triumphed over all difficulties. Mr. Kelley
neither charged nor received any pay for his first year's services in
superintending the preliminary explorations and surveys for the Ohio
Canal. The pay of the Acting Canal Commissioner was $3,00 [sic] per day.
When the work was done he resigned as Canal Commissioner, and retired from
public service to attend to his private affairs, and recuperate his
shattered constitution and health. In the Fall of 1830, he became a
resident of Columbus. In October, 1836, he was elected to the Ohio House
of Representatives from Franklin county, and was re-elected to the same
office in the next two Legislatures. He was Chairman of the Ohio Whig
State Central Committee in 1840, a year distinguished for a great
political revolution and the election of Wm. H. Harrison to the
Presidency, and was one of the most active and influential managers of
that campaign.

Mr. Kelley was appointed State Fund Commissioner in 1840, a period of
great financial embarrassment and distress. In 1841 and '42, a formidable
party arose in the Legislature and in the State, which advocated the
non-payment of the maturing interest upon the State debt, and the
repudiation of the debt itself. This was a time which indeed tried the
souls of men. Mr. Kelley went to New York, and such was the confidence
reposed in his integrity and practical ability--notwithstanding the
underhanded and atrocious means employed by the repudiators, to defeat his
object--that he was enabled to raise in that city (where no one could be
found willing to loan money to the sovereign State of Ohio) nearly a
quarter of a million of dollars on his own personal security, and thus by
his generous efforts, and by his alone, the interest was paid at maturity,
and the State of Ohio was saved from repudiation. At the time that Mr.
Kelley thus volunteered himself as security for the State, (an act which
was done contrary to the advice of his friends,) such was the
unenlightened state of public opinion, such the moral obtuseness of some,
nay, many men in power, that the chances were a hundred to one that no
effective measure would be adopted to save the public credit--none to
indemnify him.

In 1844, he was elected to the State Senate from the Franklin district. It
was during this term that he originated the bill to organize the State
Bank of Ohio, and other banking companies, which by general consent among
bankers and financiers, was the best of American banking laws. His banking
System was successfully in operation during the whole twenty years of its
charter. Many of the most valuable provisions of the present National
banking law were taken from Mr. Kelley's bill to "organize the State Bank
of Ohio." Many of the provisions of this law were original and novel, and
evinced deep thought and a profound knowledge of this department of
political science. For several years, and during some of the most trying
periods in the financial history of Ohio, and of the country, Mr. Kelley
was a member of the Board of Control of the State Bank of Ohio; and part
of the time was President of the Board. It was also during this Senatorial
term that Mr. Kelley originated the present Revenue System of the State.
The main principles of this Revenue or Tax law were subsequently
incorporated in the new Constitution of Ohio.

While Mr. Kelley was a member of the Legislature few valuable general laws
can be found in the Statute books which did not originate with him, and
most of the measures requiring laborious investigation and profound
thought were entrusted to him. He was the author, in 1818, of the first
Legislative bill--either in this country or in Europe--to abolish
imprisonment for debt.

It then failed to become a law. In a letter to a friend, dated Jan. 16th,
1819, Mr. Kelley said: "The House has to-day disagreed by a small
majority, to my favorite bill to abolish imprisonment for debt. I was not
disappointed, although at first, a large majority seemed in favor of it.
The time will come when the absurdity as well as inhumanity of adding
oppression to misfortune will be acknowledged; and if I should live to see
that day I shall exult in the consciousness of having early combatted one
of the worst prejudices of the age." In 1831, the Legislature of New York
passed the first law abolishing imprisonment for debt.

At the end of this Senatorial term he was elected President of the
Columbus & Xenia Railroad Company, and was actively engaged upon all
the duties of that enterprise until it was finished; soon after which
he resigned. While this road was in progress, upon the urgent
solicitation of the active promoters of the C., C. & C. R. R., Mr. Kelley
accepted the Presidency of that Company, and began the work with his
usual order and ability.

His zeal and labors upon this enterprise were only surpassed in his work
upon the Ohio Canal. He solicited subscriptions to the capital stock;
located much of the route; procured rights of way; attended in person to
the purchase of materials; the procuring of money, and the details of the
construction of the road, and continued the ever working president of the
road until he resigned, a short time after its completion. With his own
hands he dug the first shovel of earth, and laid the last rail upon this
road. It is but just to say, that the citizens of Cleveland and the people
of Ohio are more indebted to Alfred Kelley than to any other man for the
C., C. & C. R. R. He was still acting president of the C. & X. and the
C., C. & C. Companies, when he was chosen, in 1850, president of the
C., P. & A., or Lake Shore R. R. Company. He was actively engaged upon
this road in the performance of duties similar to those done upon the
C., C. & C. road until its completion in 1853, when he resigned. It was
while he was president of this road that the famous riots occurred at
Erie and Harbor Creek, Pa., in opposition to the construction of the road
through Pennsylvania. The success of the company in this formidable
contest was largely due to the sagacity, forbearance and indomitable will
of Alfred Kelley. When he took charge of these railroads, such enterprises
at the West had but little credit at the East. The roads constructed by
him have paid regular dividends from the time of their completion. He
continued until his death an active director in these companies.

In October, 1857, he was again elected to the State Senate from Columbus,
being then 64 years of age, and the oldest member of the Legislature. This
was his last appearance in public life. During the last year of this
service his health was declining. Although so much debilitated that
prudence required confinement to his house, if not to his bed, yet such
was his fidelity to his trust, that he went daily to the Senate and
carried through the Legislature several important measures to ascertain
the true condition of the State Treasury, and to secure the public funds
from further depredations.

At the end of this term he retired from public life hoping to regain his
health; but his constitution was too much broken to admit of
re-establishment. He did not appear to be affected with any specific
disease, but seemed gradually wasting away from an over-taxed mind and
body. His oft quoted maxim was, "It is better to wear out than to rust
out." He was only confined to his room a few days previous to his death,
and on Friday, the 2d day of December, 1863, his pure spirit left its
earthly tenement so gently that the friends who surrounded him could
scarcely determine when it ascended. Mr. Kelley was twenty-four years in
the service of the people of Ohio, in the Legislature, and as Canal
Commissioner, and Fund Commissioner. His history would be almost a
complete financial and political history of Ohio. He gave a greater
impulse to the physical development of Ohio, and left upon its statute
books higher proofs of wisdom and forecast than any who had preceded him.
Indeed, few persons have ever lived who, merely by personal exertions,
have left behind them more numerous and lasting monuments of patient and
useful labor.

Note.--For much of this sketch we are indebted to an unpublished "Memoir
of Alfred Kelley," by the late Judge Gustavus Swan, of Columbus.




Leonard Case



The late Leonard Case was the second child and oldest son of Magdalene and
Mesech Case, of Westmoreland county, Pennsylvania. His mother, who was a
native of Winchester, Virginia, was of German extraction, her maiden name
being Extene. His father, believed to have been of English ancestry, was
born in Sussex county, New Jersey. For nearly forty years Mr. Mesech Case
suffered from asthma to the extent of making him a partial invalid, and
hence much of the management of his affairs devolved upon his wife, a
woman of superior character, educated beyond the average of those days,
energetic, having good executive ability, and blessed with robust health.
The family cultivated a small farm in Pennsylvania, which yielded but a
moderate support, so that when news came of the land of rich promise
beyond the mountains, where the soil yielded with an abundance marvellous
in the eyes of those who painfully cultivated and carefully gathered in
the older States, they collected their implements and stock, packed their
household effects, disposed of the farm, and, crossing the mountains,
settled down somewhere between the western foot of the Alleghanies and
Pittsburgh. This, however, was not the land of promise. The reports they
had heard in their Westmoreland home of the soil which produced crops
almost without care, and which embarrassed by their abundant yield, came
from still farther west, and again the Case household took up the line of
march, settling down finally upon a farm of two hundred acres near Warren,
Trumbull county, Ohio, in the year 1800.

There were then five children in the Case household, Leonard, the oldest
son, and the subject of this biographical sketch, being then sixteen years
old, having been born in Westmoreland county, Penn., July 20th, 1784. In
the invalid condition of his father, and being the oldest son of the
family, young Leonard was compelled to take a prominent part in the
management of the affairs of the farm. In the Spring succeeding the
removal to Trumbull, he started out in search of working oxen needed for
the Spring work. The task was a difficult one, and he traveled for some
time, becoming much heated with the walk and the anxiety. On his return he
had to cross a stream several times whilst he was in this heated
condition, the result being the contracting of a severe cold which settled
in his limbs and brought on an inflammation that confined him to his bed
for months.

It was late in the Fall of 1801, when he recovered sufficiently to arise
from his bed. But he arose as a cripple. The injury he had received from
his unfortunate journey was permanent, and he was unable for some time
after his rising from a sick bed to walk, or even to stand. Thus helpless
in body, whilst active in mind, he pondered over his future. As a farmer
he was no longer of any use, and unless some other mode of livelihood was
adopted he must remain a dependent on his relations. This was galling his
independent nature, and he determined to avoid it if possible.

[Illustration: I am Respectfully Leonard Case]

His hands were free if his feet gave promise of but little usefulness. He
concluded that the pen would be a fitter implement for his purposes than
the plow, and he took measures accordingly. Whilst lying in bed, unable to
rise, he had a board fastened before him in such a manner as to serve for
a desk. With this contrivance he worked diligently, whilst lying otherwise
helpless, to acquire the rudiments of knowledge. He learned to write and
cipher with moderate ease and correctness, and when he had matured the
contents of an arithmetical text book, which was the property of his
mother, he borrowed a few works on the higher branches of mathematics from
some surveyors in the neighborhood. From the knowledge in this way
acquired, he conceived the desire to be a surveyor and he set to work
energetically to perfect himself in that science so far as it could be
done by books. He was embarrassed by the want of even the most simple
instruments. A semi-circle for measuring angles was made by cutting a
groove the required shape on a piece of soft wood, and filling it by
melting and running in a pewter spoon, making an arc of metal on which the
graduated scale was etched. A pair of dividers was improvised from a piece
of hickory, by making the centre thin, bending it over, putting pins at
the points, and regulating its spread by twisting a cord.

But more education was needed, and if he expected to pursue the path he
had marked out in his mind, he must leave his home and venture out in the
world. To do this, money was needed, for to a cripple like him the first
struggle in the battle of life would be almost hopeless, if he entered on
it totally without resources. As seen, he had already manifested a strong
mechanical bent. He was domestic carpenter, making and repairing such
articles as were needed in the household. This ability he immediately
commenced to turn to account. A rude chair suitable to his needs was
mounted on wheels, and in this he was able to reach the edge of the woods
surrounding the house, where he cut twigs and made baskets, which were
purchased by the neighbors. Other jobs requiring mechanical skill were
done by him for the neighborhood, and in this way a small fund was
gradually accumulated with which to make his meditated start in life.

In 1806, he was able to set out from home and reach the village of
Warren, where he concluded that a better opportunity existed for
obtaining work with his pen. He found employment as clerk in the Land
Commissioner's office, where his industry, zeal, and strong desire to
improve both his knowledge and opportunities, soon brought him into
notice and gained for him many valuable friends. Chief among these was
Mr. John D. Edwards, a lawyer, holding the office of recorder of Trumbull
county, which then comprised all the Western Reserve. Mr. Edwards proved
a fast friend to Mr. Case, and his memory was ever held in respect by the
latter. He advised the young clerk to add a knowledge of law to his
other acquirements, and furnished him with books with which to prosecute
his studies, until he was at length admitted to the bar. In addition, he
gave him such writing as fell in his way to be given out, and thus aided
in enabling him to support himself.

The war of 1812 found Mr. Case at Warren, having, among his other duties,
that of the collection of non-resident taxes on the Western Reserve, for
which he had to furnish what was then considered heavy bail. Having to go
to Chillicothe to make his settlement, he prepared for the journey by
making a careful disposition of all his official matters, so that in case
of misfortune to him, there would be no difficulty in settling his
affairs, and no loss to his bail. The money belonging to the several
townships was parcelled out, enveloped, and marked in readiness to hand
over to the several trustees. The parcels were then deposited with his
friend, Mr. Edwards, with directions to pay over to the proper parties
should he not return in time. The journey was made without mishap, but on
his return Mr. Case found that his friend had set out to join the army on
the Maumee, and had died suddenly on the way. To the gratification of Mr.
Case, however, the money was found where he had left it, untouched.

In 1816, Mr. Case received the appointment of cashier of the Commercial
Bank of Lake Erie, just organized in Cleveland. He immediately removed to
Cleveland and entered on the discharge of his duties. These did not occupy
the whole of his time, so with the avocations of a banker he coupled the
practice of law and also the business of land agent. The bank, in common
with most of the similar institutions of the time, was compelled to
suspend operations, but was revived in after years with Mr. Case as
president. Of those who were connected as officers with the original
organization, Mr. Case gave the least promise of a long life, but yet he
outlived all his colleagues.

With the close of the bank he devoted himself more earnestly to the
practice of the law and the prosecution of his business as a land agent.
The active practice of the law was abandoned in 1834, but the land agency
was continued until a comparatively recent period, when his infirmities,
and the care of his own estate, grown into large proportions, rendered it
necessary for him to decline all business for others.

Mr. Case had a natural taste for the investigation of land titles and
studying the history of the earlier land owners. His business as a land
agent gave him scope for the gratification of this taste, and his
appointment as agent for the management of the Western Reserve school
lands, enabled him still further to prosecute his researches, whilst his
strong memory retained the facts acquired until he became complete
master of the whole history of the titles derived from the Connecticut
Land Company.

From his earliest connection with Cleveland, Mr. Case took a lively
interest in the affairs of the village, the improvement of the streets,
maintenance and enlargement of the schools, and the extension of religious
influences. For all these purposes he contributed liberally, and spent
much time and labor. To his thoughtfulness and public spirit are due the
commencement of the work of planting shade trees on the streets, which has
added so much to the beauty of the city, and has won for it the cognomen
of the Forest City. From 1821 to 1825, he was president of the village,
and was judicious and energetic in the management of its affairs. On the
erection of Cuyahoga county, he was its first auditor. He was subsequently
sent to the State Legislature, where he distinguished himself by his
persistent labors in behalf of the Ohio canals. He headed the subscription
to the stock of the Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati Railroad Company
with the sum of five thousand dollars, and became a director in the
Company. His good sense, a judgment that rarely erred, his extensive
knowledge of the village and surrounding country, and the cheerful
readiness with which he gave counsel, whenever requested in good faith,
caused him to be the confidential adviser of the county and municipal
officials, after he had ceased to take an active part in public affairs.

One of the rules from which he never deviated, was in no case to contract
a debt beyond his ability to pay within two years without depending on a
sale of property. In this way he was enabled to accumulate acre after acre
in what has since proved to be valuable portions of the city, and thus to
acquire a vast estate, which, in his later years, became steadily
remunerative.

Mr. Case was a man of uncommon industry, of high integrity, and strong
common sense. His manner to strangers, especially when interrupted in
business, was brusque, and gave an unfavorable impression to those
unacquainted with his real character, which was uniformly cheerful and
kind. As a seller of land, he was both just and generous, and from no one
ever came the complaint of oppressive or ungenerous treatment. Although
not a member of any church organization, he had strong religious
tendencies, of a liberal cast.

Mr. Case died December 7th, 1864, leaving one son, Leonard Case, the other
son, William, having died a short time earlier.




Reuben Wood.



Honorable Reuben Wood, an early settler of Cleveland, was born in Rutland
county, Vermont, in 1792. In early life he worked on a farm in Summer and
taught school in Winter. Resolving to achieve more than this, he went to
Canada and studied the classics under the tuition of an English clergyman,
and while there commenced the study of law with Hon. Barnabas Bidwell.
When war was declared in 1812, young Wood, with all other resident
Americans were required to leave Canada. He then went to Middletown, Vt.,
where he completed his legal studies in the office of Gen. Jonas Clark, an
eminent lawyer of that place.

In 1818, he married, and emigrated to Cleveland, where he arrived
September of that year, a stranger, and without money. He at once
entered upon a successful practice, and soon became distinguished as a
lawyer and advocate.

In 1825, he was elected a member of the State Senate, and was twice
re-elected to the same position.

In 1830, he was elected President Judge of the Third Judicial Circuit.

In 1833, he was elected a Judge of the Supreme Court, and at the close of
his term was re-elected. For the last three years of his second term he
was Chief Justice. As a Judge he was noted for sound logic, and the
clearness of his decisions.

In 1850, Judge Wood was elected by the Democratic party Governor of the
State by eleven thousand majority, and was re-elected Governor in 1851,
under the new constitution, by a majority of twenty-six thousand.

In 1853, he was appointed, by the Government, Consul to Valparaiso, South
America. While there, he, for some months, at the request of the
Government, discharged the duties of a Minister Plenipotentiary to Chili.

On his return from Chili, he returned to his farm in Rockport, near
Cleveland, where he died, October 2, 1864, generally esteemed, and highly
respected by all who knew him.




John W. Willey.



John W. Willey was a native of New Hampshire, being born in 1797. He
pursued a regular course of study at Dartmouth College, under the
encouragement of the distinguished President Wheelock, after whom he had
been named. He studied law in New York.

In 1822, being then twenty-five years of age, he came West and settled in
Cleveland. At that time it had but one tavern, no church, no railroads, no
canal, an occasional steamboat only, three or four stores and a few
hundred inhabitants; such was the then picture of a settlement now
approaching to a city of a hundred thousand people. Small as Cleveland
then was, professionally, Mr. Willey had been preceded by men of decided
ability. Alfred Kelley, Leonard Case, and the late Gov. Wood, had taken
possession of the field four, six and twelve years before him, and were
men of far more than ordinary ability. Mr. Willey was peculiarly adapted
to such circumstances as these. Thoroughly versed in legal principles, of
a keen and penetrating mind, a logician by nature, fertile and ready of
expedient, with a persuasive eloquence, enlivened with wit and humor, he
at once rose to prominence at the bar of Northern Ohio. The Cuyahoga bar
was for many years considered the strongest in the State, but amongst all
of its talented members, each with his own peculiar forte, for the faculty
of close and long-continued reasoning, clearness of statement, nice
discrimination, and never ending ingenuity, he had no superior.

In 1827, Mr. Willey was partially withdrawn from practice, by being
elected to the Legislature, where he served three years as Representative
and three as Senator, until 1832.

He was the first Mayor of Cleveland, being elected in 1836, and re-elected
in 1837, by large majorities, and prepared the original laws and
ordinances for the government of the city.

He was amongst the earliest projectors, prior to the reverses of 1836 and
1837, of the railroads to Columbus and Cincinnati, and to Pittsburgh.

In 1840, he was appointed to the bench, thus restoring him to those
studies and subjects of thought from which years of public and of
business life had diverted him. No sooner had he assumed this new position
than by common consent it was recognized as the one above all others he
was best fitted to adorn. Possessing the power which so few men have, of
close, concentrated, continuous thought, he was at the same time prompt in
his decisions. His instructions to juries, and his legal judgments,
usually pronounced at considerable length, were marked by that precision
of statement, clearness of analysis, and felicity of language, which made
them seem like the flowing of a silver stream.

Judge Willey, at the time of his death, which occurred in June, 1841, was
President Judge of the Fourteenth Judicial District. He died deeply
regretted by a large circle of professional and other friends, who had
become much attached to him for his many virtues, uniform and dignified,
yet unostentatious life.

In the Western Law Journal for 1852, we find a judicial anecdote related
of Mr. Willey, in illustration of his wit, and immovable self-possession.
The writer says: "At his last term in Cleveland we happened in while he
was pronouncing sentence upon a number of criminals who had been
convicted during the week, of penitentiary offenses. One of them, a
stubborn looking fellow, who, to the usual preliminary question of
whether he had anything to offer why the sentence of the law should not
be pronounced upon him, had replied somewhat truculently, that he had
'nothing to say,' but who when the judge was proceeding in a few
prefatory remarks to explain to the man how fairly he had been tried,
etc., broke in upon the court by exclaiming that 'he did'nt care if the
court had convicted him, he wasn't guilty _any_ how.' 'That will be a
consolation to you,' rejoined the judge, with unusual benignity, and with
a voice full of sympathy and compassion, 'That will be a consolation to
you, in the hour of your confinement, for we read in the good Book that
it is better to _suffer_ wrong, than _do_ wrong.' In the irrepressible
burst of laughter which followed this unexpected response, all joined
except the judge and the culprit."




[Illustration: Truly Yours, S. Andrews]


Sherlock J. Andrews.



Judge Andrews was born November, 1801, in the quiet New England village
of Wallingford, Connecticut. His father was a prominent physician at
that place, where he spent a long and useful life in the practice of
his profession. He lived to a good old age, a Christian gentleman of
the old school.

Although Wallingford is but a short day's travel from Yale, even under the
old System of horse and shay, or horse and saddle, young Andrews was sent
out of New England to Union College, at Schenectady, New York, where he
graduated about the year 1821.

Soon after this time the elder Silliman was at Wallingford, and being in
need of an assistant in Chemistry and a private secretary, he offered the
position to Mr. Andrews, which was accepted. It seems to have been
mutually a happy relation. In his diary, Prof. Silliman says, "he was a
young man of a vigorous and active mind, energetic and quick in his
decisions and movements, with a warm heart and a genial temper, of the
best moral and social habits, a quiet and skillful penman, an agreeable
inmate of my family, in which we made him quite at home. We found we had
acquired an interesting and valuable friend as well as a good professional
assistant. It is true he had, when he came, no experience in practical
Chemistry. He had everything to learn, but learned rapidly, as he had real
industry and love of knowledge. Before the end of the first term he proved
that we had made a happy choice. He continued about four years serving
with ability, and the zeal of an affectionate son, without whom I could
scarce have retained my place in the College." During this experience in
the field of sciences, Mr. Andrews had pursued the study of the law at the
Law School of New Haven, with the same ardor, and in 1825, removed to
Cleveland, and established himself as an attorney.

In 1828, he married Miss Ursula Allen, of Litchfield, Connecticut,
daughter of the late John Allen, a member of Congress from that State, who
was also the father of Hon. John W. Allen, of this city. The late Samuel
Cowles had preceded Mr. Andrews here in the profession and offered him a
partnership. Their competitors were the late Governor Wood and Judge John
W. Willey, who were partners, and Judge Starkweather, who still survives.
Considering the limited business of the place, which scarcely numbered
five hundred inhabitants, the profession was evidently overstocked then,
as it has been ever since. Briefless lawyers had, however, a wide field to
cultivate outside this county, embracing at least all the counties of the
Reserve; with horse and saddle-bags, they followed the Court in its
travels, judges and attorneys splashing through the mud on terms of
democratic equality.

Judge Andrews gave immediate promise of celebrity as an advocate. With a
sensitive and nervous temperament, he entered sympathetically into the
case of his client, making it his own. He possessed a brilliant readiness
of manner, full of skillful thrusts, hits, and witticisms. His correct New
England morals were not deteriorated by contact with the more loose codes
of a new western town. In his clear and earnest voice there was that
magnetic influence, which is necessary to complete the style of any
orator, and which is a gift solely of nature. As a technical pleader,
though he stood high, there were others upon the circuit equally gifted.
But in a cause where his convictions of justice and of legal right were
fixed, there was not among his contemporaries, in the courts of this
State, an advocate, whose efforts were so nearly irresistible before a
jury. He has command of sarcasm and invective, without coarseness. He
attacks oppression, meanness and fraud as if they were offences not only
against the public, but against himself. He has never strayed from the
profession to engage in any speculations or occupations to divert his
thoughts from pure law, except for two years from 1840, while he held a
seat in Congress. In 1848, the Legislature elected him judge of the
Superior Court of Cuyahoga county, a place he continued to hold till the
Court was abolished. As a judge he was eminently successful, his decisions
having been overruled by higher courts only in a single instance, and that
owing to a clerical mistake. In politics he was evidently not at home.
After leaving the bench, Judge Andrews returned to the practice, but has
been chiefly employed as associate counsel, occasionally addressing juries
on important cases.

As an advocate, Judge Andrews, during his whole professional career, has
been in the very foremost rank, with a reputation confined neither to
county, or even State lines. Distinguished for clear conceptions of legal
principles, and their varied relations to practical life, he has also
shown rare ability in judging of mixed questions of law and fact. His
legal opinions, therefore, have ever been held in the highest esteem.

But as jury lawyer, Judge Andrews has achieved successes so remarkable as
to have secured a permanent place in the traditions of the bar, and the
history of judicial proceedings in Northern Ohio. The older lawyers have
vivid recollections of a multitude of cases when he was in full practice,
and in his prime, in which his ready insight into character--his power to
sift testimony and bring into clear relief the lines of truth involved in
complicated causes--his ability to state the legal principles so that the
jury could intelligently apply them to the facts--his humor--his pure
wit--his pathos, at times bringing unfeigned tears to the eyes of both
judge and jurors--his burning scorn of fraud--and his appeal on behalf of
what he believed to be right, so impetuous with enthusiasm, so condensed
and incisive in expression, and so felicitous in illustration, as to be
well nigh irresistible.

Yet, highly as Judge Andrews has adorned his profession, it is simply
justice to say in conclusion, that his unblemished character in every
relation has adorned his manhood. He has been far more than a mere lawyer.
With a keen relish for historical and philosophical inquiry--a wide
acquaintance with literature, and an earnest sympathy with the advanced
lines of thought in the present age, his life has also been practically
subordinated to the faultless morality of Christianity. A community is
truly enriched, when it possesses, and can present to its younger members,
such shining instances of success in honorable endeavor, and sterling
excellence in character and example.




John W. Allen.



Mr. Allen, though not among the first attorneys who settled in Cleveland,
was upon the ground early among the second generation. Samuel Huntington
was the first lawyer of the place, becoming a resident here in the year
1801. Alfred Kelley was his successor, commencing his legal career as soon
as the county courts were organized in 1810. In 1816, Leonard Case was
added to the profession and in 1818 the late Governor Wood and Samuel
Cowles, and about 1822, John W. Willey About the year 1826, soon after the
construction of the Ohio canal was commenced, a troop of young lawyers
took possession of the field, some of whom still survive, Sherlock J.
Andrews, Samuel Starkweather and John W. Allen. They were all from Yankee
land, in pursuit of fame and fortune. Mr. Allen originated in Litchfield
county, Connecticut, a place prolific in prominent characters. His father,
John Allen, was a member of Congress from that State.

From 1831 to 1835, inclusive, he was elected annually to be president of
the village corporation of Cleveland, and mayor of the city corporation
of Cleveland 1841. In 1835-7, Mr. Allen represented the district of
which Cuyahoga county was a part, in the Ohio Senate, and in 1836 was
elected to the Congress of the United States, commencing with the famous
extra session of September, 1837, as an old line Clay Whig, and was
re-elected in 1838.

As soon as Cleveland assumed the position of a city in 1836, the subject
of railways became one of the prominent public questions. A portion of the
citizens were of the opinion that they had yielded enough to the spirit of
modern innovation when the Ohio canal was suffered to enter Cleveland.
This had banished the Dutch wagons entirely, and railroads might complete
our ruin entirely, by banishing canal boats. Mr. Allen, and the new comers
generally, took the opposite side. While he was rising to a leading public
position he labored zealously in the cause of railways in harmony with his
political opponents John W. Willey, Richard Hilliard, James S. Clark and
others, most of whom are dead. But for his zeal and perseverence the
Cleveland & Columbus Railroad Company would not have been organized
probably for years after it was and then it was done almost in spite of
many of the large property holders of that day, who looked upon the
enterprise as chimerical.

Mr. Allen's free and generous manner not only rendered him popular among
his political friends, but prevented bitterness and personality on the
part of his opponents. During those years of prosperity he led a
thoroughly active life, not only as an attorney with a large practice,
but as an indefatigable public servant. In fact, through life he has
given to the public the first and best of his efforts. He never became a
finished advocate and speaker, but his enterprise and integrity secured
him a large business, most of which was litigated in the counties of the
Western Reserve.

Not long after Mr. Allen commenced practice in Ohio he married Miss Ann
Maria Perkins of Warren, Trumbull county, an auspicious connection which
was soon terminated by her death. His second wife was Miss Harriet Mather,
of New London county, Connecticut, who is now living, and was the mother
of two sons and two daughters, one son and one daughter now surviving.

[Illustration: J. W. Allen]

The financial storm of 1837-8 did so much damage to Mr. Allen's fortune,
as well as some unsuccessful efforts in the construction of local rail
roads ahead of time, that its effects are not yet gone. Being young and
energetic, with a large property, with few debts of his own, it would have
affected him but little, had he not been too generous towards his friends
in the way of endorsements.

In the winter of 1849-50, he was appointed under a resolution of the
Legislature the Agent of the State to examine into the claims of the State
on the General Government growing out of the grants of land in aid of the
canals and which had been twice settled and receipted for in full, which
occupied him five years at Washington. In this he was eminently successful
and did the State great service, and had the State performed its part of
the bargain as well as Mr. Allen did his, the result would have been a
rich compensation for his labors. His was the only case of repudiation
ever perpetrated by Ohio and he may well charge the State with punic faith
toward him.

When the State Bank of Ohio, consisting of branches scattered throughout
the State under the general management of a board of control, was
authorized by an act of the Legislature about the year 1846, and which was
the soundest system ever devised by any State Government, Mr. Allen was
one of the five Commissioners charged with the duty of putting the
machinery in operation.

Very few of the present generation realize the obligation of this city to
him, and his public spirited coadjutors of thirty years since, for the
solid prosperity it now enjoys.




Hiram V. Willson.



The first judge of the United States District Court for the Northern
District of Ohio, will long be remembered by the bar and public of that
District, for the ability, dignity, and purity with which, for over eleven
years, he administered justice. When at last he lay down to his final
rest, there was no voice raised in censure of any one of his acts, and
tributes of heartfelt praise of his life, and sorrow for his loss, were
laid on his grave by men of all parties and shades of opinion. As lawyer,
judge, citizen, and man, Judge Willson won the respect and confidence of
all with whom he was brought into social or official contact.

Hiram V. Willson was born in April, 1808, in Madison county, New York.
Graduating at Hamilton College in 1832, he commenced the study of law in
the office of the Hon. Jared Willson, of Canandaigua, New York.
Subsequently he visited Virginia, read law in the office of Francis S.
Key, of Washington, and for a time aided his slender pecuniary means by
teaching in a classical school in the Shenandoah Valley. During his early
legal studies he laid the foundations of that legal knowledge for which he
was afterwards distinguished, and acquired that familiarity with the
text-books and reports which made him a safe, prompt, and prudent
counsellor. At school, college, and in the Shenandoah Valley, he
maintained a close intimacy with the Hon. Henry B. Payne, then a young man
of about his own age. In 1833, he removed to Painesville, but soon changed
his residence to Cleveland, where he and his intimate friend, H. B. Payne,
formed a law partnership.

Long after, when at a banquet tendered by the bar of Cleveland in honor of
the organization of the United States Court for the Northern District of
Ohio, Judge Willson referred to the auspices under which the young firm
commenced business. The following toast had been offered:

  The First Judge of the Northern District of Ohio: In the history and
  eminent success of a twenty years' practice at the Bar, we have the
  fullest assurance that whatever industry, talent, and integrity can
  achieve for the character of this long sought for court, will be
  accomplished by the gentleman who has been appointed to preside over its
  deliberations.

In responding to the toast, Judge Willson spoke highly of the character
of the profession, and then made a warm appeal to the young lawyers. He
said that all there had been young lawyers and knew the struggles and
difficulties that hang around the lawyer's early path, and which cloud to
him his future, and nothing is so welcome, so genial to a young lawyer's
heart as to be taken in hand by an older legal brother. He said he could
talk with feeling on the subject, for the memory was yet green of the days
when two penniless young men came to Ohio to take life's start, and when
as discouragements, and almost despair, seemed to lie in wait for them,
there was an older lawyer who held out a friendly hand to aid them, and
who bid them take courage and persevere. Who that friend was he signified
by offering, with much feeling, a toast to the memory of Judge Willey.

But the young firm did not long need friendly counsel to cheer them in the
midst of discouragements. Although they were but young men, and Willey,
Congar, and Andrews were eminent lawyers in full practice, they soon took
place in the front rank of the profession. Business flowed in upon them,
and from 1837 to 1840, the number of suits brought by them in the Court of
Common Pleas averaged two hundred and fifty per year; whilst during the
same time they appeared for the defence in twice that number of cases
annually. Briefs in all those cases were, to a great extent, prepared by
Judge Willson. Upon Mr. Payne's retirement, a partnership was formed with
Hon. Edward Wade and Reuben Hitchcock, and after a while the firm was
changed to Willson, Wade & Wade. Under these partnerships the extensive
business and high reputation of the old firm were preserved and increased.

In 1852, Judge Willson ran for Congress on the Democratic ticket, against
William Case on the Whig and Edward Wade on the Free Soil tickets. Mr.
Wade was elected, but Judge Willson received a very handsome vote.

In the Winter of 1854, a bill was introduced to divide the State of Ohio,
for United States judicial purposes, into two districts. The members of
the Cleveland Bar pressed the matter vigorously, and after a sharp
struggle in Congress, the bill creating the United States Court for the
Northern District of Ohio was passed. During the pendency of the measure,
and when the prospects were unfavorable for its passage, Judge Willson was
chosen by the Cleveland Bar to proceed to Washington and labor in the
interest of the bill. This was done, and the final triumph of the bill was
doubtless owing in great measure to his unwearied industry in its behalf.
In March, 1855, President Pierce appointed Mr. Willson judge of the
District Court just authorized.

The formation of the court and the appointment of Judge Willson as its
presiding officer, gave general satisfaction. A banquet was held by the
lawyers to celebrate the event, and although Judge Willson was a strong
political partizan, the leading lawyers of all parties vied with each
other in testifying their entire confidence in the ability and
impartiality of the new judge. Nor was their confidence misplaced. In
becoming a judge he ceased to be a politician, and no purely political, or
personal, motives swayed his decisions. He was admitted by all to have
been an upright judge.

The new court found plenty to do. In addition to the ordinary criminal
and civil business, the location of the court on the lake border brought
to it a large amount of admiralty cases. In such cases, the extensive
knowledge and critical acumen of Judge Willson were favorably displayed.
Many of his decisions were models of deep research and lucid statement.
One of his earliest decisions of this character was in relation to
maritime liens. The steamboat America had been abandoned and sunk, and
only a part of her tackle and rigging saved. These were attached for debt
for materials, and the question arose on the legality of the claim
against articles no longer a part of the vessel. Judge Willson held that
the maritime lien of men for wages, and material men for supplies, is a
proprietary interest in the vessel itself, and can not be diverted by the
acts of the owner or by any casualty, until the claim is paid, and that
such lien inheres to the ship and all her parts wherever found and
whoever may be the owner. In the case of L. Wick _vs._ the schooner
Samuel Strong, in 1855, Judge Willson reviewed the history and intent of
the common carrier act of Ohio, in an opinion of much interest. A case,
not in admiralty, but in the criminal business of the court, gave the
judge another opportunity for falling back on his inexhaustible stores of
legal and historical knowledge. The question was on the point whether the
action of a grand jury was legal in returning a bill of indictment found
only by fourteen members, the fifteenth member being absent and taking no
part in the proceedings. Judge Willson reviewed the matter at length,
citing precedents of the English and American courts for several
centuries to show that the action was legal.

A very noticeable case was what is known in the legal history of
Cleveland as "The Bridge Case," in which Charles Avery sued the city of
Cleveland, to prevent the construction of a bridge across the Cuyahoga,
at the foot of Lighthouse street. The questions arising were: the
legislative authority of the city to bridge the river, and whether the
bridge would be a nuisance, damaging the complainant's private property.
The decision of Judge Willson, granting a preliminary injunction until
further evidence could be taken, was a thorough review of the law
relating to water highways and their obstructions. In the opinion on the
Parker water-wheel case, he exhibited a clear knowledge of mechanics, and
gave an exhaustive exposition of the law of patents. In the case of Hoag
_vs_ the propeller Cataract, the law of collision was set forth and
numerous precedents cited. In 1860, important decisions were given in
respect to the extent of United States jurisdiction on the Western lakes
and rivers. It was decided, and the decisions supported by voluminous
precedents, that the admiralty and maritime jurisdiction possessed by the
District Courts of the United States, on the Western lakes and rivers,
under the Constitution and Act of 1789, was independent of the Act of
1845, and unaffected thereby; and also that the District Courts of the
United States, having under the Constitution and Acts of Congress,
exclusive original cognizance of all civil causes of admiralty and
maritime jurisdiction, the Courts of Common Law are precluded from
proceeding _in rem_ to enforce such maritime claims.

These are but a very few of the many important cases coming before Judge
Willson's court and decided by him in a manner that made his decisions
important precedents.

The judicial administration of Judge Willson was noticeable also for its
connection with events of national importance. And here it should be again
repeated, that in all his conduct on the bench he divested himself of
personal or party predilections and prejudices. To him it was of no
consequence who were parties to the case, or what the political effect of
a decision would be; he inquired only what were the facts in the matter
and what the law bearing upon them. The keynote of his character in this
respect may be known from an extract taken from his charge to the grand
jury in the Winter term of 1856, in which it was expected a case would
come before that body of alleged impropriety or crime by a Government
officer, growing out of party zeal during a very heated political canvass.
The passions of men were intensely excited at the time of the delivery of
the charge, and that address had the effect of suddenly cooling down the
popular mind, in the city and vicinity at least, and of bringing about a
better state of feeling. After referring impressively to the language of
the oath taken by the grand jury, to present none through malice, and
except none through favouritism, Judge Willson said:

  It was but yesterday our ears were deafened by the turmoil and clamour
  of political strife, shaking the great national fabric to its centre,
  and threatening the stability of the Government itself. In that fearful
  conflict for the control of the Executive and Legislative Departments of
  the Federal Government, all the evil passions of men seem to have been
  aroused. Vituperation and scandal, malice, hatred and ill-will had
  blotted out from the land all brotherly love, and swept away those
  characteristics which should distinguish us as a nation of Christians.

  How important, then, it is for us, coming up here to perform the duties
  incident to the courts, to come with minds free from prejudice, free
  from passions, and free from the influence of the angry elements around
  us. To come with a fixed purpose of administering justice with truth,
  according to the laws of the land. A dangerous political contagion has
  become rampant in our country, invading the holy sanctuaries of the
  "Prince of Peace" and polluting the very fountains of Eternal Truth.

  God forbid the time may ever come when the temples of justice in our
  land shall be desecrated by this unhallowed and contaminating influence,
  or by wanton disregard of the Constitution, or by a perfidious
  delinquency on the part of the ministers of the law. Here let passion
  and prejudice find no abiding place. Here let equal and exact justice be
  meted out to all men--to rich and to the poor--to the high and the low,
  and above all things, with you, gentlemen, here preserve with scrupulons
  fidelity the sanctity of your oaths, and discharge your whole duty
  without fear and without favour. Put justice to the line and truth to
  the plummet, and act up fully to the obligations of that oath, and you
  will ever enjoy those rich consolations which always flow from a
  conscientious discharge of a sworn duty.

  To men of your intelligence and probity, these admonitions are, perhaps,
  unnecessary. Knowing, however, the reluctance and pain with which the
  misconduct of men in office is inquired into, by those who cherish the
  same political sentiments, I am confident, gentlemen, that in times like
  these, you can not exercise too great caution in excluding from your
  minds all considerations, as to whether the party charged before you is
  the appointee of this or of that administration, or whether he belongs
  to this or that political organization or party.

In 1858, came before the court the historic case of the Oberlin-Wellington
Rescue. The facts of the case were, briefly, that on the first of March,
1857, a negro slave named John, the property of John G. Bacon, of
Kentucky, escaped across the river into Ohio. In October, 1858, the negro
was traced out and arrested within the Northern District of Ohio, by one
Anderson Jennings, holding a power of attorney from Bacon. In company with
an assistant named Love, Jennings took the negro to Wellington, Lorain
county, with the purpose of taking the cars for Cincinnati, and thence
returning the negro to Kentucky and remitting him to slavery. A number of
residents of Oberlin concerted a plan of rescue marched to Wellington,
entered the hotel where John was kept, took him from his captors, placed
him in a buggy, and carried him off. Indictments were found against the
leading rescuers, who comprised among others some of the leading men of
the college and village of Oberlin, and they were brought to trial, fined,
and imprisoned. The trial created great excitement, and, whilst it was
pending, a monster demonstration against the Fugitive Slave Law was held
on the Public Square, midway between the building where the court held its
sessions and the jail in which the accused were confined. At one time
fears were entertained of violence, threats being freely uttered by some
of the more headstrong that the law should be defied and the prisoners
released by force. Cooler counsels prevailed, and the law, odious as it
was felt to be, was allowed to take its course. In this exciting time the
charges and judgments of Judge Willson were calm and dispassionate, wholly
divested of partisanship, and merely pointing out the provisions of the
law and the necessity of obedience to it, however irksome such obedience
might be, until it was repealed.

[Illustration: H. V. Willson]

In the November term of 1859, when the public mind was still agitated by
the John Brown raid and by the tragic affairs succeeding it, and when the
excitement of the Oberlin-Wellington Rescue had not wholly subsided, the
attention of Judge Willson was called to these matters by the District
Attorney, and in his charge to the grand jury he took occasion to define
the law of treason, with especial bearing on those events. It was a clear,
logical exposition of the law, pointing out the line of distinction
between a meeting for the expression of opinions hostile to the Government
and a gathering for the purpose of violently opposing or overturning the
Government.

In 1861, when the rebellion had broken out, and it was supposed
sympathizers with it were in Ohio plotting aid to the rebels, Judge
Willson delivered a charge to the grand jury, again defining the law in
regard to conspiracy and treason, and in the course of his address
took occasion to unreservedly condemn the motives and actions of the
rebels. He said:

  The loyal people of this great nation have enjoyed the blessings of our
  excellent Constitution too long and too well, to be insensible of its
  value or to permit its destruction. They have not yet been schooled to
  the heresy, that this noble Government is a mere myth, or that it is
  destitute of the inherent power of perpetuating its own existence. On
  the contrary, next to their religion, they love and cherish it above all
  things on earth, not only because it is the rich and sacred legacy of a
  revered and patriotic ancestry, but because it is a Government of law,
  possessing the authority to maintain social and civil order, giving to
  its citizens security of property, of person and of life.

  It is not surprising, therefore, that this bold and mad rebellion in the
  Southern States, has excited, in all patriotic hearts, a spontaneous and
  indignant feeling against treason and traitors, wherever they may be
  found in our land. It is a rebellion without cause and without
  justification. It had its conception in the wicked hearts of ambitious
  men. Possibly, some of the chief conspirators may be actuated by the
  spirit of the sacrilegious incendiary who fired the Ephesian temple to
  immortalize his name by the infamy of the act.

  Let the motives of the conspirators be what they may, this open,
  organized and armed resistance to the Government of the United States is
  _treason_, and those engaged in it justly merit the penalty denounced
  against traitors.

  Nor should we be misled by false notions of the reserved right of the
  States to secede from the Union. This assumed right, claimed by the
  States in rebellion, is false in theory; it is of the highest criminalty
  in practice, and without the semblance of authority in the Constitution.
  The right of secession, (said the lamented Webster,) "as a practical
  right, existing under the Constitution, is simply an absurdity; for it
  supposes resistance to Government under the authority of the Government
  itself--it supposes dismemberment without violating the principles of
  Union--it supposes opposition to law without crime--it sanctions the
  violation of oaths without responsibility, and the total overthrow of
  the Government without revolution."

  The history of this wicked rebellion already shows that many of those
  who have shared the largest in the offices and emoluments, as well as in
  the blessings of the National Government, have fallen the lowest in
  infamy in attempting its overthrow.

  If this Union is to be perpetuated, and the Government itself is to
  exist as a power among the nations, its laws must be enforced at all
  hazards and at any cost. And especially should courts and juries do
  their whole duty, without respect to persons, when crimes are committed,
  tending to the subversion of the Government and the destruction of our
  cherished institutions.

At the January term, 1864, he delivered another admirable charge, in which
he discussed the questions arising under the then recent act of Congress
authorizing a draft under the direction of the President without the
intervention of the State authorities, and by a very logical and
conclusive argument established the constitutional validity of the act in
question. The crime of resisting the draft, obstructing its execution by
the officers appointed for that purpose, and enticing soldiers to desert,
were defined with great clearness, resisting the enrolling officer being
held to be within the offences embraced in the act. These were but a few
of the topics treated by the Judge. The entire charge was able, well-timed
and patriotic, and was admirably calculated to conciliate and unite public
opinion in support of the law and the measures of the Government to
enforce it.

In 1865, the health of Judge Willson began to give way and symptoms of
consumption appeared. He was strongly urged by his friends to leave his
business for a time and seek the restoration of his health in a milder
climate. As Winter approached he yielded to their persuasions and visited
New Orleans and the West Indies. Unhappily the weather was unusually
severe for those latitudes, and he derived no benefit from his trip. He
was glad to reach the quiet and comfort of home once more. His sense of
duty was so strong that, though unfit to leave his home, he came down to
the city, opened court, so as to set the machinery in order, but found
himself unable to preside and was compelled to return home, where he
awaited in patience the coming of the destroyer.

On the evening of November 11th, 1866, he died. A few hours before his
death he suffered much, his breathing being labored and painful. As his
end approached, however, he became easier, and his life went out without a
struggle. Some months earlier, the Judge, who had for years been an
attendant of the services in the First Presbyterian church, and an active
supporter of that congregation, made a profession of religion and received
the rite of baptism. He was perfectly conscious to the close of his life,
and although hopeful of recovery, as is usual with the victims of
consumption, had been fully aware of his precarious situation, and had
thoughtfully contemplated his approaching end. He left a widow and a
daughter, Mrs. Chamberlin, well provided for.

On the announcement of his death the members of the Cleveland Bar
immediately assembled, and young or old, of all shades of opinion in the
profession, vied with each other in bearing testimony to the uprightness,
ability, and moral worth of the deceased. His death occasioned unaffected
sorrow among those who had known him, and among the large number of his
legal brethren who had greater or less opportunities of official
intercourse with him he did not leave a single enemy. The Bar meeting
unanimously adopted the following resolutions of respect:

  We, the members of the Bar of the Northern District of Ohio having
  learned that our brother, the Hon. Hiram V. Willson, departed this life
  yesterday evening, (Nov. 11,) at his residence, and desiring to pay a
  tribute of affection and respect to one who was our beloved associate at
  this Bar for twenty-one years, and anxious also to acknowledge our
  obligation to him, by whose influence and labors the Courts of the
  United States were established in our midst, and who has so ably and
  uprightly presided over those Courts for a period of more than eleven
  years, do hereby

  _Resolve,_ 1st. That in the death of Judge Willson the Bench has lost a
  learned, upright and fearless Judge, ever doing right and equity among
  the suitors of his Court, fearing only the errors and mistakes to which
  a fallible human judgment is ever liable. Urbanity and courtesy to the
  older members of the Bar, protecting and loving kindness to its younger
  members, and deep and abiding interest in the reputation of all, were
  among his distinguishing characteristics.

  2d. That in him we have lost a near and dear friend, disliked,
  disrelished by none, but esteemed and loved by all.

  3d. That we wear the usual mourning and attend his funeral in a body, on
  Wednesday next.

  4th. That the Chairman of this Committee present this report to our
  Court of Common Pleas, and request the same to be entered on the record
  of said Court.

  5th. That the United States District Attorney for Northern Ohio be
  requested to present this report to the Circuit and District Courts of
  said District at their next term and request that the same be entered
  and recorded in said Courts.

  6th. That the officers of this meeting be directed to send a copy of its
  proceedings to the family of the deceased.

At the opening of the next term of the United States District Court under
Judge Sherman, the successor to Judge Willson, these resolutions were
read, and warm eulogies on the deceased were made by U. S. District
Attorney, F. J. Dickman, U. S. Commissioner Bushnell White, George W.
Willey Esq., Hon. K. P. Spalding and Judge Sherman.

The funeral services over the remains of Judge Willson were held in the
First Presbyterian church, conducted by Rev. Dr. Atterburry, assisted by
Rev. Dr. Aiken. The Supreme Court of Ohio, United States Courts of
Pennsylvania and Michigan, the Cleveland Bench and Bar, and the City
Government were fully represented at the ceremonies, which were also
participated in by a very large concourse of citizens.




Samuel Starkweather.



As a member of the legal profession, both on the Bench and at the Bar, as
the chief magistrate of the city, and as an United States revenue officer,
and as a citizen of Cleveland, Samuel Starkweather has held honorable
prominence for forty years.

He was born in the village of Pawtucket, Massachusetts, on the border of
Rhode Island, a village celebrated as the seat of the first cotton
manufactures in the United States. He was the son of the Honorable Oliver
Starkweather, an extensive and successful manufacturer, and grandson of
the Honorable Ephraim Starkweather, who was prominent among the patriots
of the Revolution.

The subject of this sketch worked on a farm until nearly seventeen years
of age, when he began to fit himself for college, after which he entered
Brown University, Rhode Island, where he graduated with the second honors
of his class, in the year 1822, and was soon afterward elected a tutor in
that institution, which position he held until the year 1824, when he
resigned, to commence the study of the law, which he pursued in the office
of Judge Swift, in Windham, Connecticut, and afterwards in attendance upon
the lectures of Chancellor Kent, of New York. He was admitted to the Bar
of Ohio at Columbus, in the Winter of 1826-7, and soon after settled in
Cleveland, then a village of a few hundred inhabitants, and was recognized
as a lawyer of learning and ability in this and the adjoining counties.

Mr. Starkweather was prominent among the leaders of the Democratic party
of this State, when its principles were well defined, and was a strong
adherent to the administrations of Presidents Jackson and Van Buren, but
his being always in the political minority in the part of the State in
which he lived, prevented those high political preferments which otherwise
would have been conferred upon him. In this connection it is proper to
say, that for Mr. Starkweather to have attained the highest eminence in
the legal profession, it was only necessary that he should have made it
his specialty.

Under the administrations of Presidents Jackson and Van Buren, Mr.
Starkweather held the office of Collector of Customs of this District, and
Superintendent of Light-Houses, and under his supervision most of the
sites were purchased, and the light-houses erected on the Southern shore
of Lake Erie. He continued to hold these offices in connection with his
practice of the law, until 1840.

In 1844, Mr. Starkweather was elected Mayor of the city of Cleveland,
having previously taken a leading part in the City Councils. He was
re-elected in 1845, and was again elected Mayor in 1857, for two years,
and in these positions was active in promoting those improvements in the
city which have tended to its prosperity and beauty. To Mr. Starkweather
the public schools of the city are much indebted for the interest which he
has always taken in their behalf; and to his advocacy and efforts, with
those of Mr. Charles Bradburn, the High School of the city owes its first
establishment.

In the early struggles for advancing the schemes of railroads, the
accomplishment of which has made Cleveland the great city of commerce and
manufactures, no one was more active than Mr. Starkweather. When the
project of building the Cleveland & Columbus road was at a stand-still,
and was on the point of being, for the time, abandoned, as a final effort
a meeting of the business men of Cleveland was called. The speech of Mr.
Starkweather on that occasion, parts of which are quoted to this day, had
the effect to breathe into that enterprise the breath of life, and from
that meeting it went immediately onward to its final completion. So well
were the services of Mr. Starkweather in behalf of that road appreciated
at the time, that one of the Directors proposed that he should have a
pass upon it for life.

Mr. Starkweather, in 1852, was the first Judge elected to the Court of
Common Pleas for Cuyahoga county, under the new constitution of the State,
in which position he served for five years with ability and satisfaction
to the members of the Bar and the public generally. For a considerable
portion of his term, the entire docket of both civil and criminal business
devolved on Mm, when an additional Judge was allowed the county. He
presided at some very important State trials, in which, as in the
disposition of a very large amount of civil business, he exhibited
abundant legal learning and judicial discrimination.

Since he retired from the Bench he has been known as a citizen of wealth,
of retired habits, but of influence in public affairs, and retaining to
the full the conversational gifts which have made him the life and charm
of social and professional circles. Indeed it may be said that either at
the Bar, in well remembered efforts of marked brilliancy as an advocate,
or on the Bench, occasionally illuminating the soberness of judicial
proceedings, or in assemblies on prominent public occasions occurring all
through his life, eloquence, wit and humor seemed ready to his use. A fine
_belle lettres_ scholar, classical, historical and biographical adornments
and incidents seemed always naturally to flow in to enrich his discourse,
whether in private or public. He has often been spoken of as of the Corwin
cast, perhaps a slight personal resemblance aiding the suggestion. He
certainly has the like gifts of the charming conversationalist and the
popular orator, in which last capacity, for many years, he was the prompt
choice of the public on leading occasions, such as at the grand reception
given to Van Buren after his defeat in 1840; the magnificent reception
tendered by the city to Kossuth; at the completion of the Cleveland &
Columbus Railway on the 22nd of February, 1852; at the dedication of
Woodland Cemetery, and at many other times when the public were most
anxious to put a gifted man forward.




[Illustration: Truly Yours, Moses Kelly]


Moses Kelly.



The subject of this sketch was born January 21st, 1809, in the township of
Groveland, now county of Livingston, then county of Ontario, State of New
York. He was the oldest son of Daniel Kelly, who emigrated from the State
of Pennsylvania to Western New York in the year 1797. He is of
Scotch-Irish descent in the paternal line, and of German descent on the
side of his mother. His great grandfather, on his father's side, emigrated
from the North of Ireland to America, early in the eighteenth century, and
settled in the State of Pennsylvania, within a few miles of the city of
Philadelphia; his grandfather, born there, was a Revolutionary soldier.
Mr. Kelly lived with his father, on a farm in Groveland, until he was
eighteen years old, having the usual advantages, and following the
ordinary pursuits of a farmer's son.

At the age of eighteen he entered the High School on Temple Hill, in the
village of Genesee, Livingston county, New York, and commenced preparing
for college, under the tuition of that eminent scholar and accomplished
educator, the late Cornelius C. Felton, who subsequently became President
of Harvard University. Mr. Kelly entered the Freshman class at Harvard in
1829, and graduated with his class in the year 1833. He immediately
commenced the study of the law, with the late Orlando Hastings, Esq., of
Rochester, N. Y., and read three years in his office and under his
direction, when he was admitted to practice. He came to Cleveland in the
year 1836, and formed a law copartnership with his old friend, college
classmate and chum, the Hon. Thomas Bolton; the firm name was Bolton &
Kelly. This partnership continued until the year 1851, when S. O. Griswold
Esq., who had been their law student, was taken into the firm; the firm
name thereafter being Bolton, Kelly & Griswold. This connection continued
until the close of the year 1856, when Mr. Bolton was elected Judge of the
Court of Common Pleas. Since Judge Bolton retired from the firm Messrs.
Kelly & Griswold have continued the practice of law under that firm name,
and are still engaged in the practice.

Mr. Kelly has made commercial law and equity jurisprudence his special
studies, and in these branches of the law his great skill and learning are
acknowledged by all his brethren. Indeed, as an equity lawyer he stands at
the head of the profession.

It will be seen from the year 1836 until the present time, Mr. Kelly has
devoted himself closely to the practice of the law; the only interruption
to this was a two years service as State senator in the legislature of
Ohio during the years 1844 and 1845. He was elected to the senate by the
Whig party of the counties of Cuyahoga and Geauga, these two counties then
composing one senatorial district. During the first session of the General
Assembly, of which he was a member, the Democrats had a majority in the
Senate while the Whigs had the control of the lower house. As is usual
when a legislature is thus politically divided, no measures of general
interest were adopted. But there happened during that session to arise a
question which showed Mr. Kelly's independence, and true character. The
Democracy had made complaint of the Whig extravagance and laid great claim
on their own part to retrenchment and economy in the State administration.
The Whigs to make political capital, proposed a bill reducing the salaries
of all State officers; the salary of the Judges was put at $750 per year
and the pay of all other State officials in the same ratio. The measure
was adopted by the party caucus, and was carried through the lower house.

It was hoped by many that the Senate, being Democratic, would defeat the
bill, and thus the Whigs would have credit for great economy at the
expense of the Democrats. But when it came to that body, the Democracy,
not to be out done by their opponents, favored the bill.

Mr. Kelly, singly and alone of all his party, opposed the measure, and
spoke and voted against it. The bill was finally carried but was repealed
in the course of a year or two afterwards.

The most prominent subject before the legislature at the second session
was the establishment of a suitable banking system for the State. The
business men of Cleveland were in favor of free banks, but the great body
of the Whig party were strongly in favor of a State Bank and branches, and
having a majority in both houses in the session of 1845 were determined to
establish that system. Mr. Kelly succeeded in engrafting upon the State
Bank scheme the Independent Bank system, with State stocks pledged to
secure the circulation, and also in adding additional checks and
safeguards to the State Bank. His efforts in this direction were duly
appreciated by his constituents, and at a public meeting, called by the
principal business men of the city, irrespective of party, his action on
the Bank bill was specially approved.

It is to be observed also that the present National Bank system is modeled
after the plan of free banking advocated by Mr. Kelly at that time.

During the same session a question arose in which Mr. Kelly took an
active part, in opposition to the great body of his party, the event of
which vindicated his sagacity and practical statesmanship. The question
was upon a bill to grant to the Ohio Life and Trust Company authority to
issue bills to circulate as currency, to the extent of half a million of
dollars. At the time this bill was introduced no banking System had been
adopted by the legislature; most of the charters of the old banks had
expired prior to that time, and the State was without an adequate bank
circulation of its own. The chief stockholders and managers of that
corporation were men of high character and great wealth. The company had
been successfully managed, and its credit was then deservedly high. Also
the principal men of the company were leading Whigs, among these were
Judges Jacob Burnett and John E. Wright of Cincinnati, Nathaniel Wright
of Cincinnati and Alfred Kelley Esq., who was also at the same time a
member of the senate from the Franklin district, and this application on
the part of the company was backed by the presence and Personal influence
of these gentlemen. The plea made by this company for this additional
banking privilege was exceedingly plausible, and the measure was approved
in a caucus of the Whig members almost without inquiry. The bill was
introduced into the Senate by the Hon. Alfred Kelley, and its success was
considered certain. Mr. Moses Kelly, alone of his party, expressed his
opposition to the bill. Urged as the measure was by so many leading men,'
and introduced by the acknowledged leader of the party, it seemed that
such opposition must be fruitless. But on the third reading of the bill
Mr. Kelly attacked it in a speech of great vigor, and strength of
argument. He opposed it as unjust towards any banking system that might
be established and as unwise in giving additional privileges to an
already powerful corporation. Bat he opposed it chiefly because it gave
to the corporation power to issue bills as money simply on individual
security. He contended that whenever the State permitted any corporation
or organization to issue bills to pass as money the faith of the State
should be pledged to their ultimate redemption. While paying a high
compliment to the ability and integrity of the managers of the Ohio Life
and Trust Company, he declared there was no security but what in the
future it might pass into the control of Wall street shavers and brokers,
and from thence to ruin, and the people of the State left remediless with
a worthless circulation in their hands. His vigorous opposition, and the
strength of his argument awakened the attention of the party to the evils
of the measure, and notwithstanding its powerful backing, the bill was
effectually killed by Mr. Kelly's speech.

Mr. Alfred Kelley was greatly grieved at the failure of this measure. He
however lived to see his error, and the ruinous failure of that company
through the recklessness of the Wall street management into whose hands,
as had been predicted, that company finally fell. Judge John C. Wright,
now in Columbus, advocated the aforesaid measure. He was then the senior
editor of the Cincinnati Gazette, and the influence of his paper was given
to the bill. Although old, he was in the full enjoyment of his powers of
intellect, and at that time wielded a great influence in the political
affairs of the State. It happened that he was present in the senate
chamber when Mr. Kelly made his speech against the bill; although
chagrined at the defeat of the measure in which he had such personal
interest, so struck was he with the originality and force of the argument
of Mr. Kelly, and with his independence of character, and ability to rise
above mere party considerations in his legislative career, that he sought
Mr. Kelly's personal acquaintance, and during the remainder of his life
there existed a warm personal friendship between them.

At the expiration of his term of service Mr. Kelly returned to the
practice and ever since has devoted his energies to his profession. The
office of Bolton & Kelly has been the school of many prominent lawyers.
Among the members of the Cleveland Bar who studied under them are Messrs.
F. T. Backus, George Willey, John E. Cary and his present partner, Mr.
Griswold. Mr. Kelly was City Attorney in the year 1839, and a member of
the City Council in 1841. While he was in the Council he was active in
support of the Lake Shore improvement, which stopped the rapid
encroachment of the Lake upon the shore in front of Lake street.

In 1849, Mr. Kelly was appointed by the legislature one of the
Commissioners of the city of Cleveland to subscribe on behalf of the city
to the capital stock of the Cleveland & Pittsburgh Railroad Company. He
accepted the trust, and for a number of successive years thereafter, until
the stock of the city in that road was disposed of, was chosen a Director
of the Cleveland & Pittsburgh Railroad Company, to represent the
interests of this city in the capital stock of that company.

In September, 1866, he was appointed by President Johnson District
Attorney of the United States for the Northern District of Ohio, and held
the office until the next March, not having been confirmed by the Radical
senate for the reason that he had been a member of the Philadelphia
Convention of the previous summer.

On the organization of the City Bank of Cleveland under the law of 1845,
Mr. Kelly became a stockholder therein and was a director, and its
attorney, during its existence, and has continued in the same connection
with the National City Bank which succeeded the former. He also for a
number of years has been a director and attorney of the Cuyahoga Steam
Furnace Company.

Mr. Kelly was one of the organizers of St. Paul's Episcopal church, and
has always remained a liberal supporter of the same.

He was married in the year 1839 to Jane, the daughter of Gen. Hezekiah
Howe, of New Haven, Conn.

In 1850, Mr. Kelly purchased a tract of about thirty acres, being a part
of what was then known as the "Giddings farm," fronting on Euclid avenue,
a short distance East of Willson avenue. Here he soon after erected a
tasteful dwelling, where he has since resided, and where in the leisure
snatched from professional avocations he has gratified his taste for
horticultural and agricultural pursuits.

In person Mr. Kelly is tall and spare, and dignified in demeanor, and
although he has reached three score, he is still active and in good
health. His character for integrity is unblemished and in his long
professional career has never been known to uphold or defend a
dishonorable cause. His rule has been to decline advocating causes which,
in his judgment, have neither merits nor justice. In social intercourse he
is affable and genial, and in public, private and professional life, has
always commanded the respect, esteem and confidence of his fellow men.
Firm in his convictions of duty, and resolute in doing it, yet so
respectful and courteous to opponents is he that he may be said to be a
man without an enemy.

The great rise in real estate and his professional earnings have rendered
Mr. Kelly, if not what in these days would be called wealthy,
comparatively rich, and surrounded, as he is, by an affectionate family
and kind friends and possessed of all the enjoyments which culture and a
successful life brings, we trust he may long continue amongst us.




Thomas Bolton.



It has been said of history, that it should never venture to deal
except with periods comparatively remote. And this was doubtless true
when literature was venal, or in any way subservient to royal or to
party power.

It has been alike suggested of biography, that it cannot be securely
trusted in the portrayal of the living. And this is no doubt true where
political or partisan objects are sought to be subserved. But with this
exception the most faithful portraits may naturally be expected where
the subjects of them are before us, and familiarly known to us. And so
that the hand refrains from those warmer tints which personal friendship
might inspire, and simply aims at sketches which the general judgment
may recognize and approve, the task, however difficult, cannot be said
to be unsafe.

Thomas Bolton was born in Scipio, Cayuga county, New York, November 29th,
1809. His father was an extensive farmer in that section of western New
York, where rich fields, and flowing streams, and beautiful scenery, are
happily combined.

At seventeen he entered the High School on Temple Hill, in Geneseo, where
he fitted for college; and in the Fall of 1829, he entered Harvard
University, where he graduated in 1833, the first in his class in
mathematics. In this connection, it is pleasant to advert to the fact
that his most intimate schoolmate, classmate and fellow graduate, was
Hon. Moses Kelly, who was afterwards his partner in the law for many
years at Cleveland, and that between the two from boyhood down to the
present day, there has been a steadfast and unbroken life-friendship
almost fraternal, both now in affluence, but still living side by side.
Such life-long friendships are unusual, but whenever they do exist, they
imply the presence in both parties of true and trusty qualities which
preserve their character as pure cement, exposed to any atmosphere, or
tried in any furnace.

[Illustration: Yours Truly, Thomas Bolton]

After graduating, Mr. Bolton entered upon the study of law at
Canandaigua, in the office of John G. Spencer, now deceased, but then a
strong and distinguished name in the profession. At the end of a year he
came west, to seek a permanent location to further pursue his studies and
enter upon the practice, first stopping at Cleveland, on finding that any
further west was hardly within the pale of civilization. Cleveland itself
was then, September, 1834, but a mere village, of about twenty-five
hundred inhabitants. Superior street had not been graded, and at its
western terminus was higher than the first story of the Atwater Block, and
the bank of the lake extended fifteen rods out beyond the present Union
Depot. The village did not become a city till 1836, when at a public
meeting to determine upon the corporate limits, Mr. Bolton was appointed
on a committee to draft the charter, and urged that both sides of the
river should be embraced, but was overruled, and Ohio City was established
on the other side of the river as a sort of rival, but since consolidated
with Cleveland. His connection with city affairs was renewed as
Councilman in 1839, and as Alderman in 1841.

But to go back to his professional life. Having studied law in the office
of James L. Conger, at Cleveland, for a year, he was admitted to the Bar
in September, 1835, by the Supreme Court of Ohio, on the Circuit, Chief
Justice Peter Hitchcock, that Nestor among judges, then presiding. He was
in partnership with Mr. Conger for a year, when he bought him out and sent
for his old college friend, Mr. Kelly, with whom he formed a partnership,
which continued until the Fall of 1856, a period of twenty years, when he
was elected to the Bench.

As bearing upon his political career, it may be narrated, that in the Fall
of 1839, he was elected prosecuting attorney of the county, at which time
the Whig party was largely in the ascendancy, commanding from 1,500 to
2,000 majority, though he was a Democrat and nominated by the Democrats
for the office. Two years later, at the expiration of his term, he was
strongly solicited by both parties to take the office another term, but
declined in consequence of the inadequacy of the salary.

An incident occurred during his term as prosecuting attorney which had a
marked effect upon the politics of Cleveland and its vicinity. Up to 1841,
slave-owners were in the habit of sending their agents to Cleveland and
causing their runaway slaves to be arrested and taken before a magistrate,
when a warrant would be obtained to return the slave, and he would be
carried back into slavery. All this was done openly and publicly, creating
little or no excitement, and Mr. Bolton, in the practice of his
profession, was more frequently employed for this purpose than any other
attorney in the city. In the Spring of 1841, three negroes, who were
claimed as slaves, had run away from New Orleans and were in Buffalo. The
agent of their master applied to a law firm in Cleveland for assistance.
At that time, slaves arrested in Buffalo were in the habit of claiming a
trial by jury, which was granted. To avoid a jury, with its sympathies, it
was thought advisable to get the negroes into Ohio, and, accordingly, one
of the attorneys, the agent and a negro of Cleveland, repaired to Buffalo.
On their return the three negroes came with them, and it was said they had
been kidnapped. On their arrival at Cleveland, the negroes were arrested
under the law of Congress as fugitives from service, and lodged in the
county jail. This information coming to the ears of the few Abolitionists
then in the city, among others the late Hon. Edward Wade and Hon. John A.
Foot, lawyers at the time in full practice, they applied to the jailor for
admission to consult with the negroes. But public opinion was so strongly
prejudiced against the Abolitionists that neither the jailor nor the
sheriff would permit any of them to communicate with the prisoners.
Accidentally, a colored man inquired of Mr. Bolton if he would take up
their defence. He readily assented, and being prosecuting attorney of the
county, and it being well understood that he was not an Abolitionist, the
doors of the jail were readily opened to him, and he immediately made
preparations for a vigorous defence of the prisoners. A writ of _habeas
corpus_ was immediately applied for to Judge Barber, one of the associate
judges at the time; the negroes were brought before him, and their case
continued for ninety days, to prepare for a defence.

When it was known about town that Mr. Bolton had undertaken the defence of
the negroes, great indignation was excited, and many threatened to tear
down his office, and to use violence toward his person. This only aroused
him to greater energy and effort in behalf of the prisoners. In the
meantime indictments were procured in Buffalo against the alleged
kidnappers, and the excitement in the city greatly increased, so that on
the day of the trial the court-house was packed with people. After an
investigation, which lasted two days, the court discharged the defendants
and they went acquit.

From the iniquitous proceeding in the case, and the manner in which it
was prosecuted, and the excitement it produced, the community was led to
reflect upon the iniquity of the system and the oppression of the law;
and from that day till the slave-girl Lucy was sent back into Virginia
slavery, in 1862, (to appease, it is said, the wrath of the rebels,) not
a negro was sent back into slavery from the city of Cleveland, or county
of Cuyahoga.

Mr. Bolton left the Democratic party in 1848, or, as he claims, it left
him when it adopted its national platform of that year. He then joined the
Free Soil party, and was a delegate to the Buffalo Convention, and one of
its secretaries. In February, 1856, he assisted in organizing the
Republican party at the Pittsburgh Convention, and in the Summer of the
same year was a delegate from this Congressional District in the
Philadelphia Convention, which nominated Fremont and Dayton.

When he was admitted to the Bar, the Court of Common Pleas, under the old
Constitution, consisted of four members, a president judge and three
associates, elected by the Legislature, and the Supreme Court of the State
consisted of four judges, also chosen by the Legislature. A session of the
Supreme Court was held by two of its members once a year in each county,
and three sessions a year were held by the Court of Common Pleas in this
and the adjoining counties. In 1835, Hon. Matthew Birchard, of Warren, was
president judge. He was succeeded by Hon. Van R. Humphrey, of Hudson, and
he by Hon. John W. Willey, of Cleveland, who died during his term. Hon.
Reuben Hitchcock was appointed by the Governor to fill the vacancy, and
Hon. Benjamin Bissel, of Painesville, was elected by the Legislature during
the next session. Hon. Philemon Bliss, then of Elyria, and now Supreme
Judge of Missouri, was afterward elected, and his term was cut short in
1851, by the adoption of the new Constitution, under which the judges were
elected by the people for the term of five years. Hon. Samuel Starkweather
was the first judge elected under the new system, and in 1856. Mr. Bolton
was chosen his successor. In 1861, he was unanimounanimouslynated and
elected without opposition, and in 1866, at the expiration of his second
term, he retired from the Bench and the Bar.

We thus complete our outline sketch of the professional, judicial, and
political career of one of our most prominent and respected citizens.

He came to the Bar of Cleveland before Cleveland was a city, and entered
upon practice with that force and earnestness which were the ruling
elements of his nature. He had able competitors, but he was a strong man
amongst them. His promptness in the courts was proverbial. He was always
ready, and if he granted indulgences he never asked for any. He was less
given to books than his partner, Mr. Kelly, who was the student and
chancery member of the firm, but in the ordinary departments of the common
law and in criminal practice, he was always at home. He prepared his
causes with the most thorough premeditation of the line of his own
evidence, and of all the opposing evidence that could possibly be
anticipated. Hence he moved with rapidity and precision, and was never
taken by surprise. His arguments were not elaborate, or studied in point
of finish, but they were strong, downright practical, and to the point. In
this sense he was a fine and effective speaker to courts and juries.

These same characteristics he exhibited upon the Bench. Hardy and vigorous
in his perceptions and understanding--thoroughly versed and ready in the
law of pleadings and evidence--bringing to bear on the civil code, the
logical training of the common law system--his ten years of service as a
judge were honorable to himself and valuable to the public. In all the
phases of his career and life he has been thoroughly upright.

Retired upon an ample fortune, amassed by forecast and business
energy--fond of his home, and devoted with entire liberality to the
education of his children--independent of office and in all other
ways--strong and robust as ever in person and in mind--he is still a power
in any direction wherever he chooses so to be. His broad, projecting
brow, his direct and forcible speech and bearing, symbolize his character.
They assure you of vital energy, strong, practical comprehension,
directness and will. He may have more of the "_fortiter in re_" than of
the "_suaviter in modo_" but all who know him have faith in his truth,
implicit reliance upon the hearty fidelity of his friendships, and
assurance, that he is always loyal to his convictions, both in public and
in private life.




James M. Hoyt.



Several years since, the writer of this was in conversation with a poor
man who had a hard struggle with misfortune and sickness in his attempt to
rear a large family, and secure them a humble homestead. In the course of
conversation the name of James M. Hoyt was mentioned, and the poor man was
inquired of who that gentleman was. "Lawyer Hoyt?" he replied, "why he's
the _honest lawyer_, God bless him!" He who could acquire this title among
the poor must be no ordinary man.

[Illustration: James M. Hoyt]

James M. Hoyt was born in Utica, New York, January 16, 1815. The
circumstances of his parents were such that he was enabled to acquire a
good education, and graduated at Hamilton College, Clinton, New York, in
1834. On leaving College he commenced the study of law in Utica, but soon
removed to Cleveland, where, in February, 1836, he read law in the office
of Andrews & Foot. He remained with them in that capacity for one year,
when a partnership was formed under the name of Andrews, Foot & Hoyt,
which lasted about twelve years, and was dissolved only by the appointment
of Judge Andrews to the bench of the Superior Court of Cuyahoga county.
The firm of Foot & Hoyt continued four years longer, until in 1853, Mr.
Hoyt withdrew from the practice of law and turned his attention wholly to
the business of real estate, not as a broker, but as an operator on his
own account, or in company with others, nearly all his operations being
adjacent to the city. For the last twenty years his transactions have been
very heavy, having made of land belonging to him wholly, or in part, in
the city of Cleveland and its environs, thirty-one recorded sub-divisions,
covering an area of five hundred acres, on which he has personally, or in
connection with others interested with him, opened and named no less than
seventy-six streets, including the well-known Croton, Laurel, Greenwood,
Humbolt, Mahoning, Kelly, Lynden, Maple, Mayflower and Siegel streets, and
Longwood avenue. He was also largely instrumental in opening Prospect
beyond Hudson, and sold nearly half of the land on Kinsman street, besides
selling a large amount of land on Superior and St. Clair streets; also on
the West Side, Madison avenue, Long street, Colgate street and Waverly
avenue. He has sold in all 3000 lots in Cleveland.

Mr. Hoyt united with the Baptist church in Utica in 1835. Soon after
coming to Cleveland he became connected with the First Baptist church
Sunday school, and was its superintendent twenty-six years, when he
resigned, and became teacher of a congregational Bible class, which labor
of love he has performed for about three years, and still continues.

In 1854, he was licensed to preach the Gospel, by the church with which he
was connected. He was never ordained, and never contemplated being, but
simply desired to testify to Christian truth as a business man on the
principle of "He that heareth, let him say come." For the past fifteen
years he has labored in that capacity more or less in nearly all the
Protestant denominations in the city and elsewhere.

In 1854, he was elected President of the Ohio Baptist State Convention,
and has been re-elected annually ever since, and has held anniversaries
in nearly every city of the State. In 1866, he was elected president of
the American Baptist Home Mission Society, being the national
organization for missions for North America, has been re-elected
annually, and still holds the office. Through all this time Mr. Hoyt has
made many public addresses, and given lectures on both secular and
religious subjects, in addition to publishing a number of articles,
reviews and other literary work.

He was married in 1836 to Miss Mary Ella Beebe, in the city of New York.
Of this marriage have been born six children, five of whom are living. The
oldest daughter, Mary Ella, died in 1854, aged fourteen. The oldest son,
Wayland, is in the Baptist ministry, and is now pastor of the Strong Place
Baptist church, Brooklyn, N. Y. The second son, Colgate, is now clerk and
assistant in his father's business. The daughter, Lydia, is the wife of
Mr. E. J. Farmer, banker of this city.

We do not think it is exaggeration to say, that not a man in the city has
more entwined himself with the affection of the people than Mr. Hoyt. For
many years he has had the power to do untold evil to the poor, and to do
it with a show of justice and legality, but this power was never
exercised. Of the thousands of lots sold by him, a very large proportion
have been for homesteads for the poor, hundreds of whom became involved
through sickness, or other misfortunes, and were not able to make payments
when due; many men died and left encumbered homes for widows to struggle
on with, but they never lacked a friend in James M. Hoyt. Other creditors
would sometimes crowd such persons, but to the extent of his ability he
always kept them at bay, and if the load was in any case too heavy, would
sell for the embarrassed owners, and give them the benefit of the rise in
property. Time and again have we heard such things from the grateful poor.

He is liberal with his means, contributing freely for religious and
charitable purposes. In politics he has ever sided with the party of
progress, and, although not a politician, has added his means and
exertions to the cause whenever necessary. During the war against the
rebellion he was an energetic supporter of the Government, and rendered
valuable aid to the cause of loyalty by his money and influence.

Mr. Hoyt, since his retirement from the legal profession, has devoted much
time to those liberal studies which are too apt to be neglected amid the
engrossing engagements of the Bar. He is a ripe scholar in English
history, and especially in the period between the Revolution of 1688 and
the accession of the House of Hanover. With an eminently practical turn of
mind, he is not disinclined to meta-physical investigations, and we well
remember the enthusiasm and keen zest with which he passed many winter
evenings at the house of a friend in reading, analyzing, and applying the
canons of criticism to Burke's Essay on the Sublime and Beautiful. His
article on Miracles, published in the October number, 1863, of the
Christian Review, contains one of the most searching examinations of
Hume's doctrines extant. It presents a vexed subject in a new and striking
light, and offers an unanswerable argument to the sophistries of the great
skeptic. The article has been widely circulated and much admired for its
logical acumen, and its striking simplification of an apparently complex
subject. With the faculty, in a large degree, of presenting abstract truth
in a form plain, attractive and intelligible to the common understanding,
it is to be hoped that Mr. Hoyt will continue to contribute to the higher
departments of our periodical literature, and thus by his studies and his
pen add to his present usefulness in his daily avocation, for we seldom
find one blessed with such a versatility of talent. He is methodical in
everything, and thorough in everything. In short, he is a good lawyer, a
good preacher, a good citizen, a good business man, a good father, a good
neighbor, and a true friend. He is now only fifty-four years of age, both
mentally and physically vigorous, and we sincerely hope his life of
usefulness may be extended many years.




Franklin T. Backus.



Franklin T. Backus, was born in Lee, Berkshire county, Massachusetts, May
6th, 1813. He was the son of Thomas and Rebecca Backus. While Franklin T.
was very young, his father removed to Lansing, New York, where he shortly
died, leaving a large family of young children to the care of his
surviving widow, with limited means for their support and education. In
consequence of this, the subject of this sketch was early in life inured
to hardy exercise upon a farm, to which, in after life, he has attributed
his strong constitution, and ability to endure confinement, and the
severest mental toil incident to an extensive legal practice.

It would be inappropriate in a brief sketch, to refer to and narrate
incidents of boyhood days, and they are therefore passed over. Mr. Backus,
while in early youth, became possessed of an unconquerable desire for
knowledge, and while laboring with his hands, his mind was busy
determining how he should secure the advantages of education. No
superficial acquirements could satisfy him. Added to native talents, of a
high order, were thoroughness and perseverance in everything which he
resolved to undertake, and these traits applied particularly to him as a
student. After resolving to obtain a thorough classical education, he set
about it in earnest, and in an unusually short period of time, prepared
himself, and on examination, entered the junior class of Yale College in
1834. Though the only time actually spent in college was during his junior
and senior years, yet his standing was very high, and he graduated at Yale
in 1836, occupying a position of one of the best mathematicians in his
class. Soon after, he was tendered the position of assistant professor, or
instructor in that venerable institution, an honor accorded to but few in
so short a time after graduation.

On leaving Yale, Mr. Backus settled in Cleveland, Ohio, where he
established a classical school, which at once became very popular and
successful, and shortly afterwards commenced the study of law with
Messrs. Bolton & Kelly, who were among the leading members of the
Cuyahoga county Bar.

In August, 1839, he was admitted to the practice of law at Cleveland, the
Supreme Court then being in session there, and entered at once upon the
practice of his profession, in which, from the beginning, he took a high
position. He was also an active politician, and as a member of the Whig
party, participated largely in its active operations in the State, as well
as in his own district, and was frequently a recipient of its honors.

In 1841, he was elected to the office of prosecuting attorney of Cuyahoga
county, having been nominated to that office in a contest in which several
who were older and more experienced in the profession than he, were
candidates. His administration of the office was in the highest degree
able and successful, and so met the approval of the public, that he was
renominated by his party and elected for the second term of two years.

In January, 1842, Mr. Backus was married to Miss Lucy Mygatt, daughter of
George Mygatt, Esq., then of Painesville, now of Cleveland. The choice was
a most suitable and wise one, and Mrs. Backus still lives, the light and
joy of their home.

In 1846, Mr. Backus was elected as a member of the House of
Representatives in the Ohio Legislature, and continued there only one
term, refusing a renomination. In 1848, he was elected to the Senate of
Ohio, in which he took a commanding position, and was widely talked of
among his friends in various parts of the State as a suitable candidate
for the United States Senate, as well as for the House of Representatives
in Congress.

From the breaking out of the Rebellion to its close, he was as strenuous
an advocate as any one could be, of putting down the Rebellion at any
hazard of blood and treasure, but differed widely as to some of the
measures and policy adopted by the Government, and consequently, did not,
at, or about the close of the war, act with the Republican party, nor has
he since; and though not an active politician, he is now generally
recognized as a member of the Democratic party.

In 1840, Mr. Backus associated himself in the legal practice with J. P.
Bishop, Esq., with whom he continued for fifteen years. Mr. Bishop was
afterwards chosen one of the judges of the Court of Common Pleas of the
Cleveland district. Afterwards, for several years, he was associated with
that able jurist, Judge R. P. Ranney, and now, for some years, he has been
associated with E. J. Estep, Esq., in his profession.

That he stood high in his profession in the State as well as in Cleveland,
is shown by the fact that he was nominated, by the Whig party, as
candidate for Supreme Judge of Ohio, and afterwards by the Republican
party for the same office, but failed of an election because the party
nominating him was unsuccessful each of those years in Ohio.

Mr. Backus' life for the last twenty years has been almost exclusively
devoted to his profession. When the railroads were projected which made
Cleveland one of their terminations he embarked in the enterprise of their
location and construction, and was early retained as their attorney and
counsel, and has been acting as such to the present time. The Cleveland,
Columbus & Cincinnati Railroad, from the beginning, so far as legal
services have been required, has been under his special supervision. His
knowledge of the department of law appertaining to corporations, and his
ability as a corporation lawyer, it is believed, is not surpassed. The
same may be said of him as a land lawyer, especially in regard to all
questions arising in the northern part of this State. In short, Mr. Backus
has had a very wide and varied experience in almost every branch of legal
practice, and in every case in which he has suffered himself to be
retained, he has made it a principle to be thorough and accurate, and to
possess himself of a full knowledge of his case in all its aspects.

As a summary as to Mr. Backus as a lawyer, it is the opinion of those best
acquainted with him and his professional ability, acquirements and
experience, that, as a whole, he is unsurpassed by any in the State.

In nearly all the great enterprises of the city his advice and
co-operation have been sought, and where legal advice and aid have been
required, his services have often been called into requisition by the
city. He not only has occupied the position professionally, before spoken
of, but has, and does, still occupy high positions of trust, both for the
city and individuals, and in such matters it may be safely said, there are
few men living in whom more implicit confidence is reposed.

The extent of his varied legal practice can only be judged of in part, by
his appearance in court. His business out of court has constituted by far
the largest and most important part of his practice, and has always been
done with a view to saving his client from litigation in future, so far as
possible, and this he has accomplished.

In pecuniary matters Mr. Backus has been successful, not only as the
fruits of arduous professional labors, but in other respects.

Mr. Backus is a very benevolent and liberal man, also, but his generosity
is not in the beaten track. It is bestowed unseen and unknown by the
public, and his own judgment selects the object of his bounty. His
friendship when once bestowed is undying and changes not with time or
circumstances so long as the person on whom it is bestowed proves worthy
of his confidence.




[Illustration: Yours truly, J. P. Bishop]


Jesse P. Bishop.



Judge Bishop was born in New Haven, Vermont, June 1, 1815, and was taken
with his father's family to St. Lawrence county, New York, whilst yet a
child. His father died when he was but nine years old, and his mother
returned to Vermont, taking her children with her. As soon as he was of
age to be serviceable, he was apprenticed to a farmer until his
fourteenth year, at the expiration of which time he resided with an uncle
until his seventeenth year, when he left farm work in order to acquire an
education. He studied hard for four or five years, partly maintaining
himself by teaching school, and at length had prepared himself for a
collegiate course.

In 1836, he came to Cleveland, and after an experience in a counting-room
one season, he concluded that he was better adapted for a literary life.
Accordingly he entered Western Reserve College, and on examination was
admitted to the senior class.

In 1838, he began the study of law with Hon. Rufus P. Spalding, afterwards
with Andrews, Foote & Hoyt, and subsequently with Varnum J. Card, and was
admitted to practice August, 1839, when he immediately entered into
partnership with Mr. Card, who, however, died about one year later, and
Mr. Bishop formed a partnership with F. T. Backus. This business connection
continued fifteen years.

In 1856, Mr. Bishop was elected to the Common Pleas Judgeship of this
county and district, and served with great satisfaction both to members
of the profession and to the public. His decisions were characterized by
a painstaking research, and an exhaustless consideration of the
principles of law involved, indicating a clear, accurate and
discriminating mind. It is believed that very few of his decisions were
ever reversed by a higher court, which is of itself sufficient testimony
to his ability and industry. At the end of his term he declined being a
candidate, and at once resumed the practice of law. In this he still
continues, having associated with him Seymour F. Adams, recently of the
Lewis county Bar, New York.

Mr. Bishop's life has been one of constant application to business, having
no idle time, and scarcely any leisure moments. With him a decision is not
reached by intuition, but by careful study, but when he takes hold of a
subject he studies it thoroughly to its conclusion, and is master of all
its points. Although Mr. Bishop has never been what may be termed
physically robust, he possesses great power of prolonged mental
application. And being also endowed with a most remarkably retentive
memory, his mind is stored with a very comprehensive knowledge of law. And
if there be one faculty of his mind more than another, that gives
character to the man, it is his prodigious memory of facts. In a case that
recently came under our notice, Judge Bishop gave evidence pertaining to a
matter that occurred some twenty years since, with apparently as much
precision as if the events occurred but yesterday.

In social and religions circles Judge Bishop ranks high. He is agreeable
in private life, and thoroughly conscientious in moral and religious
matters. He has long been a valued and honored member of the Baptist
denomination. By his uprightness of character, courtesy of demeanor, and
general good qualities, he has won the respect and esteem of a very
large circle.




Henry H. Dodge.



Amongst the very earliest settlers in Cleveland, was Samuel Dodge, the
father of the subject of this notice, who emigrated from Westmoreland, New
Hampshire, to this place, in 1797, being then about 21 years of age. On
arriving at Cleveland he built a log shanty, and remained about one year,
when he went to Detroit, and remained about the same length of time, and
returned to Cleveland, which he considered his home. Here and in the
adjoining township he resided to the day of his death, which occurred
October 3d, 1854, aged 78 years. About seven years after coming to
Cleveland he married a Miss Nancy Doan, of Connecticut, who died in
Cleveland, December 19th, 1863, leaving two sons, George C. and Henry H.

It is said that Samuel Dodge built the first frame building in this city,
about the year 1800, and which was a barn for Governor Samuel Huntington,
at that time living at Painesville. His proper business was that of a
wheelwright, but adapted himself to all kinds of wood-work in the new
country. During the war of 1812, he took a contract of Major Jessup, the
commander at this point, for building a large number of boats for the
Government, both here and at Erie.

[Illustration: Respectfully Yours, Henry H Dodge]

Henry H. was born August 19th, 1810, and enjoyed what educational
advantages Cleveland afforded, finishing his education under Hon. Harvey
Rice. At the age of twenty he commenced the study of law with Hon. John
W. Willey. In 1835, he married Miss Mary Ann Willey, a niece of Mr.
Willey, of which marriage seven children were born. Mrs. Dodge died
February 4, 1867.

Mr. Dodge was admitted to the Bar at the same time with H. V. Willson and
H. B. Payne, in 1834. He at once entered into partnership with Mr. Willey,
and continued with him until the latter was elected to the president
judgeship of the Court of Common Pleas, in 1840. Mr. Dodge then withdrew
from the practice of law to devote his whole attention to the duties of a
disbursing agent of the United States, for public works, to which he had
been appointed two years previously. He held that position until 1841. He
was also commissioner of insolvents during 1837 and 1838.

In 1850, he was appointed State engineer, having charge of public works,
and retained the position until 1855. On the organization of the United
States District Court for Northern Ohio, he was appointed United States
Commissioner, and held that office for three years. In 1859, he was again
appointed State engineer, and continued as such until 1862, since which
time he has devoted himself wholly to his real estate interests, opening
up new streets, building tenement houses, and materially aiding in the
growth and beauty of the eastern portion of the city. As early as 1837, he
built the large brick block on the corner of Ontario and Prospect streets,
formerly known as the Farmers' Block, which was, at that time, one of the
largest in the city.

Mr. Dodge, through all his offices of trust as well as private business,
has maintained a character for integrity and honor. He is unassuming and
affable, and well calculated to enjoy the handsome competency accruing
from the rise of his early real estate purchases, and being of a
remarkably kind and benevolent disposition, one of his chief pleasures
arises from the consciousness of doing good, by assisting those who are in
need, to the extent of his ability. During the war he was most active in
the country's cause, and spent his time and means freely in furnishing
substitutes and rendering comfort to the families of our brave defenders,
and we think, more than anything else, this desire to promote the
prosperity and happiness of mankind, gives character to him.

Mr. Dodge has resided on Euclid avenue over thirty years, having built
the residence now owned by General Oviatt, adjoining the present residence
of Mr. D. P. Eells, in 1838, the site at that time being outside the city
limits. After a few years he sold this to Thomas Bolton, and in 1840,
built a brick cottage opposite Brownell street, which he occupied about
fifteen years, when it gave place to the present edifice, the land having
been in the family since the year 1800.




James M. Coffinberry.



Judge Coffinberry is a native of Mansfield, Ohio, having been born in that
town in 1818. He studied law with his father, Andrew Coffinberry, Esq.,
then located at Perrysburg, in the western part of the State, and upon his
admission to the Bar in 1841, opened a law office in connection with his
father in Maumee City. He very early obtained the public confidence, being
appreciated for his high personal and professional integrity, and giving
evidence of fine abilities as a lawyer and advocate, he was elected and
served as prosecuting attorney for Lucas county for several years. About
the year 1845, he removed to Hancock county, and purchased and edited the
Findlay Herald, a Whig paper of that day, and for about ten years
practiced his profession with credit and success in the large circuit of
Hancock, Allen, Putnam, Van Wert, and Wood counties.

In 1855, he removed to Cleveland, where he entered very readily into a
good practice, and for six years confirmed the good reputation which he
brought with him, and took high rank at a Bar which numbers among its
members sortie of the best lawyers in the State.

In 1861, he was elected judge of the Court of Common Pleas, and performed
the duties of the office for his full term of five years, with credit to
himself and to the eminent satisfaction of the public, and an appreciative
Bar. The kind and genial traits are characteristics of Judge Coffinberry's
mind, and his quiet manners upon the Bench made it always agreeable for
both lawyers and suitors doing business in his court. His charges to the
jury were always plain, clear, and forcible, and in the course of his
judicial service, he delivered some very able opinions, verbal and
written, which elicited the favorable consideration of the profession, and
it is understood that no judicial opinion pronounced by him has ever been
reversed on review of a higher court. The charge to the jury on the trial
of Dr. John W. Hughes, for the murder of Tamzen Parsons, of Bedford, which
took place in December, 1865, was acknowledged by the Cleveland Bar to be
one of the ablest ever delivered from the Cuyahoga Bench.

[Illustration: Yours Truly, J. M. Coffinberry]

Judge Coffinberry is remarkable for an apparently intuitive perception of
legal truth, which gives to his argument at the Bar, and as a lawyer and
judge, to his opinions, a tone of originality. He has a fine appreciation
of the learning of the profession, but though not, strictly speaking,
technical in his administration of the law, he is never unmindful of its
nicest distinctions, but makes them subservient to his broad and liberal
views of the case. He has now returned to the practice of his profession,
and is regarded as among the best advocates of the Cleveland Bar.

While Mr. Coffinberry has won distinction as a lawyer, the following
record will show that he is amongst our most enterprising and energetic
business men, outside of his profession: He is president of the Midas
Insurance Company; a director in the Willow Bank Coal Company; a director
of the Tuscarawas Iron and Coal Company; was one of the projectors of the
People's Gas and Coke Company, of the West Side; has been a director of
the Mahoning Railroad Company; director and attorney for the Fremont and
Indiana Railroad Company; took an active interest in the construction of
the West Side street railroad, and also the Rocky River Railroad; he was a
member of the City Council for two years, and president of that body.

In politics, he was formerly a Whig, but now acts with the Democrats. He
was principal Secretary of the Great Union Convention that nominated the
late David Tod for Governor.

Judge Coffinberry has been successful in almost every undertaking, and has
richly deserved it.




James Mason.



No member of the Cleveland legal fraternity stands higher in the respect
of his colleagues and the general public, both for legal abilities and
personal qualities, than James Mason. As a lawyer he stands in the front
rank of the profession, his extensive reading, well balanced judgment, and
logical reasoning, making him one of the most reliable counsellors and
successful practitioners, whether before a court or a jury, whilst no more
valuable or respected citizen is found among the list of residents of
Cleveland.

Mr. Mason was born in the Autumn of 1816, in Canton, Ohio, of Vermont
stock, his parents having early emigrated to this State. He was carefully
educated at a good school in Trumbull county, and spent two years in
Western Reserve College. In 1835, he entered the senior class in Jefferson
College and graduated with the class of 1836.

On leaving College he studied law with Hon. A. W. Loomis, in New Lisbon,
Ohio, and was admitted to the Bar in 1839, when he practiced in
partnership with his preceptor until 1845. With the close of this
partnership he went abroad and spent some time in foreign travel,
returning in 1851, when he removed to Cleveland and opened a law office.
His abilities and assiduous attention to business soon brought him a
large and remunerative practice. Among other business he became the
legal adviser of the Cleveland & Toledo Railroad Company, and also one
of its directors. The value of his connection with the company was
speedily recognized and acknowledged. Business of the highest class came
to him until he has come to find his time fully occupied by the best
class of practice.

The duties of his profession, though laborious, are not allowed to engross
the whole of his time to the exclusion of domestic pleasures and social
enjoyments. The general culture of Mr. Mason's mind, in addition to his
legal attainments, and his affable manner, make him an agreeable companion
for social intercourse, and together with his sterling qualities as a man,
and his patriotism as a citizen, have won for him a host of friends warmly
attached to him, and loyally resolved to do him honor.

Mr. Mason was married in 1853, to Miss Caroline Robinson, of Willoughby.
Of this marriage there are five children.




Daniel R. Tilden.



The name of Daniel R. Tilden has long been familiar in Cleveland and its
vicinity. For fifteen years he has held the office of Probate Judge of
Cuyahoga county, and from the nature of his office, has been brought into
connection with a large proportion of the citizens, and become intimately
acquainted with their personal and family affairs. Many of these business
acquaintances became warm personal friends, and it is believed that
neither by his official, nor by his private life, has Judge Tilden made
one real enemy.

Mr. Tilden was born in Lebanon, Connecticut, November 5th, 1806, He
received a fair common school education, and on reaching his eighteenth
year, left his native State for the South, residing four years in North
Carolina and Virginia. But the South was not a congenial soil for the son
of the genuine Yankee State, so he turned his steps westward, and set out
for Ohio. At Garrettsville, Portage county, he halted awhile, and then
went to study law with Mr. Pierson, at Ravenna. To complete his legal
education, he entered the office of R. P. Spalding, and studied with him
for some time.

In 1831, a movement was on foot to agitate the question of abolishing
slavery. The movement was exceedingly unpopular, and it required
considerable nerve to profess abolition sentiments. Now, when no other
principle is avowed, it scarcely seems possible that men, now among us in
the prime of life, had to endure obloquy, ridicule, and even danger, for
expressing sentiments that no one now dreams of dissenting from. Among the
first to espouse the abolition doctrines was Judge Tilden. With Robert F.
Paine he commenced the work of organizing an Abolition Society in
Garrettsville, the first of the kind in Portage county. In this work he
labored with unwearied zeal, and became extensively known as one of the
most prominent and active of anti-slavery leaders.

In 1832, Mr. Tilden was elected justice of the peace, and continued in
that office four years; soon after the conclusion of the term, he formed a
law partnership with Judge Spalding, at Ravenna. This arrangement
continued about four years, when he formed a partnership with W. S. G.
Otis, which lasted about three years, and was terminated by Judge Tilden
becoming prosecuting attorney, an office he held four years.

In 1842, Judge Tilden was elected to Congress as a Whig, from the district
composed of Summit, Portage, and Trumbull counties, and was in the House
of Representatives during the exciting debates relative to the annexation
of Texas and the Mexican war. He, with twelve others, took a bold stand
against the war, making several speeches of very marked ability. He and
his associates, among whom were Gov. Vance, Columbus Delano, and Joseph
Root, refused to vote for the bill furnishing means to carry on the war,
because of the preamble to the bill, which said: "Whereas, we are, by the
act of Mexico, become engaged in war," &c., &c. This, Judge Tilden and his
associates considered false, they would not vote for the bill until it was
stricken out, and the names of these thirteen were sent throughout the
country surrounded with a funeral border.

At the Baltimore Convention that nominated General Scott, Judge Tilden
represented Lake and Summit counties; and at the Philadelphia Convention
that nominated Taylor, he represented Summit, Trumbull, and Portage.

In 1852, Judge Tilden removed to Cleveland and formed a law partnership
with Hon. H. B. Payne. Two years afterwards he was elected Probate Judge,
of Cuyahoga county, and filled the position with such marked satisfaction
to his constituents that he was re-elected at the close of every term, and
still holds the office he has filled for fifteen consecutive years.

When practicing law, Judge Tilden was distinguished for his abilities as
an advocate, and his qualifications for the judicial office he fills is
attested by his repeated re-elections to it. His officiai conduct has been
marked by uniform kindness, attention to the duties of his office, and the
interests of those having business with it, and a constant endeavor to do
right by all, whether rich or poor, learned or ignorant. If he has
committed any errors--and no Judge, from the Supreme Court down, but must
plead guilty to some--they have been errors of judgment only, and not of
interest. No one can deny to Judge Tilden unimpeached honesty of purpose,
warmth of heart, and an earnest endeavor to deal justly with all men.




[Illustration: Yours Truly, C. M. Palmer]


Charles W. Palmer.



Prominent among the young men of the profession who promise to take
and worthily fill the places of the old leaders of the Cleveland Bar
now partly superannuated and soon to retire from active life, is
Charles W. Palmer.

Mr. Palmer was born in Norwich, New London county, Connecticut, September
8, 1826. Nine years after, his father, Joseph B. Palmer removed to
Cleveland with his family, and was for a time engaged in the storage
business on the river. He is now in the employ of the Cleveland &
Pittsburgh Railroad Company. Charles had only the advantages of the common
schools until he was sixteen, but before he reached that age he had
manifested an industry at his books which promised well for his future. He
taught school on "the ridge" West of Cleveland, walking out to the school
house and back before and after school hours, and at the same time
prosecuting his own studies. He prepared for College under Rev. S. B.
Canfield and W. D. Beattie, of Cleveland, and when nearly eighteen was
admitted to Western Reserve College at Hudson. He graduated in 1848, with
the highest honors of his class. For two years after graduation he was
principal of the High School in Akron, and the next year a tutor in
Western Reserve College. Coming to Cleveland again after this, he studied
law in the office of Judge Foote, and was admitted to the Bar in the Fall
of 1853. In the Spring of the following year he made his first success in
political life, being elected to the City Council. In the Spring of 1859,
he was elected city attorney. The duties of this office he discharged
satisfactorily to all, and found the practice it brought a material help
in his profession. In the Fall of 1863, Mr. Palmer was elected prosecuting
attorney for the county. Here he was brought very prominently into notice
by the successful prosecution of several important cases.

In his profession, Mr. Palmer has been a constantly rising man, until now
he is on one or the other side of most of the important cases in our
courts. His reputation as a criminal lawyer is especially high. In 1865,
he prosecuted the celebrated Hughes murder case successfully. Two years
afterwards he defended McConnell, the murderer, and in 1868, defended
Mrs. Victor, in one of the most remarkable poisoning cases ever brought
into court. His argument in the latter case was a masterpiece of legal
acumen, forcible exposition, and polished speech. Mr. Palmer began the
practice of law in Cleveland in the firm of Palmer & Austin. Afterwards he
was associated with R. B. Dennis, Esq., and at present he is senior in the
firm of Palmer & De Wolf.

In July, 1819, Mr. Palmer married Miss Sabrina Parks, of Hudson, Ohio.
This estimable lady died in little more than a year after the marriage,
leaving a son but a few weeks old. The son still survives. In 1855, Mr.
Palmer married Miss Minerva Stone, a sister of Mr. S. S. Stone, of
Cleveland. This second wife died in childbed eleven months after marriage,
and in 1858, Mr. Palmer married his present wife. She was Miss Lucy
Hubbell, a daughter of Calvin Hubbell, Esq., of New York. By this marriage
there is a son now about ten years old.

In politics, Mr. Palmer has been a member of the Republican party since
its organization. He gave the war for the Union an earnest, active and
powerful support. No man appreciated more thoroughly the principles
involved in that contest, and few indeed have the power to present those
principles so well as he. His party services have been numerous and
efficient. A man of fine personal appearance, with a fair, open face,
which carries with it the conviction of sincerity in all he says,
possessed of a grace of manner which makes it a pleasure to hear him on
any subject, and having such a command of language as to enable him to put
his thoughts in the fittest words, he is of course a favorite speaker
always. He has a conscientiousness in all he does, which never allows him
to treat carelessly any matter, even in an unexpected public speech. There
are few men in Cleveland who carry so much weight in speaking, whether it
be before a court and jury, or to a general assembly of people. Taking an
intelligent interest in all public affairs, he yet devotes himself
studiously to his profession, in which he has as bright prospects as any
man at his age need wish for.




William Collins.



William Collins was born at Lowville, New York, the county seat of Lewis
county, February 22, 1818. He was a son of Ela Collins, who was a son of
General Oliver Collins, of Oneida county, New York, and Maria Clinton,
daughter of Rev. Isaac Clinton, of Lowville.

Mr. Collins read law with his father, and was admitted to practice in the
courts of New York, at Rochester, in September, 1813. In October, 1843, he
formed a copartnership with his father, under the firm name of E. & W.
Collins. They continued in active and successful practice until the death
of his father, in 1849. Immediately after Mr. Collins' admission to the
Bar, he was elected, as the successor of his father, public prosecutor.
This office he held until 1846, when he resigned, having been elected, by
the Democratic party, in November, 1846, at the age of twenty-seven, a
member of the House of Representatives, in the Thirtieth Congress. The
district represented by him was composed of Lewis and St. Lawrence
counties. He was in Congress in the years 1847-8-9, during the first
agitation of the question of extending slavery to the free territories.
Mr. Collins opposed the proposed extension with much zeal and ability.
Among his speeches will be found one delivered July 28, 1848, on the "Bill
to establish the territorial government of Oregon," advocating the Wilmot
Proviso. Apart from its merit as a brilliant literary production, it
contains many passages that will be read with much interest by the general
reader, as showing the beginning of the end at which we have arrived.
Slavery itself having now become a matter of history, we think it will be
of interest to introduce the following extracts from the Congressional
Globe of July, 1848:

  I shall assume, then, sir, that the institution does not exist in our
  late Mexican acquisitions, but that it has been effectually prohibited.
  The real question, then, is shall the laws securing _freedom_ in these
  Territories be abolished, and _slavery_ established? This is indeed,
  sir, a question of the gravest magnitude. To millions of the oppressed
  and degraded children of Africa, it is an issue upon which depends all
  that is dear to them in life--all that is bitter in the hour of death.
  It seems to me, sir, that they are even now stretching forth their dark
  hands, and beseeching us, in the name of the God of liberty whom our
  fathers worshipped, to remove from them the poisoned cup of bondage--to
  forge for them no more chains. The termination of this question also
  involves the dearest interests of every person in this country who
  desires to sustain himself by honorable labor. It intimately concerns
  our national honor, reputation, and progress in the great family of
  nations. The two hundred and fifty thousand immigrants who annually land
  upon our shores are in pursuit of 'free soil and free labor.' Can we
  pronounce in favor of slavery, without danger to our experiment at
  self-government? If we thus decide, what will become of the cherished
  hopes of the friends of civilization, Christianity, and human progress?

  Those who insist upon preserving freedom in the Territories, have no
  desire to disturb the institution of slavery in the States. The
  Constitution confers upon them no such authority. They could not
  interfere with it if they would, and they would not if they could. They
  have ever heretofore been, and still are, ready strictly to fulfil the
  constitutional provisions upon this subject.

  I shall aim to discuss this question with a proper regard for the most
  sensitive feelings of our brethren of the slave States, but also, sir,
  with a plainness commensurate with its profound importance. The
  legislatures of thirteen of the States of the Union, including Delaware,
  which still has two thousand slaves, have passed resolutions instructing
  their Senators and requesting their Representatives in Congress to
  oppose any further extension of slavery. There is but one sentiment upon
  this subject throughout the free States--it is that of eternal and
  _uncompromising_ hostility to the project. They will never consent that
  the free and virgin soil of the Territories shall be blighted and cursed
  by the tears of the slave, while they have a will to determine, or a
  muscle to resist.

  The proposition to make this Government the instrument for planting
  slavery upon soil now free, is regarded by a few at the North as so
  improbable and monstrous, that they have refused to believe that it is
  seriously entertained. Startling as the proposal is, it is nevertheless
  true.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Another argument employed by these apologists is, that the 'Proviso,' or
  a law prohibiting slavery in these Territories, is unnecessary; that it
  is an abstraction--a 'firebrand' employed by demagogues and factionists
  to kindle strife in the Democratic party; that the Territories are now
  free, and that they will so continue, unless an act of Congress is
  passed establishing slavery. It is impossible to avoid asking ourselves
  why, if these gentlemen are sincere--if they truly believe that slavery
  can not and will not go there, and they do not desire that it
  should--why they so strenuously oppose the passage of such a
  prohibition? If their views are correct, then such a law would be a mere
  harmless superfluity. But, sir, this '_firebrand of freedom_' is a thing
  more exalted and noble than a mere abstraction. It is wielded by men of
  strong arms, adamantine will, and hearts animated by the divine impulses
  of patriotism and liberty. They have registered a vow in Heaven to
  employ every lawful and constitutional means to roll back the dark tide
  of slavery from the temple of Freedom, and vindicate the character of
  the Republic from the disgrace and reproach of establishing slavery in a
  free territory. We are no abstractionists. The Representatives in this
  Congress from the fifteen slaveholding States of the Union, without an
  exception, and without distinction of party, avow an intention to carry
  their slaves into these Territories, and there hold them in bondage.
  They assert, with passionate vehemence, that they have such a
  constitutional right. They have even told us, sir, that, regardless of
  the remonstrances of the people of the North--heedless of any
  prohibitory law of Congress upon the subject, they would invade the free
  soil of the Pacific, and take with them their slaves, and weapons of
  defence! Are these declarations abstractions? Do they make no appeal for
  immediate, energetic and prohibitory legislation?

[Illustration: W. Collins]

  When driven from every other argument, gentlemen of the South
  threaten, that if the 'Proviso' or a law prohibiting slavery in free
  territory, is passed, they will dissolve the Union. At the North, the
  dissolution of the Union is not regarded as among possible events. Its
  value is never calculated. It has been cemented by too many common and
  glorious sacrifices and struggles; it is protected by too many pious
  invocations of its magnanimous founders, to be easily severed. The
  cause by which these fraternal bonds are sundered must be other than a
  refusal on the part of the free States to allow the Government to
  establish slavery in free territory. A submission to the will of the
  majority is a fundamental principle of our institutions. If the North
  are overborne in this contest, they must and will submit. If the
  demands of the South are denied by the decision of the majority, a like
  cheerful and ready acquiesence is expected. Until, however, the
  majority have decided, no legal and constitutional efforts to exclude
  slavery from these Territories will be abated by passionate threats
  against the peace and perpetuity of the Union. The Union would never
  have been formed had the present demand of the slave States been made
  and insisted upon. A proposition in the Constitutional Convention to
  make the Government a propagandist of slavery in free territory, would
  have been indignantly rejected.

  Whilst we stand here, upon the floor of the American Congress, at the
  noon of the nineteenth century, gravely discussing whether or not we
  will extend and perpetuate slavery, the monarchical governments of
  Europe are striking off shackles and 'letting the oppressed go free.'
  Slavery has been abolished by the French colonies. Portugal, Spain,
  and Russia, are moving in the work of emancipation. Within a few
  years England has given liberty to eight hundred thousand slaves. She
  has expended, within the last forty years, one hundred millions of
  dollars in suppressing the slave trade. Is it reserved for the
  Government of 'free, happy America,' in the midst of examples like
  these, to be fastening corroding chains upon human beings? Sooner
  than be involved in such stupendous guilt, let our name and existence
  perish among the nations.

  On the part of the North no 'compromises' can be made. But one answer--a
  stern, unyielding NO--will be given to all such proposals. We have
  made all the concessions that we can make, or ought to make. If a law
  under the name of a 'compromise' is passed, planting slavery upon a
  single square mile of free territory, it will have no rest. REPEAL! will
  be shouted from the mountain tops of the North, and reverberated in
  thunder tones through the valleys. The preservation of 'free soil for
  free men,' will alone be satisfactory. For this purpose, the passage of
  an act of Congress prohibiting slavery in free territory, will be
  unceasingly urged, until the great measure is consummated.

During this Congress, although the anti-slavery-extension men were in a
minority in both branches, all compromise bills were defeated, and their
defeat was due in a good degree to the industrious and vigilant efforts of
Mr. Collins, and a few associates in the House.

Mr. Collins was tendered a renomination to the thirty-first Congress, but
having determined to remove to the West, he declined, and Preston King was
elected in his stead. He continued, with much success, the business of
the late firm of E. & W. Collins, until December, 1853, when he removed to
Cleveland and opened a law office. He was soon elected a director of the
Merchants Bank of Cleveland, and of the Lake Shore Railway Company.
Subsequently he became a director in the Bellefontaine Railway Company;
the Cleveland, Columbus, Cincinnati and Indianapolis Railway Company; the
Jamestown and Franklin Railway Company, of Pennsylvania; the East
Cleveland Street Railroad Company; the Mercer Iron and Coal Company, of
Pennsylvania, and the Merchants National Bank, of Cleveland, the active
duties of which positions have absorbed very much of his attention and
time. He has occasionally appeared in the courts here in litigated cases,
but has mainly confined his professional work to his office. Mr. Collins
had a high standing as a lawyer in New York, and has fully sustained his
early reputation here. He is most remarkable for an admirably fair and
clear way of stating and arguing to the court and jury, the questions both
of law and fact. This contributed greatly to his success, not only as a
forensic advocate, but as a political orator, and legislative debater.

The sympathies of Mr. Collins having always been on the side of freedom,
he joined the Republican party on its organization, and has remained
faithful to its principles. When the Rebellion broke out he threw himself
heartily into the cause of the Union, and contributed freely with money
and labor in every available way for the furtherance of the Union cause.
He served on the local military and other committees, working faithfully
and energetically, and contributing largely to the excellent record
Cleveland and the county made during the war, by repeatedly and promptly
filling the quota of troops required, and by liberal contributions in aid
of the sick and wounded soldiers. Whenever an effort was needed, the voice
of Mr. Collins was heard exhorting the people earnestly to energetic
action and liberal contributions, and his exhortations were promptly and
efficiently seconded by his own example. With him precept and practice
went together.

Such men as Mr. Collins would do the people valuable service were they
chosen to fill responsible places in the legislative councils and
executive departments of the State and Nation. But in these days something
more than--or it may too often be said--something different from abilities
of the description possessed by Mr. Collins, seems to be required to
secure the favor of the people, or rather of the political managers. He is
of too ingenuous a nature to yield to the intrigues and servility, too
often, now-a-days, demanded of political candidates by the managers.

On November 20th, 1816, Mr. Collins was married at Columbus, to Jane,
second daughter of the late Alfred Kelly--the two families having been
early neighbors and friends in New York. Two children of this marriage
survive, Frederick and Walter, the former seventeen years of age at the
present time, and the latter fourteen.




Rufus Percival Ranney.



Rufus P. Ranney, one of the most profound jurists this country has
produced, was born at Blandford, Massachusetts, October 30, 1813. His
father, Rufus Ranney, was an honest, industrious farmer, of Scotch
descent. His mother, whose maiden name was Dottie D. Blair, came from
revolutionary stock.

About the year 1822, Rufus Ranney removed with his family to Ohio. After a
short stay at Fairport, Lake county, they finally located at Freedom,
Portage county, where they made a permanent settlement upon a farm. It was
there that Rufus P. Ranney spent the years of his early manhood, and there
his parents lived until their decease. Judge Ranney's father was highly
respected in the neighborhood where he lived, and, though in humble
circumstances, did all within his power for the education of his children,
training them in the pathway of honesty and integrity--traits of character
which have marked the public and private career of his distinguished son.
His mother, an amiable woman who had received a good education, was very
attentive to her children, and her son, Rufus P. doubtless owes much of
whatever he has been in life to her early teachings.

Until he became of age, Rufus P. Ranney was engaged upon his father's
farm, obtaining, during the winter season, a few weeks education at such
schools as a country village then afforded. He attended the college at
Hudson for a season, but circumstances prevented his remaining long enough
to graduate with his class.

In the year 1835, having determined to make a start in life for himself,
he left his home and traveled on foot to Jefferson, Ashtabula county. In a
speech made by him at Ashtabula in September, 1868, he referred to the
time of his arrival at Jefferson, his worldly goods consisting of the
clothing upon his person, and _one_ extra shirt, which he carried in the
top of his hat.

Entering the office of Benjamin F. Wade, he applied himself with
diligence to the study of the law, and after a clerkship of one year was
admitted to the Bar. Soon afterward he entered into partnership with his
preceptor. The firm of Wade & Ranney was a powerful one, and "ruled the
circuit" of North Eastern Ohio. For several years it enjoyed an extensive
practice. The firm was dissolved upon the removal of Judge Ranney to
Warren, (1844,) and Mr. Wade was soon afterward chosen President Judge of
the Third Judicial District, from which position he was transferred to the
Senate of the United States.

In 1846, and again in 1848, Judge Ranney was an unsuccessful candidate for
Congress. In the Trumbull district the Whig party was largely in the
majority, and though Judge Ranney was defeated, he ran considerably ahead
of the general ticket, reducing the Whig majority to hundreds, when
before, that party had triumphed by thousands.

The people having determined that a convention be held to form a new
constitution, Judge Ranney was chosen to represent the counties of
Trumbull and Geauga. The convention was held in 1850. It was composed of
the first men of the State; both parties seem to have vied with each other
in sending their ablest representatives. There were William Medill, its
President, who afterwards became Governor of the State; the venerable
Ex-Governor Vance; Henry Stanbery, late Attorney General of the United
States; Peter Hitchcock, for thirty years a judge of the Supreme Court;
Benjamin Stanton, long a member of Congress; Judges Joseph E. Swan,
Sherlock J. Andrews, Simeon Nash and William Kennon; Charles Reemelin,
D. P. Leadbetter, William Sawyer, and others not less prominent in the
Judicial and political annals of Ohio.

In that convention, Rufus P. Ranney greatly distinguished himself.
Although but thirty-six years of age he commanded the respect and
admiration of all its members, and won for himself a high reputation as a
sound lawyer and ready debater. No one was more looked to for advice, and
none more generally correct in giving it. He was, in fact, a leader, whose
council, in almost every instance, was acceded to by the convention. All
the propositions which he introduced were for the welfare and benefit of
the people. In the official report of the debates will be found his views
upon nearly or quite all of the questions which agitated the convention.
He was the champion of the people against monopolies, and many of the most
important provisions in the constitution are the work of his hand.

The course which he pursued met the hearty approval of the people and
made his name prominent throughout the State. In response to the wishes of
the members of the legal profession, and the general desire of the public,
he was, by the legislature of 1851, chosen one of the judges of the
Supreme Court. When the new constitution went into effect, he was elected
to the same position by a large majority.

Judge Ranney occupied a place upon the Supreme Bench until 1856, when he
resigned on account of ill health. That year he was a member of the
Cincinnati National Convention, which nominated James Buchanan for
President.

In March, 1857, Judge Ranney, unsolicited on his part, received from
President Buchanan the appointment of United States Attorney for the
Northern District of Ohio. This position he held until July, when he
resigned. He then removed to Cleveland, where he resumed the practice of
his profession, as a member of the firm of Ranney, Backus & Noble.

In 1859, Governor Chase tendered him the appointment of commissioner to
examine and report upon the condition of the State Treasury, this being
soon after the Gibson-Breslin defalcation, by which the State lost several
hundred thousand dollars. Judge Ranney declined this appointment. The same
year he was unanimously nominated by the Democratic State convention as
the candidate of that party for Governor--his opponent on the Republican
ticket being the Hon. William Dennison, of Franklin county, late
Post-Master General of the United States. After a most gallant canvass,
Judge Ranney failed of an election, though he ran ahead of the other
candidates on the ticket in all parts of the State.

In 1862, against his personal wishes, he was nominated by the Democracy
for Judge of the Supreme Court. He consented to be a candidate only
after the convention had _positively refused_ to accept his declination.
The Republican nominee was his law partner, the Hon. Franklin T. Backus,
one of the most prominent members of the Cuyahoga Bar. The result was
the election of Judge Ranney by a decided majority, and although party
lines were closely drawn, he again ran ahead of his ticket several
thousand votes.

He held the position of judge of the Supreme Court until 1864, when he
resigned. Some months afterwards he resumed the practice of his profession
in connection with his son-in-law, Mr. T. Kelley Bolton.

During the same year, (1864) he was chosen one of the delegates at large
to the Democratic National Convention, which nominated George B.
McClellan for President, and was selected by the Ohio delegation as the
member from Ohio of the Democratic National Committee, holding that
position until 1868. In the late Presidential campaign, his name headed
the Democratic electoral ticket. This closes his public record. It is an
interesting one, and though briefly given, exhibits this fact, viz.: the
confidence and regard in which he has ever been held by the Democracy of
Ohio. Year after year his voice has been heard throughout the State in
defence of the Constitution and laws, and the honors which his party have
bestowed upon him, are but a merited tribute to his energy, ability, and
integrity of character.

As a lawyer, Judge Ranney has ever held the front rank in his
profession. His practice has been extensive and important; probably no
attorney in the State has, during the past ten years, been retained in
as many cases. Possessed of a strong, discriminating mind, capable of
enduring long continued mental labor, he unites with activity and energy
a determined spirit, which enables him to overcome obstacles which would
appal most men.

Judge Ranney is as logical as eloquent, and when his great reasoning
powers are brought into full sway, formidable must be the opponent to
overcome him. His arguments in court are peculiarly appropriate, clear,
calm, and strong; without wordy declamation, vehement gesture, or
passionate appeal; he seldom fails to carry his point, even when the odds
seem overwhelmingly against him.

Judge Ranney has a mind richly stored with not only the treasures of his
profession, but of ancient and modern classics, and the best literature of
the day. He is a great reader, and though he writes but little, whatever
proceeds from his pen is marked by elegance and culture.

As a Judge, he was courteous, affable and indulgent. His decisions are his
best _monuments_. They exhibit profound learning, sound judgment and
extensive research. No judge was more popular upon the Bench. Dignified
and benevolent, he enjoyed in an eminent degree the confidence of the Bar
and the public. He had the constant respect of those who differed from him
in opinion, and when he resigned his seat upon the Bench, the best men of
all parties expressed regret at his retirement from a position which he
had so much adorned. Pre-eminent in legal knowledge, Rufus P. Ranney has
reflected honor upon the judiciary of our country, and is one of the
ablest of the many learned men who have graced the Supreme Bench of our
State with their presence.




[Illustration: Yours Truly, C. T. Sherman]


Charles Taylor Sherman.



The Sherman family was among the earliest settlers in Massachusetts and
Connecticut. They and their descendants were men of note in their
respective Colonies, of strong, practical minds, pure and lofty in moral
tone and character.

They were early actors in the settlement and development of Ohio. Taylor
Sherman, the grandfather of the subject of this sketch, was a judge of
one of the Superior Courts of Connecticut, and was one of the trustees of
the Fire Land Company, to whom was granted, by the State of Connecticut,
the lands now comprised by the counties of Huron and Erie, in Ohio. As
early as 1800, he was in Ohio, and also in subsequent years, attending to
the surveying and allotting the lands to the owners, who suffered from
fire in the excursions of Arnold and Tryon, in Connecticut, in the
Revolutionary war.

His son, Charles R. Sherman, and father of Charles T. Sherman, emigrated
to Ohio in 1810, and settled in Lancaster, Fairfield county, Ohio. He
early became distinguished at the Bar, among the strong and able lawyers
then practicing in Central Ohio. In 1824, he was elected one of the judges
of the Supreme Court of Ohio, and died in 1830, whilst in the performance
of his duties.

Charles T. Sherman, of whose life these notes are made, was born in
Lancaster, February 3, 1813, and is Ohio born and reared. He was educated
and graduated at the Ohio University, in Athens, Ohio, in 1832, and
admitted to the Bar in 1835. He settled in Mansfield, Richland county,
and continued in the practice of his profession until he was appointed
judge of the United States Court for the Northern District of Ohio, in
Mardi, 1867.

He never sought to obtain any public office, but rather carefully avoided
it. He always esteemed it fortunate that he resided in a county and
section in which the majority was opposed to him in political sentiments.
He however took a leading part in developing and forwarding public
improvements in his county. He contributed liberally by his labors and
influence in locating and constructing through his county the Pittsburgh,
Fort Wayne & Chicago Railroad, and the Mansfield & Sandusky Railroad. For
many years he was a director in both roads, and general soliciter of the
Pittsburgh, Fort Wayne & Chicago Railroad, and a leading spirit in its
management.

He was also appointed by Mr. Lincoln to serve four years as one of the
Government Directors of the Pacific Railroad, and largely contributed to
its success in its early days.

The Bar of Richland county always ranked among the first in Northern Ohio.
Among the oldest members who were in full practice when Judge Sherman went
there, were Jacob Parker, afterwards Judge of the Common Pleas, Andrew
Coffinberry, one of the most genial and kind hearted men, and, withal, an
excellent lawyer, John M. May, who commenced the practice of the law in
1815, and is still living, and James Purdy, Orris Parrish of Columbus,
William Stanbery, of Newark, Hosmer and Henry B. Curtis, of Mt. Vernon,
and Edward Avery, of Wooster, afterwards Judge of the Supreme Court, all
practiced in that county. In later days and cotemporaneous with Judge
Sherman, were Thomas W. Bartley, Jacob Brinkerhoof, and Josiah Scott, all
of whom occupied the Bench of the Supreme Court of Ohio, James Stewart,
Judge of the Common Pleas, S. J. Kirkwood, afterwards Governor of Iowa, and
U. S. Senator from that State, together with R. G. Hurd and Columbus
Delano, of Mt. Vernon, and C. L. Boalt and J. M. Root, of Norwalk.

Judge Sherman ranked with those later and younger members of the Bar, and
enjoyed a practice equal to any, and more lucrative probably, than any of
them. He was quiet and unostentatious in his profession, and, seemingly,
only sought to do his whole duty to his clients and obtain the good will
of his fellow citizens.

A short time after the breaking out of the rebellion, he was appointed
Provost Marshal of some twenty counties in Northern Ohio, by the War
Department, and organized four regiments that went into the service, and
subsequently served on a commission to settle and adjust claims on the
Government arising in the West.

Upon his appointment to the Bench he resigned his position on the
Railroads, with the intention of devoting his whole time to the duties of
his judicial office. For more than two years he has presided with entire
satisfaction to the public and the members of the Cleveland Bar, proving
himself to be a strong, capable, common-sense, business judge; and by his
habitual courteous demeanor has made a host of legal and other friends
during his short residence in this city.




[Illustration: Very Respectfully, R. P. Spalding]


Rufus P. Spalding.



In a work professing to deal with the "representative men" of Cleveland,
it is eminently proper that he who has represented the interests of
Cleveland in Congress for six years with a fidelity unsurpassed by any of
his predecessors in the national councils, and who won for the district he
represented a prominence hitherto not accorded to it, should find a
conspicuous place. The six years' service of Judge Spalding in Congress as
the Representative from the Eighteenth Ohio District forms a period in the
history of the city of which the citizens, irrespective of party
predilections, have reason to be proud.

Rufus Paine Spalding is a native of Massachusetts, having been born on the
3rd of May, 1798, at West Tisbury, on the island of Martha's Vineyard. The
remote ancestor of the Spaldings was Edward Spalding, who is recorded as
having been "made a Freeman" at Braintree, Massachusetts, in 1640. Edward
Spalding's son Benjamin emigrated from Massachusetts to Connecticut about
fifteen years after that date, and settled in Plainfield, Windham county.
The great grandson of Benjamin Spalding, and the father of Rufus Paine
Spalding, Dr. Rufus Spalding, had in 1798, been for some time a resident
of West Tisbury, where he practiced medicine.

When his son was fourteen years old Dr. Spalding removed to Connecticut
and resided in Norwich. Rufus P. Spalding, having been prepared for
college, entered Yale at the proper time, and graduated in 1817, with the
degree of Bachelor of Arts. The class in which he graduated contained
names that afterwards acquired lustre in judicial, legislative, and
ecclesiastical circles.

From the first Mr. Spalding's tendency was towards the legal profession,
and immediately on leaving college he prepared himself by study for the
practice of the law. He was fortunate in the choice of an instructor,
having entered the office of the Hon. Zephaniah Swift, Chief Justice of
Connecticut, who is known to the profession as the learned author of the
"Digest." He profited so well by the instructions he received, that, on
his leaving the office, Judge Swift complimented him highly on his
proficiency, and predicted for the young lawyer a successful career, if he
remained true to his profession. On completing his term of reading law,
and being admitted to the Bar, he left New England to push his fortune in
the West, and in December, 1819, reached the old "Post of Arkansas,"
removing soon after to Little Rock, where he put out his shingle as a
lawyer, in partnership with Samuel Dinsman, who has since reached the
gubernatorial chair of New Hampshire. Here he remained about a year and a
half, when he turned his face eastward, and in passing through Ohio,
stopped at Warren, the county town of Trumbull county. Here he was induced
to remain, the chances of practice being represented as good, and his
profound knowledge of law, ability in making that knowledge serviceable,
and unwearied industry, enabled him to soon build up an extensive legal
connection, which he retained and increased during his sixteen years stay
in Warren.

From Warren he removed to Ravenna, in the adjoining county of Portage. He
had not long been in the county before the people recognized the abilities
and power of Mr. Spalding, and he was chosen to represent that county in
the State Legislature. The contest for the position was sharp, for Mr.
Spalding was a new man in the county, and it was considered by many proper
that older residents should represent so important a constituency. But the
recognized ability of Mr. Spalding outweighed all objections on the ground
of recent residency, and he was elected by a majority of one.

During his term in the Legislature, and mainly through his efforts, the
county of Summit was erected, and Mr. Spalding at once became a resident
of the new county by removing his place of residence to Akron. At the next
election he offered himself as a representative of Summit in the
legislature, and was accepted. On the organization of the House of
Representatives he was chosen speaker, and won the approbation of the
whole body by the ability and impartiality with which he presided over the
proceedings. During this term of office the question of repudiating the
State debt was broached. Mr. Spalding took strong ground against such a
course, holding it not only disgraceful but suicidal. In this he was
supported by the late John Brough, then Auditor of State, and largely
through the bold and persistent opposition of these gentlemen the scheme
was dropped.

In the Legislative session of 1848-9, the two houses of the General
Assembly united in electing Mr. Spalding a judge of the Supreme Court of
the State for the constitutional term of seven years. But when four years
of the term remained unexpired, the operation of the new constitution
ended the pending terms of all offices, and devolved the election of
Supreme Court judges upon the people instead of on the General Assembly.
Judge Spalding declined being a candidate for the office in a popular
canvass, and so the advantages of his ripe legal and judicial knowledge
was lost to the Bench of the State. Concurrent testimony shows that no
decisions were held in greater respect by the lawyers and the public, for
their uprightness and justice, whilst to the legal fraternity in
particular, they commended themselves by their logical force, and terse,
clear, emphatic style and precision of expression that rendered them
models of judicial literature. His judicial opinions are contained in
volumes 18, 19 and 20 of the Ohio Reports.

On his retirement from the Bench of the State, Judge Spalding returned to
the practice of the law with renewed ardor. Cleveland, presenting a wider
field for the exercise of his abilities, he removed to that city and at
once took front rank among the many able members of the profession. His
profound knowledge of the law, power as a debater, and his ability of
creating a strong impression on both courts and juries, built up for him
an extensive and lucrative practice. When he spoke he carried conviction,
it being all but impossible to resist the solid array of arguments and
terse, incisive style. The same characteristics that made him afterwards
so powerful in Congress had great effect on the most intelligent juries,
and exercised a marked influence on the judges engaged in trying the
causes in which he was interested as advocate.

Although the law claimed his first attention, and was his choice, Judge
Spalding was no indifferent spectator of the course of politics. He had
been trained a Democrat, and was a powerful worker in that party. But all
his convictions were on the side of justice and freedom, and when, in
1850, the Fugitive Slave Law wedded Democracy to slavery, Judge Spalding,
in common with thousands of others, broke through the party traces, and
joined the "Free Soil" party, opposed to the extention of slavery. At the
Free Soil convention of 1852, he was an active and prominent delegate, and
on his nomination, John P. Hale was made the candidate for the Presidency.

On the formation of the Republican party, pledged to the restriction of
the slave power, Judge Spalding took an active part in carrying out the
principles of that organization. He was a member of the Pittsburgh
Convention of 1856, at which the party was organized, and was a delegate
at large for the State of Ohio at the Philadelphia Convention that
nominated John C. Fremont. From that time he labored earnestly for the
success of Republican principles, and the good effect of his efforts
were frequently acknowledged by the party.

In October, 1862, he was chosen to succeed Mr. Riddle as Representative of
the Eighteenth Congressional District in Congress. The wisdom of the
choice was almost immediately made manifest. Judge Spalding had not long
occupied his seat in the House of Representatives before "the member from
the Cleveland District" became noticed for the interest he took in
questions of importance, the soundness of his views, and the ability with
which they were urged. He took part in all the leading debates, and with
such effect that he commanded the attention of the House whenever he
spoke, and the leaders listened respectfully to his suggestions. He was
appointed a member of the Standing Committee on Naval Affairs, and of the
Committee on Revolutionary Pensions, and on the formation of a Select
Committee on the Bankrupt Law, he was made its Chairman. In committee he
was noticeable for his punctuality, patient and conscientious attention to
the drudgery of committee work, and the system with which he was enabled
to despatch large amounts of it satisfactorily.

In 1864, he was re-elected to his seat, and in that term was made a member
of the Standing Committee on Appropriations, and retained his former
position on the Committee on Bankruptcy, the chairmanship of which was
held by Mr. Jenckes. In this Congress Judge Spalding took a leading part
in the important debates on the subject of Reconstruction, and impressed
his influence on the Legislation upon this matter. In the early days of
the session he made a speech, in which he indicated the measures he
regarded best adapted for the for the purpose of properly reconstructing
the rebel States. The speech attracted great attention, both within and
without Congress, and the suggestions therein contained were for the most
part subsequently adopted, and worked into the Reconstruction Laws. The
military features of Reconstruction, which formed an integral part of the
legislation, originated in an amendment proposed by Judge Spalding, when
the first Reconstruction Bill of Thaddeus Stevens was presented.

In 1866, he was again re-elected to Congress, his national services, as
well as his fidelity to the local interests of his constituents, having
secured for him that distinguished compliment. In this Congress he
continued to occupy a prominent position, and was recognized as one of the
leading men on the Republican side, though not so thoroughly partizan as
to accept all the measures proposed in the name of the Republican party.
He differed occasionally with the dominant section of the party, when he
believed their zeal outran discretion and sound policy, and the judgment
of the country has in most cases pronounced him to have acted rightly. In
this Congress he served on the Committee on Appropriations, the Committee
on the Revision of the Laws of the United States, and upon the Joint
Committee on the Library of Congress. In the debates on the financial
questions that enlisted the attention of Congress at this session he took
a leading part, and in May, 1868, he delivered a speech on "The Political
and Financial condition of the Country," which took strong ground against
the unconstitutionality of the Legal Tenders, whilst approving the passage
of the Legal Tender Act as a measure of military necessity at the time.
With this Congress Judge Spalding's legislative career closed. The duties
of the position, always faithfully performed by him, were growing too
onerous, and at his time of life, though still full of activity and
healthy vigor, it was urged that he should enjoy more ease than was
possibly consistent with his idea of a proper fulfillment of the trust of
member of Congress. He therefore wrote a letter to his constituents
several months before the period of nomination, positively declining a
renomination, and withdrawing from public life.

The determination of Judge Spalding to withdraw from active political life
was a matter of surprise and regret to his colleagues in Congress, who had
learned to value his sound judgment, ripe scholarship, earnest patriotism,
and great legislative ability. It was a positive loss to the people of the
Eighteenth Ohio District, for never had the interests of that district
been better cared for. To Cleveland, especially, he proved in reality a
representative member. The wishes of his constituents were promptly
attended to, their interests carefully guarded, and no stone left unturned
in the endeavor to benefit the city and its people. In the Congressional
session and out of it, he was ever on the watch for opportunities to
advance the interests of his constituents, and in complying with the daily
requests for advice and assistance, he did so, not grudgingly or
reluctantly, but with earnestness and hearty good will, as if it were a
matter of his own personal concern. The withdrawal of Judge Spalding from
public political life, was a loss to the national councils in which he had
achieved distinction, but was a still greater loss to the constituency he
represented.

Judge Spalding has returned to the legal profession, of which he ranks
among the brightest lights, and finds in its practice, and in the quiet
enjoyment of social and domestic life, a satisfaction which his public
career, brilliant as it was, failed to give. In his seventy-second year,
he is yet in the full enjoyment of all his faculties, physical and mental,
and is the picture of sound health and mental vigor.

Judge Spalding has been married twice. In October, 1822, he was married to
Lucretia A. Swift, oldest daughter of his preceptor in legal studies.
Seven children were born of this marriage, of whom but three yet live:
Col. Zeph. S. Spalding, United States Consul at Honolulu, Brevet Captain
George S. Spalding, First Lieutenant 33d U. S. Infantry, and Mrs. Lucretia
McIlrath, wife of Charles McIlrath, of St. Paul, Minnesota. In January,
1859, Judge Spalding was married to his present wife, oldest daughter of
Dr. William S. Pierson, of Windsor, Connecticut.




W. S. C. Otis.



W. S. C. Otis was born in Cummington, Hampshire county, Massachusetts,
August 24th, 1808. His father was a farmer in narrow circumstances, who,
owing to the loss of property, was able to bestow upon his children only
such an education as could be obtained in the district schools of a purely
agricultural district. Books were scarce, and as poor in quality as meagre
in quantity; but being a lad with literary tastes, a desire for
information, and an omnivorous appetite for reading, every book that fell
in the way of young Otis was eagerly seized and its contents ravenously
devoured. The life of a poor farmer, with its ceaseless drudgery and petty
needs, was distasteful to the lad, and he was anxious to obtain a
collegiate education, and thus become fitted to fight the battle of life
with brain instead of muscle. His ambition was not discouraged by his
father, but there was a great difficulty in the way of its
gratification--the want of money. Mr. Otis was utterly unable to give his
son any pecuniary assistance, though ready to resign his claim on his
son's time; an important sacrifice when the demands of a large family and
the straitness of his means are taken into consideration. Application was
made for admission to West Point Military Academy, but unfortunately a
Congressman's son was also a candidate for the appointment, and of course
the friendless son of a poor struggling farmer had to go to the wall. This
was a heavy blow and sore discouragement.

When the subject of this sketch was about seventeen or eighteen years old
his father emigrated to Ohio, leaving his son behind with only forty
dollars in money, who, after making arrangements with his brother, W. A.
Otis, to furnish him such pecuniary aid as he might need, proceeded to fit
himself for college under the Rev. Roswell Hawks, of Cummington, devoting
only one year to preparation, and entered Williams College in the Fall of
1826. In order to lighten the burden upon his brother, he taught school
two Winters during his college course, and graduated in the autumn of
1830, among the best scholars of the class.

Before graduating, he was appointed principal of Gates' Academy, in
Marlborough, Massachusetts, and entered upon the duties of the
appointment; but at the expiration of the year he followed the rest of the
family to Ohio, and in the month of September, 1831, commenced reading law
with Whittlesey & Newton, of Canfield, Ohio. In September, 1833, he was
admitted to the Bar, and immediately commenced the practice of the law in
Ravenna, Portage county, where he continued to reside till 1840.

In June, 1840, after the county of Summit was organized, Mr. Otis moved to
Akron, where he resided and continued to practice his profession until
January, 1854. While a resident of Summit county he was elected
Prosecuting Attorney of the county for two years. He also filled the
position of president of the Akron Bank, from its organization, till
January, 1854, and was a member of the Board of Control of the State Bank
of Ohio, and member of the Convention which formed the present
Constitution of the State of Ohio. While a member of the Convention he
devised and reported to that body the scheme for the apportionment of the
members of the House of Representatives, which, with slight modifications,
was adopted into the Constitution, and is now the system in this State.
While a member of the Constitutional Convention, he acquired a distaste
for political life, and resolved to abandon it, a resolution to which he
has since constantly adhered.

In January, 1854, Mr. Otis was elected vice-president of the Cleveland and
Pittsburgh Railroad Company, and in order to better perform the duties of
the position, he removed to Cleveland, taking charge of the operations of
the road and the finances of the Company. In the Winter of 1854 and 1855,
he was tendered the presidency of the Bellefontaine and Indiana Railroad
Company, but declined, and in the Spring of 1855, resumed the practice of
his profession. Soon afterwards he was elected the Solicitor of the
Cleveland and Pittsburgh Railroad Company, and continued to act as such
until he resigned the position in May, 1869, and since that time he has
confined himself strictly to the practice of law.

As a lawyer Mr. Otis ranks high in his profession, having a very extensive
knowledge of the law in all its ramifications, and a readiness in the
application of his knowledge that enables him to baffle and confound his
opponents without descending to mere pettifogging.

For many years he has been a member either of the Congregational or
Presbyterian churches in the places in which he has resided; and has
always taken great pleasure in studying the Bible, and great satisfaction
in teaching it to others, hence the secret of the spotless morality and
unswerving integrity he has maintained through life.

Mr. Otis was married in January, 1836, to Hannah, daughter of the late G.
Mygatt, and sister of George Mygatt, of Cleveland. She died without issue
in April, 1840. In November, 1842, he was married to Laura L., daughter of
the late Judge Lyman, of Ravenna.




Franklin J. Dickman.



Franklin J. Dickman is a native of Petersburg, Virginia, where his
parents have long resided. At the age of sixteen he entered the Junior
class of Brown University, at Providence, Rhode Island, and at the age of
eighteen graduated with the salutatory honors of his class. In the same
class were the Hon. S. S. Cox, Lieutenant Governor Francis Wayland, of
Connecticut, and the Rev. James C. Fletcher, now so well known for his
travels in Brazil.

On leaving college Mr. Dickman studied law in the office of the late
Charles F. Tillinghest and ex-Chief Justice Bradley, at Providence, and
after completing his studies he commenced the practice of his profession
in the same city, continuing with success until he removed to Cleveland.

His entry on public life was early. In 1857, the Democracy of Rhode
Island selected him as their candidate for Attorney General of the State,
and it is a noticeable fact that although running on the Democratic
ticket, he received almost the entire colored vote of the State. In 1858,
he was appointed a member of the Board of Visitors to the Military Academy
at West Point, and was chosen Secretary of the Board. In that capacity he
drew up the report of the Board for that year, which was subsequently
published by order of the Secretary of War.

In December, 1858, he removed to Cleveland, rightly considering that its
growth and prosperity, and the important cases continually arising out of
its commercial business, rendered it a good field for a man of knowledge
and of energy to put that knowledge to account. He entered on the
practice of his profession with zeal, and speedily reaped his reward in a
large business.

Up to the breaking out of the war Mr. Dickman had acted with the
Democratic party, but when treason culminated with rebellion, he joined
those of his political associates who disregarded party lines and united
with the Republicans in forming the Union party. Although fitted for
college with Roger A. Pryor, of Petersburg, and though his parents
remained in Petersburg during the war, Mr. Dickman took strong ground
against the rebellion and all who gave it encouragement.

In 1861, he was nominated for member of the State Legislature from this
city, and was elected by a large majority. In that body he was made
chairman of the Committee on Railroads and also placed on the Judiciary
Committee. In the latter capacity the subject of military arrests came
under his notice, and his speech on that subject was considered so able
and exhaustive an exposition of that subject that it was published at
the request of the Judiciary Committee and widely circulated through
the State.

At the close of his legislative term he formed a law partnership with
Judge Spalding, which still continues, and re-entered assiduously on the
duties of his profession, devoting most of his attention to admirality,
marine insurance, and patent cases. In these he has been very successful.

In 1867, President Johnson appointed Mr. Dickman United States District
Attorney for the Northern District of Ohio. The appointment was received
with satisfaction by all shades of political opinions, and Mr. Dickman
continued to perform its duties to, the approbation of all having business
with the court until early in 1869, when he resigned the position in
order to confine himself more closely to his private practice. It is
admitted on all sides that the duties of his office were faithfully and
ably performed. Of the great number of criminal cases brought before the
court by him only two escaped conviction, thus evidencing the merit, care
and attention given to the getting up of the cases for trial. Such
uniformity in securing conviction is very unusual.

Mr. Dickman is a gentleman of fine literary tastes, extensive reading, and
rare classical attainments. The relaxation from his legal duties is found
mainly in his library among the highest class of authors. His frequent
orations for the literary societies of Brown University and the University
of Michigan, and other occasions, have been marked by scholarly finish and
have always been received with approval. During the existence of the
Knickerbocker Magazine, before its decadence, he contributed to its pages
a series of valuable articles on "Butler's Horae Juridical," and on "The
Revolution of 1688."

Cherishing a high ideal of professional attainments and ability, Mr.
Dickman has realized it to a degree remarkable for a young man. With
ample acquirements he has clear conceptions, and broad views of the
principles of legal science, frequently never attained by older lawyers,
even after a large and life-long practice. His habits of study are wisely
methodized, so as to husband time, and make his efforts tell without
waste upon results.

A very marked feature also in his character, is a rigorous but highly
intelligent economy. Upon a limited practice in Rhode Island, before
coming to Cleveland, he not only sustained himself, but accumulated a
considerable sum as a basis upon which he could rely with honorable
independence in a new field. This was done in circumstances in which
multitudes of young men at this day, would by self-indulgence and lavish
outlay, have become embarrassed by debt.

The example of a wise economy in one familiar with the first social
surroundings--an economy supplying means for a rich and broad literary
culture, under the guidance of liberal tastes, yet rigid as to
self-control--but ever avoiding parsimony, is far too rare among young men
in this lavish and wasteful age. The young man who shows what enlightened
self-control, what high probity and fidelity to the details of little
wants and expenditures can do to lift a man high above debt, to thrift and
self-reliance, is a valuable citizen, exerting an influence as wholesome
as it is wise, manly, and rare.

Mr. Dickman, in his mental growth, aims at the solid, rather than the
merely sensational; the lasting, rather than the transient. Gifted
naturally with vigorous and admirably balanced powers, the right use of
which has enriched him already with ample mental furniture, and with
habits the most exemplary, and a high character, established upon an
intelligent religions basis, the future to him is full of promise of the
most honorable achievements.

In 1862, Mr. Dickman was married to Miss Annie E. Niel, daughter of Robert
Neil, of Columbus, Ohio, and has two children living.




James M. Jones.



The subject of this sketch is the third son of Thomas and Mary Ann Jones,
who emigrated from England to the United States, and settled in Cleveland
in the Spring of 1831, where they still reside, They were the parents of
nine sons and four daughters, all of whom, save one son and one daughter,
are still living.

James Milton Jones enjoyed only such moderate advantages in the way of
education as were afforded by the common and high schools of the day, and
by the classical and English school of the late lamented and most
accomplished educator, H. D. Beattie, A. M.; but his memory was good, he
was a close student, and he therefore readily and easily familiarized
himself with the studies in which he engaged. He early manifested unusual
taste and fondness for composition, and his inclination and talent in that
direction were much cultivated and improved by assiduous study of the best
standard works in prose and poetry.

On leaving school he became interested as a partner in the marble
manufactory of T. Jones & Sons, and acquired a practical knowledge of the
business, but never applied himself very closely to its duties.

He joined various literary and forensic societies about the year 1850,
composed of some of the best literary and professional talent among the
young men of the city, where essays, poems, and discussions on all topics
of the day were embraced in the order of exercises; and he soon became
marked for his thorough preparation of and familiarity with the subjects
of debate, and regarded as a speaker of more than ordinary promise.

He became a frequent contributor, (but never in his own name,) in prose
and poetry, to the literary, as well as the daily papers of the day, and
especially to the daily Plain Dealer, of which the late J. W. Gray, Esq.,
was then the accomplished and witty editor, and by whom Mr. Jones was much
encouraged, and his contributions frequently commended. As specimens of
his poetic contributions, we give the following. It should be noted that
with his entry on the actual duties of professional life, Mr. Jones bade a
final adieu to the muses:

      Woodland Reveries.

      In this deep shady dell,
      Where the soft breezes swell,
  And beautiful wood-sprites by pearly streams wander--
      Where the sweet perfume breathes,
      O'er angel twined wreaths,
  Luxuriantly blooming the mossy trees under--
      Here, beneath the bright vine
      Whose leaves intertwine,
  I'm dreaming of thee, my lost Angeline!

      Oh! I think of the time--
      Of the warm spring time,
  When with thee I've wandered, and with thee I've dallied;
      E're my soul had once dreamed
      That the roses which seemed
  So fadeless, could leave thy warm cheek cold and pallid,
      Or thy dear form decline,
      From its radiance divine,
  To press the cold grave sod, my own Angeline!

      While the pale starlight laves,
      With its shadowy waves,
  A brow, that with memory's anguish is throbbing;
      Each quivering leaf,
      Seems trembling with grief,
  That's borne on the zephyr's low sorrowful sobbing.
      For that dear form of thine,
      So oft pressed to mine,
  My angel-claimed lost one, my own Angeline!

      As the stream leaps along,
      And I list to its song,
  It sounds like the surging of sorrow's dark river;

      When o'er my young bride,
      Passed its dark rolling tide,
  And bore her away from my bosum forever;
      Yes; bore thee to shine
      In regions divine,
  Resplendently lovely, and pure, Angeline!

      And _there_, as I gaze
      On its bright sparkling face,
  Where pearly white ripples are merrily gleaming,
      Reflecting each star
      That shines from afar,
  The face of my lost one seems tenderly beaming;
      Yes! there beside mine,
      Are thy features benign,
  By memory mirrored, my own Angeline!

      As I gently recline,
      'Neath the clustering vine,
  The veil from futurity's vista is lifted,
      And adown life's wild tide,
      I rapidly glide,
  And into eternity's ocean am drifted;
      And there, soul of mine
      In regions divine,
  I meet thee, to part _nevermore_, Angeline!


    A Wreck! A Wreck! "Man the Life Boat."

  The blackness of midnight hung over the ocean,
    And savagely, shrilly, the Storm Spirit screamed.
  Athwart the dark billows, which wild in commotion,
    Sublimely, yet awfully, heavenward streamed.

  A bark that but rode from her moorings at morning,
    'Neath bright sunny skies, and prosperous gales,
  With streamlet and banner, in beauty adorning
    Her tapering masts and snowy white sails,

  Now rolls in the trough of the tempest-plowed surges!
    A wreck! madly urged to a rocky bound shore;
  Where from the dark jaws of wild ocean emerges,
    To fear-stricken hearts its ominous roar

  Her sails are in ribbons, her banners in tatters!
    Her masts are afloat from the perilous wreck,
  And now o'er the billows the Tempest Fiend scatters
    With one mighty effort her hurricane deck!

  The voice of the clarion-toned captain is ringing,
    Above the hoarse murmuring roar of the surge,
  And an echoing voice, seems sepulchrally flinging,
    Far back o'er the waves, for the vessel, a dirge.

  And now the doomed vessel is beating and crashing,
    With violence on the dark, rough, rugged rocks;
  And the tempest-tossed surge, while resistlessly dashing
    Around her, each effort to save her but mocks.

  The lightnings play luridly, fiercely above her,
    Illuming with horror the wind-cloven waves!
  Displaying the wreck, as their flashes discover,
    The victims despairingly gaze on their graves.

  For forked and furious, the fiery flung flashes,
    Gleam o'er the sad wreck like a funeral pyre;
  And louder and louder each thunder clap crashes.
    The air in a roar! the billows on fire!

  The heart-anguished cries o'er the pitiless waters,
    Are borne on the blast of the thunder-rocked air,
  As husbands and wives, as sons and as daughters,
    Unite in a wild shrieking wail of despair.

  But now from the moss covered fisherman's dwelling,
    The _Life-Boat_ is manned by the chivalrous brave!
  Though the wild howling storm of the tempest is swelling,
    They'll peril their own lives, the wrecked ones to save.

  And now to the merciless surges they launch her,
    And back she is flung to the white-pebbled beach!
  Now cleaves the wild surf, for never a stauncher,
    Or braver crew mounted a deadlier breach.

  Now swift o'er the waves madly bounding and dashing!
    The nobly manned life-boat speeds on her lone way,
  Now sinks she below, the waves o'er her splashing,
    Now cleaves like arrow, the white foaming spray.

  And now for a moment she's hid from our vision,
    As darkness, and thick gloom enshroud her frail form;
  A flash! and we see that the life-saving mission,
    Still skims o'er the waves like a Bird of the Storm.

  Hurrah! they have triumphed! the wrecked ones no longer
    Resignedly list to the ocean's hoarse roar;
  But now with strong arms, that bright Hope has made stronger,
    They pull with a hearty good-will for the shore.

  Hurrah! and Hurrah! on the whirlwind's commotion,
    And the howl of the storm, uprose cheers from the land;
  From hearts throbbing wildly with grateful emotion,
    As safely she reaches the surf-beaten strand.


    The �ronaut's Song.

  Up! up! from the ground, for the chords that bound
    Us to earth are rent in twain;
  And our Aerial boat shall gracefully float,
    Far, far, o'er the sea and main.

  O'er the forest trees, on the rippling breeze,
    We'll proudly soar away:
  And higher and higher, will still aspire,
    Toward realms of endless day.

  To regions on high, like an arrow we fly,
    Through limitless fields of air;
  And away apace, through trackless space,
    The giddiest flight we dare.

  Earth's brilliance fades, and her everglades
    Assumes a softer hue;
  Her hills and dales, her lake gemmed vales
    Are glorious to the view.

  Meandering round enchanted ground,
    Earth's crystal rivers seem;
  So far below to brightly flow,
    Like liquid silver's stream.

  Her cloud capped hills o'er rocks and rills,
    That proudly seem to stand,
  Now fade like gleams in passing dreams
    Of lovely fairy land.

  Yet on we mount to the drainless fount,
    Of wild tempestuous storms;
  And our fairy shrouds now kiss the clouds;
    In all their varied forms.

  Proud man, who at birth was king of the earth,
    Soon made himself lord of the sea;
  And now we arise to empyrean skies,
    For kings of the air are we.

  Grim centuries old to the past have rolled,
    Since the stars from chaos-woke;
  Yet no earth-born sound hath this deep, profound
    And solemn silence broke.

  The highest note of the lark ne'er floats
    To this region of sunless cloud;
  Nor hath eagle bird the silence stir'd,
    With his screaming, shrill and loud.

  Yet our joyous song, as we sweep along
    In pathless realms afloat,
  Rings on the air and trembles there,
    From out our fairy boat.

  On eddying waves a thousand caves,
    Where Aerial spirits throng,
  Repeat each tone as though they'd known
    Our unfamiliar song.

  O'er billowy seas with fresh'ning breeze,
    'Tis glorious oft to roam;
  And joy to mark a graceful bark,
    Divide the salt sea foam:

  And joy to wake at morning break,
    When huntsman's bugle sounds,
  And gaily lead on fiery steed,
    In chase of deer and hounds.

  But moonlight sail with fresh'ning gale,
    Or merry chase afar,
  Can ne'er compare with flight through air,
    In our Aerial Car.

Early in 1853, Mr. Gray, who was also then postmaster, offered him a
position in the Cleveland post-office, which he accepted, and entered upon
its duties; but at the end of two months, being dissatisfied with the dull
routine and monotony of such an occupation, he threw up his position; and
having, on the very day he left the post-office, decided to adopt the
legal profession, before night he had secured a position in the law office
of Charles Stetson, Esq., then in large and active practice, and had
entered upon the study of the law, where he continued for over a year and
a half, pursuing his studies with assiduity and success. He then entered
the law office of Hon. William Collins and pursued his studies with him
until June, 1855, when he was admitted to the Bar by the District Court in
Delaware, Delaware county, Ohio.

[Illustration: Yours Very Truly, James M. Jones.]

Shortly after his admission to the Bar, he was retained as leading
counsel for the defence in the famous "Townsend McHenry" extradition case,
a proceeding pending before U. S. Commissioner Grannis, on the charge that
the prisoner, who claimed to be Robert McHenry, was no other than the
notorious William Townsend, a well known, desperate Canadian highway
robber and murderer; and in this Mr. Jones attracted attention by the
skill with which he managed it. Indeed, it became necessary to send to
Canada for several successive lots of witnesses, before they could make a
case. The prisoner was, however, taken to Canada and put upon his trial
for murder as William Townsend, the sole question on the trial being one
of identity; and a more extraordinary trial in that respect cannot be
found in history. And although on the trial about one hundred witnesses
testified to his being the veritable William Townsend, he was,
nevertheless, able to produce a still larger number of equally credible
witnesses to testify that they knew Townsend, and this was not the man,
and also such an array of circumstances as satisfied the jury he was not
the man, and he was acquitted!

Mr. Jones was nominated by the Republican party of Cleveland as judge of
the City Court, in 1857, but in common with the entire ticket, was
defeated. He was an early adherent of the old Liberty party, and a warm
advocate on the stump and elsewhere, of the election of John C. Fremont to
the Presidency, and a firm supporter of Lincoln's administration.

He was appointed Attorney for the Western Union Telegraph Company, one of
the largest corporations in the United States, in the year 1865, and has
ever since continued, as such attorney, to have charge and supervision of
a large and peculiar legal business for the company, extending over the
various States and Territories embraced in what is known as the Central
Division of the territory covered by its lines. He has made telegraph law
a speciality for several years, and has probably had as large and extended
experience in that comparatively new and peculiar branch of the law as any
other attorney in the country.

He was elected Prosecuting Attorney for the county of Cuyahoga, in the
Fall of 1867, and was distinguished during his term for the zeal,
fidelity, and ability with which he discharged his officiai duties. It
fell to his lot to prosecute many important and difficult criminal cases;
prominent among them was the trial of Sarah M. Victor, for the murder, by
poison, of her brother, William Parquette. The case was peculiar and
remarkable; the murdered man had lain in his grave a whole year before
suspicions were aroused that his death was caused by foul play; slight
circumstances directed attention to suspicious appearances in the case,
which a quiet investigation did not diminish. The prosecutor, therefore,
caused the body to be secretly disinterred, and engaged J. L. Cassells, an
accomplished chemist, to subject the body to a chemical analysis, which on
being done, arsenic in sufficient quantity to produce death was found in
the stomach and other internal organs. Her arrest for murder, therefore,
immediately took place. The circumstances of the case were well calculated
to arouse an intense interest in the public mind as to the result of the
trial. The facts that the alleged poisoner was a woman, that the murdered
man was her own brother, that her own sister was supposed to be an
important witness against her, that the murder, if murder it was, was in
the highest degree cruel, mercenary, and devilish, that at the time of her
arrest she was prominently connected with religious and benevolent
institutions of the city, though it was well known she had previously led
an irregular life, and the profound secrecy in which the dark deed had
slumbered for a whole year, all seemed to concur in riveting public
attention upon it; and yet, previous to the trial, the belief was
prevalent in the community generally, as well as among the members of the
Bar, that however guilty the prisoner might be, she would not be
convicted. In this belief the prosecutor did not share, but at once went
to work with his accustomed energy to unravel the evidences of the great
crime; and for many weeks, with an energy that never flagged, himself and
his assistant, H. B. DeWolf, Esq., patiently and persistently explored the
dark secrets of her life, examined hundreds of witnesses, and inextricably
wound the coils of evidence around her.

The case, which was tried in the May term of the Court of Common Pleas,
1868, lasted fourteen days, was fully reported phonographically, and made
about twenty-seven hundred pages of testimony, which was pronounced, when
closed on the part of the State, "a marvelous net-work of circumstantial
evidence."

The case was closed by Mr. Jones in an able and conclusive speech of six
hours in length. The prisoner was convicted by the jury after but a
brief deliberation, and she was sentenced to be hanged, but her sentence
was afterward commuted to imprisonment for life. In numerous other
important and warmly contested criminal cases Mr. Jones has been almost
uniformly successful, displaying in them all, much tact, self-possession,
and legal ability.

Mr. Jones was married at Chagrin Falls, Cuyahoga county, Ohio, February
8th, 1860, by the Rev. Luther Lee, to Ermina W., daughter of Harmon and
Leonora Barrows, of the latter place.




Educational.



Citizens of Cleveland are justly proud of their Public Schools, and of the
system of education under which they are conducted, but yet the history of
these schools, until within a few years, was one of struggle against
parsimony and prejudice. It was only by persistent efforts on the part of
a few public-spirited citizens, who believed that money spent in educating
the masses is the best investment that can possibly be made, that the
Public School system of Cleveland has attained its present excellence, and
the miserable make-shift school buildings, in which the children of the
city were taught have given place to the large, convenient and elegant
buildings of the present.

The first public school of Cleveland, the "Cleveland Free School," was
established in March, 1830, "for the education of male and female children
of every religious denomination," and was supported by the city. It was
held for years in the basement of the Bethel church, which was then a
frame building, measuring forty by thirty feet, situated at the corner of
Diamond street and Superior Street hill. In 1837, the average number of
pupils in attendance was ninety males and forty-six females. There were
also the Young Ladies' Seminary, or the old "Academy," on St. Clair
street, presided over by Miss Harrison, and the Cleveland Female Seminary,
in Farmer's Block, corner of Ontario and Prospect streets, incorporated
April, 1837, with Henry Sexton, Benjamin Rouse, H. H. Dodge, A. P. Smith,
and A. Wheeler as trustees. At that date, Ohio City supported two district
and one free school, but the attendance is not recorded.

The story of the growth of the school system of the State and of its local
development in the city of Cleveland is mainly told in the biography of
Mr. Harvey Rice, on pages following this, and in the preceding pages which
sketch the history of Mr. Charles Bradburn. All that is necessary to be
given here, is a brief summary of some of the leading events in the
history of the Cleveland Public Schools as prepared by one who took a
leading part in their organization and development.

The Public Schools were organized under the city charter in 1837, and the
control vested in a board of five school managers, elected by the Council.
The chairman of the board was styled the acting manager, and was secretary
and Superintendant of repairs and of discipline. This original arrangement
was succeeded in 1853, by a board of seven members, appointed by the
Council. In 1854, when Cleveland and Ohio City were united, another change
occurred. One member of the school board from each of the eleven Wards was
chosen by the Council. In 1856, the number was reduced to five, and
finally, in 1859, by authority of a law of the State, the members of the
Board of Education, one from each Ward, were elected by the people, for
the term of one year, which was extended to two years in 1862, and so
remains to the present time. The powers of the board were greatly enlarged
by a law passed in the Spring of 1869.

Charles Bradburn was the first acting manager, secretary and
superintendent, assisted and encouraged by a few warm friends of
education, chief of whom, at this time, was Geo. Willey. In 1840, Mr.
Andrew Freese was employed as principal teacher, and soon became actual
superintendent, though not formally clothed with that authority until
several years afterwards. In the meantime, school buildings were erected
on Prospect street, Rockwell street, West St. Clair street and Kentucky
street, (West Side).

For several years the course of instruction was quite limited, and of low
grade. The school buildings, then supposed to be large and commodious,
were soon crowded with scholars very much mixed, as to standing, and
moving forward amid much confusion. In 1841, the second stories of the
Prospect street and Bockwell street buildings were converted into grammar
schools of a higher grade. The West St. Clair street school was the first
one arranged for the improved grading of primary and secondary schools in
separate departments.

In 1850, the board directed Mr. Freese to exercise a general
superintendence over the classification, instruction and discipline in all
the grammar and subordinate schools, but no superintendent was authorized
by law, until 1853. It was full time that some authority should be
introduced to correct the abuses which had insensibly and unavoidably
crept into the discipline and course of instruction, and vigorous
enforcement of strict rules brought out a fierce opposition from anxious,
but ill-informed and partial parents, who felt provoked and discouraged by
the discovery that their children were in classes far ahead of their
actual qualifications and must be put back to be more thoroughly drilled
in preparatory studies. Gradually confusion gave place to order, scholars
were ranked as near as could be according to their actual standing; the
grades arranged as Primary, Secondary, Intermediate and Grammar
departments, the entire course consummated in the East and West High
Schools. But all this was the work of immense labor, extending through
years of ceaseless effort and expense, little anticipated by the people,
or perhaps by the hopeful projectors of the system, when they so manfully
entered upon the undertaking. Twenty-six years ago the entire corps of
teachers numbered only fifteen. In 1848, they had increased to twenty. In
that year, children under six years of age were excluded, to the great
disgust of many fond mothers who thought the public school the very best
place to keep the troublesome young ones out of their way.

Under the general school law a portion of the taxes collected was set
apart for the support of the schools, while a special fund for school
buildings was raised, from time to time, by direct taxation, or by
loan, and buildings erected in the different Wards as the city
increased in extent.

In 1846, the East High School was opened in the basement of the old
Universalist Church (now the Plymouth Church) on Prospect street, near
Erie street. A strong opposition was made to this advanced step. It was
objected to as illegal, which it actually was, though that was soon
remedied; and as unnecessary and unreasonable.

It is gratifying to know that many of those strenuous opponents are
now among the warm friends of the High Schools, and justly proud of
their success.

Richard Fry, then Principal of the West St Clair school, distinguished
himself by his writings through the press, and his speeches at public
meetings, in advocating the claims of the High School, and thus powerfully
sustained its friends in their unpopular contest. The law authorizing a
High School limited the whole course to two years, and required one year's
previous attendance at one of the grammar schools.

In 1851, a regular course of instruction was adopted, extending to three
years, but still confined to English studies. In 1856, the Latin and
Greek languages were introduced, and in 1859, the German was added to
the full course. These ancient and foreign languages were optional with
the students, as well as the French language, which was introduced some
years later.

The first graduated class consisted of ten scholars, eight of whom
afterwards became teachers. Indeed, it soon became evident that the High
School was not only the best, but almost the only reliable source of
supplying teachers for the subordinate schools, which were fast
increasing. The extreme difficulty of procuring competent and reliable
teachers had, all along, been one of the greatest embarrassments in
carrying forward a course of instruction, extensive, thorough, and
heretofore almost unknown west of the mountains.

The original design of one central High School was found to be unsuited to
the extended territory on both sides of the river, and two High Schools
were substituted.

The East High School building was completed and opened in 1856. The West
High School was first opened in the Kentucky street building, and
continued there for several years, until in 1861, the new building was
completed.

In 1861, Mr. Freese was relieved from the superintendency which had become
too laborious for his declining health, and L. M. Oviatt took the
management for two years, when he was succeeded by Anson Smyth, formerly
State Superintendent. On his resignation, Mr. Andrew J. Rickoff, of
Cincinnati, was called to the position. Under his management important
changes in the classification and management of the schools have been
introduced.

The prominence given to Messrs Bradburn, Willey and Freese, in the history
of the public schools, is not intended to disparage or undervalue the
services rendered by many others, without whose hearty and efficient
co-operation the whole undertaking would have failed. Prominent among these
cooperators were J. D. Cleveland, J. Fitch, Dr. Maynard, Harvey Rice, Bev.
J. A. Thome, T. P. Handy, W. D. Beattie, (since deceased,) R. B. Dennis,
Ansel Roberts, L. M. Oviatt, and Thos. Jones, Jr.

In 1868, there were eighteen male, and one hundred and thirty-nine female
teachers employed in the public schools of the city, making an aggregate
of one hundred and fifty seven. The total number of pupils enrolled was
10,154. The average number belonging to the schools, 7060, and the average
daily attendance, 6623.




[Illustration: Yours Truly, Harvey Rice]


Harvey Rice



In the Ohio Educational Monthly for April, 1860, appeared a pretty full
biography of Hon. Harvey Rice, who has filled an important position in
connection with the educational interests of Ohio. From that account we
learn that Mr. Rice is a native of Massachusetts. He was born June 11th,
1800. In 1824, he graduated from Williams College, and the same year
removed to Cleveland. He came to Ohio a stranger and without influential
friends here or elsewhere to aid his efforts for advancement. When he
landed at Cleveland he owned nothing but the clothes he wore, and three
dollars in his pocket. At that time Cleveland contained but 400
inhabitants.

Making no disclosure as to the low state of his treasury and the rather
dull prospect for an immediate replenishing of the same, he took lodgings
at the best public house the town afforded, at the rate of two dollars and
a half per week. At the expiration of one week he paid his board bill and
removed to a private boarding-house, with but fifty cents left, and
commenced teaching a classical school in the old academy on St. Clair
street. About the same time he commenced the study of the law under the
direction of Reuben Wood, then a prominent member of the Cleveland Bar,
and at the expiration of two years was admitted to practice, and entered
into copartnership with his former instructor, which continued until Mr.
Wood was elected to the Bench.

In 1829, he was elected Justice of the Peace, and in 1830, elected to
represent his district in the State Legislature. Soon after, without
solicitation on his part, he was appointed an agent for the sale of the
Western Reserve school lands, a tract of fifty-six thousand acres,
situated in the Virginia Military District. He opened a land office at
Millersburgh, in Holmes county, for the sales, and in the course of three
years sold all the lands, and paid the avails, nearly one hundred and
fifty thousand dollars, into the State Treasury, as a school fund for the
exclusive benefit of educating the children of the Western Reserve, the
interest of which is now annually paid by the State for that purpose.

In 1833, Mr. Rice returned to Cleveland, and was appointed Clerk of the
Common Pleas and Supreme Courts, an office in which he faithfully served
for seven years, and in 1834 and 1836, was nominated by the Democratic
Convention as a candidate for Congress, and received the united support of
the party, though without expectation of success, as the Democrats were
largely in the minority. He was the first Democrat ever sent to the
Legislature from Cuyahoga county, and, while serving in that body, was
considered one of its ablest and most influential members. He was
appointed by the House one of the select committee for revising the
statutes of the State, and while in that capacity, introduced and
advocated with acknowledged ability many new provisions, which still
retain their place upon our statute book.

The natural abilities of Mr. Rice are of a very high order. His mind is
thoroughly disciplined and cultivated, and for the comparatively short
time he practiced at the Bar, he obtained an enviable reputation for legal
ability, sound, practical, discriminating judgment and gentlemanly
deportment.

He is well known as an able contributor to many of the best periodicals of
the day, and is a graceful and exceedingly vigorous writer. His
imagination is rich and glowing, and his mind well stored by a long and
judicious course of mental training. We have seen some articles of Mr.
Rice's which compare favorably with those of the best writers of the day.

The following, which we find in the "Nineteenth Century," we take the
liberty of publishing here, and look upon it as a meritorious and
beautiful poem:


    The Moral Hero.

  With heart that trusteth still,
    Set high your mark;
  And though with human ill
    The warfare may be dark,
  Resolve to conquer, and you will!

  Resolve, then onward press,
    Fearless and true:
  Believe it--Heaven will bless
    The brave--and still renew
  Your hope and courage in distress.

  Press on, nor stay to ask
    For friendship's aid;
  Deign not to wear a mask
    Nor wield a coward's blade,
  But still persist, though hard the task.

  Rest not--inglorious rest
    Unnerves the man;
  Struggle--'tis God's behest!
    Fill up life's little span
  With God-like deeds--it is the test--

  Test of the high-born soul,
    And lofty aim;
  The test in History's scroll
    Of every honored name--None
  but the brave shall win the goal'

  Go act the hero's part,
    And in the strife,
  Strike with the hero's heart
    For liberty and life--
  Ay, strike for Truth; preserve her chart'

  Her chart unstain'd preserve,
    'Twill guide you right.
  Press on and never swerve,
    But keep your armer bright,
  And struggle still with firmer nerve.

  What though the tempest rage,
    Buffet the sea!
  Where duty calls, engage:
    And ever striving be
  The moral hero of the Age!

In the fall of 1851, Mr. Rice was put in nomination for the State Senate,
and was elected by a majority exceeding seven hundred votes.

The General Assembly to which he was now returned, was the first that
convened under the new Constitution. Upon this body devolved the
responsibility of reconstructing the statutes of the State, and adapting
them to the requisition of the Constitution, so as to secure to the people
the practical benefits of the great reforms which had been achieved by its
adoption. Mr. Rice contributed quite as much as any other member to the
important legislation of the two sessions held by that General Assembly.
It was said of him that he _was always at his post_. The degree of
influence which he exercised as a legislator, was such as few have the
good fortune to wield.

Among the variety of measures which engaged his attention, he took a
prominent part in procuring the passage of the act which authorized the
establishment of two additional lunatic asylums in the State.

His course in relation to the subject of common schools attracted public
attention throughout the State, and called forth from the press
commendations of a very complimentary character. The correspondent of a
paper published at Newark, writing from Columbus, remarks as follows:

  Senator Rice, of Cuyahoga, has in charge a bill for the reorganization
  of schools and providing for their supervision.

  No better man than Mr. Rice could have been selected for this work. He
  is a model man and a model Senator. Clear headed, sound minded,
  carefully and fully educated, with a painstaking disposition, he is the
  ablest chairman of the standing committee on schools that any Ohio
  Legislature ever had. Deeply impressed with the great importance of the
  subject--of the stern necessity which exists for basing our whole
  republican form of government on the intelligence of the people, he has
  carefully provided a bill, which, if enacted into a law, will give a
  good _common_ school education to every child in the State, and in so
  doing, has been equally careful that the money raised for that purpose
  be not squandered. The bill provides for a State Commissioner of Common
  Schools, and it has been mentioned to me as a matter of deep regret,
  that the Constitution excludes Mr. Rice from being a candidate for that
  office--no member of the Legislature being eligible to an office created
  while he was a member, until one year after the expiration of his term
  of office.

On the question of the final passage of the bill, Mr. Rice addressed the
Senate in a concluding speech, which was published, and very generally
noticed by the press. Among these notices, a leading paper published at
Cleveland, with a magnanimity rarely possessed by a political opponent,
makes the following comments and quotations:

  Mr. Rice made the closing speech on the School Bill, in the Senate, on
  the 24th. It was his Bill. He had labored over it, and for it, a long
  time, and given to it every consideration, and gained for it every
  counsel, which, by any possibility, he could gain.

  The text of his speech was the language of the Constitution itself; the
  duty of securing 'a thorough and efficient system of common schools
  throughout the State.'

  Mr. Rice goes into detail on the school bill, and, regretting that we
  have not room for the detail, we close our synopsis of his very sensible
  speech by quoting its conclusion:

  "It is certainly much cheaper, as well as much wiser, to _educate_ than
  to _punish_. How much of crime would be prevented if a higher order of
  education were generally diffused among all classes. A well educated and
  enlightened people will have but little occasion for criminal courts,
  jails and penitentiaries. The educated man has ordinarily too much
  self-respect, too much regard for moral principle and the value of a
  good character to stoop to crime. In short, sir, the perpetuity of the
  government, and security of the citizen, and of property, depend upon
  the virtue and intelligence of the people.

  "By the provisions of this bill, it is intended to make our common
  schools what they ought to be--the colleges of the people--'cheap enough
  for the poorest, and good enough for the richest.' With but a slight
  increase of taxation, schools of different grades can be established and
  maintained in every township of the State, and the sons and daughters of
  our farmers and mechanics have an opportunity of acquiring a finished
  education, equally with the more favored of the land. And, in this way,
  the elements of mind now slumbering among the uneducated masses, like
  the fine unwrought marble in the quarry, will be aroused and brought out
  to challenge the admiration of the world-Philosophers and sages will
  abound everywhere, on the farm and in the workshop. And many a man of
  genius will stand out from among the masses, and exhibit a brilliancy of
  intellect, which will be recognized in the circling years of the great
  future, as

    'A light, a landmark on the cliffs of time.'

  "It is only the educated man who is competent to interrogate nature, and
  comprehend her revelations. Though I would not break down the
  aristocracy of knowledge of the present age, yet, sir, I would level up,
  and equalize, and thus create, if I may be allowed the expression, a
  democracy of knowledge. In this way, and in this way only, can men be
  made equal in fact--equal in their social and political relations--equal
  in mental refinement, and in a just appreciation of what constitutes man
  the brother of his fellow man.

  "In conclusion, sir, allow me to express my belief, that the day is not
  far distant when Ohio, in the noble cause of popular education and of
  human rights, will 'lead the column,' and become, what she is capable of
  becoming--a star of the first magnitude--the brightest in the galaxy of
  our American Union."

  A proud hour now came for Mr. Rice! A good and glorious one for the
  State! The roll of the Senate was called, and that body, on the 24th day
  of January, 1853, proceeded to cast its final vote upon the bill, when
  only two negatives were announced.

Another bill, of scarcely less importance than the school bill, was
introduced into the Senate by Mr. Rice, near the heel of the adjourned
session, which with him was a favorite measure, and which seemed to meet
with the hearty approbation of the public. It had for its object the
establishment of a "State Reform School," expressly designed for juvenile
offenders.

But owing to the late day of the session in which the bill was introduced,
though very favorably received by the senate, a motion was made to
postpone it until the next session. In reference to this motion, without
attempting to make a formal speech, Mr. Rice explained briefly the object
contemplated by the bill. His remarks relating as they did to a subject of
public interest, were reported and published. The bill, at a subsequent
session, resulted in establishing the present Reform Farm School.

The eminent services which he has rendered the State in the promotion of
her educational interests will be long and gratefully remembered by those
of his fellow citizens who properly appreciate the true objects of life,
and who wish to secure to themselves, to their children, and to the
generations which will follow them, the social blessings which flow from a
high degree of refinement, intelligence and moral virtue.

While a member of the City Council, in 1857, Mr. Rice took the lead in
establishing the Cleveland Industrial School, and was chairman of the
committee that put it into successful operation. It has now grown to be
one of the most important charitable institutions in Cleveland. Mr. Rice
is still active in extending its usefulness.

In the same year he originated the project, and introduced the resolution
into the Council, authorizing the erection of the Perry Monument which now
graces the Public Park of the city. The cost of the Monument, by the terms
of the resolution, was made to depend on the voluntary subscriptions of
the citizens. Mr. Rice was appointed Chairman of the Monument Committee,
and after three years of persevering effort, succeeded in carrying the
object of the resolution into effect. The Monument was inaugurated with
imposing ceremonies, on the 10th of September, 1860, the anniversary of
Perry's victory on Lake Erie. Mr. Bancroft, the historian, delivered the
Inaugural Address. As carefully estimated, not less than one hundred
thousand people attended the inauguration. In carrying out the programme
the battle of Lake Erie was reproduced, in a mock fight, on the Lake in
front of the city. It was a proud day for Cleveland. Both the Monument and
the inauguration were pronounced a perfect success.

In 1861, Mr. Rice, being elected to the Board of Education, was appointed
President of the Board, and during his term of office rendered essential
service in promoting the educational interests of the city. In fact, he
has always been a zealous friend and advocate of popular education. In his
literary career he has become widely known as the author of "Mount Vernon,
and Other Poems"--a volume containing two hundred and fifty pages which
has reached a fifth edition.

In 1862, Mr. Rice was appointed by the Governor of the State, with the
concurrence of the War Department, a commissioner for Cuyahoga county, to
conduct the first draft made in the county during the late civil war. In
executing this delicate task he acquitted himself with firmness,
integrity, and discretion. While in the discharge of his duties he found
his office one morning suddenly besieged by some five or six hundred
excited citizens, who were armed with pistols and other weapons,
threatening to demolish the office and destroy the records. They had been
instigated to make this demonstration by false rumors regarding the
fairness of the draft. Mr. Rice met the crisis firmly, sent to the
military camp on the Heights for a detachment of soldiers, infantry and
artillery, who came to his relief on the "double quick," and dispersed the
riotous assemblage. To satisfy the disaffected that all was right and just
in relation to the draft, Mr. Rice proposed that they should appoint a
committee of their own to investigate the state of affairs in the draft
office. They did so, and with his aid an elaborate examination was made,
and the committee reported that the draft had been conducted fairly and
justly in all respects. Mr. Rice then proceeded with the draft, and as
luck would have it, two of the committee, who had been ring-leaders in
getting up the demonstration, were drafted on the spot, and every body
seemed pleased with the result.

In 1867, Mr. Rice, wishing to express his regard for the cause of
Missions, as well as for the college where he graduated, erected at his
own expense, and with the approval of the college authorities, a beautiful
marble monument in Mission Park, at Williamstown, Mass., commemorative of
the origin of American Foreign Missions. The park is a part of the college
domains, and within it there is a maple grove where a few pious young
students of the college, in the summer of 1806, held occasional
prayer-meetings. At one of these meetings a shower of rain compelled them
to seek the shelter of a neighboring haystack, where they continued their
exercises, and where one of their number, Samuel J. Mills, first suggested
the idea of a mission to foreign heathen lands, as being a religions duty.
In this noble and philanthropic thought his associates all concurred, and
there, while at the haystack, consecrated themselves in solemn prayer, to
the great work. From this circumstance originated American Foreign
Missions. The monument was planned by Mr. Rice It is erected on the spot
where the haystack stood, is twelve feet in height, and surmounted with a
marble globe three feet in diameter, and cut in map lines. The face of the
monument has the inscription, "The Field is the World," followed with a
haystack, sculptured in bas relief, and the names of the five young men,
who held the prayer-meeting, and the date 1806. The monument was dedicated
July 28th, 1867, at the maple grove, in the park. A large audience was
present. Mr. Rice, by special request, delivered the dedicatory address,
which was received with a high degree of satisfaction, and afterwards
published, with the other proceedings, in pamphlet form.

Mr. Rice has accumulated a reasonable share of "this world's goods;" has
been twice married--first in 1828, and afterwards in 1840.

He has a wife, three sons and three daughters still living, and now
leads, comparatively, a retired, yet not an idle life.

He still has the appearance of a well preserved gentleman, he is six
feet in height, erect and of good proportions, and his general personal
appearance is pleasing. In manner he is a true gentleman,--modest and
kind, but prompt and decided. Two of his sons, Capt. Percy W. Rice and
James S. Rice, are settled in business at Cleveland. The youngest son,
Harvey Rice, Jr., resides in California. The three daughters are
married and settled--one in California and the other two in Cleveland.
Mrs. Rice is a lady of refinement, exemplary, and much beloved and
respected. As a family, but few have been more highly favored, or lived
in more perfect harmony.




Andrew Freese



The name of Andrew Freese will always hold a place of honor in the
scholastic records of Cleveland. No educator in the city is held in such
affectionate esteem by a large class of former pupils, and none better
deserves the grateful tributes paid to his abilities as a teacher and his
worth as a citizen.

Mr. Freese was born in Levant, Penobscot county, Maine, on November 1st,
1816. His father was a farmer, but Andrew was of such slender frame and
weak constitution that he was completely unfitted for farming life. His
father destined him to be a printer, and took him to the nearest printing
office to show him how types were set and newspapers printed. The boy was
not favorably impressed with what he saw, and begged to be allowed to
enter college. This was considered out of the question, his father being
too poor to provide the necessary funds. But the boy's heart was set upon
it, and he thought that by teaching school for a time he could obtain
money enough to complete his own education. This idea he carried into
execution, and had no sooner entered on the business of teaching than he
realized that he had found his true vocation. He continued to teach and
study until his collegiate course was completed, and then he resolved to
fit himself for the business of teaching by studying the best systems of
education, as laid down in the most approved books and practiced in the
most successful schools. He examined the best school buildings, and
brought away plans of construction, and models of their furniture. The
most thorough teachers were consulted as to the results of their
experience, and when he had thus acquired a thorough mastery of the whole
science of teaching, instead of setting out as an educational empiric, he
resolved to seek the West as a better field for turning his knowledge to
account, than was the East, where educators were far too numerous to make
the business profitable.

[Illustration: Yours Truly, Andrew Freese]

Mr. Freese came to Cleveland in 1840, and offered his services to the
Board of School Managers as a teacher. His rare ability was appreciated,
he was immediately engaged, and was at once recognized as the head of the
schools. There was then only the general school law to work under. The law
as then understood, made it almost a crime to give instruction in the
higher branches of even an English education. There was then no high
schools, or graded schools in the great State of Ohio. To Cleveland, and
to Mr. Freese, belong the honor of establishing the first free high school
in the State. The scholars from that school may now be found in almost
every State in the Union, eminent in all departments of life. They have
been met with as Governors, jurists, mechanicians, and artists, and the
first inquiry from them _all_ has been, "Is Mr. Freese still with you? All
I am, and all I have, I owe to him; may God forever bless him."

The high school was established in July, 1846, and Mr. Freese at once
placed at its head. Those unfriendly to public schools, and especially to
this department, offered him large inducements to engage in a private
school, but Mr. Freese had faith in the success of the experiment, and was
determined not to abandon it until its success was insured. The pay given
by the city was but a beggarly pittance, and his labors inside and out of
the school room were exceedingly arduous, but no discouragement could
daunt his zeal, and he resisted blandishments as he treated opposition,
with indifference. The unexpected and severe labors imposed upon him
shattered his health, but with him love overcame all other considerations,
and he persisted. In June, 1853, the office of Superintendent of
Instruction was created, and tendered to Mr. Freese, who held it until
1861, when his failing health admonished him to retire. Recently he was
summoned from his retirement to take the position of principal of the
Central High school, now grown to proportions its founders scarcely dared
hope for it. It was with extreme reluctance that Mr. Freese consented to
resume his old profession, but he finally did so, working with great zeal
and success until the close of the Summer term of 1869, when, immediately
after re-election by a highly complimentary vote, he was compelled, by the
condition of his health, to resign his position and bid a final farewell
to the profession he so much loved. The proceedings of the Board of
Education in relation to the resignation of Mr. Freese are of interest, as
showing the high value set upon his services to the cause of education.

The following communication was presented to the Board:

  To the Honorable the Board of Education of the city of Cleveland:

  Gentlemen: I have to submit herewith the resignation of Mr. Andrew
  Freese, who has for the past year acted as principal of the Central
  High school.

  On account of ill health it was with great reluctance that Mr. Freese
  went into this position. In accordance, however, with the advice of
  friends, he finally yielded to persuasion and entered upon the discharge
  of its duties with the well known earnestness of his character. The
  result has been marked in the earnestness with which his able corps of
  assistants associated with him have co-operated to promote the highest
  interests of the school, and of each and all its pupils. It has been
  specially marked, too, by the increased devotion of all the scholars to
  their studies, and the ready acquiescence with which they have obeyed
  all the rules and regulations of your Board.

  In taking leave of Mr. Freese it is due to him that I should thus
  formally and earnestly record my high appreciation of his services.
  Furthermore, it may not be inappropriate for me testify to the fact,
  that much of the hearty earnestness of the corps of teachers with which
  I am now laboring, is due to the influence of this gentleman when he
  held the office which I now hold.

  Andrew J. Rickoff,
  Superintendent of Instruction.


  The Board of Education having received and accepted the resignation of
  Andrew Freese, Esq., principal of the Central High School, Mr. Perkins
  offered the following resolutions, which were adopted:

  _Resolved_, That the thanks of the Board are hereby tendered to Mr.
  Freese, for the valuable services he has rendered in the various
  relations he has sustained to the public schools of this city during the
  last quarter of a century. In every position he has been called to fill,
  he has proved himself faithful to the trust committed to his keeping. To
  him more than any other are we indebted for the deservedly elevated
  character of our System of graded schools.

  _Resolved_, That the president and secretary of the Board be requested
  to communicate to Mr. Freese the feeling of regret occasioned by his
  withdrawal from our service, together with a certified copy of its
  action this evening.

Mr. Freese was the originator of the celebrated outline maps. Many years
before any were published by Mitchell, they were in use here, and may
still be found on some of the walls and floors of our old school houses,
where they were placed by Mr. Freese. What Horace Mann and William Colburn
did for the schools of New England, Andrew Freese has done for the schools
of the West. Almost immediately after commencing his labors he began to
protest to the Board of School Managers against our school laws; under
them he could do no justice to himself or his scholars. His efforts were
aided by the Board of School Managers, and after a hard contest with city
and State authorities, the laws were altered so as to give us one of the
best school systems in the world. The first free high school in the State
was started by Mr. Freese, in the basement of an old church, at a rent of
fifty dollars per annum, and this was regarded by some of our largest tax
payers as so great an outrage that they threatened to resist the payment
of their taxes. The school now enjoys the use of a palatial building, and
our grammar schools have the use of the most elegant and convenient
structures for educational purposes in the State. Many of our citizens
devoted their time and money to bring about this great change, which has
done and is doing so much for the welfare of our city. But perhaps no one
man has done so much as Mr. Freese.

It would be difficult, if not impossible, to overrate the services of Mr.
Freese to the cause of education in Cleveland. It was the sole business of
his life, and he entered on it with utter unselfishness. With him the
cause was everything, self nothing. He traveled far, spent his own slender
funds freely, and labored assiduously in the endeavor to secure the best
of everything in plan and machinery, for the city schools. He had no
ambition outside or beyond the school room, and his shrinking modesty
prevented him claiming the credit justly due him for the unintermitted and
successful labors performed within the school walls.




Anson Smyth.



Among the citizens of Ohio, few are more worthy of mention than Rev. Anson
Smyth. There is not a township in the State in which his influence has not
been felt, nor a school district in which his name is not honored. He has
labored to uplift the intellectual, social, and moral status of our great
commonwealth, and his impress is left on the highest and most sacred
interests of the people.

Though born in Pennsylvania, Mr. Smyth is none the less a New Englander.
His parents and older brothers and sisters were natives of New England.
There many of his early years were spent, and there he received both his
collegiate and his theological education. There for two years he taught
school, and for three, was pastor of a church. Thus it is seen, that
while his birth makes him a Pennsylvanian, his blood and education make
him a Yankee.

Mr. Smyth is a self-made man. By his unaided energies he surmounted the
difficulties that stood in the way of his advancement, and has achieved
distinction by a career of great usefulness. His father was a man of high
respectability, and most excellent character. He was a farmer in moderate
circumstances, and being well advanced in life, and declining in health,
when his youngest son, the tenth of twelve children, determined to acquire
a liberal education, he was unable to do anything for his assistance. But
the boy had a brave heart, and he went forward, strong in the idea that
"there is nothing impossible to him that wills." At first by manual labor,
and afterwards by teaching, he contrived to secure funds for meeting those
expenses which demanded ready payment. When he left the theological
seminary he owed several hundred dollars, all of which he paid from his
first earnings.

After preaching for three years at the East, Mr. Smyth accepted a call to
the pastoral charge of a church in Michigan. It was a village of a few
hundred people, in a new and wild region. Society was in a chaotic
condition, and there were but few who had either the ability or the
disposition to do much for the young pastor's support or encouragement.
The locality was unhealthy, and Mr. Smyth suffered severely from prevalent
diseases. But during a ministry there of four years, he was eminently
successful, and he left the church four times as strong as he found it.

In 1847, Mr. Smyth came to Ohio, and, after spending a few months in
Cleveland, received and accepted a call to the pastorate of the
Presbyterian church in Toledo. He entered upon his new charge with zeal
and energy. He labored faithfully for the advancement of the cause of
Christ in that rising town, but owing to chronic alienation among the
members of his church, from the beginning he felt the need of that degree
of co-operation and sympathy necessary to insure the full benefit of his
labors. Still, the condition of affairs greatly improved under his
ministry; the membership of the church being nearly doubled, and the
congregation largely increased. At the end of three years he resigned his
charge and entered upon that department of public service in which he has
acquired most honorable distinction.

[Illustration: Yours truly, Anson Smyth]

Until 1850, the facilities for education in Toledo were all in the future.
While pastor of the church there, Mr. Smyth felt keenly the need of
establishing a good system of schools ere the town should become confirmed
in the habit of neglecting so important an interest. A few of the citizens
took hold of the business with energy; the "Akron School Law" was adopted,
and a Board of Education elected. Mr. Smyth was placed at the head of the
movement. This was a position he had never expected to fill, but,
regarding it as a field of usefulness, a field in which to serve God and
society, not less sacred than that of the pastoral office, he went to his
new work without a doubt that thereby he was doing the will of God. In
many particulars the business Mr. Smyth found upon his hands was new and
strange to him. He had had no experience in organizing schools upon the
graded plan. Eighteen years ago there were very few good schools in Ohio.
Lorin Andrews, at Massillon, Dr. Lord, at Columbus, M. F. Cowdery, at
Sandusky, Andrew Freese, at Cleveland, and H. H. Barney, at Cincinnati,
were the leaders in the educational reformation, then rising into notice.
Not till three years afterwards was our noble school law enacted. But Mr.
Smyth took hold of the great work entrusted to him with characteristic
energy. He read much and thought more upon the best plan of organizing a
school system for the city, and when he left there, in 1856, the schools
of Toledo had gained a most enviable character. They were regarded as
among the best in the country, and their Superintendent had acquired the
reputation of being one of the wisest and most successful educators in
America. The Board of Education committed the entire management of the
schools to him. The selection of teachers, the classification and
discipline of the schools, the course of study, and the examinations were
just what Mr. Smyth was pleased to make them. He gathered around him a
corps of teachers equal to the best in the State, and the schools were the
pride of the citizens. When he resigned, in closing an article upon the
subject, the Blade remarked: "_We regard the retirement of Mr. Smyth as no
less than a public calamity_."

At a meeting of the State Teachers Association, in December, 1855, Mr.
Smyth was unanimously elected President of that body, also editor of the
Journal of Education. In the following February he removed to Columbus,
and entered upon his editorial duties. His success in his new field was
most satisfactory to all who were interested in the cause which he
represented.

In May, 1856, the Republican State Convention nominated Mr. Smyth for the
office of State Commissioner of Schools. This was an honor as unexpected
by him as it was satisfactory to the people. He was elected by a large
majority, and in February, 1857, entered upon the discharge of the duties
of his new office. In this high position he remained six years, having
been re-elected in 1859.

Mr. Smyth was not disheartened when he found his post at the head of the
educational forces of the State, environed with most serious
embarrassments. The general school law had been in operation three years,
encountering the hostility of a large portion of the people, who were
persistent in their efforts to secure its repeal, or extensive
modification. It was regarded as doubtful whether it could much longer
survive in the face of the antagonism which confronted it. But when Mr.
Smyth turned the office over to his successor, in 1863, the law had become
popular, and strong in the regards of nearly all the people. The changes
which it had experienced were improvements, and it was everywhere working
out its own praise.

In this sketch, Mr. Smyth's labors and successes in the Commissionership
can not be detailed. He spared no pains in promoting the interests which
the State had confided to him. Whether looking after members of the
legislature who were working against the law, or performing ordinary
office duties, or traveling and addressing the people, he showed untiring
industry and enthusiastic devotion to the good cause. When he declined,
another nomination, the State Teachers' Association, at their meeting in
Mount Vernon, passed a resolution highly approving his administration.
David Tod, then Governor, wrote of him to a friend: "The most faithful
manner in which Mr. Smyth has discharged the arduous duties of School
Commissioner of our State for the last six years, involving, as it did,
the expenditure of millions of money, without the loss of a dollar, has
won for him my fullest confidence and profound respect. He is an excellent
business man, and a Christian gentleman." No man ever left an office
stronger in the confidence and esteem of the people.

Mr. Smyth did not propose to continue longer in the educational field, and
declined many invitations to positions at the head of institutions of
learning. But, very unexpectedly to him, he was elected Superintendent of
Instruction for Cleveland. A strong inclination to reside here, and the
urgency of friends, secured his acceptance. He removed to this city in
July, 1863, and was warmly welcomed by the people.

At that time, the Board of Education was in many things subordinate to
the City Council, and these two bodies not always working harmoniously
prevented the adoption of many reforms advocated by the Superintendant.
Still, Mr. Smyth's administration was a period of great prosperity and
advancement with the Cleveland schools. The gradation and classification
were improved; modes of teaching were introduced which greatly promoted
the purposes of education. Through his influence the use of the rod in the
schools was to a great extent discontinued, while better order was
secured. His success in the selection of teachers was remarkable. He
seemed to have an intuitive knowledge of character, and next to none of
those he placed in charge of schools proved failures. His power over
teachers was very great. While he was exacting in his demands, never
excusing negligence, he knew how to temper authority with kind and
courteous manners.

In the management of schools, Mr. Smyth required that due regard be had to
manners and morals. Arithmetic and grammar were not, in his estimation,
more important than politeness and Christian morality. He encouraged the
ornamentation of the school rooms with plants, flowers and engravings,
which has been so generally adopted, thus rendering them attractive and
conducive to taste and refinement.

For five successive years Mr. Smyth was re-elected, but the last election
he declined to accept, having entered into business arrangements, that he
might pay needed attention to pecuniary interests. During his
superintendence the number of teachers employed in the schools increased
from eighty to one hundred and thirty; the splendid school buildings now
approaching completion, were planned and put under contract, the School
Library was established, and all school interests were most prosperons.
When he retired from the superintendence of the schools, nearly two years
ago, the Leader expressed the public sentiment in regard to his services,
in the following terms: "It is with unfeigned regret that we announce the
resignation of Rev. Anson Smyth, as Superintendent of Instruction in this
city. He has discharged the duties of this office for four years with
ability and efficiency. The educational interests of the city have been
guarded with jealous care; and the excellent condition of our public
schools, the firm, judicious discipline that is enforced, and the thorough
system of instruction well attest his zeal, ability and faithfulness. To
the teachers of the schools and the citizens generally, he has given the
most unqualified satisfaction, and all will sincerely regret the
circumstances which have induced him to retire."

Mr. Smyth has never given up pulpit services, but has averaged to preach
one sermon per Sunday ever since resigning his pastoral charge in Toledo,
eighteen years ago. Though a Presbyterian in doctrine, and loyal to that
church, he is remarkably free from sectarian exclusiveness, and all
evangelical churches seek and obtain his ministerial services.

Within the last year he has given more than twenty addresses at college
commencements, and before literary and educational associations, while he
has been obliged to decline numerous applications for like labors.

The weight of fifty years and the work of a life of very great activity
rest lightly upon him. He is possessed of robust health, and is as marked
for energy and vivacity as he was twenty years ago. But few men, who at
his age have accomplished so much labor, seem still so able to repeat
their life-work.




R. F. Humiston.



The family of Humiston, or Humbastone, as it was originally called, is one
of considerable antiquity, and its American branch dates from an early
period in the history of this country, John Humbastone, its founder,
having settled in New Haven, Connecticut, towards the middle of the
seventeenth century. For over two hundred years the family, or a portion
of it, resided in the same neighborhood, about seven miles out of New
Haven, on the Quinnipiac river. At the breaking out of the Revolutionary
War, several members of the family took part in the struggle on the side
of the patriots, and did good service.

Caleb Humiston (the name had been corrupted in the course of time) was of
the third generation in descent from John Humbastone, the original settler
in New Haven. He was born on the old homestead on the Quinnipiac river,
inherited a portion of it, and lived there until he was thirty years old.
Then he removed to Berkshire county, Massachusetts, settling down in 1816
on a farm he had purchased in Great Barrington. He was at this time a
farmer in comfortable circumstances, but misfortune came upon him, his
property passed from his control, and he was reduced to extremely narrow
circumstances. When this misfortune came upon him he had already been
burdened with a large family. Ten children had been born, one of whom
died, but the others grew up and had to be provided for, the family
consisting of seven boys and two girls. It is a noteworthy fact, that with
the exception of the child who died in infancy, and Caleb Humeston
himself, there has been no death in the family for over half a century,
the youngest of them now living being thirty-eight years old. The family
had been noted for its longevity, the average age of the ancestors of the
present generation being between seventy and eighty years.

R. F. Humiston, whose life we propose briefly to sketch, was born in Great
Barrington, July 29th, 1821. The misfortune suffered by his father
overtook him when R. F. was nine years old, and from that time each one of
the children was capable to do something towards earning a living. Tools
were provided for each, proper work marked out, and every one held
responsible for the faithful performance of the allotted task. As long as
could be afforded, the children were sent to the district school, but the
grade of education provided was low, and the knowledge acquired meagre. In
his ninth year, R. F. Humiston was taken from school and put to earn his
living with a neighbor, with whom he remained a year, and was then placed
to work in a cotton factory at Stockbridge, Mass. His duty in this
establishment was to tend a spinning jenny, and the winter hours of labor
were from six o'clock in the morning to eight at night, with half an
hour's intermission for dinner.

His health failing through the severity of this labor, his parents took
him from this factory and placed him in another factory, for the
manufacture of cotton batting and wadding, in West Stockbridge. Here he
remained several months, but was obliged to leave on account of sickness.

In the Spring of 1833, the family removed to Ohio. After selling his farm
and paying his debts, Caleb Humiston had barely sufficient left with which
to reach Hudson, Ohio. Here he engaged in making brick, the subject of
this sketch, twelve years old, assisting in the brick yard. Change of
climate, hard work, and want brought sickness on the whole family, and
before R. F. Humiston was fifteen years old the physicians pronounced his
constitution entirely broken down, and that he could never do severe
labor. He availed himself of an offer to become clerk of a store in
Hudson, and clerked there and in Cleveland until he was sixteen years
old. When clerk in a Cleveland bookstore, the proprietor failed and the
books were taken to Buffalo, young Humiston receiving an offer of a
clerkship in that city. This he declined, refusing to desert his family,
who were in poverty, and working hard. His health having been partially
restored, he took off his good clothes and re-entered the brick yard,
where he remained until he was eighteen years old. Whilst in the store he
had learned to keep books, and turned this knowledge to account in
arranging his fathers business. A number of the better class of citizens
of Hudson insisted on the boy having an education, and a merchant offered
to bear the expense of a collegiate course, but the boy was too useful in
his father's business to be spared, and so the opportunity was lost.

But the brick-making did not suit the boy, who was ambitious, and desirous
of learning. In the Winter after he was eighteen, he went to learn the
trade of a carpenter, agreeing to pay his father for his unexpired time as
soon as he became of age. He learned the carpenter's trade of Samuel
Johnson, in Ravenna, an intelligent man, who was highly respected by his
neighbors, and whose influence was of great benefit to his apprentice,
forming correct habits, and giving him moral and intellectual training.

Young Humiston was ambitious to excel as a mechanic, and spent his
evenings in studying architecture and examining plans for buildings. There
was no eight or ten hour system in those days. Mechanics worked from
daylight to dark, frequently continuing their labors sixteen hours. Under
this severe strain his health again gave way, and in September, 1841, he
was reluctantly compelled to abandon the trade of a carpenter, except to
work about three days in the week in order to pay his board.

At this point he determined to gain an education, and endeavor to earn a
living by his brain, since his muscles failed him. He returned to Hudson
with the purpose of entering college, his entire capital being ten cents
in money and a few tools, with which he hoped to earn enough to pay for
his board and tuition. He remained at the college five years, working at
his trade by the hour, and doing odd jobs, teaching an occasional term,
and working hard as a carpenter in vacations. His studies and labors were
unremitting, sometimes allowing him but three hours' sleep out of the
twenty-four. As might be expected, his health again gave way, and he was
obliged to leave. The college conferred on him the honorary degree of M.
A., and the Wesleyan University, at Delaware, Ohio, subsequently conferred
the same degree, both without solicitation.

[Illustration: R. F. Humiston.]

On leaving college he went into the nursery business, not having physical
stamina sufficient to prosecute his studies for the ministry, as intended.
In this business he continued directly for eighteen months, and partially
for five or six years.

In the Fall of 1847, he commenced teaching in the public schools in
Cuyahoga Falls, and in the following Spring established a private school,
the Cuyahoga Falls Seminary. At the end of that year he was elected
Superintendent of Public Instruction and principal of the high school. He
continued his seminary, having assistants, and the privilege being allowed
him of spending a portion of his time in the management of that
establishment. In the Fall of 1849, he came to Cleveland and was appointed
principal of the Rockwell street grammar school, where he remained seven
years, bringing up the school from a low pitch to rank among the foremost
in the city. His salary, when he began to teach in Cleveland was but five
hundred dollars, and out of this he had to provide for two families, his
own and that of his parents. To add to his small stipend, he taught
evening school, and took agencies in the vacation. At the same time he was
repeatedly offered other situations at better salaries, and was invited to
become the principal of a State Normal school. He tendered his resignation
as principal of the Rockwell street school, but was induced to remain on
promise of increase of salary. Finally, becoming weary of that hope
deferred that maketh the heart sick, he resigned and was engaged at a much
higher salary, to establish, under the patronage of an association of
leading citizens, the Cleveland Academy. This enterprise was very
successful, and the position pleasant, a fine corps of assistants being
gathered around him.

After two years labor in this position, some gentlemen connected with the
property on University Heights, requested him to engage in the enterprise
of a school on the Heights, in the building erected for a college under
president Mahan, but which now lay unfinished and unoccupied, the college
scheme having failed. They offered rent and grounds free, but he refused,
until they agreed to sell him the whole property for a nominal sum, if he
could acquire a clear title, the ownership having become badly involved by
the failure of the college. This he eventually accomplished after much
labor, and took possession of the property in 1856.

The task was a gigantic one to a man like Mr. Humiston, with limited funds
and uncertain health. The building was unfinished and needed considerable
expenditure to put it in shape for occupation. The location though very
promising in the distant future, was then very inconvenient of access,
and was therefore objectionable. But Mr. Humiston possessed a determined
will and he set to work without delay. He borrowed money, fitted up a
portion of the building, and opened the Cleveland Institute with strong
hopes for the future, but gloomy prospects in the present.

About the middle of the second year the building took fire and a large
portion of the interior was destroyed. The school was closed for six
months, and with characteristic energy Mr. Humiston went to work to repair
damages, enlarging the building, and again involving himself in debt to
meet the expense. Success crowned his enterprise. The number of scholars
increased rapidly, and again the building had to be enlarged and improved.

The institute was continued ten years, and the gross income in its later
years ranged from $20,000 to $31,000 per year. During nearly the whole
time Mr. Humiston taught himself, and usually five hours out of the six
devoted to studies. At the same time he gave medical lectures at the
Western Homoeopathic College, and managed all the affairs of the
institute, keeping no agent or steward. He purchased and fitted up in
the institute a fine chemical and philosophical apparatus, collected a
good library and several valuable cabinets of specimens in natural
history, geology, and mineralogy. The corps of teachers was large and of
superior talents.

In 1868, Mr. Humiston, considering that he had earned a respite from his
arduous and unremitting labors, accepted an offer from some gentlemen
desirous of establishing a Homoeopathic Hospital, and sold his building'
with half the adjoining grounds for $35,000. He then accepted the tender
of the agency of the American Missionary Association in Great Britain,
and early in 1869 left for Europe, having previously visited the South in
order to acquaint himself with the condition of the freedmen, whose cause
he designed especially to present. After a year or more spent in this
work he designs visiting the remainder of Europe, North Africa, and the
Holy Land.

Mr. Humiston has, since 1859, held the position of Professor of Chemistry
and Toxicology in the Western Homoeopathic College, and has given ten
courses of lectures in that institution. Each year he insisted on
resigning, but the resignation has always been refused. On closing his
educational career he again resigned, but the college again refused to
accept his resignation, promising to supply his place temporarily during
his absence in Europe.

The distinguishing characteristic of Mr. Humiston is his strong will, and
this is well exemplified in the fact that although born with a
constitutional fierce thirst for liquor, he has been able to continue in
right habits of temperance through all temptation, though at the cost of
many powerful struggles with his inordinate cravings. He is a man of
strong religions convictions, and has been so from his youth up. For many
years he was connected with the Methodist church on University Heights. As
an educator he ranks among the best in the State, and was held in
deservedly high esteem by those who had themselves been taught by him, or
whose children had been brought up under his tuition.




Railroading



First of the railroads of any description chartered in connection with
Cleveland were the Cleveland and Newburgh and Cleveland and Bedford
Railroad Companies. The first named was incorporated in 1835, built soon
after, and for some time run by horse power, hauling stone and timber, and
occasionally passengers. It was eventually abandoned. The Cleveland and
Bedford was never built. Another local road, run by horse power, with
wooden rails, was, about the same time, constructed between the city and
East Cleveland, passing up Euclid street.

The Ohio Railroad was of a different character. It was intended to run
along the lake shore from the Pennsylvania line to Toledo, mostly to be
built on piles. Considerable work was done, though no iron laid, when the
financial crisis overwhelmed it and its kindred schemes. The piles driven
for the track are yet visible in places between Cleveland and Sandusky.
The rights of the company, as far as they existed, afterwards became the
property of the Junction Railroad Company, now the Cleveland and Toledo.
Of the same period, was the Cleveland, Warren and Pittsburgh. This was
chartered in 1836, the act of incorporation authorizing the construction
of a railroad from Cleveland, in the direction of Pittsburgh, to the
State line of Pennsylvania. At the point of intersection with the State
line, the charter provided for the union of the road with any other road
which the State of Pennsylvania might authorize from Pittsburgh, or any
other point below the Ohio river, running in the direction of Cleveland,
in order that a continuous route might be perfected from Cleveland to
Pittsburgh, under the authority of both States. The charter was very
loose in its provisions, allowing the president and directors to create
and sell stock as in their judgement occasion might require, without
limit as to the amount issued, except that it should not exceed the
needs of the company. Plenary powers were granted to the company in the
selection of a route, the condemnation of land, and like "full and
discretionary power" was granted to the company in "the use and occupancy
of the road, in the transportation of persons or property, either by the
force and power of steam, or animals, or any mechanical or other power,
or any combination of them, which the company may think proper to
employ." The cost of the line was estimated to be less than $7,000 per
mile. The road was to be an extension of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad,
a branch of which was to extend to Pittsburgh, and thus would "give the
whole vast region of the western lakes an opportunity of marketing their
products in, and receiving their foreign produce from Philadelphia and
Baltimore, at least rive weeks earlier in the season, and at much less
expense," than was accomplished at New York.

In the same year a charter was obtained for the Cleveland, Columbus
and Cincinnati Railroad, connecting Cleveland and Cincinnati by the
way of Columbus.

None of the roads were built under these charters. The financial panic of
1837 swept them all into oblivion, together with a multitude of other
roads projected throughout the country. Some of them were heard of no
more, and others were revived in after years, the charters greatly
amended, and the roads eventually built. The design of the Cleveland,
Columbus and Cincinnati Railroad Company was eventually carried out to the
extent of building a line to Columbus and there connecting with railroads
extending to Cincinnati. The Cleveland, Warren and Pittsburgh charter was
dug up, amended, and made authority for organization of the Cleveland and
Pittsburgh Railroad, whilst the original route was mainly occupied by the
new Cleveland and Mahoning Railroad.

The Cleveland and Bedford was at last rendered unnecessary by the
Cleveland and Pittsburgh passing over its route, whilst the Cleveland and
Newburgh reap-pears as a street railroad, for passengers only, the
original design of a local railroad for freight being abandoned thirty odd
years ago.

In 1845, the lapsed charter of the Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati
Railroad Company was revived, revised, and a new company organized, with
John W. Allen, Richard Hilliard, Jolin M. Woolsey and H. B. Payne as
Cleveland directors, and John W. Allen as president. Between the
organization of the company and the construction of the road there was a
wide gulf of difficulties, jealousies and enmities, bridged over at last
by untiring perseverance and unwavering faith in the final success of the
undertaking. The story of the struggle is told incidentally in the
biographical sketches of those connected with the enterprise. All that we
have to do here is, to briefly sketch the leading features in the
narrative as it has been already told, after a careful examination of the
documentary history of the company. That account says the incorporation
of the company had been obtained in the year 1845, with a proviso
authorizing the city of Cleveland to subscribe two millions of dollars to
the stock. The bonds of the city were promptly given, but before any money
could be obtained upon these bonds it was necessary that a further
subscription should be made by the citizens, not only to meet the current
expenses, but to give assurance to capitalists abroad that the people here
were really in earnest, and would not suffer the undertaking to fall
through. After a thorough canvass of the city, by two well known and
respected citizens, it was found that not more than twenty-five thousand
dollars could be obtained. There was both a scarcity of cash and a lack of
faith in the enterprise.

John M. Woolsey was sent to Cincinnati to negotiate the city bonds with
the Ohio Life and Trust Company; to Pittsburgh to ascertain upon what
terms iron could be obtained; and to Philadelphia and New York to enlist
the sympathy and help of capitalists. The mission was a failure. The
common strap iron of that day could not be obtained without cash on
delivery, and the money could not be procured on any terms. Cleveland was
too far off, and entirely unknown to the moneyed men of the eastern
cities. Thus, in the Spring of 1847, one of the very darkest periods in
our history, it was determined to abandon the enterprise for the time, and
await a more favorable season.

In this desperate extremity Mr. Hilliard and Mr. Payne volunteered another
and last effort of three months personal labor to arouse their fellow
citizens to a proper sense of the importance and ultimate value of this
grand undertaking. By patient perseverance they succeeded in securing a
leading subscription of five thousand dollars from Leonard Case, who also
consented to become a director of the company. The ultimate result of the
solicitations was the subscription of about $40,000 additional to the
amount previously pledged. About the same time an accession of the utmost
importance was made when Alfred Kelley, of Columbus, accepted the
presidency of the road, contrary to his inclination to retire from further
public duties and to the strong remonstrances of his personal friends.
Through the influence of Mr. Dwight, of Springfield, Mass., the directors
secured the services of Captain Childs, well known among Eastern
capitalists as a skillful engineer, and his endorsement of the company did
much to advance its credit abroad. But it was still necessary to secure a
large disposal of stock at home, and to effect this, a liberal additional
assessment upon the friends of the road was made and accepted. Mr. Childs
finally recommended Mr. Harbeck, who, in company with Stillman Witt and
Amasa Stone, Jr., undertook and carried out the building of the road to
its completion.

In February, 1851, the first through train arrived from Columbus, bringing
the State authorities and the Legislature, to celebrate the union of the
two cities. Thus the Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati Railroad was the
pioneer of the series of the now enlarged, and most important enterprises
so clearly identified with the growth of the city. The chairman of the
building committee stated at the opening of the new depot, that during the
entire building of that road, there was not a dollar paid as a bribe to
either the Legislature or the City Council, to receive their favors.

The terminus of the road at Cleveland was originally intended to be on
Scranton's Flats, but it was afterwards determined to bring the road
across the river to the site of the old New England House. Appreciating
the importance of extending it to the lake shore, the contractors agreed
to grade the road free of charge from that point to the lake, and it was
accordingly carried forward to its present terminus.

In 1869, the road was consolidated with the Bellefontaine line, thus
placing its western terminus in Indianapolis. Its southern stem had
previously been extended by way of the Delaware Cut-Off to Springfield,
thus opening another connection with Cincinnati.

We have already said that the charter of the Cleveland, Warren and
Pittsburgh Railroad, after sleeping for several years, was dug up,
amended, and the Cleveland and Pittsburgh Railroad Company organized under
it. The resuscitation of the charter took place in March, 1845, when the
route was changed from "the most direct in the direction of Pittsburgh,"
to "the most direct, practicable, and least expensive route to the Ohio
river, at the most suitable point." The company organized at Ravenna, in
October of the same year, with James Stewart, of Wellsville, as president,
A. G. Cattell, as secretary, and Cyrus Prentiss, as treasurer. The route
was surveyed, meetings held in aid of the project, and in July, 1847, the
first contracts let from Wellsville northward, and the work of
construction commenced. The northern end dragged, owing to the slow coming
in of subscriptions, and the work was not fully let until 1849.

In February, 1851, the line was opened from Cleveland to Hudson, and the
General Assembly and State officers who had come to Cleveland to attend
the celebration of the opening of the Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati
Railroad, accepted an invitation to ride over the new railroad to Hudson.
A short supply of provisions at Hudson, and the ditching of the train on
the return trip, made the weary and hungry legislators long remember their
pioneer trip over the unfinished Cleveland and Pittsburgh Railroad. In
March following, the track was completed to Ravenna, in November to
Hanover, at which time free passes for "each stockholder and his lady,"
and "landholders through whose land the road passes, with their wives,"
were issued, good for one ride over the line and return, that they might
see the whole of the stupendous undertaking and admire it. In January
1852, connection was made with the Ohio and Pennsylvania Railroad at
Alliance, and a route thus opened to Pittsburgh, and in March, of the same
year, the line was opened to Wellsville, and connection with the Ohio
river perfected, thus completing the work laid out in the amended charter.

At different times, subsequently, authority was granted by the General
Assembly for the extension of the line and the construction of branches.
In this way the River Division was built, connecting the Wellsville end
with Pittsburgh by a junction with the Ohio and Pennsylvania at Rochester,
and with the Baltimore and Ohio and Central Ohio, by a line to Bellair.
The Tuscarawas Branch was built to New Philadelphia, and there stopped,
though its original purpose was to form a connection with the Steubenville
and Indiana Railroad. Authority was also given to build a branch from
Hudson towards the Ohio and Pennsylvania and any line running in the
direction of Columbus. A separate company afterwards constructed this
"Akron Branch," or Cleveland, Zanesville and Cincinnati Railroad, so far
as Millersburgh. The Cleveland and Pittsburgh Railroad has had a serious
financial struggle to go through, but it has come out as an important and
prosperous line. It is now working under a consolidation of earnings with
the Pittsburgh, Fort Wayne and Chicago, formerly known as the Ohio and
Pennsylvania.

The Cleveland, Painesville and Ashtabula Railroad Company, now, after
several consolidations and changes of title, forming part of the Lake
Shore and Michigan Southern Railroad Company, was part of the general
plan of the Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati Railroad, was built under
much of the same influence, and has always been intimately connected
with it in its working. The charter was obtained by special act in 1848,
and empowered the corporators to build a line by way of Painesville,
through Ashtabula county, to the Pennsylvania State line, and to
continue their line into that State to any point authorized by the
Pennsylvania Legislature. That part of the road extending to Erie, in
the State of Pennsylvania, was constructed under the charter of the
Franklin Canal Company, passed by the Legislature of Pennsylvania, the
21st day of May, 1846, and amended April 9th, 1849, giving it authority
to construct a railroad.

The company was organized August 1st, 1849, by the selection of Alfred
Kelley, Samuel L. Seldin, Heman B. Ely, George E. Gillett, David R. Paige,
Laphnor Lake and Peleg P. Sanford as directors, and Heman B. Ely as
president, and the surveys from Cleveland were made under the
superintendence of Frederick Harbeck as chief engineer, and from the State
line to Erie he acted as consulting engineer, filling both situations
until his death, which occurred in the month of February, 1851. A contract
for the construction of the road from Cleveland to the State line of
Pennsylvania was made with Frederick Harbeck, A. Stone, Jr., and Stillman
Witt, on the 26th day of July, 1850, but the work progressed slowly for
six months after the contract was concluded, principally for the reason
that there was no confidence in the ability of a railroad from Cleveland
to Erie or Buffalo to compete with the lake in the transportation of
persons and property, and the contractors expended more than $100,000 of
their means before a like amount could be raised through all other
sources. In the month of January, 1851, the Hon. Alfred Kelley was
appointed general agent of the company with unlimited authority to raise
funds and press forward the work of completion. He entered upon his duties
with his usual indomitable perseverance and energy, fully seconded by the
directors and contractors, and they had the satisfaction of passing a
locomotive over its entire length late in the autumn of the year 1852.

The act conferring authority on the Franklin Canal Company to construct a
railroad from the State line of Ohio to the city of Erie, being regarded
by the Legislature of the State of Pennsylvania as doubtful, they
repealed it on the 28th day of January, 1854. On the 5th day of May,
1856, the Legislature of the State of Pennsylvania passed an act
authorizing the Cleveland, Painesville and Ashtabula Railroad Company to
purchase the road as constructed from the State line to Erie, and to
operate it under the general law of the State of Pennsylvania, passed the
19th day of February, 1849. The history of the Pennsylvania portion of
the line reflects no credit on that State. The petty and vexations "Erie
War" in 1854, by which a portion of the people of Erie attempted to
prevent a through connection of the road at that place, and the
unjustifiable expenses to which the company were subjected by the
Legislature, are blots on the record of that State.

The road was operated jointly with the Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati
Railroad until April 1st, 1855, when the management was divided. In 1869,
it was consolidated, first with the Cleveland and Toledo and then with the
Michigan Southern and Buffalo and Erie Railroads. The Cleveland,
Painesville and Ashtabula has been one of the most profitable railroads in
the country.

The story of the Cleveland and Mahoning Railroad Company--one of
persistent struggle against apparently insurmountable difficulties, is
told in great part in the sketch of the life of Jacob Perkins, to whose
labors and sacrifices the success of the undertaking is in great measure
due. The road was projected to develope more fully the mineral and
agricultural resource of Trumbull and Mahoning counties, and to find a
market for their products in Pittsburgh or Cleveland. Unlike many
projected railroads, the first object of this line was a local trade; the
through business anticipated was a secondary consideration. The Company
was incorporated in 1851, and the first meeting of stockholders held at,
Warren, Trumbull county, in June, 1852, when $300,000 local subscriptions
were reported and it was determined to survey and prepare estimates for
the road. The directors under whom this work was commenced were Jacob
Perkins, Frederick Kinsman and Charles Smith, of Warren, David Tod, of
Youngstown, Dudley Baldwin of Cleveland, Robert Cunningham, of New
Castle, and James Magee, of Philadelphia. In order to aid the enterprise
by securing connections, they opened negotiations with the Pennsylvania
and Ohio Railroad, and the Pittsburgh and Erie Railroad, but without
success. About the same time a contract was made with the Junction
Railroad, afterwards merged in the Cleveland and Toledo Road, for
purchase of ground near the mouth of the Cuyahoga river, on the west
side, and the right of way obtained through a portion of Ohio City, and
through Scranton's Hill to the west end of the Columbus street bridge,
near which the freight depot was afterwards established. In 1853, the
principal office of the Company was removed to Cleveland, which was made
the head quarters of the Company.

After surveying different routes and hesitating over the choice between
them, it was decided to build the road from Cleveland, on the West Side,
and running through Scranton's hill to Newburgh, Bedford, Aurora, Mantua
and Warren, fifty-three miles, and thence down the Mahoning Valley to
Youngstown and Poland, to the east line of the State.

Repeated attempts were made to induce the Legislature of Pennsylvania to
authorize an extension of the road in that State, but owing to the
opposition of the Pittsburgh and Erie Bailroad, and especially of the
Pittsburgh, Fort Wayne and Chicago Railroad, the desired permission was
finally refused. The estimated aggregate cost of the road was about one
and three-quarter millions of dollars, and when the principal contracts
for labor and iron were made, there was a very fair prospect of disposing
of the bonds of the company to advantage, and thus, in addition to the
loans effected in Philadelphia, New York and at home, the means to
complete the work were reasonably anticipated. In the Directors' Report of
1854, they were obliged to announce unlooked for embarrassments, growing
out of the altered condition of the money market. The story of the
seemingly hopeless, but finally successful, struggle that followed is told
in another part of this work. At length, in 1857, after five or six years
of persevering efforts, and most perplexing difficulties, the road was
opened through to Youngstown; substantial machine shops were built at
Cleveland, station houses erected along the route, and the coal and iron
of the Mahoning Valley were made accessible by a quick and easy route.

In October, 1863, the road was leased for ninety-nine years to the
Atlantic and Great Western Railroad, which had already laid a broad gauge
upon the track, That company now controls the main line to Youngstown,
with the several branches to Hubbard and the coal mines. The narrow gauge
is kept up for the use of the Mahoning trains, freight and passenger,
while the broad gauge is used by the Atlantic and Great Western through
trains. The track has been extended to the shore of the old river bed, an
extensive wharfage established, and large facilities obtained for
connecting the traffic of the road with the lake commerce.

The Cleveland and Toledo Railroad Company was formed by the consolidation
of two rival and nearly parallel lines. One of the companies thus united,
was incorporated as the Junction Railroad Company, and the other by the
name of the Toledo, Norwalk and Cleveland Railroad Company. The former was
incorporated by an act of the legislature of Ohio, passed on the second
day of March, 1846; and the latter, by an act of the seventh of March,
1850. The Junction Railroad Company, by its original charter and two
amendments, in 1861, was authorized to construct a railroad from the city
of Cleveland to the west line of the State by such route as the directors
might determine, with power to construct branches to any points within the
counties through which the main line might pass. The charter of the
Toledo, Norwalk and Cleveland Railroad Company, authorized the
construction of a railroad from Toledo, by the way of Norwalk, in the
county of Huron, to a connection with the Cleveland, Columbus, and
Cincinnati Railroad, at some point in the counties of Huron or Lorain. The
authorized capital stock of the Junction Company was three millions, and
that of the other company, two millions of dollars.

The consolidation was effected, and the new company organized on the first
of September, A. D. 1853, under the specific provisions of the twelfth
section of the amendment to the Toledo, Norwalk and Cleveland Railroad
charter, passed on the first of March, 1850. Under its charter, the
Toledo, Norwalk and Cleveland Railroad Company constructed a road from the
east bank of the Maumee river, opposite the city of Toledo, to Grafton,
where it connects with the Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati Railroad,
twenty-five miles south-west from the city of Cleveland, being a distance
of eighty-seven and one-half miles, all of which was finished and put into
operation in January, 1853. This became known as the Southern Division of
the Cleveland and Toledo Railroad.

The Northern Division, or Junction Railroad, was originally intended to
run from Cleveland, west side, via Berea and Sandusky, westward to a point
on the Michigan Southern and Northern Indiana Railroad some twenty miles
west of Toledo, and crossing the track of the Toledo, Norwalk and
Cleveland Railroad at a point about eight miles east of the same city. The
road was opened between Cleveland and Sandusky and operations commenced
upon it in the Fall of 1858, immediately after the consolidation. The
original project of a separate line to the west was carried out by the
consolidated corporation so far as to construct the road to its
intersection with the old Toledo, Norwalk and Cleveland track, from which
point both lines approached Toledo over the same right of way. This line
was operated over its whole length until the 31st day of December, 1858,
on which day the use for regular business of that portion lying west of
Sandusky was discontinued, and all the through travel and traffic turned
upon the Southern Division. On the 30th of July, 1856, a contract was
entered into with the Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati Railroad Company
by which the Cleveland and Toledo Company acquired the right to use the
track of the first named company from Grafton to Cleveland, for the
Southern Division trains, and from Berea to Cleveland for the Northern
Division, and thence forward all trains were run into, and departed from,
the Union Depot in Cleveland--a change which soon resulted in the
practical abandonment, for the time, of that portion of the Northern
Division lying between Berea and Cleveland on the west side of Cuyahoga
river. This arrangement, together with the completion, in 1855, of a
bridge over the Maumee river at Toledo, enabled the company to receive and
discharge its passengers in union depots at each end of its line. During
the years 1865 and 1866, about eight miles of new road were constructed
between Elyria on the Northern Division, and Oberlin on the Southern
Division, for the purpose of allowing all trains to leave and come upon
the Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati Road at Berea, thirteen miles,
instead of Grafton, twenty-five miles from Cleveland. This new piece of
road was opened for business on the 10th of September, 1866, and the road
between Oberlin and Grafton immediately abandoned, The construction of a
bridge near the mouth of the Cuyahoga river at Cleveland, brought the
Northern Division line between Cleveland and Berea once more into use, and
over it the freight trains of the line are now run. In 1869, the company
was made part of the Consolidated line between Buffalo and Chicago.

The Atlantic and Great Western Railroad, by its lease of the Cleveland and
Mahoning Railroad, has become an important part of the Cleveland railroad
System. The company was organized in 1851, as the Franklin and Warren
Railroad Company, to build a road from Franklin Mills (now Kent) in
Portage County, to Warren, in Trumbull county, with power to extend to a
point in the eastern line of the State, northeast of Warren and
southwesterly to Dayton, Ohio. In July, 1853, operations were actively
commenced along the whole line, but were soon seriously retarded by
financial embarrassments. In 1854, the Franklin and Warren Railroad
Company, under authority of an Act of the General Assembly of 1853,
changed its name to the Atlantic and Great Western Railroad Company. Two
years before, a project had been started to extend the broad gauge of the
Ohio and Mississippi Railroad through Ohio, northeastern Pennsylvania and
southwestern New York, to connect with the New York and Erie Railroad.
This route would run through Meadville, Pennsylvania, Warren, Kent, Akron
and Galion to Dayton, Ohio. In 1858, the Meadville Railroad Company
changed their name to the Atlantic and Great Western Railroad Company of
Pennsylvania. In 1859, a company was organized in the State of New York,
under the name of the Atlantic and Great Western Railroad in New York, and
purchased in 1860 of the New York and Erie Railroad Company thirty eight
miles of their road, from Salamanca to near Ashville. These thirty eight
miles with eleven miles of new line, make up the entire length of line of
this road in the State of New York. Each of the above companies made
contracts for the building of their respective roads.

In the Fall of 1858, negotiations were commenced in London with James
McHenry, for the means to carry on the work. T. W. Kennard, a civil
engineer, came over as the attorney of Mr. McHenry, and engineer in chief
of the whole work. In 1862, the road was opened from Corry to Meadville,
Pennsylvania. In 1863, it was extended to Warren, and in the next year to
Ravenna and Akron--202 miles from Salamanca.

In October, 1863, the three companies above named, leased for ninety-nine
years, the Cleveland and Mahoning Railroad, extending from Cleveland
southerly to Youngstown, Ohio, sixty-seven miles. This road has a narrow
gauge track crossing the Atlantic and Great Western Railroad at
Leavittsburgh, Ohio, fifty miles south of Cleveland. The Atlantic and
Great Western Company laid a rail on either side of the narrow track, thus
carrying the broad gauge into Cleveland, and a broad gauge train from the
city of New York entered Cleveland on the evening of November 3rd, 1863.
Subsequently the several companies forming the Atlantic and Great Western
line were consolidated into one line, and this again was, in 1869,
consolidated with the Erie Railway.

Besides opening a new and important thoroughfare to the East, this line
has opened up to Cleveland the resources of north-western Pennsylvania,
and in the oil product has added an immense and highly profitable trade to
the business of the city.

Several lines have been built, connecting with and adding business to the
railroads leading to Cleveland, but of these it is not the province of
this work to speak. A large number of new railroads have been from time to
time projected in various directions. Some of these "paper railroads" have
intrinsic merit, and these, or lines aiming at the same objects, will
eventually be built.





[Illustration: Yours truly, Jacob Perkins]


Jacob Perkins.



Jacob Perkins was born at Warren, Trumbull county, Ohio, September 1st,
1822, being next to the youngest of the children of Gen. Simon Perkins,
one of the earliest and most prominent, business men of norther Ohio, a
land agent of large business, and the owner of extensive tracts of land.
In his early years Jacob Perkins developed a strong inclination for study,
acquiring knowledge with unusual facility, and gratifying his intense
passion for reading useful works by every means within his power.

He commenced fitting himself for college at the Burton Academy, then under
the direction of Mr. H. L. Hitchcock, now president of Western Reserve
College, and completed his preparation at Middletown, Connecticut, in the
school of Isaac Webb. He entered Yale College in 1837.

While in college he was distinguished for the elegance of his style and
the wide range of his literary acquirements. He delivered the philosophic
oration at his junior exhibition, and was chosen second editor of "Yale
Literary Magazine," a position in which he took great interest, and filled
to the satisfaction and pride of his class. His college course was,
however, interrupted by a long and severe illness before the close of his
junior year, which compelled him to leave his studies and (to his
permanent regret) prevented him from graduating with his own class. He
returned the following year and was graduated with the class of 1842.

He entered his father's office at Warren, and was occupied with its
business until, upon the death of his father, some two years afterwards,
he became one of his executors.

During his residence at Warren he appeared occasionally before home
audiences as a public speaker, and always with great acceptance.

In politics, he early adopted strong anti-slavery principles, then not the
popular doctrine, and they were always freely and openly advocated. Of an
address delivered in 1848, which was published and attracted very
considerable local attention, the editor of the Chronicle remarked, "We
have listened to the best orators of the land, from the Connecticut to
the Mississippi, and can truly say, by none have we been so thoroughly
delighted in every particular as by this effort of our distinguished
townsman." The oration discussed the true theory of human rights and the
legitimate powers of human government--and the following extract gives the
spirit of his political principles on the subject of slavery:

The object of law is not to make rights, but to define and maintain them;
man possesses them before the existence of law, the same as he does
afterwards. No matter what government may extend its control over him; no
matter how miserable or how sinful the mother in whose arms his eyes
opened to the day; no matter in what hovel his infancy is nursed; no
matter what complexion--an Indian or an African sun may have burned upon
him, this may decide the privileges which he is able to assert, but can
not affect the existence of his rights. His self-mastery is the gift of
his creator, and oppression, only, can take it away.

Without solicitation he was nominated and elected a member of the
Convention that framed the present Constitution of Ohio. His associates
from the district were Judges Peter Hitchcock and R. P. Ranney, and
although "he was the youngest member but one of the Convention--and in the
minority, his influence and position were excelled by few."

He was one of the Senatorial Presidential Electors for Ohio on the Fremont
ticket in 1856.

In the intellectual progress of the young about him, and the building up
of schools and colleges, he took especial interest. He first suggested and
urged upon President Pierce to adopt the conditions of the present
"Permanent Fund of Western Reserve College," rather than to solicit
unconditional contributions, which experience had proved were so easily
absorbed by present necessities, and left the future as poor as the past.
In connection with his brothers, he made the first subscription to that
fund. The embarrassment arising from his railroad enterprise prevented him
from increasing that contribution. The wisdom of his suggestions was
subsequently shown, when, during the rupture and consequent embarrassment
under which the college labored, the income of this fund had a very
important, if not vital share in saving it from abandonment, and
afterwards proved the nucleus of its present endowment.

He was always efficient in favoring improvements. He was associated with
Hon. F. Kinsman and his brother in founding the beautiful Woodland
Cemetery at Warren. The land was purchased and the ground laid out by
them, and then transferred to the present corporation.

Soon after his return from the Constitutional Convention, he became
interested in the Cleveland and Mahoning Railroad. He was most
influential in obtaining the charter and organizing the company, of
which he was elected president, and became the principal, almost sole
financial manager.

Owing to prior and conflicting railroad interests, little aid could be
obtained for his project in either of the terminal cities, Cleveland and
Pittsburgh, and the work was commenced in 1853 with a comparatively small
stock subscription. A tightening money market prevented any considerable
increase of the stock list, or a favorable disposition of the bonds of the
road, and the financial crisis a few years afterwards so reduced the value
of the securities of this, as of all unfinished railroads, as practically
to shut them out of the market. In this emergency the alternative
presented itself to Mr. Perkins and his resident directors, either to
abandon the enterprise and bankrupt the company, with the entire loss of
the amount expended, or to push it forward to completion by the pledge,
and at the risk of their private fortunes, credit, and reputations.

In this, the darkest day of the enterprise, Mr. Perkins manifested his
confidence in its ultimate success, and his generous willingness to meet
fully his share of the hazard to be incurred, by proposing to them,
jointly with him, to assume that risk; and agreeing that in case of
disaster, he would himself pay the first $100,000 of loss, and thereafter
share it equally with them.

With a devotion to the interests entrusted to them, a determination rarely
equalled in the history of our railroad enterprises, they unanimously
accepted this proposition, and determined to complete the road, at least
to a remunerative point in the coal fields of the Mahoning Valley.

The financial storm was so much more severe and longer continued than the
wisest had calculated upon, that for years the result was regarded by them
and the friends of the enterprise with painful suspense. In the interest
of the road Mr. Perkins spent the Spring of 1854 in England, without
achieving any important financial results.

At length, in 1856, the road was opened to Youngstown, and its receipts,
carefully husbanded, began slowly to lessen the floating debt, by that
time grown to frightful proportions, and carried solely by the pledge of
the private property and credit of the president and Ohio directors. These
directors, consisting of Hon. Frederick Kinsman and Charles Smith, of
Warren, Governor David Tod, of Briar Hill, Judge Reuben Hitchcock, of
Painesville, and Dudley Baldwin, of Cleveland, by the free use of their
widely known and high business credit, without distrust or dissension,
sustained the president through that long and severe trial, a trial which
can never be realized except by those who shared its burdens. The
president and these directors should ever be held in honor by the
stockholders of the company, whose investment they saved from utter loss,
and by the business men of the entire Mahoning Valley, and not less by the
city of Cleveland; for the mining and manufacturing interests developed by
their exertions and sacrifices, lie at the very foundation of the present
prosperity of both.

Before, however, the road was enabled to free itself from financial
embarrassment, so to as commence making a satisfactory return to the
stockholders, which Mr. Perkins was exceedingly anxious to see
accomplished under his own presidency--his failing health compelled him to
leave its active management, and he died before the bright day dawned upon
the enterprise.

He said to a friend during his last illness, with characteristic
distinctness: "If I die, you may inscribe on my tomb stone, Died of the
Mahoning Railroad;" so great had been his devotion to the interests of the
road, and so severe the personal exposures which its supervision had
required of him, who was characteristically more thoughtful of every
interest confided to his care, than of his own health.

He was married October 24th, 1850, to Miss Elizabeth O. Tod, daughter of
Dr. J. I. Tod, of Milton, Trumbull county, Ohio, and removed his family to
Cleveland in 1856. Of three children, only one, Jacob Bishop, survives
him. Mrs. Perkins died of rapid consumption, June 4th, 1857, and his
devoted attention at the sick bed of his wife greatly facilitated the
development of the same insidious disease, which was gradually to
undermine his own naturally vigorous constitution.

The business necessities of his road, embarrassed and pressing as they
were, united with his uniform self-forgetfulness, prevented his giving
attention to his personal comfort and health, long after his friends saw
the shadow of the destroyer falling upon his path. He was finally, in
great prostration of health and strength, compelled to leave the active
duties of the road and spent the latter part of the Winter of 1857-8 in
the Southern States, but returned in the Spring with little or no
improvement. He continued to fail; during the Summer and in the Fall of
1858 he again went South in the vain hope of at least physical relief, and
died in Havana, Cuba, January 12th, 1859. His remains were embalmed and
brought home by his physician who had accompanied him--and were interred
at Warren, in Woodland Cemetery, where so many of his family repose around
him. A special train from either end of the Cleveland and Mahoning
Railroad brought the board of directors and an unusually large number of
business and personal friends to join the long procession which followed
"the last of earth" to its resting place.

One of the editorial notices of his death, at the time, very justly
remarks of him:

  He was a man of mark, and through strength of talent, moral firmness and
  urbanity of manner, wielded an influence seldom possessed by a man of
  his years. In addition to his remarkable business capacity, Mr. Perkins
  was a man of high literary taste, which was constantly improving and
  enriching his mind. He continued, even amid his pressing-business
  engagements, his habits of study and general reading. Mr. Perkins
  belonged to that exceptional class of cases in which great wealth,
  inherited, does not injure the recipient.

An editorial of a Warren paper, mentioning his death, says:

  He was born in this town in 1821, and from his boyhood exhibited a
  mental capacity and energy which was only the promise of the brilliancy
  of his manhood. To his exertion, his personal influence and liberal
  investment of capital the country is indebted for the Cleveland and
  Mahoning Railroad. To his unremitting labor in this enterprise he has
  sacrificed personal comfort and convenience, and we fear, shortened his
  days by his labors and exposure in bringing the work to completion.
  Known widely as Mr. Perkins has been by his active part in public
  enterprises, his loss will be felt throughout the State, but we who have
  known him both as boy and man, have a deeper interest in him, and the
  sympathies of the people of Warren, with his relatives, will have much
  of the nature of personal grief for one directly connected with them.

Said a classmate in the class meeting of 1862:

  Although his name on the catalogue ranks with the class of 1842, his
  affections were with us, and he always regarded himself of our number.
  He visited New Haven frequently during the latter part of his life, in
  connection with a railway enterprise, in which he was interested, and
  exhibited the same large-heartedness and intellectual superiority which
  won for him universal respect during his college course.

A gentleman who knew Mr. Perkins intimately, and as a director was
associated with him in the construction of the Cleveland and Mahoning
Railroad, and in carrying its debt, wrote of him as follows:

  The management and construction of the Cleveland and Mahoning Railroad
  by Mr. Perkins, under circumstances the most difficult and trying, were
  well calculated to test his powers, and, in that work he proved himself
  possessed of business capacity rarely equalled, sustained by
  unquestioned integrity, and remarkable energy. These qualifications,
  united with his large wealth, gave him the requisite influence with
  business men and capitalists. His devotion to the interests of the road,
  his abiding confidence in a favorable result, and his clear and just
  appreciation of its value, and importance to the community, called forth
  his best efforts, and were essential conditions of success. To him more
  than to any other individual are the projection, inauguration, and
  accomplishment of this enterprise attributable. From its earliest
  projection, he had a most comprehensive and clear view of its importance
  to the city of Cleveland and the Mahoning Valley, and confidently
  anticipated for them, in the event of its completion, a rapidity and
  extent of development and prosperity, which were then regarded as
  visionary, but which the result has fully demonstrated.

  His life was spared to witness only the commencement of this prosperity,
  nor can it be doubted, that his close application, and unremitting
  efforts to forward the work shortened his life materially. His deep and
  absorbing interest in it, prevented the precautionary measures and
  relaxations, which in all probability would have prolonged his life for
  years. His associates in the board saw the danger and urged him to
  earlier and more decided measures for relief. He too was aware of their
  importance. But the constant demand upon his time and strength, and the
  continually recurring necessities of the enterprise, which he had so
  much at heart, were urgent, and so absorbed his thoughts and energies,
  that he delayed until it was obvious that relaxation could afford merely
  temporary relief.

  In his intercourse with the board, Mr. Perkins was uniformly courteous
  and gentlemanly, always giving respectful attention to the suggestions
  of his associates, but ever proving himself thoroughly posted; readily
  comprehending the most judicious measures, and clearly demonstrating
  their wisdom. Entire harmony in the action of the directors was the
  result, and all had the fullest confidence in him. While his business
  capacity and integrity commanded their highest admiration, his urbanity,
  kindness and marked social qualities secured their strong personal
  attachment, and by them his decease was regarded as a severe personal
  affliction, as well as a great public loss.

Thus is briefly noticed, one who dying comparatively early, had given
evidence of great business capacity, as well as the promise of unusual
power and popularity with the people of his own State, and nation.




William Case.



A work professing to give sketches, however brief and incomplete, of the
representative men of Cleveland, would be manifestly defective did it omit
notice of the late William Case, a gentleman of sterling worth and great
popularity, who was identified with much of the material progress of the
city, who had a host of deeply attached friends while living, and whose
memory is cherished with affectionate esteem.

[Illustration: William Case]

William Case was born to prosperity, but this, which to very many has
proved the greatest misfortune of their lives, was to him no evil, but, on
the contrary, a good, inasmuch as it gave him opportunity for gratifying
his liberal tastes, and his desire to advance the general welfare. From
his father, Leonard Case, he inherited an extraordinary business capacity,
indomitable energy, and strong common sense, with correct habits. To these
inherited traits he added an extensive knowledge, acquired both from books
and men, and made practical by keen observation, and liberal ideas, which
he carried into his business and social affairs. In all relations of life
he was ever a gentleman, in the true meaning of the word, courteous to
all, the rich and the poor alike, and with an instinctive repugnance to
everything mean, oppressive or hypocritical. With regard to himself, he
was modest to a fault, shrinking from everything that might by any
possibility be construed into ostentation or self-glorification. This
tribute the writer of these lines,--who owed him nothing but friendship,
and who was in no way a recipient of any favor from him, other than his
good will,--is glad of an opportunity to pay, and this testimony to his
good qualities, falls short of the facts.

William Case takes his place in this department of our work by virtue of
the fact that he was an early friend to the railroad enterprises of
Cleveland. He contributed largely to the Cleveland, Painesville and
Ashtabula Railroad, and for four years and a half, until August, 1858, was
president of that company. Under his management the railroad prospered and
paid large dividends, and when he left that position it was with the
regret of all his subordinates, whose esteem had been won by his kindness
and courtesy.

But it was not alone as a railroad man that Mr. Case won for himself the
title to a place among the leading representative men of the city. He grew
up with Cleveland, and was alive to the interests of the growing city. No
scheme of real improvement but found a friend in him. He was energetic in
forwarding movements for bettering the condition of the streets; he took a
leading part in the location and establishment of the Water Works. Anxious
to effect an improvement in the business architecture of the city, in
which Cleveland was so far behind cities of less pretension, he projected
and carried on far towards completion the Case Block, which stands to-day
the largest and most noticeable business building in the city, and which
contains one of the finest public halls in the West. Mr. Case died before
completion of the building, which unforeseen difficulties made of great
cost, but his plans so far as known--including some of great generosity,
such as the donation of a fine suite of rooms to the Cleveland Library
Association--have been faithfully carried out.

In 1846, Mr. Case was elected member of the City Council from the Second
Ward, and served in that position four years. In that body he was noted
for his advocacy of every measure tending to the improvement of the city,
and the development of its industrial and commercial resources.

In the Spring of 1850, he was nominated, on the Whig ticket, for mayor of
Cleveland, and was elected by a large majority, against a strong
Democratic opponent, his personal popularity being shown by his running
ahead of his ticket. His administration was marked with such energy,
ability and public spirit, that in the following year--the office then
being annually elective--he was re-elected by an increased majority, and
ran still further ahead of his ticket.

In 1852, the Whig convention for the Nineteenth Congressional District,
which then included Cuyahoga county, assembled at Painesville, under the
presidency of Mon. Peter Hitchcock. Mr. Case was there nominated for
Congress by acclamation, and the canvass was carried on by the Whigs with
great enthusiasm. But the Democracy and the Free Soil party were against
him, and under the excitement growing out of anti-slavery agitation, the
Free Soil candidate, Hon. Edward Wade, was elected, though closely pressed
by Mr. Case. From that time Mr. Case, who was not in any respect a
politician, and who had at no time a desire or need for office, took no
active part in politics.

Mr. Case did not possess a strong constitution, and early in life his
medical attendant reported against his being sent to college, as the
application would be too severe a strain on his health. In accordance with
the advice then given, he devoted much attention to hunting, fishing, and
to horticultural and agricultural pursuits. But these were insufficient to
save him, and he died April 19th, 1862, whilst yet in the prime of life,
being but forty years old.




Amasa Stone, Jr.



Conspicuous among the railroad managers connected with Cleveland, indeed
occupying a prominent position in the list of the railroad magnates of the
country, is the name of Amasa Stone, Jr. The high position he has
attained, and the wealth he has secured, are the rewards of his own
perseverance, industry, and foresight; every dollar he has earned
represents a material benefit to the public at large in the increase of
manufacturing or traveling facilities.

Mr. Stone was born in the town of Charlton, Worcester county,
Massachusetts, April 27th, 1818. He is of Puritan stock, the founder
of the American branch of the family having-landed at Boston in 1632,
from the ship Increase, which brought a colony of Puritans from
England. The first settlement of the family was at Waltham. The father
of Mr. Stone, also named Amasa, is now alive, hale and hearty, at the
age of ninety years.

Young Amasa Stone lived with his parents and worked upon the farm,
attending the town district school in its sessions, until he was seventeen
years old, when he engaged with an older brother for three years, to learn
the trade of a builder. His pay for the first year was to be forty
dollars, increasing ten dollars yearly, and to furnish his own clothing.
At the end of the second year, thinking he could do better, he purchased
the remainder of his time for a nominal sum, and from that time was his
own master. In the Winter of 1837-8, he attended the academy of Professer
Bailey, in Worcester, Mass., having saved sufficient from his small wages
to pay the expenses of a single term.

His first work on his own account was a contract to do the joiner work of
a house building by Col. Temple, at Worcester. The work was done, and in
part payment he took a note of a manufacturing firm for $130; within a
few months the firm failed, the note became worthless, and the first
earnings of the young builder were lost. That note Mr. Stone still
preserves as a memento.

The following year, at the age of twenty, he joined his two older brothers
in a contract for the construction of a church edifice in the town of East
Brookfield, Mass. In the succeeding year, 1839, he engaged with his
brother-in-law, Mr. William Howe, to act as foreman in the erection of
two church edifices and several dwelling-houses in Warren, Mass.

During this time Mr. Howe was engaged in perfecting his invention of what
is known as the Howe truss bridge. After securing his patent Mr. Howe
contracted to build the superstructure of the bridge across the
Connecticut river, at Springfield, for the Western Railroad Company. Mr.
Stone engaged with him in this work. During a part of the first year he
was employed on the foundations of the structure in the bed of the river.
Thereafter until the year 1842, he was employed constantly by Mr. Howe in
the erection of railway and other bridges, and railway depot buildings. In
the Winter of 1841, his duties were most trying and arduous. About a
thousand lineal feet of bridging on the Western Railroad, in the Green
Mountains, had to be completed, and Mr. Stone and his men were called upon
to carry the work through. In some locations the sun could scarcely be
seen, the gorges were so deep and narrow, while during a large portion of
the time the thermometer ranged below zero. But the work was successfully
completed.

In the year 1842, he formed a copartnership with Mr. A. Boody, and
purchased from Mr. Howe his bridge patent for the New England States,
including all improvements and renewals. Subsequently an arrangement was
concluded with Mr. D. L. Harris, under the name of Boody, Stone & Co., for
the purpose of contracting for the construction of railways, railway
bridges, and similar work, the mechanical details generally to be under
the charge of Mr. Stone. In the year 1845, Mr. Stone was appointed
superintendent of the New Haven, Hartford and Springfield Railroad, he,
however, still continuing his partnership in the firm of Boody, Stone &
Co., and the business of the firm becoming so heavy that within a year
from the time of his appointment he resigned his office as superintendent.

Circumstances occurred previous to his appointment that may be worthy of
remark. The purchase of the bridge patent, before alluded to, was for the
sum of forty thousand dollars, to be paid in annual instalments. A few
years after the purchase some defects showed themselves in the bridges
that had been erected on this plan, and many prominent engineers had come
to the conclusion that it was not superior to, if it equalled, the truss
plan of Col. Long, the arch and truss of Burr, or the lattice plan of
Ithial Towne, and the firm of Boody, Stone & Co. began to fear that they
had made a bad bargain in the purchase of the patent. Mr. Stone, in
relating the incident to a friend, said: "I came to the conclusion that
something must be done or there must be a failure, and it must not be a
failure. The night following was a sleepless one, at least until three
o'clock in the morning. I thought, and rolled and tumbled, until time and
again I was almost exhausted in my inventive thoughts, and in despair,
when at last an idea came to my mind that relieved me. I perfected it in
my mind's eye, and then came to the conclusion that it would not only
restore the reputation of the Howe bridge, but would prove to be a better
combination of wood and iron for bridges than then existed, and could not
and would not in principle be improved upon. Sleep immediately came. I
afterwards, with models, proved my conclusions and have not, up to this
time, changed them." It seems that the invention consisted in the
introduction of longitudinal keys and clamps in the lower chords, to
prevent their elongation, and iron socket bearings instead of wooden for
the braces and bolts, to avoid compression and shrinkage of the timber,
which was the great defect in the original invention, and the adoption of
single instead of double intersection in the arrangement of the braces,
the latter being the arrangement in the original invention.

In the autumn of 1846, an incident occurred that may be worthy of
notice. On the 14th day of October, when walking in Broadway, New York,
Mr. Stone met the president of the New Haven, Hartford and Springfield
Railroad, who had in his hand a telegram, stating that the bridge across
the Connecticut river at Enfield Falls, one-fourth of a mile long, had
been carried away by a hurricane. The president asked the advice of Mr.
Stone, who stated that the timber for that structure was furnished by
Messrs. Campbell & Moody, of that city, and advised that he order it
duplicated at once. The president, a very faithful officer, but
disinclined to take responsibilities, asked Mr. Stone to take the
responsibility of ordering it. Mr. Stone replied, "Not unless I am
president." The timber was, however, ordered, and at the request of the
president, Mr. Stone went immediately with him to Springfield, where a
committee of the board was called together, and he was asked to propose
terms, and the shortest time upon which his firm would contract to
complete the bridge. He stated that his terms would be high, as the
season was late and would likely be unfavorable before so heavy a work
could be completed, and further suggested that if they chose to appoint
him manager of the work, he would accept and do the best he could for
them. He was immediately appointed sole manager of the work, and the
board placed at his control all the resources of the company. The work
was immediately commenced by bringing to the site men and material, and
it was completed, and a locomotive and train of cars run across it by
Mr. Stone within forty days from the day the order was given for its
erection. The structure consisted of seven spans of seventy-seven feet
each, with two other spans at each end of about fifty feet each. Mr.
Stone has been heard to state that he regarded this as one of the most
important events of his life, and that no one was more astonished than
himself at the result. He was rewarded by complimentary resolutions, and
a check for one thousand dollars by the company.

The following Winter the partnership of Boody, Stone & Co. was dissolved
by mutual consent, and the territory that their contract for the bridge
patent covered was divided, by Mr. Stone taking the States of
Massachusetts, Connecticut and Rhode Island, and Mr. Boody the other three
States. A new partnership was then formed between Mr. Stone and Mr.
Harris, which continued until the year 1849.

From the year 1839 to 1850, the residence of Mr. Stone, most of the time,
was in Springfield, Mass., but the numerous contracts in which he was
interested called him into ten different States, He served several years
as a director in the Agawam Bank, was also a director for several years,
and one of the building committee in the Agawam Canal Company, which
erected and run a cotton mill of ten thousand spindles, in the town of
West Springfield.

In the autumn of 1848, he formed a partnership with Mr. Stillman Witt and
Mr. Frederick Harbach, who contracted with the Cleveland, Columbus and
Cincinnati Railroad Company to construct and equip the road from Cleveland
to Columbus. This was the largest contract that had, at that time, been
entered into, of this character, by any one party or firm in the United
States. A large amount of the capital stock was taken in part payment for
the work. It was generally regarded as a hazardous adventure, but the work
was carried through in accordance with the terms of the contract, and
proved to be a profitable investment for its stockholders. In his
partnership contract it was stipulated that he was to act as financial
agent at the East, to send out the necessary mechanics, and to
occasionally visit the work, but was not to change his residence. Events,
however, occurred that required his constant presence in Ohio, and in the
Spring of 1850, he moved his family to Cleveland, where they have since
resided. In the Winter of 1850-1, the road was opened for business through
from Cleveland to Columbus, and Mr. Stone was appointed its
superintendent.

[Illustration: Respectfully, Amasa Stone, Jr.]

In the Fall of 1850, the firm of Harbach, Stone & Witt contracted with
the Cleveland, Painesville and Ashtabula Railroad Company to construct the
railroad from Cleveland to the State line of Pennsylvania, and furnish it
with cars, and to take in part payment for the work a large amount of the
stock and bonds of the Company. Soon after the execution of this contract,
Mr. Harbach died suddenly in the city of New York, and the completion of
the work devolved on Messrs. Stone and Witt. The completion of the road
through to Erie principally devolved upon the Cleveland company, and was
attended with many difficulties, as the Legislature of Pennsylvania seemed
determined that no road should be built through the State along the shore
of Lake Erie, and the general impression was, at that time, that the
construction of a road along the shore of the lake was a wild scheme and
would prove a failure. It was difficult to get capital subscribed and more
difficult to collect instalments. The contractors having confidence in its
success, prosecuted the work with vigor up to a period when they found
they had expended more than $200,000, while the aggregate amount that the
railroad company was able to raise and pay them was less than $100,000. An
effort was then made, with success, to engage the services of Mr. Alfred
Kelley. His well known character, aided by the reputation of others who
were elected directors, and a subscription from the city of Cleveland of
$100,000, enabled the company to meet its engagements with the
contractors, who carried the work forward to completion, and the road was
opened through to Erie in the Winter of 1852, when Mr. Stone was appointed
its superintendent. Notwithstanding the great expense that had to be
incurred in crossing the deep ravines in the State of Pennsylvania, and
the heavy burdens imposed on the company by that State, it has proved to
be one of the most successful railroad enterprises in the United States.

In the year 1852, Mr. Stone was elected a director in both Cleveland,
Columbus and Cincinnati, and the Cleveland, Painesville and Ashtabula
Railroad Companies, and has held that office in both companies
continuously up to the present date. He also continued to hold the office
of superintendent of both roads until the year 1854, when he insisted on
being relieved in consequence of failing health, caused by the arduous
labors which seemed unavoidably to devolve upon him. He was elected
president of the Cleveland, Painesville and Ashtabula Railroad Company in
the year 1857, which office he has continued to hold for twelve successive
years, until 1869.

In 1868, the Cleveland and Toledo Railroad was leased perpetually to the
Cleveland, Painesville and Ashtabula Railroad Company, at which time he
was also elected President of the former company.

In the year 1855, he, with Mr. Witt, contracted to build the Chicago and
Milwaukee Railroad, and was for many years a director in that company, and
for awhile its president.

For several years he held the office of director in the Merchants Bank, of
Cleveland. From its first organization until it was closed up, he was
director in the Bank of Commerce, of Cleveland, and has been director in
the Second National Bank, and the Commercial National Bank, of Cleveland,
and the Cleveland Banking Company, from the time of their respective
organizations until the present time. He was for some years president of
the Toledo Branch of the State Bank, at Toledo. He was elected a director
in the Jamestown and Franklin Railroad Company in the year 1863, which
office he has held until the present time. In the same year he was elected
president of the Mercer Iron and Coal Company and held the office until
the close of the year 1868.

Mr. Stone aided in the establishment of several manufactories at this
point. During the construction of the railroads from Cleveland, his firm
carried on extensive car shops in the city, where cars were constructed,
not only for those two roads, but for several others. He gave financial
aid and personal influence to the establishment and maintenance of several
leading iron manufacturing establishments and machine shops. In the year
1861-2, he erected, in the city of Cleveland, a woolen mill of five sets
of machinery, and for several years ran it and turned out more goods
annually than any other mill in the state of Ohio. He subsequently sold it
to Alton Pope & Sons.

He is often pleased to note the progress in American enterprise, and among
other events that has come under his own observation, relates the
following: In the year 1839, he commenced his first railroad service upon
the foundation of a bridge that was then being erected across the
Connecticut river at Springfield, Mass., of 1260 feet in length. It was
regarded as a very difficult undertaking, as the bed of the river was
composed mostly of quicksand, and a rise of 25-1/2 feet in the river had
to be provided for, and floating ice, its full width, fifteen inches in
thickness. Maj. George W. Whistler, the first of his profession, was chief
engineer of the work, and he had as advisers Maj. McNeal, Capt. Swift, and
other eminent engineers. The work was about three years under
construction, at a cost of over $131,000, and every effort was made to
keep its cost at the lowest possible point, at the same time making
certain the stability of the structure. Within nine years from the time of
its completion, a similar structure, in every particular, was to be
constructed across the same river, at Hartford, twenty-six miles below.
Its length varied but a few feet, although it covered more water, and its
foundations and other contingencies were quite as difficult and
unfavorable. Mr. Stone concluded a contract for its construction for the
firm of Stone & Harris, complete, for the sum of $77,000, and to have it
ready for the cars in twenty months. The work was executed in accordance
with the terms of the contract, and has not only proved as substantial as
that at Springfield, but in many particulars, more so. It was the pride of
Mr. Stone for many reasons, (among others, that it was stated by many that
it could not be done for this sum of money,) to personally superintend
this work himself, and to put in practice some of his own inventions, the
most important of which was the cutting off the foundation piles with a
saw arranged on a scow, propelled by a steam engine, and the sinking of
the piers below water by means of screws. The result proved to be
satisfactory, and as favorable, in a financial point of view, as he
estimated. It will be noticed that the bridge structure, complete, at
Hartford, cost $54,000 less than that at Springfield, of like character.

He has been interested in the construction of more than ten miles in
length of truss bridging, and in the construction of roofs of large
buildings, covering more than fifteen acres of ground, most of which he
designed and personally superintended their election. The last extensive
structure that he designed, and the election of which he personally
superintended, was the Union Passenger Depot, at Cleveland. He was the
first person that designed and erected pivot draw-bridges of long spans,
which, however, have been much increased in length of span by other
parties since. He was also the first to design and erect a dome roof of a
span of 150 feet, sufficient to cover three lengths of a locomotive with
its tender, and numerous are the improvements he has introduced in the
construction of railroad cars and locomotives. The only eight-wheeled dump
gravel car in successful use was designed and put in practice by him.

For a number of years Mr. Stone has been trustee of the First Presbyterian
Church Society of Cleveland, and still holds that office. He was chairman
of the building committee in the election of the new church edifice, and
when it was burned down, was again elected chairman of the building
committee, and given full charge of the reconstruction of the building.

In 1868, Mr. Stone visited Europe, being compelled to seek relief, for a
brief period, from the exhausting cares of his numerous business
engagements. He is expected to return in the Fall of this year, ready to
again engage in the active prosecution of the important enterprises with
which he is connected, and in which he has won such distinction by his
sound common sense, sound judgment, unresting energy, and practicable
knowledge. In whatever he undertakes there is good reason for believing
that the success he has hitherto met will still attend his efforts.




Stillman Witt



Connected indissolubly with the story of the rise and progress of the
important railroad interests of Cleveland and northern Ohio, is the name
of Stillman Witt. As one of the builders of the pioneer railroad from the
city, and of the next in point of time, which has since become one of the
foremost lines of the country in importance and profitableness, Mr. Witt
deserves honorable record among the men who have contributed most to make
Cleveland what it is to-day, a rich, populous, and rapidly growing city.

Stillman Witt is a self-made man, and unlike some of this class, his
self-manufacture will stand the test of close criticism. The material has
not been spoiled or warped in the process. Those who know him best know
that the struggles of his early years have not soured his disposition or
hardened his feelings, and that access of fortune has not made him
purse-proud. The Stillman Witt of to-day, rich and influential, is the
same Stillman Witt who paddled a ferry boat at about forty cents a day,
and was happy in his good fortune.

Mr. Witt was born in Worcester, Massachusetts, January 4th, 1808. His
parentage was humble, and, in consequence, his facilities for obtaining an
education very limited. When about thirteen years old, his father moved
with his family to Troy, New York, where young Stillman was hired by
Richard P. Hart to run a skiff ferry, the wages being ten dollars per
month, which the lad thought a sum sufficient to secure his independence.
Among the passengers frequently crossing the ferry was Mr. Canvass White,
U. S. Engineer, at that time superintending the construction of public
works in various parts of the country. Mr. White took a strong fancy to
the juvenile ferryman, and was so much impressed by the interest the boy
manifested in construction, that he applied to Stillman's father for
permission to take the lad and educate him in his own profession. The
permission was granted, and from that day dates the career of the future
railroad builder.

[Illustration: Yours Truly, S. Witt]

Young Witt was greatly pleased with his new profession, and devoted
himself to it with such zeal and faithfulness that he grew rapidly in the
esteem of his patron. When he had sufficiently progressed to be entrusted
with works of such importance, he was dispatched in different directions
to construct bridges and canals as the agent of Mr. White. In this manner
he superintended the construction of the bridge at Cohoes Falls, on the
Mohawk river, four miles above Troy, where, in conjunction with Mr. White,
he laid out a town which has since grown to a population of thirty
thousand. The side cut on the Erie canal, at Port Schuyler, was dug under
his management, and the docks there, since covered with factories, were
built by him. When these were completed he was dispatched into
Pennsylvania, with twenty-four carpenters, all his seniors, to build a
State bridge at the mouth of the Juniata, from Duncan Island to Peter's
Mountain. He was then ordered to the work on the Louisville and Portland
canal, but before this was completed he was taken sick and remained a
prisoner in a sick room at Albany for thirteen months.

With his recovery came a temporary change of occupation. Abandoning for a
time his work of bridge building and canal digging, he took charge of the
steamboat James Farley, the first lake-canal boat that towed through,
without transhipment, to New York. This was followed by his taking charge,
for between two and three years, of Dr. Nott's steamboat Novelty. Next he
became manager of the Hudson River Association line of boats, in which
capacity he remained during the existence of the association, ten years.
The Albany and Boston Railroad having been opened, Mr. Witt was invited to
become its manager at Albany, and accepted the trust, remaining in that
position seven years and a half.

Now came the most important epoch in Mr. Witt's life. After a hard
struggle the scheme for the construction of a railroad between Cleveland
and Columbus assumed definite shape, a company was organized and was
prepared to go to work when contractors should be found who would build
the road with a little money and a good deal of faith. Mr. Witt's
opportunity had come. At the end of a four days' toilsome journey from
Buffalo in a cab, he reached Cleveland, and satisfactory arrangements were
finally entered into. A firm was formed, under the name of Harbach, Stone
& Witt, and the work commenced. The story of the building of the
Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati Railroad has already been told in
another part of this volume; it is a story of hoping almost against hope,
of desperate struggles against opposition and indifference, and of final
triumph. Mr. Witt's part in the struggle was an important one, and the
solid benefit resulting from the success that crowned the enterprise was
well deserved by him.

Before the work of construction was half completed, Mr. Harbach died, and
the firm remained Stone & Witt, under which name it has become familiar to
all parts of the American railroad world. The road was opened between
Cleveland and Columbus in 1851, and the success that speedily followed the
opening, demonstrated the wisdom of the projectors of the line, and
justified the faith of its contractors. The three years of construction
had not terminated before Messrs. Stone & Witt undertook the construction
of the Cleveland, Painesville and Ashtabula Railroad, and in two years
this road, now one of the richest and most powerful lines of the country,
was completed. This was followed, sometime after, by the building of the
Chicago and Milwaukee Railroad, which required but one year to construct,
although built in the best manner.

With the completion of the Chicago and Milwaukee road Mr. Witt's active
career as a railroad builder ceased. Since that time he has been chiefly
employed in the management of his extensive railroad and banking
interests, having been at different periods a director in the Michigan
Southern; Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati; Cleveland, Painesville and
Ashtabula; Cleveland and Pittsburgh; Chicago and Milwaukee, and
Bellefontaine and Indiana railroads, besides being vice-president of two
of these roads and president of one of them. His connection with the
Bellefontaine and Indiana Railroad is noticeable from the fact that it was
by his sagacity and unwearied energy, ably assisted by the late Governor
Brough, as general manager, that the company was raised from absolute
insolvency to a high rank among dividend paying lines. Mr. Witt had gone
into the undertaking with a number of other Clevelanders, had all but lost
his entire investment, but had never lost faith in the ultimate success of
the line, or flagged for an instant in his efforts to bring about that
success. The event proved the justness of his conclusions.

In addition to his railroad engagements, Mr. Witt is president of the Sun
Insurance Company, of Cleveland; director of the Second National, and
Commercial National Banks, and Cleveland Banking Company; also, of the
Bank of Toledo. His interests are not all centered in railroad and banking
enterprises, he having investments in the Cleveland Chemical Works, and in
several other enterprises that contribute to the prosperity of the city.

Mr. Witt was married in June, 1834, to Miss Eliza A. Douglass, of Albany,
but who was a native of Rhode Island. Of the four children who were the
fruit of this marriage, but two survive. The elder daughter, Mary, is now
the wife of Mr. Dan P. Eells, of Cleveland. The younger, Emma, is the wife
of Col. W. H. Harris, of the United States Army, now in command of the
arsenal at Indianapolis.

Mr. Witt's qualifications as a business man are attested by his success,
won not by a mere stroke of luck, but by far-seeing sagacity, quick
decision, and untiring industry. From first to last he never encountered a
failure, not because fortune chanced always to be on his side, but because
shrewdness and forethought enabled him to provide against misfortune. As a
citizen he has always pursued a liberal and enlightened policy, ever ready
to unite in whatever promised to be for the public good. In social life he
has a wide circle of attached friends, and not a single enemy. Genial,
unselfish, deeply attached to his family, and with a warm side for
humanity in general, Mr. Witt has made for himself more friends than
perhaps he himself is aware of.

Wealth and position have enabled him to do numerous acts of kindness, and
his disposition has prompted him to perform those acts without ostentation
and with a gracefulness that gave twofold value to the act.

In religious belief Mr. Witt is a Baptist, having joined with that church
organization in Albany, thirty-one years ago. For years he has been a
valuable and highly respected member of the First Baptist Church in
Cleveland.




James Farmer.



Although James Farmer has been a resident of Cleveland but thirteen years,
and cannot, therefore, be ranked among the old settlers of the city, he is
looked upon as one of its most respected citizens, whose word is as good
as a secured bond, and whose sound judgment and stability of character
place him among the most valuable class of business men. But though
prudent in business affairs, and of deeply earnest character in all
relations of life, Mr. Farmer has not allowed the stern realities of life
to obscure the lighter qualities that serve to make life endurable. Always
cheerful in manner and genial in disposition, with a quaint appreciation
of the humorous side of things, he endeavors to round off the sharp
corners of practical life with a pleasant and genial smile. A meditative
faculty of mind, untrammeled by the opinions or dicta of others, has led
Mr. Farmer into independent paths of thought and action, in all his
affairs. Before taking any course, he has thought it out for himself, and
decided on his action, in accordance with his conscientious convictions of
right, independent of considerations of mere worldly notice.

Mr. Farmer was born near Augusta, Georgia, July 19th, 1802. His early
opportunities for acquiring an education were scant, only such knowledge
being gained as could be picked up in a common school, where the
rudiments of an education only are taught. Until his twenty-first year,
his time was chiefly spent on his father's farm, but on attaining his
majority he concluded to strike out a different path for himself, and
coming north, he engages in the manufacture of salt, and in the milling
business, at Salineville, Ohio. His means were small, but by assiduous
attention to business he was moderately successful. Four years later he
added a store for general marchandise to his mill and salt works, and
thus added to his property.

In the Spring of 1847, Mr. Farmer, imbued with the spirit of progress, and
appreciating in advance the benefits to accrue from the proposed Cleveland
and Pittsburgh Railroad, entered with spirit into the enterprise, worked
hard in procuring subscriptions to the stock, and aided in various ways to
its consummation. For several years he held the position of president of
the company, and it was through his labors in this channel of commerce,
that he became so thoroughly identified with the progress and prosperity
of Cleveland.

[Illustration: Very Respectfully, James Farmer]

On the completion of the railroad, Mr. Farmer was among the first to
avail himself of the increased facilities for business offered by the
road, and embarked in the coal trade, having previously owned coal fields
in Salineville. These coal fields were now worked, and the product shipped
by railroad to Cleveland and other points.

In the Spring of 1856, he removed to Cleveland, abandoning the mercantile
business after devoting to it thirty-two years of his life, and having
been completely successful. His coal fields still continue to furnish
supplies to the coal market of Cleveland.

So far as human power can be said to control human affairs, Mr. Farmer has
been wholly the architect of his own fortunes. The prosperity that has
attended his efforts has been due to the close attention given his
legitimate business, his strictness in making and keeping contracts, his
prudent economy, and his nice sense of commercial honor and general
honesty. What man can do to make honest success, he has endeavored to do,
and Providence has smiled upon his efforts.

Mr Farmer is still a hale appearing gentleman, though sixty-seven years
old, retaining most of his mental vigor, and much of his physical stamina,
and will, we trust, be permitted to remain among us for years to come,
that he may enjoy the fruits of his labor, and have the satisfaction felt
by those only who minister to the necessities of others.

In 1834, Mr. Farmer was married to Miss Meribah Butler, of Columbiana
county, Ohio, by whom he has had seven children, of whom five still
live--one son and four daughters. The son, Mr. E. J. Farmer, has been for
some years engaged in the banking business in Cleveland.

The father of Mr. James Farmer joined the Society of Friends, and was an
honored member of that society. His family were all brought up in the same
faith, and Mr. James Farmer has maintained his connection with the
society, by the members of which he is held in high respect and esteem.




George B. Ely.



George B. Ely is a native of Jefferson county, New York, a county which
has contributed many good citizens to the population of Cleveland. He was
born in the town of Adams, June 23d, 1817, received a good academical
education, and when seventeen left the academy to become clerk with Judge
Foster, under whose auspices he came to Cleveland. After serving with
Judge Foster one year in Cleveland, he accepted the position of
book-keeper in the forwarding house of Pease & Allen, on the river,
remaining in this position until 1843. At that date he removed to Milan,
Erie county, then at the head of slackwater navigation on the Huron river.
Here he engaged in trading in wheat, and in the general forwarding
business, and also became interested in lake shipping, doing business
under the firm name of Wilber & Ely.

In 1851, the railroad between Columbus and Cleveland was completed, and
the course of trade was almost entirely diverted from its old channels.
The business of Milan fell away rapidly, and the forwarding trade at that
point was completely at an end, Mr. Ely closed up his connection with the
place in the Spring of 1852, and removed to Cleveland, where he had
engaged a warehouse with the intention of continuing in the forwarding
business, but was induced to take the secretaryship of the Cleveland,
Painesville and Ashtabula Railroad, many of his old business and personal
friends having become interested in that undertaking and desiring the
benefit of his business tact and experience. About a year after his
accession to the company, the offices of secretary and treasurer were
combined, and Mr. Ely assumed charge of the joint offices. Three years
later he was elected a director of the company and has continued in that
position to the present time. At various times he has been chosen
vice-president of the company. In 1868, he was elected president of the
Cleveland and Toledo Railroad Company, retaining that position until the
consolidation of the company with the Cleveland and Erie Railroad Company,
and the formation of the Lake Shore Railroad Company. Mr. Ely is now the
oldest officer in point of service in the Consolidated company, and is
about the oldest employee. During all his long service he has been an
indefatigable worker, having the interests of the line always at heart,
and his arduous and faithful services have contributed their full share to
the prosperity of the company.

[Illustration: Yours Respectfully, Geo. B. Ely]

Whilst always watchful for the interests of the road with which he was
connected, Mr. Ely found time to engage in other enterprises tending to
advance the material interests of the city. In connection with Messrs.
R. H. Harman, A. M. Harman, and L. M. Coe, he projected and built the
Cleveland City Forge and put it into successful operation in the year 1864.
This forge has now four large hammers at work, and preparations are making
for two others, and it gives employment to about eighty skilled workmen.
He was one of the projectors of the Pennsylvania Coal Company, of
Cleveland, an organization having five thousand acres of coal lands in
Mercer county, Pennsylvania, and now that the Jamestown and Franklin
Railroad is completed, the prospects of ample returns for the outlay are
good. Sixty tons of good coal are daily delivered in Cleveland, whilst the
best markets of the product are found in Erie, Buffalo, and the
Pennsylvania oil regions. Of this company Mr. Ely is treasurer and one of
its directors.

Among his other business connections he was a director in the old Bank of
Commerce from its early days until it was reorganized as the Second
National Bank, and is still a director under the new organization. He is
also a director in the Citizens Savings and Loan Association, and is
interested in the Cleveland Banking Company.

Mr. Ely has been the architect of his own fortune, and attributes his
success in life to close application to business and a firm determination
never to live beyond his income. He is now fifty-two years old, enjoys
vigorous health, and has never been seriously sick. From present
appearances he has a fair prospect of a long life in which to enjoy the
fruits of his labors, and to pass the afternoon and evening of his life
amid domestic comforts earned by industry and the esteem of a large circle
of friends to whom he has become endeared by his many social qualities and
personal virtues.

In 1843, he was married to Miss Gertrude S. Harman, of Brooklyn, Michigan,
and formerly of Oswego, New York. They have one son, now twenty-five years
old, who has charge of the Cleveland City Forge, and one daughter, Helen,
aged seventeen, who is now at school.




Worthy S. Streator.



Dr. Streator, as he is still called, although for many years he has
abandoned the active practice of medicine, was born in Madison county, New
York, October 16th, 1816. He received an academical education, and at the
age of eighteen he entered a medical college, where he remained four
years. On completing his medical course he went to Aurora, Portage county,
Ohio, where he commenced the practice of his profession, in the year 1839
In Aurora he remained rive years, when he removed to Louisville, Kentucky,
spent a year in the medical college there, and returned to Portage county,
resuming his practice in Ravenna.

In 1850, Dr. Streator removed from Ravenna to Cleveland, and after
remaining two years in the practice of medicine, turned his attention to
railroad building. In conjunction with Mr. Henry Doolittle, he undertook
the contract for building the Greenville and Medina Railroad, and
completed it successfully. In 1853, the same parties contracted for the
construction of the Atlantic and Great Western Railway in Ohio, a work of
244 miles. Operations were at once commenced, and were pushed forward with
varying success, funds of the company coming in fitfully. In 1860, the
same firm took contracts for the construction of the Pennsylvania portion
of the line, ninety-one miles, and next for the New York portion. Work on
both these contracts was commenced in February, 1860, and the road was
completed from Salamanca, in New York, to Corry, in Pennsylvania,
sixty-one miles, in the Spring of 1861.

During the prosecution of the work Mr. Doolittle died, and, in 1861,
Dr. Streator sold the unfinished contracts to Mr. James McHenry, of
London, England, by whom they were completed, Dr. Streator acting as
superintendent of construction for about a year after the transfer
of contract.

[Illustration: Yours Truly, W. S. Streator]

In 1862, he projected the Oil Creek Railroad, from Corry to Petroleum
Center, the heart of the Pennsylvania oil regions, a line thirty-seven
miles long. The line was built with extraordinary rapidity, and achieved a
success unparalleled in railway history. No sooner had the rails reached a
point within striking distance of Oil Creek than its cars were crowded
with passengers flocking to the "oildorado," and for many months, during
the height of the oil fever, the excited crowds struggled at the stations
for the privilege of a standing place on the car platforms after the seats
and aisles were filled. The resources of the road were inadequate to meet
the great demand on it for the transportation of passengers and oil, and
although Dr. Streator worked energetically to keep pace with the demand
upon the road, the development of the oil regions, consequent upon the
construction of the line, for some time outstripped him. The profits of
the line were enormous in proportion to the outlay, but the amount of
wealth it created in the oil regions was still more extraordinary. Dr.
Streator managed the road until 1866, when he sold out his interest to
Dean Richmond and others interested in the New York Central Railroad. In
order to connect the Oil Creek Railroad with the line of its purchasers an
extension northward, styled the Cross-Cut Railroad, was built from Corry
to Brocton, on the Buffalo and Erie Railroad, a distance of forty-two
miles, by Dr. Streator, for the New York Central Railroad Company. This
was the last of Dr. Streator's railroad building undertakings.

Since the close of his railroad business Dr. Streator has organized a
company, mainly composed of citizens of Cleveland, for the working of coal
lands purchased in La Salle, on the Vermillion river, Illinois. The
purchase contains three thousand acres on which is a five and one-half
feet splint-vein of coal resembling in general characteristics the
Massillon coal of Ohio. Thirteen miles of railroad have been built to
connect the mines with the Illinois Central Railroad, and during the year
that the road has been opened the average product of the mines has been
two hundred and fifty tons per day, with demands for more, that cannot be
met owing to a deficiency of rolling stock. By the close of 1869, it is
expected the product will reach a thousand tons daily. Another railroad is
to be built to connect with the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad.

Aside from his interest in this coal company, Dr. Streator has now no
active business engagements, and devotes his time to the care of his real
estate and a fine stock farm in East Cleveland, containing over three
hundred acres, on which he is raising some of the finest stock to be found
in the county.

Dr. Streator has had the good sense to retire from the pressing cares of
business whilst able to enjoy the fruits of his labors. At fifty-three
years old he is healthy and vigorous, and fully able to appreciate the
advantages of wealth in procuring social and domestic enjoyments. His
residence on Euclid avenue is a model of comfort and elegance, and the
surrounding grounds are laid out with artistic taste.

He was married in 1839, to Sarah W. Sterling, of Lyman, N. Y. His only
daughter is the wife of E. B. Thomas, Esq., of Cleveland; his oldest son
devotes his attention to the care of the stock farm; the other sons are
yet at home, being young.

Although Mr. Streator has been regarded, for years, as one of our most
active and energetic business men, he has found time to devote to his
religious duties. He has for a long time been a useful member of the
Disciple Church.




The Coal Interest



By the commencement of the season of 1828, the Ohio canal had been opened
from Cleveland to Akron. Henry Newberry, father of Professer Newberry, who
among his other possessions on the Western Reserve, owned some valuable
coal lands, saw, or fancied he saw, an opening for an important trade in
coal, and sent a shipment of a few tons to Cleveland by way of experiment.
On its arrival a portion of it was loaded in a wagon and hawked around the
city, the attention of leading citizens being called to its excellent
quality and its great value as fuel. But the people were deaf to the voice
of the charmer. They looked askance at the coal and urged against it all
the objections which careful housewives, accustomed to wood fires, even
now offer against its use for culinary purposes. It was dirty, nasty,
inconvenient to handle, made an offensive smoke, and not a few shook their
heads incredulously at the idea of making the "stone" burn at all. Wood
was plentiful and cheap, and as long as that was the case they did not see
the use of going long distances to procure a doubtful article of fuel,
neither as clean, convenient, nor cheap as hickory or maple. By nightfall
the wagon had unsuccessfully traversed the streets and found not a single
purchaser for its contents. Here and there a citizen had accepted a little
as a gift, with a doubtful promise to test its combustible qualities.
Eventually, Philo Scovill was persuaded into the purchase of a moderate
quantity at two dollars per ton, and promised to put in grates at the
Franklin House to properly test its qualities.

That was the beginning of a trade which has since grown to mammoth
proportions, and which has become the foundation of the prosperity of
Cleveland, for it is to the proximity and practically inexhaustibleness of
its coal supply that Cleveland owes its manufacturing character, which is
the secret of its rapid development within a few years, its present
prosperity, and the assured greatness of its future.

As a domestic fuel coal made slow progress in the city for many years, but
other uses were found for it, and the receipts of coal by canal rapidly
increased. Steamboats multiplied on the lakes, and these found the coal of
Cleveland a valuable fuel. By degrees manufacturing was ventured on, in a
small way, and there being no water-power of consequence, recourse was had
to steam, which created a moderate demand for coal. For ten years the
receipts increased steadily, until in 1838, it reached 2,496 tons. In
1848, it had grown to 66,551 tons, and in 1858--the canal transportation
being supplemented by two lines of railroad crossing the coal fields on
the way to Cleveland--to 222,267 tons. In 1868, it had swollen to 759,104
tons, and the demand continues to increase in a rate more than
proportionate to the enlarged sources of supply and increased facilities
for transportation.

The opening of the Cleveland and Mahoning Railroad gave a strong stimulus
to the coal trade of northern Ohio, and was one of the most important
events in the history of Cleveland. By this time the beds of the valuable
Briar Hill, or block coal, were tapped, which has proved the best fuel for
manufacturing iron from the raw ore, and has no superior, if it has a
rival, in the West. With the discovery of this bed of coal, blast furnaces
and rolling mills were established in the Mahoning Valley, and as the uses
of the coal became known in Cleveland and in other ports, a large demand,
for consumption in the city and exports to other points, sprang up. Over
one-half the amount of Ohio coal raised is of the Briar Hill grade, and of
the whole amount of Ohio coal raised, about one-half finds its market in
Cleveland.

The bituminous coal is of several grades, each suitable for a particular
purpose. The most important is the Briar Hill grade, mined in the southern
half of Trumbull county and finding its outlet by the Cleveland and
Mahoning Railroad. This is a good grate coal, but its great use is in the
manufacture of iron, and the numerous furnaces of the Mahoning Valley, the
iron manufactories of Cleveland, and the demand along the line of the
lakes, keep the numerous mines in full operation. The Mineral Ridge grade
is a comparatively new quality to Cleveland, and has yet but comparatively
few mines. It is used both for domestic and manufacturing purposes. The
Massillon grade is brought both by canal and railroad, and is highly
esteemed as a grate coal. The rapidly growing demand for grate fuel has
given a great stimulus to the mining of this coal within a few years. The
Hammondsville and Salineville grades are used chiefly for stoves in
domestic use, for steam purposes, and for the manufacture of gas. These
grades come to market on the Cleveland and Pittsburgh Railroad. The
Blossburgh grade is used almost entirely for blacksmithing.

Besides the Ohio bituminous coals there is a steadily increasing demand
for the anthracite and semi-anthracite coals of eastern Pennsylvania,
which is brought by lake from Buffalo.

The growth of the coal trade during the past four years can be seen by the
following table, showing the receipts from all sources and shipments,
chiefly by lake, coastwise and to Canadian ports:

  Date.      Receipts.       Shipments.

  1865.......439,483 tons....235,784 tons.
  1866.......583,107  "  ....397,840  "
  1867.......669,026  "  ....334,027  "
  1868.......759,104  "  ....392,928  "

The amount brought over each route of supply during 1868, is thus shown:

  By Lake, Anthracite...................................... 13,665 tons.
  " Canal, Bituminous...................................... 197,475 "
  " Cleveland and Pittsburgh Railroad...................... 274,159 "
  " Atlantic and Great Western Railroad
       (Cleveland and Mahoning)............................ 254,000 "
  " Cleveland and Erie Railroad............................ 17,600  "
  " Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati Railroad............ 2,205   "
                                                            -----------
                                                            759,104 "

This shows an increase of nearly 100,000 tons on the receipts of 1867,
notwithstanding a most obstinate and continued strike among the miners,
which diminished the receipts by the Atlantic and Great Western, from
20,000 to 30,000 tons. Of the shipments of each during the year, 382,928
tons went by lake, and about 10,000 tons by rail, mostly by Cleveland and
Toledo Railroad to Toledo and intermediate points.




William Philpot.



Although never a resident of Cleveland, the enterprise of William Philpot
so directly contributed to the prosperity of the city, the labors of his
life were so connected with it, and the interests he founded have since
become such an integral part of the business of Cleveland, that his
memoir appropriately finds a place in this work. It is proper, too, that
it should stand foremost in the department relating to the coal trade of
the city, for he may justly be considered one of the leading founders of
that trade.

William Philpot was born in Shropshire, England. At an early age he
removed to Wales and went to work in the mines at three pence per day.
Soon after he was able to earn full wages, he became an overseer, and
continued in that capacity until he took contracts on his own account. His
success was varied, on some he made handsomely, on others he failed. By
the year 1835, he accumulated about eight thousand dollars, and concluded
to go to the United States as affording greater facilities for small
capitalists. He proceeded to Pittsburgh, where he immediately interested
himself in the mining of coal. He commenced by leasing from one party a
portion of the coal and the right of way on a large tract of coal land,
for a term of twenty-one years, and leased coal from others, at a quarter
cent per bushel. Of another person he purchased a farm, bearing coal, at
seventy-five dollars an acre. In the Summer of 1837, he took into
partnership Mr. Snowden, and the firm set to work vigorously, mining coal
at Saw Mill Run and shipping on the Ohio river, to which Mr. Philpot had
built a railway a mile in length. The two partners were not well matched.
Mr. Philpot was full of energy, fertile in resources, and never slackened
in his endeavors to push his affairs. No difficulties daunted him; the
greater the obstacles the more pleasure he took in surmounting them. He
built his railroad tracks where most other men would have shrunk from
placing a rail and whilst those who commenced preparations for a mine at
the same time with himself were still in the preparatory stages of work,
his cars would be rattling down to the river loaded with coal. One great
secret of his ability to hasten matters was his influence with the men
under him. He was familiar and affable with them, worked energetically
among them whenever a sharp effort was needed, and in this way got more
work out of the men, without their feeling that they had been imposed
upon, than most employers could have done. Mr. Snowden was a man of an
entirely different stamp, and it soon became evident that the firm must
dissolve. After some negotiations Mr. Philpot disposed of his interests to
Messrs. Snowden and Lewis, and in 1838, removed to Paris, Portage county,
Ohio, where he had purchased a farm. His family at that time consisted of
his wife and two daughters; Mary Ann, now the wife of R. J. Price, Esq.,
Dorothy, now widow of the late David Morris, Esq. With them also was his
father, Samuel Philpot, now dead. Soon after his removal to Portage county
he became interested with Mr. Philip Price, in the excavation of the
Pennsylvania and Ohio canal, and during the progress of the work they
purchased land on either side of the canal, including Lock fourteen, where
they built a saw and flouring mill, using the canal water as motive power.
Towards the latter part of 1839, Mr. Philpot purchased the interest of Mr.
Price in the mills and land, and ran the mills successfully, until 1841,
when he sold both mills and land to Colonel Elisha Garrett, of
Garrettsville. In the Spring of 1841, Mr. Philpot rented his home farm and
removed with his family to Middlebury, Summit county, where he had
purchased a coal bank, and engaged once more in the coal trade.

The importance of his operations in coal, both to the business of the coal
regions and of Cleveland, which formed his principal market, can scarcely
be overestimated. Before removing to Springfield he discovered there, in
1840, a valuable coal mine, which he afterwards developed and worked
successfully, building a railroad of about three miles from the mines to
the canal at Middlebury, whence the coal was shipped to Cleveland. This
road he stocked with about forty coal cars, and for several years his mine
supplied the principal demand for the Cleveland market. In 1843, he
developed and improved the celebrated Chippewa mines, Wayne county, near
the village of Clinton, and built a railroad to the Ohio canal. From these
mines he supplied the Cleveland market with large quantities of coal until
the year 1845, when he sold out half his interests in them to Mr. Lemuel
Crawford, and some time afterward he sold one-quarter interest to Mr.
David Camp.

His next remove was to Youngstown, where, in 1846, he leased the Manning
and Wertz bank, and while sinking for coal, discovered iron ore. He then
went to Pittsburgh and endeavored to get up a furnace company, but not
being successful, he returned, and associated himself with Jonathan
Warner and a few others in organizing the Ohio Iron and Mining Company,
now known as the Eagle Furnace Company, Messrs. Philpot and Warner owning
two-thirds of the entire stock. Mr. Philpot at that time opened and
developed the Wertz and Manning Briar Hill coal mines, the furnace having
been built with the purpose of smelting iron ore with raw stone coal,
being the second constructed for this purpose in the Mahoning Valley, the
first being that of Wilkenson, Wilks & Co., at Lowellville. The
experiment was hazardous, and was carried forward under many difficulties,
financial and otherwise, but the energy and enterprise of Mr. Philpot
triumphed over them all.

Mr. Philpot was a man of rare energy, industry and practical good sense.
He was always successful for he seemed to have an intuitive knowledge of
what was the right course to take, and when once entered on an enterprise
never allowed himself to be defeated or discouraged. His integrity was
unquestioned. His word was as good as a bond, and was entirely relied on.
He was a kind husband and father, a true friend, and his heart and hand
were always open to the poor and distressed, many of whom were not only
relieved from their pressing emergencies, but were assisted to start in
business or to procure homesteads. Besides his many excellent social
qualities and business talents, he was possessed of a most extraordinary
memory, and it is related of him by one who knew him intimately, that
after hearing a speech or sermon that enlisted his whole attention, he
would sometimes rehearse it to others almost verbatim.

Mr. Philpot died in Liberty township, Trumbull county, June 2d, 1851.

In all the great enterprises of his business career, Mr. Philpot was ably
supported by his beloved partner in life, who was a woman of more than
ordinary ability. She was also most remarkably benevolent, bestowing much
care on the sick and indigent in her immediate neighborhood. She survived
her husband a number of years, and died at Cleveland, in August, 1865,
deeply lamented.




[Illustration: Lemuel Crawford]


Lemuel Crawford.



The subject of this sketch belonged to the business classes, as
distinguished from the professional, but which are none the less fruitful
in characters of prominence and public interest.

Indeed it has come to pass in later years that what are commonly known as
the learned professions, law, medicine and theology, though still high in
rank, have lost something of the ruling pre-eminence they occupied in our
earlier history. Other departments in the world's industry have asserted
themselves, and railway systems, telegraphs, commerce, journalism,
manufactures, banking, and other branches, have come forward and absorbed
their fair proportion of the best talent and ambition of the country.

Lemuel Crawford was born in Florida, Schoharie county, New York,
December 15, 1805.

Left without means, at the age of fourteen he chose the trade of moulder
in the iron or furnace business.

At twenty-one he came to Painesville, Ohio, where he was made foreman of
the Geauga Furnace. Here he remained about six years, having especial
superintendence of the pattern and moulding department, and filling his
position with great skill and credit. At this place, July 29, 1832, he
married Louisa Murray, of Willoughby, in the same county, who still
survives him, and to whose long and faithful companionship, judgment and
energy, in all the vicissitudes of his fortune, he was largely indebted
for his success.

In 1833, Mr. Crawford moved with his family to Detroit, whence, after
remaining six years, he removed to Presque Isle on Lake Huron, where he
was the first to start the wood trade, for fuel for our then rapidly
growing steamboat commerce. Here he remained seven years, superintending
large bodies of wood cutters and suppliers, the saw mills, now so common
in the lumber region, being then unknown.

In 1846, perceiving, with his usual forecast, that coal was likely to
supplant wood for the uses of our steam marine, he removed to Cleveland,
and at once invested about forty thousand dollars in the Chippewa mines,
so called, in the Mahoning Valley, which had been opened a year or two
before, and promised, as the event proved, to afford an almost
inexhaustible supply of the richest coal. These mines, adding tracts of
adjoining coal land to them as occasion demanded, he continued to work
with a large annual yield for more then twenty years.

Shortly after commencing with the Chippewa, he was found, in 1848, to be
among the pioneers in opening up the beds of Briar Hill coal in the
Mahoning Valley, so well known to steamboat men and manufacturers ever
since, as being a kind of coal peculiarly fitted for their uses. Here he
continued to mine largely at several different localities selected by him
with rare judgment. He also opened and carried on mining extensively at
other points, such as on the Ohio, below Steubenville, also in Orange
county, Pennsylvania, and elsewhere.

His chief business office and coal depots were at Cleveland, but he had
branch establishments at Detroit and Chicago, and at one time was largely
interested in vessel property on the Lakes, and although the business of
mining and selling coal, mainly for supplying steam craft and for
exportation, was his leading pursuit, he was one of the earliest in 1851,
to engage in the manufacture of pig iron from our native ores in the
Mahoning Valley, having an interest in the second furnace started there,
and being the builder of the fourth. From time to time he invested
judiciously in real estate.

From all these sources in spite of some business adventures which
proved disastrous, through unexpected financial revulsions, or the
fault of others, he succeeded in amassing a splendid fortune to be
inherited by his family. He was never a speculator, nor a rash
operator, but his business views were liberal and comprehensive, and
carried out with energy and wisdom. Personally he was a man of fine
presence and manners, always pleasant to meet with on the street,
cordial and unassuming. He was intensely loyal and liberal throughout
the war, and always kind and charitable to the poor. He was not a
church member, but was a regular church attendant and a respecter of
religions institutions. In his later years he was frequently an
invalid, and being in New York in the Fall of 1867, by the advice of
physicians, and in company with friends from Cleveland, he sailed for
Europe, where, in Paris, during the Exposition, he spent some months,
returning with health improved, but which again declined until June
30, 1868, when at the age of sixty-two years, six months and fifteen
days, he died at his beautiful home in Cleveland, surrounded by his
family and friends, peacefully and calmly, as a good man dies.

We feel that we can not do better than to conclude this brief and
imperfect sketch with the notice which appeared in the Cleveland Herald on
the evening of the day of his decease. Speaking of the event it says:

  We regret to announce the decease of this prominent business man and
  respected citizen, who died at his residence on Euclid avenue this
  (Tuesday) morning at about 9 o'clock.

  Mr. Crawford had for years been more or less an invalid, but had not
  been alarmingly ill until last Thursday, when by a sudden and severe
  attack he was completely prostrated, and recovery became hopeless.

  Mr. Crawford had nearly reached the age of sixty-three. A native of New
  York, beginning life with few, if any, adventitous aids, he had attained
  to affluence and position by a long and enterprising business career.
  For the last twenty-four years he has lived in Cleveland. He was among
  the pioneers in the coal mining business of Northern Ohio, contributing
  largely ever since by his sagacity and experience, to the development of
  that important element of commerce and public wealth.

  Through all the vicissitudes of a long business life he maintained a
  character of the most perfect integrity. As a citizen he was liberal and
  public spirited; as a neighbor and friend he was kind and generous; in
  his social and domestic relations he was simple and unostentatious,
  affectionate and beloved. Very many in the various ranks and conditions
  of life, both here and elsewhere, will mourn his loss, and remember him
  with sincere respect.




D. P. Rhodes.



The name of D. P. Rhodes is distinguished among those who have
contributed to the prosperity of Cleveland by the development of its coal
and iron interests. For many years he has labored to build up the coal
and iron trade of the city, on which its future mainly depends, and has
met with a success which has benefitted the public in a far greater
degree than it has enriched himself, although he has had nothing to
complain of in that respect.

Mr. Rhodes was born in Sudbury, Rutland county, Vermont. His father dying
when the boy was but five years old, he was compelled to work for his own
living, riding horse for his neighbors whilst they plowed corn, digging
potatoes and picking apples for every tenth bushel, and doing other odd
jobs. When he was fifteen years old his mother married again and he lived
with his stepfather till twenty-one. His stepfather, being rich, offered
him a farm if he would stay with him, but he was bent on seeing the West
before accepting the farm, and so set out westward. Whilst in the West he
became engaged to be married, and before marriage he visited his home,
when his stepfather offered him half his property if he would return there
and live. The papers were made out but were not to be executed till he had
consulted his affianced. To do this he returned to the West. As he
traveled by canal he had abundant time to consider the matter, and the
more he thought of it the more he became sick of the idea. Things were too
circumscribed down east to suit his taste. He said nothing of the matter
to his affianced, but wrote home that he was not coming; and to this day
he has never seen occasion to regret his decision, but has been confirmed
in its wisdom. To use his own expression: "By Jupiter, I would rather live
west, if I did'nt live half as long."

Mr. Rhodes became early interested in the coal business, his first
enterprise being in company with Messrs. Tod and Ford, in 1845, at the old
Briar Hill mines, from which they raised and shipped by canal about fifty
tons per week. This was considered a good business. In two or three years
business increased to a hundred tons daily. In 1846, another mine was
opened in Girard. This was followed by the Clover Hill mine in the
Tuscarawas Valley, previous to the opening of which the firm was changed
by the death of Mr. Ford. The next opened was the Clinton mines in the
Tuscarawas Valley. Then a mine in Fairview, Wayne county, which was the
last large transaction with Gov. Tod as partner. In about 1855, Tod and
Rhodes dissolved partnership, Mr. Rhodes taking Clover Hill, and Gov. Tod
all the rest of the interests.

Whilst developing his coal interests, Mr. Rhodes made important
discoveries of iron ore, the first being veins of black band ore, very
similar to the English and Scotch, though richer. The veins of this ore in
Tuscarawas are from five to fifteen feet thick. He also discovered and
worked a vein of mountain ore that will also run from five to fifteen feet
thick, and is easily mined, one miner being able to mine twenty tons per
day after the earth has been removed. Mr. Rhodes spent several months in
the ore fields of Scotland and England in 1868, and found the veins there
not over two feet in thickness.

[Illustration: Yours Truly, D. P. Rhodes]

In the Tuscarawas Valley property, Mr. Rhodes has found seven veins of
coal, five of which are very good, and he has worked the whole of them.
There is also as good fire-clay as any yet discovered, the finest grade
being pure sandstone, which stands fire as hearthstones in furnaces better
than any other. Shell ore, block ore, and limestone also exist in
abundance. The iron enterprises in which Mr. Rhodes is interested are the
Tuscarawas Iron Company, formed about 1864, of which Mr. Rhodes is
president. This company have three or four thousand acres of mineral land
in the Tuscarawas Valley, and the works have a capacity of a hundred and
fifty tons per week; also the Dover Rolling Mill Company, of which Mr.
Baker is president. It makes all sizes of merchant and small T rail iron,
having a capacity of about fifteen tons per day.

He is largely interested in a mining company near Massillon, having three
engines and three openings there, and can mine a thousand tons of coal per
day as soon as the road from Massillon to Clinton is completed. This will
be the shortest coal bearing road,--for blast furnace coal--to Cleveland,
by fifteen miles, for it connects with the Cleveland, Zanesville and
Cincinnati Railroad at Clinton, thence to Cleveland by Cleveland and
Pittsburgh Railroad at Hudson. A company was formed and sunk some eight
hundred or nine hundred feet, within three miles of Canal Dover, on the
line of this company, and found salt water of the very best quality, the
water itself being almost strong enough to preserve meat. There is coal
within twenty rods of the wells at ninety cents per ton, whereas in
Syracuse and Saginaw they have to use wood, at a cost (at the former
place) of seven dollars per cord. Mr. Cass, President of the Fort Wayne
Railroad, and J. N. McCullough, of the same and of the Cleveland and
Pittsburgh Railroad, are heavily interested in the road connections
adverted to above.

At Fulton, three miles below Clinton, is another coal company in which Mr.
Rhodes is interested. This mine yields about three hundred tons per day,
and could double that amount if there were sufficient transportation.
There are two engines and two openings at this bank.

Mr. Rhodes is also interested in three mines at Marseilles, Willmington
and Braceville, Illinois. He has taken a hearty interest in all
improvements, and especially in the matter of railroads. He was interested
in building the Northern Division of the Cleveland and Toledo Railroad,
and was on the executive committee.

D. P. Rhodes and H. S. Stevens built the West Side street railroad, and
equipped it. He was also largely interested in building and equipping the
Rocky River railroad. He is also interested in the Cleveland and
Zanesville railroad project.

Dr. Upson, of Talmadge, and Messrs. Philpot and Camp were in the coal
business when Mr. Rhodes commenced, and they have all disappeared. They
only then received about one boat load of fifty tons per week by canal,
whereas, the firm of Rhodes & Co. now handle from ninety thousand to one
hundred thousand tons per year.

Mr. Rhodes has built his docks in this city, two of them are the largest
on the line of the river. About seven hundred men are employed on works in
which he is heavily interested, but nothing troubles him. He says: "If the
men don't dig the coal or iron, they don't get paid for it, so I take it
easy, and am giving my attention to farming. I have a stock farm of five
hundred and forty-four and a half acres at Ravenna that I run myself, and
I have another of eighty acres adjacent to the city, rented for gardening,
and still another of twenty-six and a half acres, out on the Detroit road
where I intend to build me a home to live and die in, if I do not die away
from home." He is now only fifty-three years old, hale and hearty, and
seemingly good for another score or two of years.

He has four children, the oldest and youngest being daughters. The oldest
is the wife of M. A. Hanna, of the firm of Rhodes & Co. The oldest son,
Robert, is a member of the same firm; the other son, James, has just
returned from a long visit to the mineral fields of Europe and attending
lectures on metallurgy and mining. By his observation and studies he has
acquired an extensive knowledge of the old world and the modes of working
mines. The youngest daughter, Fanny, is at school at Batavia, New York.

In 1867, Mr. D. P. Rhodes and J. F. Card being tired of the sale department
of their coal business, and having immense interest in mines that
required close attention, gave up their sale business in Cleveland to
Rhodes & Co., a firm consisting of G. H. Warmington, M. A. Hanna, and
Robert R. Rhodes, who are receiving and selling both coal and iron, the
same as the old firm.

The sales of coal by the firm for the past two years amounted to one
hundred thousand tons per year; together with a large trade in pig iron
and ore. The Willson Bank and Massillon and also Briar Hill grades of coal
are principally handled by this firm, who are also operators largely in
the Pennsylvania anthracites.

The ores passing through Cleveland to supply the manufactories of the
Mahoning Valley are from Lake Superior and Canada; the Canada ores forming
quite an extensive item. The firm keep for sale many varieties of pig
iron, the most considerable being that of the Tuscarawas iron, but
including also the Lake Superior and Salisbury irons.

The business of the firm averages one million dollars per year, and
extends through the entire chain of lakes, having agencies at Chicago and
Milwaukee, and also on Lake Superior ports. The Chicago trade is steadily
increasing, for which there are two or three good reasons, to wit: The
city is growing very rapidly; the Illinois coals are very inferior to
those of Ohio, and the local demand for the product of the Illinois coal
fields is very large, owing to the scarcity of wood.




David Morris.



The importance of biography as a branch of historical literature is
indisputable, and long before reaching this portion of our work the reader
must have realized the truth, that in the life of the individual can be
seen mirrored not only his individual struggles, "but all mankind's
epitome." The trouble, trials and labors of the one are but specimens of
the struggles of the many who have to fight the battle of life, and who go
down to their graves unchronicled. From the story of those whose
experience is recorded, may be gleaned lessons of hope under the most
discouraging circumstances, of perseverance amid difficulties, and
assurances that labor and faith will eventually conquer. These lessons are
forcibly taught in the history of the subject of the present sketch.

David Morris was born of respectable parents, in Sirhowy, Monmouth county,
on the border of Wales, July 9th, 1819. His opportunities for acquiring an
education were limited, but such as they were he made the most of, and
obtained sufficient knowledge of the ordinary branches to enable him to
successfully carry on business in after life. When about twenty years of
age he emigrated to the United States, landing in New York. October 4th,
1839, in company with his mother and the remainder of the children, his
father having arrived earlier, for the purpose of seeking a location. The
first stop was made in Pottsville, Pennsylvania, thence they removed for a
short time to Llewellyn, and afterwards to Primrose, Schuylkill county.

In 1841, he left his parents and went to Middlebury, Summit county, Ohio.
He at once commenced digging coal for Mr. Philpot, with whom he had been
acquainted in Wales. After a few months he commenced driving team on the
railroad, and continued in that capacity for about two years. The zeal
and ability shown by the young man attracted the attention of his
employer, and proved of signal assistance in pushing forward the work. So
marked was the interest exhibited by Mr. Philpot in his assistant, that
he favored a closer connection, and in 1843, his daughter, Dorothy
Philpot, was married to David Morris. The young wife was a lady of more
than ordinary good qualities, and the union proved a source of unfailing
happiness, Mrs. Morris being not only an exemplary wife and mother in her
home, but by her counsel and assistance materially advancing the business
interests of her husband.

In 1847, Mr. Morris, in connection with W. H. Harris, contracted with
Lemuel Crawford for mining the Chippewa bank by the ton. After two years,
he took the management of the work for Crawford & Price, the latter having
purchased an interest. He then went to Girard to work his own mines at
that point. The coal being of an excellent quality, and the demand
constantly increasing, these mines became a source of great wealth,
engrossing large capital, and giving employment to a host of workmen.
Instead of the one mine which he found, his original enterprise, his
estate now comprises the Mineral Ridge mines, which have been worked about
eighteen years, and have yielded about a hundred and fifty tons per day;
the Girard mines, worked about the same period, and yielding two hundred
tons daily; and mines at Youngstown, which have been worked eight years.
The pay roll of these mines now bears about $12,000 per month, and the
freight bills on the railroad average $3,000 per week. The coal is mostly
brought to Cleveland, whence it is shipped to Chicago, Milwaukee,
Hamilton, and Toronto, a large amount going to the latter place.

In 1856, Mr. Morris moved to Cleveland, the amount of business transacted
with this city making this step prudent. Here the firm of Crawford, Price
& Morris was formed, which subsequently became Price, Crawford & Morris,
and finally Morris & Price. On the 15th of February, 1862, he died in the
forty-third year of his age.

[Illustration: Truly Yours, David Morris]

Mr. Morris was active, industrious, and unfailing in his watchfulness
over the interests in his charge, both when an employee and when an
employer. His industry set a good example, which those under him were
induced to follow, and in this way labors which would have wearied and
discouraged men with a less energetic and industrious manager, were
performed with cheerfulness. He was a man of few words but his manner and
acts spoke more forcibly than words, and his men learned to obey and
respect an employer, who, instead of ordering and lecturing them, quietly
showed them how he wished a thing by setting about it with them. He was
careful to restrain his passions, and to act from judgment instead of from
impulse. In this way he was not only successful in business, and respected
by his business associates, but possessed the esteem and confidence of his
workmen, who, when he lay in his last illness, gathered anxiously to learn
every item of intelligence that could be learned in regard to his
condition.

Mr. Morris was simple and unpretending in his habits, and of a religious
turn of mind. He felt his obligations to God, and during his later years,
especially, was diligent in his attention on Divine worship. In the
closing days of his illness, he was constantly engaged in prayer, and
departed this life in the assured hope of a peaceful and joyous hereafter.

The disease that carried him off was typhoid fever, with which he was at
first seized in Cleveland, where he lay at his residence for some weeks.
On his partial recovery he visited Girard, where he suffered a relapse,
and after a lingering illness, died at the residence of his parents. He
was buried in Youngstown cemetery, the funeral exercises being attended by
one of the largest assemblages of friends ever congregated at that place
on a similar occasion.

It was feared that with his death the operation of his works would cease
and a large number of people be thus thrown out of employment. But a short
time before his death he had expressed the desire that the works should be
carried on after his departure the same as before it; "because," said he,
"to stop the work would do much harm to others and no good to us." Mr.
Morris appointed his wife, Mrs. Dorothy Morris, and Mr. Robert McLauchlan,
executors of his will, and trustees of the estate. Mr. McLauchlan, who had
been for a number of years engaged with the firm previous to the death of
Mr. Morris, and therefore familiar with all its business detail, had the
additional qualification of being an able financier, and possessing a
practical knowledge of all branches of the coal interest, and above all,
a character for unimpeachable integrity. His administration has been
eminently successful.

Mr. Morris left a wife and six children to mourn his loss, the eldest of
whom, Mary, is now the widow of the late A. V. Cannon, and the second,
William, is a member of the firm of Ward, Morris & Co., coal dealers. The
third, John, is engaged at one of the estate mines, at Niles, Ohio, the
rest being quite young.




W. I. Price.


W. I. Price was born in Nantiglo, South Wales, May 21st, 1823, and came to
the United States with his father when about twelve years of age. His
father settled at Paris, Ohio, where the subject of this sketch remained
until he grew up to man's estate, when he removed to Cleveland, and was
engaged as book-keeper with Messrs. Camp & Stockly. The confidence of his
employers in his business ability and integrity was soon manifested by
their sending him to Chicago as their agent in the coal business. His stay
in that city was marked by several severe fits of sickness, and he was
eventually compelled to leave that post and return to Cleveland.

Soon after his return he became interested with Lemuel Crawford, in the
business of mining coal, in the early development of which branch of trade
he filled a conspicuous and important part. He often related, after the
coal interest had assumed large proportions, the difficulties to be
surmounted in introducing coal as an article of fuel, especially on the
steamboats. Frequently he has sat up all night watching for the steamers
to come in, and then almost gave away coal in order to induce their
officers to use it.

The firm of Crawford & Price was formed in 1850. With persistent energy it
continued to push its coal business until it assumed considerable
proportions, when, in 1856, Mr. David Morris became a partner, and the
firm name was changed to Crawford, Price & Co., and again in 1858, to
Price, Crawford & Morris. In 1857, the firm of Price, Morris & Co. was
established in Chicago, and Mr. Price was, during much of his time,
actively engaged in the extensive coal transactions of that firm.

[Illustration: Very Resp. Yours, W. I. Price]

Mr. Price was married to Miss Harriet Murray, who died in 1850, after two
years of married life, leaving one child, which only survived her three
months. He was married again August 27, 1856, to Miss Caroline Anderson,
of Manchester, Vermont, daughter of Rev. James Anderson, of the
Congregational church.

Being in ill health at the time of his second marriage, Mr. Price, with
his wife, took a trip to Europe, visiting his old home in Wales, and
returned with his health so much improved that he was scarcely recognized
by his friends.

The year 1857 was a most trying time for business men. Mr. Price's labors
were arduous in the extreme; his energy was unbounded, and the labors he
was compelled to perform doubtless so over-taxed his strength that he had
not sufficient vitality to recover.

In the Fall of 1858, he had the first serious apprehensions for his
health. A bronchial difficulty from which he suffered, was aggravated by
traveling and exposure, and in the Spring of 1859, he went to New York
for advice. He was told to make another trip to Europe. This advice was
followed, but he returned very little benefited. After a few weeks he
started with his wife on a tour south, intending to remain there during
the Winter. Reaching Charleston, S. C., about the middle of November, he
remained but a short time, and then set out for the Sulphur Springs, at
Aiken. Here he improved rapidly, but as the cold came on, and the
accommodations were poor, it was thought advisable to go further south.
At Savannah he remained a short time, and after wandering from point to
point, arrived early in February at New Smyrna, where a large company of
English hunters made their headquarters. Here they found better food and
accommodations. After wandering through the South until about the middle
of May, they returned to New York, where they were met by the partner of
Mr. Price, Mr. Morris, and Mr. Price's brother Philip. The latter
accompanied them to Manchester, Vermont. The mountain air of that region
stopped the cough of the invalid, and from Thursday, May 17th, to Monday
21st, he was able to sit up, and was attending to business with his
brother all the morning of the last named day. A friend from Brooklyn
called, and with him he conversed for half an hour. On rising to bid him
good bye, he was seized with hemorrhage, and asked to be assisted to bed.
He never spoke more, and died in fifteen minutes. His remains were
brought to Cleveland and interred in Erie street cemetery, but were
afterwards removed to Woodland. The last illness of Mr. Price was borne
without a murmur.

Mr. Price was modest and retiring in manner, affable in disposition, and
benevolent to a fault. He was most beloved where best known. In business
circles his integrity was proverbial, and his financial ability
everywhere acknowledged. Few men have died so sincerely regretted by
those who knew him.

James Anderson Price, the only child of the subject of this sketch, was
born April 22d, 1858, and though yet very young, presents in personal
appearance and disposition an exact counterpart of his father.




D. W. Cross.



In the Spring of 1855, when the coal trade of Cleveland was,
comparatively, in its infancy, and before the Mahoning Railroad was built,
the late Oliver H. Perry and David W. Cross set about investigating the
coal deposits in the Mahoning Valley, which resulted in their making some
leases of coal lands, and in purchasing a coal tract of about one hundred
and fifty acres, known then as the old Heaton coal bank, of Mineral Ridge
coal. In January, 1856, Perry, Cross & Co. commenced operations in
earnest, opened an office and coal yard on Johnson & Tisdale's dock and
mined and brought to Cleveland the first cargo of Mineral Ridge coal. It
came by the way of the Pennsylvania and Ohio canal from Niles, Trumbull
county, Ohio.

At that time, when a gold dollar was only worth a dollar, the coal was
mined at forty cents per ton, the canal freight about one dollar and
seventy-five cents per ton, "dead work," handling, dockage, &c., about
seventy-five cents, making the total cost of that coal on the docks in
Cleveland ready for delivery, about two dollars and ninety cents per ton.

This mine produced about a hundred tons per day. The company that year
also received about eight thousand tons of Briar Hill or "block coal" from
Powers' bank, about two miles below Youngstown. This coal was also brought
in by canal boats.

In the year 1859, Hon. Henry B. Payne, who had an interest in the
original purchase of coal lands, with a view of establishing his son,
Nathan P. Payne, in business, bought the entire interest of Mr. Perry in
the concern and the business was continued in the name of D. W. Cross & Co.
Mr. N. P. Payne, then an active young man just from his collegiate studies,
took charge of the retail trade, and Isaac Newton had charge of the books.
In 1860, arrangements were made with the late Lemuel Crawford to run his
Chippewa and Briar Hill mines in connection with the Mineral Ridge mines,
and it resulted in forming the company known as Crawford, Cross & Co., for
one year, at the expiration of which time the firm of Cross, Payne & Co.,
composed of D. W. Cross, Nathan P. Payne and Isaac Newton, carried on the
business. This firm made extensive explorations for coal. They discovered
and opened the Summit bank coal mines, near Akron, built a locomotive
railroad three miles long to the canal at Middlebury, and to the Cleveland
& Zanesville and Atlantic & Great Western railroads; repaired the feeder
canal from Middlebury to Akron, built a basin capable of holding eight
canal boats, extensive shutes, docks, &c., capable of handling four
thousand five hundred tons per day. This coal tract includes between three
and four hundred acres. The coal is a superior quality of the Massillon
grade, about four and a half feet thick, and for steam, manufacturing and
domestic uses is claimed to have no superior. The company employed at this
mine from seventy-five to a hundred and fifty men; built extensive shaft
works for elevating coal to the surface; erected about forty comfortable
tenements for the workmen and miners, and, in short, used all their past
experience to make this a model mine. It is the nearest coal bank to
Cleveland now open.

They also, in connection with the late W. A. Otis, Charles A. Otis and
James Lewis, leased and purchased several hundred acres of coal lands in
Brookfield, Trumbull county, Ohio, and opened the extensive works known as
the Otis Coal Company's bank.

A shaft on this tract was sunk to the coal eight by sixteen feet and a
hundred and fifty-five feet deep, in sixty-one days by Isaac Halford,
superintendent, through solid rock, said to be the quickest work ever
known in the valley. This tract produces an excellent quality of the Briar
Hill grade of coal; a locomotive railroad connects it with a branch of the
Mahoning Railroad, and the works are capable of mining and raising three
hundred tons of coal per day.

In February, 1867, Mr. Cross retired from the business, and the present
firm of Payne, Newton & Co., composed of N. P. Payne, Isaac Newton and
Charles J. Sheffield, now carry on the extensive business of the entire
concern. They have ample facilities for mining and handling five or six
hundred tons of coal per day.

After the completion of the Cleveland & Mahoning Railroad the Pennsylvania
and Ohio canal was abandoned, the Railroad Company having obtained control
of the stock, and fixed so high a tariff as to cut off all competition
with themselves. This effectually killed the canal, except that portion
between Akron and Kent. The active trade on this part of the Pennsylvania
and Ohio canal will insure its preservation, and as it is an important
feeder (supplying water and trade) to the Ohio canal, the State will
undoubtedly take possession of it. The capital invested by this concern in
the coal trade is about $250,000.

Since his retirement from the coal trade, Mr. Cross has been actively
interested in the Winslow Car Roofing Company and the Cleveland Steam
Gauge Company, both carrying on their manufactories in Cleveland.




Religious



Although originally settled by people from Connecticut, Cleveland was not
in its early days distinguished for its religious characteristics. Old
inhabitants narrate how in the infancy of the settlement the whisky shop
was more frequented than the preaching meeting, whenever that was held,
and how, on one occasion, a party of scoffing unbelievers bore in mock
triumph an effigy of the Saviour through the streets. A regular meeting of
infidels was held, and burlesque celebrations of the Lord's Supper
performed. Still later, when the business of slaughtering hogs became an
important branch of industry, it was carried on regularly, on Sundays as
well as on week-days, and as this was a leading feature in the year's
doings the religious observance of the day was seriously interfered with
during slaughtering season. Trade on the river, in the busy season, went
on with but little regard for the Sundays, except that Mr. John Walworth
invariably refused, although not a church member, to conform to the usage
of his neighbors in doing business on that day. Unlike the modern
emigrants from New England, the Cleveland pioneers did not carry the
church with them.

The first regularly organized religious society in Cleveland was the
Episcopal, which gathered together for religious worship in 1817, under
the ministration of the Rev. Roger Searles. The meetings were held
wherever a room could be obtained, the court-house, old academy building,
and other public rooms being frequently used for the purpose. In 1828,
Trinity Church was regularly incorporated, and the frame building which
stood on the corner of Seneca and St. Clair streets until its destruction
by fire in 1853, is remembered with affection by many Clevelanders as
"Old Trinity."

The next religions organization was Presbyterian. In 1820, a few residents
of Cleveland engaged, the Rev. Randolph Stone, pastor of a church at
Morgan, Ashtabula county, to devote a third of his ministrations to
Cleveland. In June of that year the first Sunday school was established
with Elisha Taylor as superintendent, but it was only by the most
persistent effort that it was enabled to combat the prejudices and
overcome the indifference of the people. In September, 1820, the First
Presbyterian church was formally organized, with fourteen members, in the
old log court-house. In 1827, the society was regularly incorporated, and
in 1834, the old stone church on the Public Square was opened for worship.
During the whole of this time the congregation had no settled pastor, but
was dependent on occasional visits of ministers from other places.

The first attempt at Methodist organization was somewhere between 1824 and
1827. Methodism was not in favor among the early settlers in Cleveland.
The historian of the Erie Conference relates that a Methodist friend in
New England, who owned land in Cleveland, sent on a deed for the lot on
the northeast corner of Ontario and Rockwell street, where Mr. Crittenden
afterwards built a large stone house, which lot would have been most
suitable for a church, and that no person could be found willing to pay
the trifling expense of recording, or take charge of the deed, and it was
returned to the donor. In 1830, Cleveland became a station, with Rev. Mr.
Plimpton, pastor.

The first Baptist meeting was held in the old academy, in 1832, the Rev.
Richmond Taggart preaching to a handful of believers. In 1833, the First
Baptist society was formally organized with twenty-seven members, Moses
White and Benjamin Rouse, who still live in the city, being of the
original deacons. In 1836, their first church, on the corner of Seneca and
Champlain streets, was dedicated with a sermon by the Rev. Elisha Tucker,
of Buffalo, who was afterwards called to the pastorate.

About the year 1835, the first Roman Catholic church was built on Columbus
street on the flats, and was intended to supply the religious needs of the
Roman Catholics of Cleveland and Ohio City, being situated almost midway
between the settled portions of the two places. The first pastor was the
Rev. Mr. Dillon.

In 1835, the first Bethel church, for the use of sailors, was built at the
back of the site of Gorton, McMillan & Co.'s warehouse. It was a plain
wooden structure, which remained there until the erection of the brick
church on Water Street, when the wooden building was removed to make way
for the Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati Railroad.

In 1839, the first Hebrew synagogue was organized and a brick church was
afterwards built on Eagle street.

From these feeble beginnings have grown up the present religious
organizations of Cleveland, numbering about seventy churches, many of them
of great beauty and costliness, with flourishing Sunday schools and
wealthy congregations. The leading denominations have each several
churches graded, from stately buildings for the older and wealthier
congregations to the modest mission chapels. Nearly all the religious
beliefs of the day are represented by organizations in the city, and all
are in a flourishing, or at least a growing condition.




Samuel C. Aiken.



The ancestors of Mr. Aiken were from the North of Ireland, particularly
from Londonderry, Antrim and Belfast. At an early day one or two colonies
came over to this country and settled on a tract of land on the Merrimac
River, in New Hampshire, calling it Londonderry, after the name of the
city from which most of them had emigrated. Fragments of these colonies
were soon scattered over New England, and a few families moved to Vermont
and purchased a tract of land midway between the Green Mountains and
Connecticut River. The township was at first called Derry, and afterwards
divided, one portion retaining the original name, and the other taking the
name of Windham. In the latter town Dr. Aiken was born, September 21,
1791. His parents were both natives of Londonderry, New Hampshire. Before
their marriage, his mother, whose maiden name was Clark, resided a
considerable portion of her time in Boston, with a brother and three
sisters, and was there when the Revolutionary war broke out. When the city
fell into the hands of the British, they refused to let any one leave. By
some means however Miss Clark escaped and crossed over to Cambridge, where
the American army was stationed under General Washington. After
questioning her as to her escape and the situation of affairs in the city,
Washington told her, that, in the present condition of the country it was
unsafe for her to travel unprotected, and accordingly gave her an escort,
proving that the great General was also mindful of the courtesies of a
gentleman.

When about twelve or thirteen years of age, Dr. Aiken, after a preparatory
course, entered Middlebury college, in 1813. In his junior year a long fit
of sickness placed him under the care of a physician from Georgia, who
bled him forty times and gave him calomel and julep, (such was the way of
curing fever,) sufficient to destroy the best constitution. The
consequence was, his health was so impaired that he was obliged to leave
college for a year. Afterwards returning he entered the class of 1814. In
both classes were quite a number of young men who became distinguished in
Church and State. Among them was Sylvester Larned, the eloquent preacher
of New Orleans, Levi Parsons and Pliney Fisk, first missionaries to
Palestine, Carlos Wilcox, the poet, Silas Wright, afterwards Governor of
New York State, and Samuel Nelson, now on the Bench of the Supreme Court
of the United States.

[Illustration: ]

Dr. Aiken's first religious impressions were occasioned by reading
Doddridge's Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul. Faithful parental
instruction in the Bible and Shorter Catechism had laid the foundation for
belief in the truth of religion. A revival of religion soon after entering
college awakened a new and solemn purpose to devote his life to the work
of the Gospel ministry. The usual course of three years at Andover
Theological Seminary was passed without any special occurrence. He was
then called by the "Young Men's Missionary Society" in New York, to labor
in their service in that city. He had but just entered the field when an
urgent request from the First Presbyterian society in Utica, New York,
took him to that place, then only a small village, where he was ordained
and installed, the third of February, 1818. Some events of deep interest
occurred while he was in Utica. The building and completion of the Erie
canal was one. The cholera in 1832, was another. It was there and then
this fatal epidemic first appeared in the United States. In Utica also
during his ministry were several revivals of religion of great power and
interest. Moreover, about that time the subject of anti-slavery began to
be agitated; opposition and mobs began to gather, which, under the control
of the Almighty, have resulted in the emancipation of millions of slaves.

Impaired health, after about nineteen years of labor, with very little
relaxation or relief by traveling, such as is common now, determined him
to accept a call from the First Presbyterian church and society in
Cleveland, over which he was installed pastor in November, 1835. Although
the church had been organized fifteen years, Rev. Mr. Aiken was the first
regular pastor. The ministerial duties were performed by supplies.

Soon after Mr. Aiken was installed pastor, a great financial revulsion
took place; and for a period of about ten years he voluntarily
relinquished three hundred dollars out of his salary of fifteen hundred,
lest it should prove burthensome to the church. This low tide in financial
matters was characterized by remarkable religious developments; slavery,
temperance and Millerism became church questions; and it was regarded as
the peculiar mission of Mr. Aiken to distinguish between truth and error.
His moderation, judicious advice, and devoted character were just
calculated to conduct his charge safely through the distractions of that
period. The society increased at such a rate that the building became
crowded, and another church was organized for the West Side. On the East
Side a Congregational church was formed about the year 1840, to which some
of the more radical members of the First Presbyterian church went over. In
process of time the nucleus of the Second Presbyterian church on Superior
street, and the Third, on Euclid street, were formed out of the First
church, not because of any dissatisfaction, however, but for want of room.
But, notwithstanding these offshoots, a new and larger edifice became
necessary, and in 1853, the present enlarged, elegant and substantial
building was put up on the site of that of 1834. In March, 1857, the wood
work of this spacious stone structure was destroyed by fire.

In his physical constitution, with which the mental is closely allied, Mr.
Aiken is deliberate, to a degree which some have greatly mistaken for
indolence. But with a commanding person, and strong will this habitual
absence of excitement was never tame, but rather impressive. He seldom
rose above the even tenor of his discourse, but never fell to commonplace,
was generally interesting and occasionally eloquent. His sermons were not
hasty compositions, without a purpose, but well studied, rich with
original and important thought, artistically arranged and glowing with
genuine piety and embellished with scholastic treasures. Dr. Aiken
possessed the accomplishment, and understood the value of good reading, so
rare in the pulpit, and which is scarcely inferior to eloquence. We
remember but few occasions when he became thoroughly aroused. The
destruction of so fine a church edifice so soon after it was completed
seemed to him a personal calamity. On the following Sunday the
congregation met in Chapin's Hall. His heart was evidently full of grief;
but also of submission. His fine enunciation, correct emphasis, and strong
yet suppressed feelings, secured the earnest attention of every hearer. He
touched graphically upon the power of fire; how it fractures the rock,
softens obdurate metals, envelopes the prairies in flame, and how it
seized upon the seats, ceiling and roof in his darling house of worship,
thence fiercely ascending the spire to strive to rise still higher, and
invade the clouds. From this he turned to the doctrine of submission, in a
manner so earnest and pathetic that a perceptible agitation pervaded the
audience, in which many could not suppress their tears. There was no
laboring after effect. It was the natural result of a lofty sentiment,
expressed with unction, beauty and vigor.

During the same year the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church was
held at Cleveland. The slavery question was there presented for the last
time. The Southern members, represented by Rev. Mr. Ross, of Alabama, had
counted upon what they called a conservative course, on the part of Mr.
Aiken. They wished, simply, to be let alone. From the Middle States there
were many clergyman of moderate views, who expected him to take their
ground, or, at least, to be silent. He had advised non-resistence to the
execution of the fugitive slave law, even on the part of the blacks, in
cases where governmental officials were implicated. As usual, the negro
question came up, and a large portion of a day was given to it.

Until near the close of the debate the representatives of the Middle and
Southern States were quite hopeful of a moderate policy, or of no policy.
Mr. Aiken sat near the marble pulpit in the Second church without any
apparent interest in the discussion. He rose and spoke with difficulty and
in a weak voice, and few words. In a temperate but firm and patriarchal
manner he recounted the various phases of the question, during his public
ministry. He then touched upon the moral and religions aspect of the case,
but with no asseveration, and concluded by denouncing slavery as an evil,
so monstrous that the church could neither sustain nor ignore it. The
silence was so complete that no word was lost. When he sat down, the
Southern members remarked that their fate within the church was settled.

On a previous public occasion in 1851, when the Columbus Railway was just
completed, and an excursion of State dignitaries made a trial trip to
Cleveland, Mr. Aiken was requested to preach in their presence. As this
discourse is one of a very few that have been printed, we can give a few
literal extracts:

  It was my privilege on the Lord's day to address De Witt Clinton and
  the Canal Commissioners of New York in recognition of the beneficient
  hand of Providence, who had carried them on to the completion of the
  Erie Canal. In a moral and religions, as well as in a social and
  commercial point of view, there is something both solemn and sublime
  in the completion of a great thoroughfare. It indicates not only the
  march of mind and a higher type of society, but the evolution of a
  divine purpose.

In his quarter century sermon, June 3d, 1850, he says of revivals:

  They are as their Divine Author says, like the breath of wind through
  fragrant trees and flowers, scattering grateful odors, pervading the
  universal church with the treasured sweetness of divine grace. If my
  success has not been as great as I would wish, it is as great as I had
  reason to expect. I confess I have much to deplore, and much for which
  to be thankful. There have been adverse influences here to counteract
  those usually falling to the lot of other ministers. So far as the
  subject of slavery is concerned I have endeavored without the fear or
  favor of man to preserve a course best calculated to promote freedom and
  save the church from dismemberment.

With such a style, perspicuous, easy and impressive, it is easy to see
how he might thoroughly absorb the attention of an audience, without
affecting the orator. If he had been more ambitions and more enterprising,
he might have risen higher as a popular preacher, but would have held a
lower place in the affections of his people. The position of a pastor in
an active and growing city is beset with difficulty on all sides. To
retain place and influence in one congregation during a period of
thirty-five years is an evidence of prudence, character and stability of
purpose more to be desired than outside fame in the church.

Though not yet arrived at extreme old age, he is too feeble to perform
much service. It is ten years since he has retired from active duty, but
his congregation continue his annual salary by an unanimous vote. Few
clergyman are permitted to witness, like him, the fruits of their early
labors. He has contributed largely to shape the religions institutions of
a city, while it was increasing in population from three thousand to
ninety thousand. We remember but one instance where he was drawn into a
newspaper discussion. This was in the year 1815, in which he reviewed the
decrees of the Council of Trent in relation to the prohibition of the
Scriptures to the common people. The letters of "Clericus" and "Veritas"
on that subject covered the whole ground on both sides, and are worthy of
publication in a more permanent form.

The Rev. Doctor sustained the relation of pastor to the First Presbyterian
church until 1858, when he resigned, leaving the Rev. Dr. Goodrich sole
pastor. The whole extent of his ministry from the time of his license by
the Londonderry Presbytery, 1817, to the present time, March, 1869, has
been about fifty-three years. During forty-three years of this period he
has been a pastor in only two congregations. The other portion of this
time he has preached and labored in vacant churches and where there was no
church, as health and opportunity permitted.

The Doctor still resides in Cleveland, beloved by the church over which
for so many years he watched and prayed, and honored in a community in
which he has so long been recognized as an unswerving advocate of right.

Retired from active duty, and nearing, as he is, the sunset of life, his
quiet hours may bring to him remembrances of vigorous effort and
unmeasured usefulness, while his gentle nature may be cheered by the
consciousness that he still holds the love of this people.




Seymour W. Adams.



The subject of this sketch, Rev. Seymour Webster Adams, D. D., was born at
Vernon, Oneida county, New York, August 1, 1815. His father's name was
Isaac Adams and his mother's maiden name was Eunice Webster--she was a
niece of Noah Webster, the great American lexicographer. His mother is
still living. His father died in 1861. Dr. Adams was possessed of
remarkable equanimity of temperament, a healthful constitution and great
powers of application and endurance. These traits, the home influences
under which he was nurtured, developed in a high degree. His early years
were passed upon his father's farm at Vernon and in the home circle.
Having before him constantly not only the example of right living, as
generally esteemed, but of holy living, he could not do otherwise than
profit greatly by the example set before him. But he did not only profit
by this example--he went much further. It is said of him, "As a son he was
docile, loving, tenderly attached to his kindred, profoundly obedient and
reverent towards his parents, whose wish was the law of his heart, and
whom he loved to call blessed."

At the age of seventeen he became a member of the Baptist church at
Vernon, and soon after this entered upon a course of preparation for a
liberal education and in due time he entered Hamilton College, Clinton,
New York, from which he graduated after a full course, taking a very high
position in his class.

That the leading traits of his character while young may be appreciated,
some of his early writings are here referred to.

Soon after entering upon his collegiate course he wrote upon "Integrity of
Character," and among other things remarked that the man who suffers his
principles to be violated "sacrifices his honor, barters all that is noble
and admirable, and abandons those principles to which he should cling with
an unyielding grasp."

On another occasion a little further on he is found maintaining the
necessity of the exercise of the physical and intellectual powers of man
"as a wise provision of the Sovereign Ruler of the world" for man's
happiness, and he maintains that not only in this should there be activity
but _energy_.

Afterwards, in 1841, when he had become a senior and was about to bid
adieu to college life, he chose as the subject of his oration,
"Development of Character," maintaining that no one can become "deservedly
great" who does not encounter and overcome the impediments and
difficulties constantly presenting themselves. He says: "Difficulties may
long have met the aspirant at every step and been for years his constant
companions, yet so far from proving detrimental, they have been among the
most efficient means for preparing him for vigorous effort to surmount
still greater barriers."

These references are deemed sufficient to indicate the principles and
leading traits of the youthful Seymour W. Adams, and as we shall see, were
his unvarying guides through life. To him it was the same to resolve as to
perform, for whether in earlier or later life he never put his hand to the
plow and looked back. Therefore, having resolved to become a Christian
minister, he never swerved from that resolution for a single moment, but
went forward with his mind fixed upon his purpose and object as the
mariner's upon his guiding star. In pursuance of his previous
determination, in the Fall of 1841 he entered the Hamilton Theological
Seminary at Hamilton, Madison county, New York, from which in regular
course he graduated, and after acting as ministerial supply in one or two
places, he was called to and accepted the pastorate of the Baptist church
at Vernon, his native place, having previously received ordination. Here
he was greatly beloved by his people and continued there quietly pursuing
his duties, until sought out at his village home and invited to accept the
vacant pastorate of the First Baptist church of Cleveland, Ohio.

When first invited to the Cleveland pastorate he refused to listen, and
declined to entertain the call; but upon the matter being further pressed
upon him, upon the second call he consented to visit Cleveland for the
purpose of becoming acquainted with the people and learning their
situation, but was careful to give them no encouragement that he would
accept their invitation.

Mr. Adams came to Cleveland in pursuance of this call October 19th, 1846,
and after remaining three weeks returned home to Vernon, leaving it in
great doubt whether he would return here. In about a month afterwards, the
church at Cleveland calling him was relieved of suspense by his acceptance
of the pastorate. He entered upon it November 22d, 1846. The subject of
his discourse on this occasion was:

  "For they watch for your souls as they that must give
  account."--Heb. xiii, 17.

A few words as to this discourse is deemed not out of place here, as it
has become historic in the church to which it was delivered. The doctrine
of the discourse was the reciprocal duty of pastor and people. Reference
will only be made to what appertains to the pastor. He laid down most
rigid rules for him--"that he should be a holy man,"--that he should be
one that "hath clean hands and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his
soul unto vanity." That the injunction was laid upon him, "Keep thyself
pure;" that as the conduct of the minister is observed by many it should
be fitting as an example to others "in word, in conversation, in charity,
in spirit, in faith, in purity." That in preparation for preaching the
Word "time, thought and prayer must be given--that the burden of all his
preaching should be 'Christ and him crucified.'"

How well he observed these will appear hereafter in the language of those
who made addresses at his funeral, or soon afterwards. The reader is also
referred to the Memoir of Dr. Adams, edited by Judge Bishop.

In this pastorate Dr. Adams continued till his decease. No extended
reference can be made to his labors in so brief a sketch as this. A mere
summary only can be given of his life work. The number of sermons preached
by him, including addresses at funerals, is three thousand four hundred
and ninety-three; number of marriages solemnized, three hundred and
fifty-two; number of funerals attended, five hundred and four; number
received into the church, including those received both by letter and
baptism, about seven hundred. In addition to his other labors, in 1858-9,
he wrote the life of Rev. Dr. Nathaniel Kendrick, so long and honorably
known as the founder of the Hamilton Theological School, and which has
since grown to be Madison University and Hamilton Theological Seminary.
While in this work all display and all mere ornament is avoided, it is a
work of decided merit, requiring severe application and patient industry
to accomplish it. His surviving wife has said that "his pastoral labors
were prosecuted regardless of self."

He was three times married. First to Miss Caroline E. Griggs, who died
April, 1847. Second, January, 1849, to Mrs. Cordelia C. Peck, widow of
Rev. Linus M. Peck, and daughter of Rev. Dr. Nathaniel Kendrick; she died
October, 1852. Third, to Miss Augusta Hoyt, August, 1855, who is the
mother of his four surviving children.

He was not only a Christian minister, but he was a true Christian patriot,
and never, during all the terrible struggle for the life of the nation,
when he offered prayer, did he fail to remember his country. Nearly the
last work of his life was to accept an appointment in the Christian
Commission to render service in Washington and at the front, relieving and
comforting the sick and wounded of our army.

On the sixth of July, 1864, he returned home from this service, quite
unwell, but he thought he could find no space for repose, and labored on
more intensely than ever, all which time a crisis was approaching which he
did not anticipate. He at last began to perceive symptoms of severe
illness, and Sabbath, September 11th, he preached his last sermon to his
people from Heb. iii: 7, 8. "To-day if ye will hear his voice harden not
your hearts," &c. All that can be said here of this discourse is, that if
he had known it was his last he could not have spoken more appropriately
or warned more earnestly. From the preaching of this discourse he went to
the sick-room, and on the 27th of September, 1864, Dr. Adams bade adieu to
earth and passed away.

His funeral was attended September 30th, by a great multitude of mourners
and friends, at the First Baptist church, and a large number of the
clergymen of Cleveland participated in the solemnities.

This sketch can not be better concluded than by referring briefly to some
of the remarks made on that occasion, as a fitting testimonial to the
character and worth of Dr. Adams.

Remarks, 1st, by Rev. Dr. Aiken:

  I have known him intimately, and I have thought, as I have seen him on
  the street, of that passage of Scripture, "Behold an Israelite indeed in
  whom there is no guile," for there was no guile in him. You might read
  his profession in his daily life. He commended daily the Gospel that he
  preached, and gave living witness of its power and showed that he loved
  the truth. He was eminently successful as a pastor and useful in the
  cause of the Redeemer.

2d, by Rev. Dr. Goodrich:

  There was manifest a diligence in his study and a thoroughness of
  thought which commanded increased respect the longer we listened to him.
  His life and character made him felt in this community even more than
  his words. He preached one day in the week to his own flock, but he
  lived forth the Gospel of Christ every day before the world. There was
  in him a sincerity and consistency which could not be hid. He was
  transparent as crystal and honest as a little child. No man ever doubted
  him. He was always himself, true, manly, faithful. Men, as they passed
  him in the street, said to themselves, "There is a man who believes all
  the Gospel he preaches." He is gone, but his works follow him. "Being
  dead he yet speaketh."

3d, by Rev. Dr. Hawks:

  Possessed naturally of a strong intellect, he disciplined it by the
  severe process of thought and study. His scholarship was accurate and
  thorough, his reading extensive and profitable, by means of these he
  intended to serve, as he did, Christ and the church. Dr. Adams was a
  pastor as well as preacher. He taught not only publicly but from
  house to house.




J. A. Thome.



James Armstrong Thome was born in Augusta, Kentucky, January 20, 1813.
He is of Scotch descent on his father's side, and of North Irish by his
mother, a native Armstrong of the border land. His father was a
Presbyterian of the Scotch type, and a ruling elder in the church. His
mother was a Methodist of the original Wesleyan order and period, having
been converted under the labors of the Wesleys at the age of nine. This
difference of the parents in religious beliefs and church affinities
remained unchanged till the death of the mother, each attending their
respective meetings; yet, wide as the distinction then was, and warm as
the prevalent feeling was, between Presbyterians and Methodists,
particularly in Kentucky, there was neither sectarian width nor warmth
between the godly pair, the twain were one flesh and one spirit in
Christ Jesus.

The son usually followed his father to church, though he sometimes
accompanied his mother; and during week-day evenings he had the double
advantage of going to prayer-meeting with the one, and to class-meeting
with the other. To this two-fold, yet harmonious, religious training in
childhood the son is indebted for a breath of religious sentiment and
sympathy which made him early a Presbyteria-Methodist in heart, and led
him subsequently to the mid-way ground of Congregationalism, where many a
Presbyterian and many a Methodist have met in Christian unity,

He owes his early conversion to the faithful teachings and pious example
of his parents, to their religious instruction, to family worship, to
Sabbath observance, to sanctuary means, in prosecution of the covenant his
parents entered into with God when they consecrated him in infancy.

The son's first great sorrow came when he was in his ninth year, in the
death of his mother. The loss was irreparable, but it led him to Christ,
From the sad moment when the dying mother laid her hand upon his head and
spoke in words never to be forgotten, her last benediction, sorrow for the
sainted dead was blended with penepenitentialrow towards God, and prayers
and tears cried to heaven for mercy. It was not, however, until the age of
seventeen that the blind seeker found the Saviour, and conscious peace in
Him. This happy event was immediately followed by union with the
Presbyterian church, and this by personal consecration to the ministry.
Just before his conversion, his college course, early begun, had been
completed. Three years were spent in farther study, and in travel, and
general observation bearing on the chosen calling of life.

At the opening of Lane Seminary, under the Theological headship of Dr.
Lyman Beecher, the young divinity student chose that school of the
prophets, and joined its first class in 1833. It was a class destined to
be made famous by a discussion, in its first year, of the slavery
question, then beginning to be agitated by the formation of an
anti-slavery society on the basis of immediate emancipation, and by the
active agitation of the subject in the neighboring city, Cincinnati,
whereby the mobocratic spirit was aroused, whence threats of sacking the
seminary buildings, and thereupon alarm and hasty action of the trustees,
disallowing further agitation, and enjoining the disbanding of the
society. The students, too much in earnest to yield, after unavailing
attempts at reconciliation with the authorities, the professors mediating,
and Doctor Beecher conjuring his beloved pupils to stay with him, seceded
in a body, in December, 1834. The young Kentuckian, son of a slave-holder,
became a thorough convert to the doctrine of emancipation, joined the
anti-slavery society, agitated with his brethren, delivered an address at
the first anniversary of the American Anti-Slavery Society, in New York,
May, 1834, and seceded with the class. "A Statement of the Reasons which
induced the Students of Lane Seminary to Dissolve their Connection with
that Institution"--a pamphlet of twenty-eight pages, signed by fifty-one
names, and bearing date December 15, 1834, was published and went over the
land, and the city, intensifying the agitation at home, and raising it
throughout the country. Among the signatures to this document are those of
Theodore D. Weld, H. B. Stanton, George Whipple, J. W. Alvord, George
Clark, John J. Miter, Amos Dresser, (afterwards scourged in the Public
Square of Nashville,) William T. Allen, son of a slaveholding Presbyterian
minister in Alabama, and James A. Thome.

Exiled from the Seminary halls, these rebel reformers took refuge in a
building hard by the city, and extemporized a Theological school,
themselves being both lecturers and students. The following Spring,
negotiations being matured for adding a Theological department to the
Oberlin Institute by the accession of Professors Finney and Morgan the
seceders went in a body to Oberlin, where they prosecuted their
preparations for the ministry, which were completed in 1836. Among these
first graduates of Oberlin Theological Seminary was J. A. Thome. The Winter
of 1835-6, he had spent in lecturing on anti-slavery in Ohio, under
commission of the American Anti-Slavery Society. The Winter of 1836-7, he,
with Jos. Horace Kimball, of New Hampshire, visited the British West India
Islands to investigate the results of the abolition of slavery, two years
prior, by act of Parliament. A volume entitled "Emancipation in the West
Indies," prepared by Mr. Thome, and published, in 1837, by the American
Anti-Slavery Society at New York, embodied these observations. The book
was timely and told efficiently on the reform in this country. The Winter
of 1837, was passed in Kentucky, the abolitionist living among
slaveholders, and officiating as the minister in the church of his father.
The next Spring he accepted a call to the chair of Rhetoric and Belles
Lettres in Oberlin college, and in September following was married to Miss
Ann T. Allen, daughter of John Gould Allen, Esq., of Fairfield,
Connecticut. After ten years of professorial labors, in association with
men of great worth, most of whom still retain their connection with the
college, Mr. Thome entered upon the pastoral work, December, 1848, in
connection with the church of which he is still the pastor.

He has enjoyed a pastorate of twenty years, uninterrupted by serious
ill-health, and cheered by successive revivals and consequent accessions
to the church, which, having a membership at the beginning of his
pastorate of little over one hundred, now numbers over three hundred,
after many losses by dismission and death.

Mr. Thome, early converted to anti-slavery, and consistently devoted to
that cause, has lived to see slavery abolished in America. In addition to
the volume on West India Emancipation, he wrote, in 1850, a book on
Slavery in America, which was published by the British Anti-Slavery
Society. Since, a Prize Tract on Prayer for the Oppressed, also a tract
during the war on "What are we Fighting for?" and a treatise on "The
Future of the Freed People."

At the earnest solicitation of the Secretaries of the American Missionary
Association, and with the generous consent of his church, Mr. Thome,
accompanied by his wife and daughter, went abroad early in 1867, to
secure pecuniary assistance from the friends of the freedmen in England
and Scotland for their education and evangelization. He was absent on
this mission one year. The result of his efforts have not yet ceased to
be realized.

After thirty years of unbroken domestic felicity, three beloved daughters
having been reared to womanhood in the enjoyment of the Christian's hope,
and two of them happily wedded, Mr. Thome and his wife were overwhelmed
with sorrow by the sudden death, on the last day of April, 1869, of their
second daughter, Mrs. Maria E. Murphy, wife of Mr. Thos. Murphy, of
Detroit. A lady of singular amiability, purity, and Christian excellence,
she was endeared by her sweet graces to rich and poor, to young and old,
throughout the circle of her acquaintances.




William H. Goodrich.



Rev. William H. Goodrich, D. D., pastor of the First Presbyterian Church of
Cleveland, is a native of New Haven, Conn. His ancestry is among the most
honorable known in American society. His father was the late Rev. Chauncey
A. Goodrich, D. D., a greatly distinguished professor in Yale College; and
his grandfather, Hon. Elizur Goodrich, for some years a representative in
Congress, and for twenty years Mayor of New Haven; and his
great-grandfather, Rev. Elizur Goodrich, D. D., distinguished both as a
clergyman and an astronomer. His mother was the daughter of Noah Webster,
LL.D., the lexicographer.

He graduated at Yale college, and was subsequently a tutor in that
institution. He studied theology at the New Haven Theological Seminary.
While tutor, it was his duty to preserve order about the college grounds,
and he received, (though not from a student,) during a night disturbance,
a severe injury upon the head, which put his life in peril and
interrupted mental labor for a long period. A part of this time was spent
abroad in 1848; and it was not till 1850 that he entered steadily upon
the duties of his profession. He was first settled as pastor of the
Congregational Church of Bristol, Connecticut, where he remained four
years. He was then called to the pastorate of the Presbyterian Church in
Binghamton, N. Y., where he remained till 1858, when he removed to this
city, where, for eleven years, his ministry has been marked by very great
success. The prosperous condition of the church under his care, together
with almost unparalleled attachment between pastor and people, afford
evidence of the ability and faithfulness with which he has discharged his
ministerial duties. To remarkable mental vigor, he adds great delicacy of
character and the warmest sympathies; and those who know most of him,
regard it as no partial judgment which awards him a front rank among
preachers and pastors.

[Illustration: Yours truly, W. H. Goodrich]

Mr. Goodrich has enjoyed the best of opportunities, and is a writer of
rare taste and rhetorical force, and an eloquent and impressive speaker.
As a preacher he is never speculative and theoretical, never dogmatic nor
sectarian, but eminently spiritual and practical. But the strongest point
in his character is his downright, never-failing _common sense_. He never
blunders, and never has to apologize for important mistakes committed. He
is remarkable for insight to the character of all with whom he has to do.
This trait gives him influence with many who care little for the gospel
which he preaches. Though not conspicuously demonstrative in his outward
life, and though free from all approach to obtrusiveness, so earnest and
direct are his ways, that he becomes known to thousands with whom he has
no personal acquaintance.

In this country it is generally regarded as a misfortune to have had a
grandfather. Most Americans who have reached distinction for abilities and
usefulness, have been the sons of parents unknown to fame. As a general
rule, self-made men are the only well made men. By the force of their own
energies they have surmounted the difficulties that stood in their
pathway, and achieved distinction by their own efforts. There are very few
prominent men in our country whose fathers and grandfathers have left
names which will live for a score of years in the memory of society. But
to this general truth the history of our country affords honorable
exceptions. The sons of certain families distinguished for wealth, for
talent and for the highest position in society, have been so wisely and
prayerfully trained that they have escaped the dangers which have proved
fatal to most of those who have inherited honored names, and to this class
Mr. Goodrich belongs. Though not ignorant of the truth that his ancestry
is held in the highest honor by all good men, it seems never to have
occurred to him that anything less than his own personal labors and merits
would avail to give him a good name with those whose good opinion is
desirable. "The poet is born, not made." _Character is made, not born_.

In 1867, Mr. Goodrich was prostrated by severe illness, which for a
season filled the hearts of his friends with most painful apprehension,
but the prayers of a loving people were answered, and after an interim of
six months he again resumed the duties of his pastorate. It soon became
apparent, however, that while the "the spirit" was "willing," "the flesh"
was "weak," and that a longer respite was necessary before he could again
enter upon his work with his wonted zeal. Hoping to renew his impaired
energies by a temporary release from care, and in the pleasures of travel,
Mr. Goodrich, with his wife, sailed for Europe in 1868, where he remained
for eight months, re-visiting the scenes with which he had become
acquainted twenty years before. The ultimate object of his tour was
secured, and at the close of the year he returned to his people in
excellent health, and with an enriched experience from which he seemed to
draw new inspiration for his work.

Soon after his return from abroad, the rapidly failing health of his
mother, residing in New Haven, became to him a constant source of
solicitude, more especially so from the fact of his being the sole
surviving child of that once happy and affectionate household. His
departure for Europe had been saddened by the sudden death of his only
brother, Rev. Chauncey Goodrich. In the month of August, 1869, that mother
passed from a life which seemed rounded to completeness, into the
"day-break of heaven," leaving this son, Rev. William H. Goodrich, to rear
the tablet to her memory, and to go out from a vacant, voiceless home, the
last of his household.

But a quarter of a century has laid grandparents, parents, brother and
sisters in the grave.

At the present writing, Mr. Goodrich is once more united to his people,
and we but give utterance to the general voice in the desire, that in the
love and confidence of this church and community, he may find solace for
his bereavements; and that henceforth Cleveland may be the home of his
adoption, and the field of his labors.




Isaac Errett.



Among the preachers and writers of the nineteenth century who have pleaded
for a return to primitive Christianity, the subject of this notice stands
pre-eminently among the most distinguished. For more than thirty-five
years he has been connected with the Disciples, and, during the greater
portion of that time, has been an earnest, able and successful advocate
for their plea for reformation.

Isaac Errett was born in the city of New York, January 2, 1820. His father
was a native of Arklow, county of Wicklow, Ireland, and his mother was a
native of Portsmouth, England. His paternal grandfather was shot down in
sight of his own house during the Irish rebellion of 1798. His immediate
parents were both of Protestant families, and became identified with the
Disciples in New York city, as early as 1811--the father being an elder in
the original church in that place. Hence, the son was trained from infancy
in the principles which he now cherishes, and, in the Spring of 1832, at
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania--where his mother had moved soon after the death
of his father, in 1825--when only a little over twelve years of age, at a
time when the church was without preaching, under the instruction of his
mother, he, in company with an elder brother, went forward and asked the
privilege of baptism. He was baptized by Robert McLaren, one of the elders
of the church.

He now became a diligent student of the Word of God, and, under many
embarrassing circumstances, made constant and encouraging progress.

From the time he was ten years old he has been dependent upon his own
personal exertions for a living; hence his respectable education has been
gathered in the midst of toil and care, by dint of untiring, industrious
application.

While laboring as farmer, miller, lumberman, bookseller, printer,
schoolteacher, and editor, he never ceased to augment his stock of useful
knowledge, and to use whatever opportunities he had for the discipline of
his mental powers.

He commenced preaching in the city of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in the
Spring of 1840, and soon gave promise of the distinguished position which
he has since held as a preacher of the Gospel.

He enjoyed the advantages of frequent and intimate association with
Walter Scott, Thomas Campbell, Alexander Campbell, and most of the early
advocates of primitive Christianity in the West; and his association with
these men was of incalculable advantage to him, for they not only gave him
valuable instruction in the principles of the Reformation, but he was
enabled, by coming in frequent contact with them, to draw inspiration from
their lives and characters for the great work upon which he had entered.

His ministerial labors have been divided between the work of an evangelist
and pastor. He was pastor of a church in Pittsburgh three years; New
Lisbon, Ohio, five years; North Bloomfield, Ohio, two years; Warren, Ohio,
five years; Muir and Ionia, Michigan, eight years; and Detroit, Michigan,
two years. At all these points he was eminently successful, and, besides
his regular pastoral labors, did considerable work in the general field.

He removed to Warren, Ohio, in 1851, and while there, was corresponding
secretary of the Ohio Missionary Society three years; and it was he who
first put that society into systematic and active operation.

In 1856, he removed his family to Ionia county, Michigan, and while
laboring to build up a congregation at that point, he was prevailed upon
to take the corresponding secretaryship of the American Christian
Missionary Society, which position he held three years, and succeeded in
bringing the society to a degree of prosperity which it had never before
reached. When heresigned the Secretaryship he was appointed first
vice-president, and afterwards presided at the annual meetings of the
society until 1866, when he was elected president. This, however, he at
once declined. In the Spring of 1856, he removed to Cleveland, Ohio.

In April, 1866, he established the Christian Standard in Cleveland, which
has become a leading and influential religions journal. In August, 1868,
having been elected first president of Alliance College, he removed to
Alliance, Ohio, and at once gave to the new college a successful position
among our literary institutions. In May, 1869, he was elected president of
the Ohio Christian Missionary Society. In August, 1869, he was elected, by
a unanimous vote of the Board of Curators of Kentucky University, to the
presidency of the Agricultural and Mechanical College of that University.
Also, about the same time, Bethany College tendered him the Biblical
Department of that institution. We have not learned whether he has yet
accepted either of these positions.

Mr. Errett's personal appearance is striking and prepossessing. He is
about six feet one inch high, has dark auburn hair, light grey eyes, and a
well developed muscular organization. As a public speaker he has few, if
any, superiors. His language is chaste and copious, containing an
unusually large per cent, of Saxon words; his gesticulation is easy and
natural, but his voice, though well under control, has not volume enough
to give full force to his beautiful and stirring thoughts. His writings,
like his sermons, are full of strong and rugged points, and are frequently
interspersed with brilliant passages of exquisite beauty that will compare
favorably with many of the finest word-paintings in the English language.

In the social circle he is companionable, but not a very good
conversationalist. He needs the inspiration of an audience, or the quiet
solitude of the study, to bring out his full strength; hence, while he is
pleasant in company--full of wit and humor--he does not appear there to
the best advantage.




Benjamin Rouse



Benjamin Rouse was born in Boston, March 23d, 1795, and was brought up as
a builder, working at the trade at first in Massachusetts, and
subsequently removing to New York, where he carried on his business
extensively for about six years. From an early age he had taken great
interest in religions matters, and especially in the establishment of
Sunday schools. In 1830, he accepted the appointment of agent of the
American Sunday School Union for the purpose of going to the West and
establishing Sunday schools and book depositories. For this purpose he
gave up his business and turned his face westward, prepared to endure
hardships and encounter difficulties for the cause in which he was so
deeply interested.

Coming directly to Cleveland, he opened his Sunday school book depository,
near the corner of the Public Square and Superior street. The prospect was
not a hopeful one, but Mr. Rouse had faith, and persevered. There was but
one church building in the place, old Trinity, built by the Episcopalians
with the aid of those of other denominations, and but little religious
sentiment among the people. A Sunday school had for some time struggled
hard to maintain its existence, and had but just become established on a
tolerably firm basis. The depository, aided by the active labors of Mr.
Rouse in the schools, gave a powerful impetus to the cause.

Three months after the opening of the depository Mr. Rouse purchased the
lot on which it stood, for six hundred dollars. In making the purchase he
had little thought of its speculative value, the sole object being a
permanent home for his agency. Time has, however, so enhanced the value of
property that the lot on which stood the little book-room, has now, with
the pile of buildings standing on it, reached a value of eighty thousand
dollars, thus amply repaying Mr. Rouse for his labors in the cause of
religion and morality in the earlier days of the place.

For about three years the depository was continued, and then Mr. Rouse
turned his attention for a while to general store-keeping, abandoning it
finally for the purpose of removing to Richfield, where he went to benefit
the health of his wife. In that place hie remained six years.

Mr. Rouse was a member of the Baptist denomination, and was largely
instrumental in the organization of a Baptist society in Cleveland. When,
in 1835, it was decided to erect a church building on the corner of Seneca
and Champlain streets, the experience of Mr. Rouse, then a deacon of the
church, was called into requisition. In due time the church was built and
a steeple placed on it, which became the wonder and admiration of the
country round about, and Trinity, built by the Episcopalians with the aid
of those of other denominations, and but little religious sentiment among
the people. A Sunday school had for some time struggled hard to maintain
its existence, and had but just become established on a tolerably firm
basis. The depository, aided by the active labors of Mr. Rouse in the
schools, gave a powerful impetus to the cause.

Three months after the opening of the depository Mr. Rouse purchased the
lot on which it stood, for six hundred dollars. In making the purchase he
had little thought of its speculative value, the sole object being a
permanent home for his agency. Time has, however, so enhanced the value of
property that the lot on which stood the little book-room, has now, with
the pile of buildings standing on it, reached a value of eighty thousand
dollars, thus amply repaying Mr. Rouse for his labors in the cause of
religion and morality in the earlier days of the place.

For about three years the depository was continued, and then Mr. Rouse
turned his attention for a while to general store-keeping, abandoning it
finally for the purpose of removing to Richfield, where he went to benefit
the health of his wife. In that place he remained six years.

Mr. Rouse was a member of the Baptist denomination, and was largely
instrumental in the organization of a Baptist society in Cleveland. When,
in 1835, it was decided to erect a church building on the corner of Seneca
and Champlain streets, the experience of Mr. Rouse, then a deacon of the
church, was called into requisition. In due time the church was built and
a steeple placed on it, which became the wonder and admiration of the
country round about, and the especial pride of Deacon Rouse.

On his return from Richfield, Mr. Rouse engaged in the coal business in
connection with Mr. Freeman Butts. About the year 1862, he retired from
active business and thenceforth devoted his time to the cause of
patriotism, religion, and charity. From the breaking out of the war Mr.
and Mrs. Rouse entered vigorously on the work of aiding the nation's cause
by caring for the nation's defenders. Their zeal and activity were
irrepressible, visiting the camps and hospitals, ascertaining the needs of
the soldiers, and then with unresting assiduity collecting money and
materials to supply those needs. Mrs. Rouse became president of the
Soldiers' Aid Society of northern Ohio, and was directly instrumental in
the formation of hundreds of auxiliary societies that made every city,
village, and nearly every home in northern Ohio busy in the work of
preparing and sending forward comforts and luxuries for the soldiers of
the Union. Mrs. Rouse visited camps and hospitals in the South, and her
visits and reports were productive of great good. Her name was known and
respected by thousands of soldiers, was repeated with grateful praise in a
multitude of homes from which brave boys had gone forth to the war, and
has passed into history. In all her labors she was cordially seconded and
efficiently aided by her husband.

Three sons and one daughter have been born to this worthy couple.




Medical.



In the early records of Cleveland, as in those of most western towns, the
story of sickness and death fills a large part. Fever and ague, brought on
by exposure, privations, and by the miasma from swamp, river and uncleared
lands, disabled a large number of the early settlers, and hurried some to
untimely graves. There were no physicians, and save a few drugs and the
simples gathered from the river banks and forest, there were no remedies.

In course of time appeared the pioneer doctor with his saddle-bags, and he
was soon followed by a number of his brethren to practice their skill upon
the settlers. When the first Cleveland Directory was issued, in 1837,
there were already established a round two dozen of physicians and
surgeons, and three "surgeon-dentists." It may be interesting to quote
the names of these brethren of the lancet and saddlebags who purged and
bled the good people of thirty-two years ago. They were, J. L. Ackley, F.
I. Bradley, C. D. Brayton, W. A. Clark, Horace Congar, E. Cushing,
Jonathan Foote, S. B. Gay, Robert Hicks, M. L. Hewitt, Smith Inglehart,
Robert Johnston, Burr Kellogg, David Long, P. Mathivet, George Mendenhall,
Joshua Mills, T. M. Moore, W. F. Otis, A. D. Smith, J. Swain, Charles
Terry, Samuel Underhill, Joseph Walrath. The surgeon-dentists were B.
Strickland, and Coredon & Sargeant.

This list has now swollen to proportions that make the two dozen and three
exceedingly insignificant by comparison, and every school of medicine is
represented. There are two Allopathic medical colleges--the Cleveland and
Charity Hospital colleges--and two Homeopathic--the Western Homeopathic
college and the Homeopathic College for Women. There are also three
hospitals, the Charity Hospital (Allopathic), the Homeopathic Hospital on
University Heights, and the Woman's Hospital on Wilson street.




David Long.



Dr. Long was born at Hebron, Washington county, New York, September 29,
1787. In early life he qualified himself for the practice of medicine and
surgery, studying in Massachusetts and graduating in New York city. In
June, 1810, he arrived at Cleveland and commenced his professional career.
At this early day there was no physician nearer than Painesville on the
east, Hudson on the south-east, Wooster on the south, River Raisin (now
Monroe) on the west. The arrival of a physician was, therefore, a matter
of no small gratification to the settlers here and the neighboring
settlements.

In this wild region, without roads, streams without bridges, cabins in
many places eight to ten miles apart, did the young and ardent Long
hopefully commence the practice of medicine. Nor were the hopes of the
early settlers disappointed. In rain and snow, in Winter's cold and
Summer's heat, by darkest midnight or mid-day sun the doctor ever
cheerfully responded to all the calls for his services with alacrity and
zeal, forgetful of self, desirous only to administer timely relief to the
suffering and afflicted. In this he was eminently successful, as many of
those who knew him for more than a third of a century can testify.

In proof of the untiring perseverance of Dr. Long in the early part of his
professional life, it has been stated that on one occasion, in the Fall of
the year, about midnight, he rode nine miles in fifty-one minutes. In
another instance of extreme urgency, he rode, in the day time, fourteen
miles in fifty minutes by changing horses twice on the route. He was a
surgeon in the army during the war of 1812, and brought the news of Hull's
surrender at Detroit to this city, from the mouth of Black River, a
distance of twenty-eight miles, in two hours and fourteen minutes. Such
was his character for promptitude to all the calls that were made upon
him, and they were far from being few.

For kindness to his patients and friends he had no superior. In his zeal
in their behalf, in a few years, he sacrificed in a measure one of the
finest constitutions.

After following his profession thirty years or more, Dr. Long retired
from general medical practice, and engaged in other pursuits more
favorable to his health and congenial to his tastes.

In all public measures for the benefit of our city, in the way of
improvements, schools, churches, every effort in behalf of humanity,
religion or science, Dr. Long was ready to place his shoulder to the work
with all the ardor and enthusiasm of youth.

Dr. Long never had any aspirations for political distinctions, but such
was his popularity and so great the confidence of the people in his
judgment and integrity that he could have obtained it had he so desired.
At one time, however, he was elected to fill a vacancy which had
occurred by the death of one of the three County Commissioners.
Unimportant as this may seem now, it then occasioned intense excitement.
The location of a new county court house, presumptively fixing the
county seat for all time, devolved upon these Commissioners. Newburg and
Cleveland were the contestants, both being villages of about an equal
number of inhabitants--the claims of each supported by a single
Commissioner, yet Newburg having the more central location. Though hotly
contested, Dr. Long was elected, and the result was the erection of the
Court house in the south-west corner of the square, which was demolished
about ten years since.

In the year 1834, Dr. Long united with the Presbyterian church in this
city, and by his daily walk and conduct in the community, by his deeds of
love and charity to the poor, his kindness to the sick and afflicted gave
the most striking evidence of a heart renewed by grace and made meet for
the kingdom of heaven. During his last painful illness his calmness and
resignation showed that he had placed his trust firmly upon the sure
foundation.

He filled all the relations of life in a most exemplary manner and thus
embalmed his memory in the hearts of all who knew and survive him. He died
on the first day of September, 1851, at the age of sixty-four years,
lacking a single month.




John Delamater.



Just before the massacre of St. Bartholomew, the ancestors of Dr.
Delamater fled from France to Holland. The family name was then De La
Maitre. Being whole-souled protestants, they migrated with other Dutch
families to the Province of New York, and settled on the banks of the
Hudson, near Kingston. Their names are still visible on the ancient grave
stones of that neighborhood. Like the Huguenots, of South Carolina, they
were Calvinist, or puritans of the French school. They became allied by
marriage to the Rogardus family of New York, and others partook of the
blood of Anneke Jans, whose name has become famous in the New York courts.
The investigation of this connexion and heirship, occupied the last years
of Prof. Delamater's life. It was closed only about a month before his
death. His coadjutor in this work, was the late Chancellor Walworth, of
Saratoga, whose ancestors were also in the line of Anneke Jans.

Dr. Delamater was born in Columbia county, New York, near Chatham, on the
State line of Massachusetts, April 18th, 1787. He died at East Cleveland,
in March, 1867, having almost reached the extreme age of four score years.

The Huguenots like English Puritans, and the Scotch Irish, have made their
mark in North America. John Delamater, while a boy, was destined to be a
farmer, on the soil where he was born. He was transferred to the medical
profession on account of an accident, which injured his ability for manual
labor. His father removed to Schenectady, New York, where his son was put
under the tuition of one of the self-denying clergymen of those times,
whose salary did not meet the expenses of living. At the age of nineteen
his medical education was finished and he commenced practice in his native
town. From thence he moved to Florence, Montgomery county, N. Y. Then
stopped a short time in Albany, N.Y., and in 1816, established himself at
Sheffield, Massachusetts. There was a settlement of negroes in this
ancient borough. Dr. Delamater was then, as ever since, an active
philanthropist. He attended the negroes as physician, Sunday teacher, and
preacher. They also drew money from his purse, which was never very well
filled, and paid back very little, either of his fees or of their debts.
After some years of assiduous labor on his colored charge, his views of
the race underwent a radical change. Among the last utterances of his life
he expressed the opinion, based upon his experience at Sheffield, that the
negro is by nature unfit for citizenship. In the days of the Jeffersonian
Republicans and Adams Federalists, Dr. Delamater was in full accord with
the new and rising Democratic party. He left it during the administration
of General Jackson, and since then was a thorough Whig and Republican. No
one hated slavery more. He saw the remnants of it in his early practice
over the line in Connecticut, but never recovered faith in the capacity of
the colored man for self-government.

Returning to his medical career, in which for sixty years he led in the
profession, it is briefly as follows: While practising in the valley of
the Housatonic, he rode almost constantly on a racking horse, about
sixteen hands high, and almost with the speed of the wind, and
occasionally in a two wheeled vehicle, common in those days, called a
chaise, or more often a "one horse shay." At such times one of his medical
students rode beside him, and drove the horse.

Between calls along the road the Doctor read his works, especially those
relating to cases in hand. This custom of keeping up with the new works
and periodicals of the profession he never relaxed, even after old age and
the most distressing physical infirmities prevented his practice. Neither
was the old shay ever abandoned; our citizens remember it well, moving
carefully along these streets, with its huge calash top and faithful
horse. No storm of rain or snow prevented him from keeping an appointment
while he was able to get in and out of his vehicle.

In 1823, Dr. Delamater was made Professer in the Medical Institute of
Pittsfield, Berkshire county, Mass.; in 1827, at the Fairfield Medical
School, Herkimer county, New York. He was at the same time giving lessons
at Bowdoin College, Mass. While at Fairfield, he was invited to lecture in
the Medical College of Ohio, where Kirtland, Drake and Mussey have
occupied chairs. This resulted in an appointment as Professor in the
Willoughby University, Lake county, Ohio, at that time a flourishing
institution. In 1842, he became one of the Faculty of the Western Reserve
Medical College, at Cleveland.

Almost every man has some prominent talent, though with many it is never
developed. With Professor Delamater it was the ability to give prolonged,
profound and perspicuous lectures. This was his special gift and as usual
in such cases he was not a facile writer. It is said he delivered seventy
courses of medical lectures. His memory was perfect and his reading
embraced everything relating to his profession. A good lecturer requires
not only a clear perception of his subject, but a lucid and fluent
presentation of it. Dr. Delamater never wrote lectures. His memoranda were
of the most meagre kind. They were frequently nothing more than a few
hieroglyphics made on the margin of a newspaper drawn from his vest pocket
as he mounted the desk. Every case he had ever treated and all its details
appeared to be thoroughly fixed in his recollection. He sometimes wrote
medical essays for publication, but with evident reluctance. In cases of
malpractice Dr. Delamater was the especial dread of the attorney whose
side he did not favor. His full, clear and logical statements made a deep
and generally an irresistible impression upon the court and jury.

After he became unable to visit patients he was consulted with never
ceasing confidence by physicians and by patients, especially those
afflicted with chronic complaints.

His moral and religious qualities were as conspicuous as his mental ones.
He carried the faculty of conscientiousness to a length which the most
conscientious would regard as extreme. Against the poor his charges for
professional service were merely nominal and were never pressed, and with
the rich he was so moderate and easy that with a large practice he was
barely able to maintain his family, which, like himself, were afflicted
with prolonged constitutional diseases. His rare Christian virtues are
described with fidelity and beauty in the farewell discourse of Rev. W. H.
Goodrich, of the First Presbyterian Church, which, being in print, may be
read and preserved by the numerous friends of the good old man.




Jared Potter Kirtland.



Prof. Kirtland belongs to the class of self-made naturalists who attain to
greater eminence than others of equal talents and better advantages.
Success in this branch of science requires not only a native genius, but
enthusiasm and never tiring perseverance; to the rich and the educated
these last qualifications are frequently wanting, or, if they are not,
instead of growing with the progress of life, they become more and more
weak instead of more and more strong. Industry and ambition are more than
a match for education in minds of the same order.

[Illustration: Your Fellow Citizen, J. P. Kirtland]

Dr. Kirtland originated at Wallingford, Connecticut. His father,
Turhand Kirtland, in 1799, was appointed general agent of the
Connecticut Land Company, on the Reserve. He removed to Poland, in
Mahoning county, the next year, where he became a prominent citizen of
the new county then known as New Connecticut. So long as the Company
existed he was continued in the agency, and survived until 1833 to
witness the developments of the region.

Jared appears to have been left in Connecticut, probably to secure the
advantages of those common schools which were wanting in this western
wilderness. The young man made his appearance in Ohio on horseback, July
4th, 1810, at the age of fifteen years. He was destined to be a physician,
and in 1817 he was sent to the celebrated medical school of Dr. Rush, in
Philadelphia. After leaving that institution he set forth on the way of
life with horse and saddle bags, dispensing advice and prescriptions,
according to the custom of the times, to the people of the townships
around Poland. Every old settler knows what a time the pioneer doctors
had. Their patients were scattered far and wide in log cabins which stood
in small clearings in the forest surrounded by gigantic trees. A messenger
rushed in at any hour of the day or night from a distressed, perhaps a
distant family, requiring immediate attention. It was the duty of the
frontier physician to saddle his horse at the moment and return with the
messenger. The route more often lay along a narrow trail through the
woods, over roots and logs, with mud and water on all sides. In dark
nights, or in storms of rain and sleet, the overhanging boughs of the
trees dripping with water, these visits were not of the most cheerful
character. In those early days bridges were behind roads in regard to
condition and repairs, and it was frequently necessary, in order to reach
a suffering patient, to do as Cassius did--plunge in and trust to a
faithful horse--in order to cross swollen creeks and rivers.

While engaged in this rude professional practice, acquiring a good
reputation as a physician, he was closely observing the fishes, reptiles,
shells and animals of a region teeming with animal and vegetable life.
Scientific works were scarce in that new region, but living subjects were
abundant. This exuberance of life was of more value to a scrutinizing
mind than a surplus of books and a deficiency of specimens. An unusually
rich field for the naturalist lay open to his daily observation for
twenty years.

During his residence at Poland, Dr. Kirtland was twice elected to the
House of Representatives for Ohio. In that body he directed his efforts
especially to a change in the Penitentiary system. It was mainly through
his zeal and activity that the old style of treating State prisoners was
abandoned, and they have been made a source of revenue and not of expense.
Convict labor has thus proven by experience to be valuable to the public
and to the convict a relaxation of the rigor of his situation.

It was while studying the habits of the fresh water shells of the
Mahoning and its branches that Dr. Kirtland made a discovery which
attracted attention throughout the scientific world. The classification
of species had been made upon mere difference of form. Dr. Kirtland
perceived that in the same species a difference of form was due to sex in
_testacea_ the same as in all other animals, and that too many species
had been adopted. This bold announcement, coming from the back woods of
Ohio, created quite a commotion among naturalists. It was, however,
found, on investigation, to be true, though it rendered obsolete a large
number of terrible Latin phrases.

In the publication of his views, and afterwards for his descriptions of
the fishes of Ohio, he found a liberal patron in the Boston Society of
Natural History. When the State of Ohio organized a geological survey, in
1838, the department of Natural History was of course given to him. There
was barely time to make a catalogue of the fauna and flora of the State
before the survey was suspended, but many of his figures and descriptions
of the fishes have since been published in the transactions of the Boston
Society. This appointment broke up his large medical practice in Trumbull
and adjacent counties. He now accepted the appointment of Professer in the
Ohio Medical College at Cincinnati. About 1838, Prof. Kirtland removed
from Poland to Cleveland, to perform the same duties in the Cleveland
Medical College. With a restless energy he went beyond natural history and
medicine in his investigations, into the field of horticulture,
floriculture and agriculture.

Purchasing a rugged farm on the ridge road five miles out of Cleveland, he
entered with zeal into the business of scientific farming. Here he
demonstrated that a stiff clay soil derived from the underlying Devonian
Shales may be made highly productive in fruit. His success stimulated
others along the ridge road, until the old pastures and meadows on that
side of the city have been changed into the most profitable orchards and
gardens in the vicinity. This required twenty years more of time and
industry, during much of which he came daily to the college and delivered
one or more lectures. In the lecture his style is entirely
conversational, but rapid, fluent, and always intelligible. Here all the
varieties of his studies come into play, as it were, spontaneously. He is
equally at home among the birds, the insects and the reptiles, the fishes
or the mammalia. Their habits are as familiar as those of his children and
grandchildren. He writes but seldom, and thus the teachings of so many
years on so many subjects are confided principally to the memory of the
many hundreds of students to whom they have been delivered.

For several years Dr. Kirtland has declined to lecture on any subject. He
is verging upon four score, a period which with most men, is necessarily
one of rest if not of weariness, but he has never known what it is to
rest. No farmer in Rockport is up earlier or attends more closely to his
grounds. All the valuable varieties of peaches, pears, cherries and
grapes, have been tested by their actual product, or are in the process of
being tested. He is enthusiastically fond of the culture of bees and of
every variety of flowers which will thrive in this climate. A number of
new varieties of cherries have been originated on the Kirtland farm, and
after trial those which are valuable have been scattered over the country.
There are very few men who are enabled to make so many applications of
science to practical subjects, and still fewer who are permitted to live
long enough to witness the fruits of their labors.




Theodatus Garlick.



We are almost at a loss in what class to place Dr. Garlick. By natural
taste and genius he belongs to the artists. His devotion to the healing
art arose principally from the necessities of our race for something to
eat and wear. He had the fortune, probably good fortune, to be born in
Vermont, at Middlebury, March 30th, 1805, in view of the Green
Mountains, among rocks and mountains. This region is principally famous
for marble, slate, iron ore, and hardy young men, generally known as
Green Mountain boys.

An older brother, Abel B. Garlick, having been apprenticed to a marble
cutter, came out West, sometime after the war of 1812, and located at
Cleveland. In 1816, Theodatus, at the age of eleven years, had drifted
as far as Erie, Pennsylvania; in 1819, to Cleveland. The Winter of
1819-20, he spent at Black River, which was then the leading ship yard of
the lakes.

Abel B. had artist's ability also. In this region no marble was to be
found, but a tolerable substitute existed in the fine grained blue
sandstone at Newburg. A mill was erected at the quarry on Mill creek,
below the falls, where these stones were sawed, as they are now, into
handsome slabs.

Like other New Englanders, the Vermont boys are early impressed with the
idea of self-support. Although Theodatus much preferred fun and frolic to
hard labor, he entered cheerfully upon the business of a stone cutter at
the age of sixteen. Their marble yard (without marble) was on Bank street,
where Morgan & Root's block now stands. Abel marked the outlines of the
letters upon incipient grave stones in pencil, and Theodatus carved them
with his chisel. Most of the renowned sculptors of Ohio, such as Powell,
Clevenger and Jones, took their first lessons in the same way. All of them
have left samples of their untutored skill in various angels and cherubs,
now mouldering in old churchyards. The blue sandstone monuments, on which
Dr. Garlick cut inscriptions fifty years since, are still to be seen in
the early cemeteries of the Western Reserve; some are touching enough, but
not a few are more ridiculous than mournful. When Nathan Perry became so
prosperous that he proposed to remove the old wooden store on the corner
of Water and Superior streets and replace it with a brick one, he
concluded to expend something upon ornament. He ordered two oval stone
signs to be made and to be built into the walls over the two doors, one on
each street. These were among the earliest efforts of Dr. Garlick. Both of
these stones were in existence until the ground was cleared for the
present Bank building, when they were broken up and put into the cellar
wall. In those days it was one of the duties of an apprentice to sharpen
the tools at a blacksmith's forge. The young man concluded to carve flying
cherubims with their stone trumpets to ring in the ears of coming
generations no longer.

Having a robust physical constitution, he became passionately fond of
hunting and fishing. In 1822, he lived with a brother in Newbury, Geauga
county, which was then a forest full of game. In a letter referring to the
sporting days of his youth, he wrote as follows:

  My brother and myself started out very early one morning for a deer that
  we knew had been feeding around the cabin that night; within a quarter
  of a mile from the cabin my brother shot him, and as he fired, up jumped
  eleven elk; one of our neighbors shot five of them within an acre of
  ground; they were near together, at bay, fighting with the dogs. I
  helped to get them in; they were a part of a larger herd, we counted
  their beds in the snow where they had lain at night, and there were over
  one hundred in the drove.

[Illustration: Yours Truly, T. Garlick]

Ten or fifteen years previous to that time, one of those tornadoes, which
occasionally visit this region, had prostrated the timber along a tract a
mile wide and several miles in length, through the township of Newbury. A
thicket of bushes had sprung up among the fallen trees, which furnished
excellent browsing ground and shelter for game, of which there was an
abundance of bear, wolves, elk, deer, turkeys, &c., constituting quite a
paradise for a young Nimrod.

He finally determined to become a physician, and after some years of the
usual experience of medical students, practicing some, and assisting at
operations, he entered the medical department of the University of
Maryland, in the city of Baltimore, where he graduated in 1834.

No sooner was his diploma secured than the artist again broke forth. He
suddenly produced bas-reliefs in wax of five favorite professors without
sittings, which were pronounced perfect likenesses. General Jackson and
Henry Clay gave him a short sitting, and the next day their statuetts were
on exhibition. Mr. Clay expressed his satisfaction for his own in an
autograph letter. Another miniature in relief, full length, of Chief
Justice Marshall, from a portrait by Waugh, was pronounced by Mr. Bullock,
an English virtuoso, as equal to anything produced by Thorwaldsen. But
being surrounded by medical men, who, like men of all professions, regard
their own as more important than any other, Dr. Garlick was induced to
turn his artistic skill upon anatomical models.

He located at Youngstown, Ohio, the same year that he graduated, at which
place, and at the Medical College of Cleveland, he devoted nearly two
years in getting up models of all parts of the human body, taken from
subjects in the dissecting room. They may yet be seen in the Medical
Colleges at Cleveland, Buffalo, Toronto, Charleston, South Carolina,
Cincinnati, and other places. These were such close imitations of nature
that the late Professer Mussey, of Cincinnati, pronounced them superior to
the French models at Paris by Auzoux. At Youngstown he made a life size
bust of Judge George Tod, copies of which are now in the family. In 1853,
after a successful practice at Youngstown, he came to Cleveland, and
formed a partnership in surgery with the late Professer H. A. Ackley, and
for a number of years was a member of the Board of Medical Censors of the
Cleveland Medical College, and vice president of the Cleveland Academy of
Natural Science. As he was a naturalist, he applied the principles of the
anatomical models to animals and parts of animals, especially fishes. He
entered with great zeal upon the artificial propagation of brook trout and
other fish in connection with Dr. Ackley. In 1857, he published a small
book, which is the standard work of the United States on this subject.

He was a skillful physician and surgeon, a diligent student of natural
history, a keen sportsman, and a great lover of the fine arts. A good
physical constitution is at least one-half of the capital of any man,
however gifted in mind. In this respect he was like Christopher North,
with few equals. In the rude contests of strength among the young men of a
new country, the races, wrestling matches, and occasional fights, he never
felt like backing down; but of late years this powerful frame has been
partially stricken with paralysis.

The doctor still resides in this city, devoted to natural science,
especially botany, but the days of his personal activity are past.




J. L. Cassels.



John Lang Cassels, M.D., LL.D., was born in Stirlingshire, Scotland, and
in 1827, while quite a young man, came to this country. Soon after, he
studied medicine with Prof. John Delamater, in Fairfield, New York, and
graduated in 1834, in the College of Physicians and Surgeons located at
Fairfield, N. Y. He was Demonstrator of Anatomy in that school three years,
two years during his pupilage and one after his graduation. He opened an
office for the practice of medicine in Earlville, New York, in the spring
of 1835, and in the fall of the same year received and accepted the
appointment of Professor of Chemistry in Willoughby University, Ohio,
which connection he retained until the fall of 1843, when he and his
associates opened and established the Cleveland Medical College, in which
he still occupies the chair of Chemistry.

In 1837, he received the appointment of First Assistant Geologist of the
New York State Geological Survey, which he occupied for several seasons,
performing field labor in the summer and lecturing on chemistry in
Willoughby Medical College during the winter. His connection with the New
York survey gave him an excellent opportunity to become an expert
practical geologist; his location being on the Hudson river district,
offered him a fine field of action, as it is really the key to the geology
and mineralogy of the State.

In the winter of 1839, he gave a course of demonstrated lectures on
chemistry before the Young Men's Library Association in Cleveland, the
first public lectures on science ever given in the city. The following
winter the citizens of Cleveland invited him to lecture again on the same
subject, and he complied. The city at that time contained mostly young
people--only two gray-headed men attended the Stone Church.

In 1815, he spent most of the season in visiting and collecting specimens
of mineral in the lead region of Wisconsin, Illinois, Iowa and Missouri,
thus becoming familiar with the geology of their rich mineral region.

In 1846, he spent the whole season in exploring the Lake Superior country,
coasting the south shore in a bark canoe, having for his traveling
companions two Indians and a half-breed voyager. At this date there were
no steamers on Lake Superior, and but a very few small sailing craft. It
was during this time that he took squatter possession of a mile square of
the iron region of that country, for the benefit of the Cleveland Iron
Company. He was the first white man that had visited this region, now so
famous for its ferruginous wealth. Near the close of the season he spent a
short time geologizing Isle Royale, and returned to Saut St. Marie on the
steamer Julia Palmer, which had, during the summer, been hauled over the
passage of Saut St. Marie. During the winter following, at the request of
a number of Clevelanders, he gave a public lecture on the Lake Superior
region; at the close of which he said he would venture a prophecy: "Such
was the character of the climate, scenery, etc., of Lake Superior that the
time was not far distant when it would become as great a resort for
invalids and pleasure-seekers as Saratoga and Newport now are." Also, that
there is iron enough in the iron district sufficient to furnish a double
track of the much talked of Whitney's railroad. These statements were then
received with a stormy manifestation of incredulity.

In 1859, the Jefferson College of Mississippi conferred the Degree of LL.D.
on Dr. Cassels.

In 1861, he was elected a corresponding member of the Imperial Geological
Institution of Berlin, Prussia.

For the last ten years, in addition to the duties of his chair in the
Cleveland Medical College, he has regularly filled the chair of chemistry
and natural history in the Western Reserve College at Hudson. During the
past twenty years he has given several courses of popular experimental
lectures in his favorite branches of chemistry and geology in a number of
our neighboring towns, Akron, Canton, &c. He is also the regular lecturer
in these branches in the Female Seminary in Painesville.

Perhaps few men have been as extensively engaged in texicological
examinations during the past twenty years as Dr. Cassels. Many of these
have been of great interest, both in a social and moral point of view. In
all such cases he is regarded with great confidence, both on account of
his scientific skill and his high sense of moral integrity.

As an analytical chemist he has few superiors, and is much of his spare
time engaged in the analysis of waters, ores, coal, limestone, &c. In
1866, he analyzed the water of Cleveland which is brought from Lake Erie
and distributed through the city. He analyzed this water taken from
different parts of the city and from the point where it entered the pipes
to be forced into the reservoir; also from a point in the lake three
thousand four hundred and fifty feet from the shore, where he advised that
the inlet pipe ought to be located. All these analyses are embraced in his
report to the Trustees of the city water works; in which also are many
valuable suggestions respecting supply pipes and the character of the
water for steam purposes.




J. S. Newberry.



J. S. Newberry, M.D., LL.D., was born at Windsor, Connecticut, of old
Puritan stock, his ancestry having formed part of the colony which in
1635, emigrated from Dorchester, colony of Massachusetts Bay, and founded
the town of Windsor, the first settlement made in Connecticut.

[Illustration: Yours Very Truly, J. S. Newberry]

The family continued to reside at Windsor for two hundred years, during
which time it held an honorable place in that community and contributed
several representatives, who took an important part in the affairs of the
State government, or in the defense of the colony against the Indians, and
in the French and Indian and Revolutionary wars. Dr. Newberry's
grandfather, Hon. Roger Newberry, a distinguished lawyer, and for many
years a member of the Governor's council, was one of the directors of the
Connecticut Land Company, which purchased a large part of the Connecticut
Western Reserve. The town of Newberry received its name from him. His son,
Henry Newberry, inherited his interest in the land of the company, by
which he became possessed of large tracts in Summit, Ashtabula, Medina,
Lorain and Cuyahoga counties, including one hundred acres now within the
city of Cleveland. Looking after these interests he made three journeys on
horseback (the first in 1814,) from Connecticut to Ohio, and, in 1824,
removed his family to Summit county, where he founded the town of Cuyahoga
Falls, remaining there till his death, in 1854.

Dr. Newberry graduated at Western Reserve College, in 1846, and from the
Cleveland Medical College in 1848. The years 1849 and 1850, he spent in
study and travel abroad. Returning at the close of the latter year he
established himself, early in 1851, in the practice of medicine in
Cleveland. Here he remained till 1855, when his professional business
became so engrossing as to leave him no time for the scientific study to
which he had been devoted from his boyhood. To escape from too great
professional occupation, and impelled by an unconquerable passion for a
scientific career, in May, 1855, he accepted an appointment from the War
Department, and became connected with the army as acting assistant
surgeon and geologist to the party which, under Lieutenant R. S.
Williamson, U.S.A., made an exploration of the country lying between San
Francisco and the Columbia river. The results of this expedition are
embodied in Vol. 6 P. R. R. Reports. The reports of Dr. Newberry on the
"Geology, Botany and Zoology of North California and Oregon," are
republished in a volume of 300 pp., 4to., with 48 plates. In 1857-8, he
accompanied Lieutenant J. O. Ives, U.S.A., in the exploration and
navigation of the Colorado river, one of the most interesting
explorations made by any party in any country. The object of the
expedition was to open a navigable route of communication with our army
in Utah. To this end an iron steamer was constructed in Philadelphia,
taken in sections to the head of the Gulf of California, where it was put
together and launched. With this steamer the river, before almost
entirely unknown, was navigated for five hundred miles, opening a route
of travel which has since been extensively used. Beyond the point reached
by the steamer the course of the river is for several hundreds of miles
through the "Great Ca�on," as it is called, a chasm worn by the stream in
the table lands of the "Colorado Plateau." This ca�on has nearly vertical
banks, and is nowhere less than three thousand feet deep; in some places
six thousand feet, or more than a mile in depth.

The party with which Dr. Newberry was connected, spent nearly a year in
exploring the country bordering the Colorado, adding much to our knowledge
of our western possessions, and giving, in their report, an interesting
and graphic description of, perhaps, the most remarkable portion of the
earth's surface. Half of the report of the Colorado Expedition was
prepared by Dr. Newberry, and so much importance was attached to his
observations by his commanding officer, that in the preface he speaks of
them as constituting "the most interesting material gathered by the
expedition."

In 1859, having finished his portion of the Colorado Report, Dr. Newberry
took charge of another party sent out by the War Department, to report to
Captain J. N. Macomb, topographical engineer, U.S.A., for the exploration
of the San Juan and upper Colorado rivers. The Summer of 1859 was spent in
the accomplishment of the object had in view by this expedition, during
which time the party traveled over a large part of Southern Colorado and
Utah and Northern Arizona and New Mexico, filling up a wide blank space in
our maps and opening a great area before unknown, much of which proved
rich and beautiful, abounding in mineral wealth, and full of natural
objects of great interest. Among the results of this expedition were the
determination of the point of junction of Grand and Green rivers, which
unite to form the Colorado, and the exploration of the valley of the San
Juan, the largest tributary of the Colorado; a stream as large as the
Connecticut, before almost unknown, but which, though now without an
inhabitant upon its banks, is for several hundred miles lined with ruined
towns or detached edifices built of stone, and once occupied by many
thousands of a semi-civilized people. The report of this expedition made
by Dr. Newberry, containing much new and interesting scientific matter,
was finished just before the war, but yet remains unpublished.

Immediately after the commencement of the war, the United States Sanitary
Commission was organized. Dr. Newberry was one of the first elected
members, and it is, perhaps, not too much to say that no other one
individual contributed more to the great success that attended the labors
of that organization. In September, 1861, he accepted the position of
Secretary of the Western Department of the Sanitary Commission, and from
that time had the general supervision of the affairs of the Commission in
the valley of the Mississippi; his head-quarters being first at
Cleveland, and subsequently, as the frontier was carried southward, at
Louisville, Kentucky.

Through his efforts branches of the Sanitary Commission were established
in the principal cities of the West, and agencies for the performance of
its work at all important military points, and with each considerable
sub-division of the army. Before the close of the war the entire West was
embraced in one great System of agencies for the production and
distribution of supplies, and the care of sick and wounded on the
battle-field, in hospital or in transitu. The magnitude of the work of the
Sanitary Commission at the West may be inferred from the fact that there
were at one time over five thousand societies tributary to it in the loyal
States of the Northwest--that hospital stores of the value of over
$5,000,000 were distributed by it in the valley of the Mississippi--that
over 850,000 names were on the records of its Hospital Directory at
Louisville, and 1,000,000 soldiers, for whom no other adequate provision
was made, were fed and sheltered in its "homes."

Of this great work Dr. Newberry was the responsible head, and by the
wisdom and energy displayed by himself very much of the harmony and
efficiency which characterized this organization are to be ascribed.

As his labors in connection with the Sanitary Commission were drawing
to a close, Dr. Newberry was appointed Professor of Geology in the
School of Mines of Columbia College, New York city. He entered on the
duties of the position in 1866. In 1869, he was appointed by Governor
Hayes to the office of State Geologist, created by the Ohio General
Assembly of that year.

The scientific acquirements of Professor Newberry have given him a
world-wide fame. As a Geologist his reputation ranks among the foremost.
He has been honored with the membership of the most of the learned
societies of this country, and of many in Europe; was one of the original
corporators of the National Academy of Sciences; was recently elected
president of the American Association for the advancement of Science, and
is now president of the New York Lyceum of Natural History.




D. H. Beckwith.



The first Homeopathist in Cleveland was W. K. Adams, who succeeded in
converting Dr. Hoyt, with whom he formed a partnership. Very soon after,
in 1845, Drs. Wheeler and Williams were added to the list. There were but
six families in the city having firm faith in the principles of
homeopathy, and these were silent followers of Dr. John Wheeler, not
willing to be known as such, so strong was public opinion against them.
Dr. Wheeler continued unshaken by the strong opposition he met with, and
heeded neither sneers nor denunciations. His course was onward and his
practice successful, every month adding to his list of converts, and the
profits of each year doubling the preceding one. Dr. Wheeler was the first
member of the profession to propose that a homeopathic medical college
should be located in Cleveland, and he earnestly pressed his theory that
Cleveland should be the centre of homeopathy in the West. His name was the
first signature to procure a charter, and when the college was organized
he was selected as the President, and held the office for the first eleven
years of its existence, contributing materially to its success, and
resigning only when increasing age rendered its duties too onerous, when
added to a large practice.

From the little beginnings in the early days of Dr. Wheeler's
practice, homeopathy has grown in Cleveland, until it now reckons a
flourishing college, a woman's medical college, two hospitals, an
insurance company, twenty-six practicing physicians, and a host of
believers in homeopathic principles and modes of treatment.

Prominent among the number of practicing physicians is D. H. Beckwith,
M.D., who was born in Huron county, Ohio, in 1826. His father was one of
the pioneers of the northern part of the State; emigrating from the State
of New York in 1815, and making the journey the most of the way on foot,
occupying more than six weeks. He remained a few days in Cleveland, and
not admiring the soil for agricultural purposes (little thinking it was
the site for a city of its present beauty and magnitude), he journeyed on
until he reached more fertile soil in Huron county, where, by economy and
industry, in a short time he accumulated sufficient to purchase a small
farm, on which he lived until his death, having seen his family of six
sons and one daughter arrive at mature age.

[Illustration: Truly Yours, D. H. Beckwith]

The subject of this memoir remained at home during his boyhood, attending
school during the winter and working on the farm in the summer season. At
the age of sixteen he entered the Norwalk Seminary, pursuing his studies
with vigor for a few years, when it became necessary for him to earn his
own living. He taught several schools and was among the first in the State
to inaugurate the normal school system to elevate the standard of teaching
and improve public schools.

Early in life he decided that the medical profession would be his choice,
and all his leisure hours were spent in studying medical books. After
securing a sufficiency from teaching (as he supposed,) to meet the
expenses of a medical education, he studiously applied himself, under the
tuition of John Tiff, M.D., one of the most scientific practitioners of
the State. During the third year of his studies his money was expended,
and not wishing to call on friends for assistance he concluded to commence
the practice of medicine. A partnership was offered him in an adjacent
town, and arrangements were made for him to commence his professional
career. He unfolded his plan to his preceptor, who listened attentively to
his future plans, and then rising from his chair, exclaimed with much
emphasis: "If there is anything, sir, that I despise, it is half a
doctor," and immediately left the office. The brilliant prospect was
clouded. With but eight months more study the young student could commence
the practice of medicine and be an honor to his preceptor and to himself,
but the lack of money was a seemingly impassable barrier. It was a dark
day to the student, but he had learned "never to let his energies
stagnate." One resource was left him. He determined to open a select
school for advanced scholars. In four days from that time he entered the
school room with one hundred scholars, many of them his former pupils.
Morning and evening he clerked in a drug store, for which he received his
board and washing. On Wednesday and Saturday evenings he was examined in
his medical studies with two other students who devoted their entire time
to their studies. Thus for thirteen weeks he was daily performing the
duties of a teacher, so arduous that many would have complained, though
they had no other occupation. In addition to this he was several hours
each day compounding and dispensing medicine, and at the same time keeping
pace with his class in the study of materia medica and botany.

Having already attended one course of lectures in an allopathic college,
and not being satisfied with that mode of prescriptions for the sick, he
attended the Eclectic College of Cincinnati, where he listened to the
first course of lectures ever delivered in any chartered college in the
country on homeopathic medicine, by the lamented Prof. Rosa who had no
superior in his profession. After receiving his degree he commenced the
practice of medicine with his preceptor. The prompt and curative effect
produced by homeopathic remedies soon convinced him of its superiority
over other systems of medicine and decided him to adopt it as his system
of practice for life. The success that has attended his labors ever since
has well proved the correctness of his choice.

The first few years of his practice were spent among the acquaintances of
his childhood, in the beautiful village of Norwalk. In 1852, he left a
large practice and many warm friends to seek a larger field for future
work, and located in Zanesville, Ohio, where he continued his profession
until the year 1863. The climate not being adapted to the health of his
family he moved to Cleveland and soon obtained what he had left in
Zanesville--a large and lucrative practice. By close attention to his
patients, being always ready to give his services to the poor as
cheerfully as to the rich, and his unusual kindness to all persons placed
under his professional care, he has won the affection and esteem of his
patients to a degree rarely equaled.

He has always taken a lively interest in the advancement of medical
science, firmly believing in the immutable principles that govern the
administration of homeopathic medicine as well as the curative effect. He
has always been anxious to induce young men that proposed to study the
science of medicine to follow the example of the illustrious Hahnemann.
His lectures in the Cleveland Homeopathic College have always been
characterized by practicability. He has not only published a medical
journal, but has largely contributed to the pages of many others in this
country. He has always been a leading member of county and State medical
societies, as well as of the Northwestern and American Institute of
Homeopathy, holding the office of Vice President of all the above named
societies. In 1866, he was chosen by the American Institute as one of the
committee to prepare an essay on Cholera, its nature and treatment.

He was among the first to establish the Hahnemann Life Insurance Company
of Cleveland, being one of its incorporators and procuring a large amount
of capital stock for its support, besides giving his time in organizing
it. He was chosen their chief medical examiner, and the great success of
the Company is largely due to his skill in selecting good and healthy
risks for insurance.




[Illustration: T. T. Seelye]


Thomas T. Seelye.



Thomas T. Seelye, M.D., was born in Danbury, Connecticut, August 23, 1818.
His parents were Seth and Abigail Seelye, of English descent. After
preparing for a collegiate course, it became necessary for him to take
charge of his father's store. At twenty-one years of age he commenced the
study of medicine as a private pupil of William Parker, professor of
surgery in the College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, from which
college he graduated in the Spring of 1842. He was then appointed
assistant physician in Bellevue Hospital, where he remained one year, when
he commenced the practice of his profession in Woodbury, Connecticut.
There he remained until the Spring of 1848, when he sold out his business
and removed to Cleveland, having previously leased a tract of land just
within the suburbs of the city, covered with native forest and such a
profusion of real natural beauty in glen, woodland, and beautiful springs
of soft water, that it seemed apparent that art only needed to blend with
nature to make this one of the most desirable of localities for a great
health institution.

His system of practice, though called water cure, in fact drew assistance
from all the experience of the past in relieving physical suffering and
curing disease. It was not _orthodox_, it belonged to no _pathy_, and in
consequence had the opposition of all branches of the profession. His
means were quite limited, as were also his accommodations--not so limited,
however, but that the expense of construction and furnishing greatly
exceeded the length of his purse. Business waited for _success_, to
establish itself, but the sheriff _did not_. Debts became due, and nothing
with which to pay, but hope in the future, which is rather unsatisfactory
nutriment for hungry creditors.

But, by and by, patient labor and persistent effort in the right direction
began to bring forth fruit. Business increased, the visits of the sheriff
were less frequent, and after about five years he could lie down to rest
at night without fear of a dun in the morning.

In ten years he purchased the Forest City Cure, which was started in
opposition, the capacity of the old Cure having become altogether
inadequate for his increased business. After ten years he sold it to the
Hebrews for an orphan asylum, preferring to unite the two institutions
under one roof. He then proceeded to complete the plan he had been
perfecting for the past five years, for erecting buildings of an extent
that would amply accommodate his ever increasing patronage, and supplied
with those conveniences and appliances which an experience of twenty-one
years had deemed most desirable for the invalid. The architect has
furnished us a sketch of this institution, of which, when completed, every
lover of our beautiful city will be proud.

In addition to his professional labors he is largely engaged, in
connection with W. J. Gordon and others, in the manufacture of the
non-explosive lamp, which bids fair to be one of the most successful and
extensive manufacturing enterprises ever started in this city.

Within the past three years, Dr. Seelye has purchased the twenty-six acres
he originally leased, and twenty-two acres adjoining, making a very
valuable tract of real estate, taken in connection with the present and
prospective growth of the city.

Although Dr. Seelye is not engaged conspicuously in public charities, few
hands are so frequently open as his to the wants of the poor. Great
comprehensiveness of intellect, an indomitable energy, a rare penetration
and control over other minds, combined with an unblemished integrity of
character, have given him a high reputation among physicians in the West.




[Illustration: Water Corm.]


Manufacturing



With neither water power nor steam power very little can be done in the
way of manufacturing. Cleveland, until the construction of the Ohio canal,
was without either of those two requisites for a manufacturing point. The
Cuyahoga river, though giving abundant water power along a considerable
portion of its course, enters Cleveland as a slow moving stream, winding
its sluggish way in so tortuous a course that it seems reluctant to lose
its identity in the waters of the lake. Water power, under such
circumstances, is out of the question, and, as with no coal, and a rapidly
decreasing supply of wood, steam cannot be economically used for
manufacturing purposes, the people of Cleveland turned their attention
wholly to buying and selling instead of producing.

The construction of the Ohio canal to the coal fields of Summit county
opened the eyes of the more enterprising citizens to the possibilities of
a great future for Cleveland as a manufacturing city. No sooner had the
canal reached Akron, and an experimental shipment of coal been made to the
future city--with but poor success, as already narrated--than attention
was called to the importance of the new field thus opened to Cleveland
enterprise. On the 7th of March, 1828; a letter appeared in the Cleveland
Herald, from which the following is an extract:

"We possess, beyond a doubt, decided advantages over Buffalo, or any other
town on Lake Erie, in our contiguity to inexhaustible beds of pit-coal and
iron ore, very justly considered the basis of all manufacturing. On the
one hand, at the distance of about thirty miles, we can obtain any
quantity of crude iron of an excellent quality, while, on the other, at
about the same distance, we have access by canal to exhaustless mines of
coal of good quality. This last most invaluable, and all important article
in manufacturing, can not be obtained anywhere else on the Lakes without
the extra expense of shifting from canal-boats to other craft.

"When these mines shall have become extensively worked, coal will be
delivered in this place very little, if any, above that paid in
Pittsburgh, say from four to six cents; and good pig-iron can and is now
delivered at a less price here than in Pittsburgh. Doctor Cooper further
says: 'The very basis of all profitable manufacturing is, plenty of fuel,
easily, cheaply and permanently procurable;--the next desirable object is
plenty of iron ore; iron being the article upon which every other
manufacture depends. It is to the plentiful distribution of these two
commodities that Great Britain is chiefly indebted for the pre-eminence
of her manufactures and her commerce.' Surely it need not be thought
strange that Cleveland must one day become a great manufacturing place,
if we consider,

"_First_, That the canal will give us access to one of the finest portions
of country in the United States, sufficient for vending, to almost any
extent, articles such as might be manufactured here;--and, _Secondly_,
That power and materials in great abundance are 'easily, cheaply and
permanently procurable.' There is probably not a town in the Western
country, Pittsburgh only excepted, that unites these two objects so
happily as this place does.

"Every steam-engine wanted for boats on the Lake, for mills and factories
near the Lake, and on and near the canal should be made at this point.

"Not a pound of nails, a wagon-tire, an anchor, a cable, a cast-iron
stove, pot, kettle, ploughshare, or any article made of cast-iron--a yard
of coarse cotton, a gallon of beer, an ax, a shovel, nor a spade, should
be sent east for. There ought to be in full operation before the
completion of our canal, at least one steam engine manufactory, one
establishment for puddling iron, one rolling and slitting mill, and nail
factory, two or three iron foundries, in addition to the one now going
into operation under very favorable auspices, a cotton factory, a woolen
factory, a steam grist and saw mill, a brewery, &c."

On the succeeding week appeared some editorial comments in support of the
suggestions in the letter, and for some time frequent references, by
correspondents and editorially, were made to the matter. On the 25th of
April, 1828, appeared in the Herald a notice of a new iron foundry; the
first that had been built, and reference to which had been made in the
letter quoted. This was built by John Ballard & Co., and an editorial
announcing its opening says it "supplies this place and the surrounding
country on short notice and on reasonable terms, with the various articles
of cast iron work, for which, before this foundry was established, our
citizens were forced to send to a distance, and at the cost of much
trouble and expense."

But with all this urging of newspapers, and talking of far-sighted
citizens, the cause of manufacturing progressed slowly. To establish
manufactories was a costly experiment, requiring capital, patience, and a
faith, which, though some might profess, few actually possessed. As is
frequently the case in regard to public improvements, those who pressed
them most had no funds to invest in them, and those who had the funds were
little inclined to heed the suggestions of moneyless advisers.

MacCabe's Directory of Cleveland and Ohio City for 1837-8, says that at
that time there were on the east side of the river, in the corporation of
Cleveland, "four very extensive iron foundries and steam engine
manufactories; also, three soap and candle manufactories, two breweries,
one sash factory, two rope walks, one stoneware pottery, two carriage
manufactories, and two French run millstone manufactories, all of which
are in full operation." A flouring mill was in course of erection by Mr.
Ford which, it was predicted, would be, when finished, "the largest and
most complete establishment of the kind in the State of Ohio." At the same
time Ohio City was described as possessing "among the principal
manufactories of the place, the Cuyahoga Steam Furnace, the Saleratus
manufactory, and the Glue manufactory." The Cuyahoga Steam Furnace had
turned off in the previous year five hundred tons of castings, besides a
great quantity of wrought iron work, and gave employment to seventy men.
In noticing the description of the iron furnaces and steam engine
manufactories on the East side of the river as "very extensive", it must
be borne in mind that the standard of size and importance for such
establishments in Cleveland was much smaller then than now.

In spite of all the attempts made to stir up an interest in manufactories,
slow progress was made until a comparatively late period. One great
obstacle in the way was the opposition or indifference of the
land-holders, who directly rebuffed the proposals of intending
manufacturers, or placed a value on their land so high as to require an
amount of capital sunk in the soil that rendered the chances of profit
very hazardous. There was also a strong prejudice against factories on the
part of very many persons because they were "so dirty," and would tend to
make the neat and trim residences and door-yards of Cleveland as smutty as
those of Pittsburgh.

It was not until the breaking out of the war for the Union called into
existence manufactories all over the land to supply the needs born of the
war, that manufactories found a home and cordial welcome in Cleveland. The
exigencies of the time, and the intense feeling excited, scattered to the
wind all the prejudices against the dirt and smoke of iron manufactories,
and establishments of this kind sprang up on all sides, calling into
existence a host of other manufactories dependent on and contributing to
the successful conduct of iron foundries and iron mills. The war found
Cleveland a commercial city, whose trade, if not languishing, threatened
to soon reach its turning point; it left Cleveland a busy, bustling
manufacturing city, over a great part of which hung a perpetual cloud of
dense smoke, and with a population nearly doubled in numbers and greatly
changed in character owing to its change from a commercial to a
manufacturing city. The petroleum discovery in North Western Pennsylvania
and the coincident opening of direct railroad communication between
Cleveland and the oil regions, contributed greatly to the rapid increase
of the population and wealth of the city. Oil refineries grew up rapidly
like mushrooms in the valleys and ravines around, and lined the railroad
tracks, but, unlike mushrooms, did not disappear with equal rapidity. A
great number of people found employment in this new industry, and wealth
poured in with greater volume from this source than had ever been known to
flow from any species of trade or manufacture hitherto established. From
this time the future of Cleveland was assured. Year by year it has grown
with astonishing increase and new manufactories of every description are
springing up on every side. The flats that had lain deserted and of but
little value were brought into requisition for iron furnaces and iron
mills, and wherever lands could be had at reasonable rates in convenient
neighborhood to transportation lines, factories of some kind were
established.

The four or five small iron manufactories in and about Cleveland in 1837,
have grown to fourteen rolling mills, having two hundred puddling furnaces
and a daily capacity of four hundred tons of finished iron, not including
the nails spikes, nuts, bolts, horseshoes, &c. Several of these mills own
their own blast furnaces, and nearly all have coal mines of their own.
There are also five stove foundries; one malleable iron works; one axe and
tool company; half a dozen boiler plate and sheet iron works of large
capacity; nearly as many factories of steam engines of all descriptions,
and other machinery; three foundries for making car wheels and castings
for buildings; one large manufactory of cross cut, circular and other
saws, and several saw and file works of smaller dimensions.

Although the operations of domestic iron works were seriously affected by
the large increase of importations from Europe, the following amount of
iron was produced from the mills of Cleveland in 1868:

  Pig Iron                                 11,037 Tons.
  Rail Road Iron                           22,344  "
  Merchant Iron                            11,396  "
  Boiler, Tank and Sheet Iron               2,676  "
  Forgings                                  4,125  "
  Nuts, Washers, Rests, Nails and Spikes    5,607  "
  Machinery Castings                       18,250  "
  Wire                                        865  "

Making a total of 76,300 tons. To produce this it is estimated that
225,000 tons of coal and coke were consumed. The stove foundries produced
nearly 35,000 stoves, with the attendant hardware and stove furniture;
requiring nearly 10,000 tons of metal, and 4,000 tons of coal and coke,
and giving employment to about five hundred persons.

The planing mills and wooden ware manufactures give direct employment to
six hundred and fifty persons, and the year's business exceeded a
million dollars.

The growth and magnitude of the petroleum business of Cleveland can be
seen by the reports of receipts and shipments during the past four years:

  Date.               Crude Received    Refined Forwarded
  1865                 220,000 bbls.    145,000 bbls.
  1866                    613,247 "     402,430 "
  1867                    693,100 "     496,600 "
  1868                    956,479 "     776,356 "

Between three and four millions of dollars of capital are invested in this
business in Cleveland, and the annual product will not fall short of ten
or twelve millions of dollars. The rapid increase of the business created
an urgent demand for barrels. The receipts of staves in 1868, mainly to
supply this demand, were nearly three times in excess of the previous
year. Some 3,000 tons of hoop iron were required for barrels.

It is impossible to give, in the absence of any recent exact census, full
and correct statistics of the number and classification of the
manufactories of Cleveland, the capital invested, and the value of the
product. It has, however, been estimated from the best data that could be
procured, that the grand total value of all the manufactories of the city
in 1868, was not less than sixty millions of dollars, and it is daily
increasing.




William B. Castle.



William B. Castle was born in Essex, Crittenden county, Vermont, November
30, 1814. Immediately on the conclusion of the war, his father removed to
Toronto, where he had been engaged, as an architect, to superintend the
construction of the first Parliament buildings there. In 1827, he removed
with his family to Cleveland, William B. Castle being then thirteen years
old. His father had taken a farm about thirteen miles from the city, and
there the lad spent most of his time until 1832, when, in company with his
father and Mr. Charles M. Giddings, he established the first lumber-yard
in Cleveland. The business was carried on for a couple of years, when Mr.
Castle, Sen., died, and the son removed to Canada, engaging in
merchandizing and in manufacturing lumber for the yard in Cleveland. In
1839, he abandoned the Canada branch of the business, and in the following
year the partnership with Mr. Giddings was dissolved.

A new partnership was formed with a brother-in-law, under the name of
Castle & Field, for carrying on the hardware, in connection with jewelry
and watch making, business, on the west side of the river, then known as
Ohio City. In 1843, he left the business and entered the Cuyahoga Steam
Furnace Company, with which he has ever since been connected. So
thoroughly identified has Mr. Castle been with the history of that
establishment during the past quarter of a century, that this is a fitting
place for a brief sketch of the nature and history of the pioneer iron
company of Cleveland.

In 1830, Mr. Charles Hoyt projected the works which were erected and put
in operation under the firm name of Hoyt, Railey & Co. In 1834, the firm
was changed to an incorporated company under the name of the Cuyahoga
Steam Furnace Company, with a capital of one hundred thousand dollars, of
which three-fourths were paid in. The principal stockholders at the time
of the incorporation were Josiah Barber, Richard Lord, John W. Allen, and
Charles Hoyt. The managing officer was Charles Hoyt. Soon after the
incorporation the works were burned to the ground, but the company were
energetic, and soon a substantial brick structure, two hundred and
thirty-five feet front, with a wing of ninety feet deep, was erected on
the site of the destroyed building. The pig metal for the use of the works
was obtained at the company's blast furnace at Dover, twelve miles west,
and was considered equal in quality to the best Scotch pig. In 1840, Mr.
Hoyt was succeeded in the management by D. Cushing, who had been secretary
of the company. In 1843, Mr. Cushing gave place to Elisha T. Sterling, who
remained the head of the concern until his untimely death, in 1859.

[Illustration: Yours Truly, W. B. Castle]

From the advent of Mr. Sterling and the consequent re-organization of the
staff of officers of the works, dates the connection of Mr. Castle with
the establishment. Mr. Castle took the position of secretary, and held
that post until the death of Mr. Sterling, when he was appointed to fill
the position of manager. At the time when the sole charge of the works
devolved upon him the company was in a deplorable financial condition. The
prospect was sufficient to daunt a less resolute and hopeful spirit, but
Mr. Castle at once set about the Herculean task of bringing the concern
through its difficulties and establishing it on a firm financial basis.
The struggle was long continued, and more than once the advance gained
seemed suddenly to be again lost, but eventually it was pulled through
without having compromised a single debt, and without having but a single
case of litigation under his management. This case was not properly
chargable to the administration of the works, as it arose from the
supplying of a defective beam strap, which, there being then no forges in
Cleveland, had been ordered from Pittsburgh. This unusual exemption from
litigation was, doubtless, owing to the invariable rule adopted by Mr.
Castle, to reduce all contracts to careful writing and to live strictly up
to the letter as well as spirit of the contract.

The heavy work of the establishment in its early years was the supplying
of most of the mills in Ohio and the new States of the West with mill
gearing, and the manufacture of agricultural implements. In 1840, was
commenced the manufacture of stationary and land steam engines. In 1843,
the manufacture of marine engines was commenced by building the engine for
the first propeller on Lake Erie, the "Emigrant." About the same time work
was commenced on engines for the large side-wheel steamers, the largest of
their day being fitted out with machinery from these works. Among the
steamers thus equipped, and which were in their successive days the
wonders of the lakes, was the Europe, Saratoga, Hendrick Hudson, Pacific,
Avon, and Ohio. Among the propellers receiving their engines from the
Cuyahoga Works were the Winslow, Idaho, Dean Richmond, Ironsides, S. D.
Caldwell, Meteor, and a very large number of others, besides a great many
first-class steam tugs plying on Detroit river.

In 1853, the introduction of the manufacture of locomotives added a new
feature to the manufacturing industry of Cleveland. The Cleveland,
Columbus and Cincinnati Railroad was supplied from these works, and
locomotives were also made for the Cleveland and Pittsburgh, Lake Shore,
Cleveland and Toledo, and Bellefontaine and Indianapolis Railroads,
besides several other railroads in the west. In 1857, this branch of the
business was sold out to the Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati Railroad
Company, who now use the locomotive works for the manufacture and repair
of their own engines.

In addition to the marine engines, for which the establishment has become
famous, the company have lately entered upon the manufacture of first
class engines and blowing machines for blast furnaces. These have been
supplied to the furnaces in the Mahoning Valley and Wisconsin, and to
furnaces elsewhere, even supplying Pittsburgh, the home of the iron
manufacture. A very large engine has been constructed for the Atlantic
Docks, in Brooklyn, New York. Rolling mill engines and machinery have been
made for mills at Alliance, in the Tuscarawas Valley, at Harmony, Indiana,
and at Escanaba, in the Lake Superior iron district. Various engines have
been supplied to the Newburgh works, including the blowing engines and
hydraulic cranes for the Bessemer steel works, among the most perfect of
their kind in America. Railway tools manufactured by the company's works
have been ordered from so far east as New Jersey.

The Cuyahoga Steam Furnace Company have employed at times two hundred and
fifty men, and will probably average one hundred and fifty. Year after
year the company have been compelled to enlarge their facilities, until
now their property occupies the two corners of Detroit and Centre streets,
and one corner of Centre and West River streets. The buildings extend
three hundred and fifty feet on the river, and to a greater length on
Detroit street. The capital employed amounts to about a quarter of a
million dollars. The importance of these works in attracting attention and
capital to Cleveland, in giving employment to the people, and in assisting
to build up the business of the city, can hardly be overestimated. Taking
its nature, extent and history together it may probably be said with
safety that nothing in the city has had a more important influence in
shaping the future of Cleveland and contributing to its present
prosperity, and much of this influence is due to the labor and wisdom of
Mr. Castle. At present the works are organized under the presidency of Mr.
Castle, with Josephus Holloway as superintendant and designing engineer;
S. J. Lewis, secretary; W. W. Castle, book-keeper. From 1843 to 1857, the
superintendent and designing engineer, was Mr. Ethan Rogers, who by his
knowledge and skill added very much to the celebrity of the works.

In 1853, Mr. Castle was elected mayor of Ohio City, and during his term
of office the consolidation of the two cities was effected. To bring
about this desirable end he labored diligently, and was one of the
commissioners for settling the terms of annexation. In 1855, he was
elected mayor of the Consolidated city, and his rule was marked by vigor,
justice, and a strict regard for the rights and interests of the
citizens. For six years subsequent to his mayoralty he held the office of
commissioner of water works.

Mr. Castle was married in December, 1836, to Miss Mary Derby, who died in
Canada in the following year. In 1840, he was married to Miss Mary H.
Newell, of Vermont, by whom he has had one son and three daughters. The
son, W. W. Castle, now twenty-six, is book-keeper of the Cuyahoga Steam
Furnace Company. The oldest daughter is wife of Mr. Robert R. Rhodes, of
Cleveland. The youngest daughters are still at school.

The success of Mr. Castle has been achieved by a persistent struggle
against adverse circumstances and with but little to aid him but a
resolute will and good constitution. At an early age he was left with the
care of his father's family on his hands, and has had to fight, not only
his own battles, but to struggle with the difficulties into which
circumstances had thrown the company with which he became connected. Out
of the struggle he has come with a spotless reputation, the esteem of his
friends and the respect of his fellow-citizens, financial prosperity, and
the blessing of good health and undiminished vigor.




Charles Jarvis Woolson.



On the sixth of August, 1869, the citizens of Cleveland were surprised and
pained at the announcement of the death, on the morning of that day, of
Charles Jarvis Woolson, one of the most active and respected business men
of the city. Few were aware of his illness, and even by those acquainted
with the facts his death, up to within a very short time of the event, was
wholly unexpected.

Mr. Woolson was born in Chester, Vermont, and received careful educational
training, the family being in good circumstances. His father was engaged
in various manufacturing enterprises, including cotton and wool fabrics,
and the making of machine and hand cards. He was one of the very earliest
manufacturers of cooking stoves in the country.

At the age of nineteen, Mr. Woolson went into business on his own account,
choosing the newspaper profession instead of manufactures for his _debut._
His first venture was as editor and publisher of a newspaper in Grafton
county, New Hampshire. Two years later, he sold out and removed to
Virginia, where he assumed charge of the Charlotteville Advocate. But the
political and social atmosphere of the South was uncongenial to one born
and bred in the free air of Vermont. He could neither feel nor affect to
feel anything but abhorrence of the "institution," and so he soon
terminated his connection with the press of Virginia, and returned to the
land of churches, free schools and free speech. In 1830, he married Miss
Pomeroy, of Cooperstown, New York, and removing to Keene, New Hampshire,
engaged in mercantile business; but he who has once dabbled in journalism
imbibes a taste which it is difficult afterwards to eradicate. Mr. Woolson
was not at home in a mercantile store, and before long he purchased the
New England Palladium, a Boston daily newspaper, and conducted it for two
years, when he bade a final adieu to journalism as a profession, disposing
of his property in the Palladium and removing to Claremont, New Hampshire,
where he engaged with his father in the manufacture of stoves. Here he
remained until 1840, when he removed to Cleveland, taking with him the
patterns and materials connected with the stove business, and commenced
on his own account in a small way, his capital having been seriously
crippled by the financial convulsion of 1837.

Mr. Woolson had, in 1845, succeeded in getting his business into a
flourishing condition, when, through the defalcation of a trusted partner,
he was very nearly ruined. But he did not stop his works one day on
account of this disaster. Collecting together his scattered resources, he
set to work all the harder, and as the Fall of the year approached, had
succeeded in accumulating a fine stock of wares for the Fall trade, which
he had stored in a warehouse at the rear of his factory, but which he
neglected to insure. A fire broke out, and the building, with its
contents, was completely destroyed, resolving the valuable stoves into a
heap of old iron. Even this did not stop the works. With his
characteristic energy, Mr. Woolson had the ground cleared and set to work
with redoubled zeal, making new stoves out of the old iron, and succeeded
in doing a tolerable business that winter, in spite of his accumulation of
disasters.

When Mr. Woolson commenced business in Cleveland, it was but a lively
village. His stove foundry, the first of importance in northern Ohio, when
running to its full capacity, employed but ten hands, and its trade was
limited to the immediate vicinity, and a few towns on the canal. But few
of the farmers then used cooking stoves, the fire on the hearth serving
for all purposes of cooking and warming. The works now employ about one
hundred hands when running full, and the customers are found in Chicago,
St. Louis, Kansas, Nebraska, Minnesota and Iowa. The firm was changed
several years since to Woolson & Hitchcock, and subsequently to Woolson,
Hitchcock & Carter. Death removed the senior and junior partners of the
firm within a few months of each other.

Mr. Woolson's death was caused by erysipelas, brought on by debility;
after an illness of two weeks the disease yielded to medical treatment,
and he seemed to gain strength rapidly. On Saturday, the 31st of July,
he joined a party of friends and drove in his buggy twenty miles into
the country, believing that the fresh air would invigorate him as it had
done many times before when his health gave way. But the old remedy
failed, and, leaving his horse behind, Mr. Woolson took the cars and
reached home in the evening very much exhausted. After lingering five
days, typhoid symptoms appeared, and at eight o'clock Friday morning he
died, unconscious, and without suffering, after a life of 63 years and
one month.

Mr. Woolson possessed a very genial and sociable disposition, was highly
intelligent and well informed, and in spite of an infirmity of deafness
was a charming companion. His business qualifications are proven by the
success of the establishment he founded, in spite of the succession of
unforeseen and unavoidable disasters with which it had to contend. He was
a man of very domestic habits, and these habits were mellowed and refined
by many family losses that might have crushed one less hopeful, and less
patient and uncomplaining. To his family he was entirely devoted, and all
the affection of a loving household clustered around him with an intensity
that made the blow of his sudden loss one peculiarly hard to be borne.

Mr. Woolson had long been connected with Grace Church (Episcopal), of
which he was senior warden, and very tender domestic ties, sundered by
death some years since, made that church peculiarly dear to him.




William Hart.



William Hart, son of Judah Hart, of English descent, was born in Norwich,
Connecticut, in the year 1811. About the year 1821, Judah Hart removed to
the West with his family, settling in Brownhelm, Lorain county, where he
died two years after, and one year from this time, William changed his
residence to Cleveland. Soon after the arrival of the Harts in Cleveland,
Governor Clinton, of New York, came to Ohio to formally commence the work
of constructing the Ohio Canal, which was begun on the fourth of July,
1825. Governor Clinton landed in Cleveland in June, and one of the
principal incidents of Mr. Hart's recollection of his early days in
Cleveland, was the general turning out of the people to receive and
welcome the father of internal improvements. Cleveland was then but an
insignificant village, a place "six miles from Newburg, where steamboats
stopped to wood and water," but great, and well-founded hopes were
entertained of the benefits to flow from the opening of the canal, and the
people were therefore much elated at the arrival of Governor Clinton, who
was to commence the important work, and whose influence had done so much
to aid the enterprise.

[Illustration: Yours Truly, Wm. Hart]

About this time young Hart went to live with Asabel Abel, to whom he was
apprenticed for the purpose of learning the business of cabinet making.
When the term of his apprenticeship had expired, he set up in business on
his own account, at first opening his modest store and workshop on the
site of the present Birch House, and subsequently, after five or six years
of business, removing his location to the opposite side of the street, on
the spot now occupied by his present warehouse.

In 1852, a fire swept away his entire establishment, destroying
ware-rooms, factory, and all the appurtenances, and throwing out of
employment the twenty hands of which his force of workmen then consisted.
In the succeeding year, he rebuilt the warehouse and factory on a greatly
enlarged scale, and has since still further enlarged and improved the
buildings, until, in size and commodiousness, they are not excelled in
the city. At present, seventy-five hands are employed in the
establishment, aided by the most improved descriptions of labor-saving
machinery adapted to the business, and the annual sales reach nearly two
hundred thousand dollars.

Mr. Hart believed in always putting his shoulder to the wheel, though on
one occasion a too literal adherence to this principle came near costing
him his life. In attempting to give some aid in the factory, he came in
contact with a circular saw, and his right arm was nearly severed from the
shoulder. This was in the year 1850. On his partial recovery, the
citizens, to show their sympathy with him in his misfortune, elected him
City Treasurer, an office then of but little value, requiring only a small
portion of his time and paying him two hundred dollars a year. For
nineteen years he held this office uninterruptedly, being elected by both
parties term after term, and witnessing the growth of the city, under his
financial administration, from an annual revenue of forty-eight thousand
dollars to nearly two millions. The emoluments of the office have risen
from a salary of two hundred dollars to a salary of fifteen hundred
dollars, and a percentage on special taxes collected. During his nineteen
years of service, Mr. Hart has negotiated all the loans, sold the school
bonds, and collected the special taxes, occupying nearly the whole of his
time, and employing the services of a clerk in transacting the business of
his office.

When William Hart became City Treasurer, the credit of the city stood
rather low, city warrants being hawked about at seventy-five cents on the
dollar. This unsatisfactory state of things was put an end to, mainly
through the exertions of the Hon. H. B. Payne, then in the City Council,
who procured the funding of the outstanding debt, and brought the credit
of the city up to the high standard at which it now stands.

When Judah Hart reached Cleveland, the then far West, a part of the family
slept in the Mansion House, occupying the site on which now stands
Cooper's hardware store, but young William and some other members of the
family slept in the covered traveling wagon, under a shed standing on the
site of the present Atwater Block. With the revolution of years the then
poor boy has now become part owner of the splendid block standing where a
part of the Harts slept, homeless wayfarers, forty-five years ago.

In 1834, Mr. Hart was married in Cleveland, to Miss Elizabeth Kirk,
daughter of John Kirk, who had left England about a dozen years
previously. No children were born of this marriage, but the pair have
adopted four, giving them all the advantages and rights of children born
to themselves, and three of these are now married.

Still in vigorous life, Mr. Hart has, to a great extent, retired from
active business, his establishment being carried on mainly by his sons
through adoption or marriage. This partial rest he has earned by a life of
labor and enterprise, in which he has watched narrowly his opportunities,
and availed himself of every chance of improving his facilities for
manufacture, and enlarging his field of business, has faithfully performed
his official duties, and has secured the respect alike of his business
acquaintances, his political constituents, and the public at large.




John Bousfield.



The wooden ware manufacture of Cleveland is an important part of its
industry, the manufacturing establishments being the largest within the
United States and doing a business that covers the entire west. Large as
the industry now is, it is of but very recent growth, and Cleveland is
chiefly indebted for its permanent establishment, in spite of a series of
discouraging disasters, to the enterprise and determination of John
Bousfield.

[Illustration: Yours Truly, John Bousfield]

Mr. Bousfield was born at Stockport, in the county of Cheshire, England,
July 22, 1819. After serving an apprenticeship to the saddle and harness
business for seven years, he engaged in that business on his own
account, adding to it the manufacture of whips. Four years were thus
spent, when he decided on removing to America, leaving his native land
in December, 1843. Having brought two of his workmen with him, he
established himself in the same business in a small way in the city of
New York, but his health failing after a few months, he determined on
leaving for the west, hoping that a change of atmosphere, and possibly
of business, would be of benefit.

His first stay was at Kirtland, Lake county, Ohio, where he purchased a
farm and at the same time carried on the harness business. At this he
continued until about the year 1850, when he purchased a factory and water
power, put in a pail-making machine, and commenced, in a small way, the
manufacture of pails. In 1854, he removed to Fairport, in the same county,
where he purchased a larger building and carried on pail manufacturing
upon a larger scale. In March, 1855, he sold out the establishment, taking
in pay for it a note which he still holds.

In May of that year he came to Cleveland and organized the Cleveland
Wooden Ware Manufacturing Company, built a factory on the ground now
occupied by the present firm of Bousfield & Poole, and commenced
manufacturing in the following September. The first operations of the
company were on a small scale, making tubs, pails, washboards, and similar
articles in a limited way, but gradually increasing the business until it
reached what was then considered respectable proportions. In July, 1857,
the company sold out to Greenman & Co., of Massachusetts, and Mr.
Bousfield was retained by the new owners as superintendent of the works,
until January 12, 1859, when the factory was destroyed by fire.

In March of that year, Mr. Bousfield rented a building on the West Side
and commenced manufacturing again on his own account. Five months
afterwards he was burned out. Nothing daunted, he immediately purchased
the ruins of the Greenman & Co. factory, rebuilt it, and in January, 1860,
associated with him Mr. J. B. Hervey, of Cleveland, and in the following
month resumed work.

The new partnership was very successful. The business increased rapidly,
the area of their trade enlarged until it comprised all the principal
cities and towns in Ohio, Indiana, Michigan, Illinois and Wisconsin. A
planing mill was added to the factory, and this, too, was highly
profitable. In 1864, the works were greatly enlarged to meet the rapidly
increasing demand for their wares. In 1865, Mr. John Poole, of Harmer,
Ohio, was admitted to the partnership, thus bringing in additional
capital and experience gained in the management of a similar factory at
Harmer. Mr. Poole has devoted himself principally to the financial and
sales departments of the business, and has proved himself a man of more
than ordinary business ability.

Thus far everything had been going on prosperously, but the old enemy,
fire, was as relentless as ever. On the 23d of March, 1866, the whole of
the extensive establishment was reduced to ashes, and the unfortunate
proprietors sorrowfully contemplated the ruins of years of labor and
enterprise, whilst a host of workmen stood still more sorrowfully by, and
saw their daily bread swept from them by the pitiless flames.
Seventy-five thousand dollars of capital were converted into valueless
ashes in a few hours.

The owners of the factory wasted no time in fruitless sorrow. An old
wooden building had partially escaped the flames. This was hastily patched
up, and within thirty days they were making pails and tubs as earnestly as
if they had never known a fire. Mr. Hervey sold out his interest to the
other partners, Messrs. Bousfield & Poole, who went to work with almost
unparalleled enterprise and energy, built one of the largest and most
substantial factories in the country, and entered upon the work of
manufacturing wooden ware upon a larger scale than had ever before been
attempted. The factory has two hundred feet front on Leonard and Voltaire
streets, with a depth of sixty feet, and five stories high; attached to
the main building are the engine and boiler rooms. The cost of the
building was forty-five thousand dollars. The present capacity of the
works is twenty-five hundred pails per day, six hundred tubs, a hundred
and twenty-five churns and other small ware, and a hundred dozen zinc
washboards.

In May, 1867, the firm commenced the erection of a match factory which
was ready for operation in September of that year. A superintendent was
engaged who, unfortunately, was unqualified for his position and did much
harm to the enterprise, but on his removal, Mr. Bousfield took personal
charge of the match factory, and has succeeded in building up an
extensive trade. The daily capacity of the factory is two hundred and
ninety gross, which, if run to the full capacity throughout the year,
would yield to the United States government a revenue of over a hundred
and twenty thousand dollars.

The trade of Messrs. Bousfield & Poole extends from Buffalo through the
principal cities of the central, southern and western States, to New
Orleans on the south, and Salt Lake City on the west, two bills having
been sold to the son-in-law of Brigham Young in that city. A branch
warehouse has been established in Chicago as an entrepot for the supply of
the vast territory of which Chicago is the source of supply.

The manufactory of Messrs. Bousfield & Poole is the largest in the
country, and for the past three years has turned out about fifty per cent.
more work than any other in the United States. It consumes ten millions of
feet of lumber and logs annually, besides other material, and gives
employment to from three hundred to three hundred and fifty persons, men
women and children. Its influence on the population and prosperity of the
city can therefore be judged. The money for the support of these people,
and for the purchase of the materials employed, is almost wholly brought
from abroad, the amount of the wares used in Cleveland being, of course, a
very small fraction of the amount produced and sold. The same is true to a
greater or less extent, of all the manufactories of Cleveland, and serves
to account for the rapid growth of the city in population and wealth
within the few years past, in which Cleveland has entered in good earnest
on its career as a manufacturing centre.

Mr. Bousfield was married January 1, 1855, to Miss Sarah Featherstone, of
Kirtland, by whom he has had ten children, six of whom are yet living.
The oldest son, Edward Franklin Bousfield, is engaged with his father in
the factory.

The secret of Mr. Bousfield's successful career can be found in his
indomitable perseverance. He has been wholly burned out three times, and
had, in all, about twenty fires, more or less disastrous, to contend with,
but each time he seemed to have gained new strength and vigor in business
as his works rose phoenix like from the ashes. Coupled with his
perseverance is a remarkable mechanical ingenuity which has served him to
good purpose in the construction and management of his factories. Whilst
in England, he invented a machine for braiding whips that would do the
work of fifteen women working by hand, as was the usual practice.




J. G. Hussey.



Among the elements that have contributed to the prosperity of Cleveland,
copper and oil hold no inconsiderable place. Not only has the cupriferous
wealth of Lake Superior directly enriched many Cleveland citizens who
interested themselves in its production, but it has led to the
establishment of a large and steadily increasing commerce between
Cleveland and Lake Superior. In the other direction, the enterprise of
Clevelanders in the petroleum region of Western Pennsylvania has built up
large fortunes for themselves and has established in Cleveland one of the
most extensive and remunerative of its industries. One of the earliest to
be identified, first with the copper and afterwards with the oil interest,
was J. G. Hussey.

Christopher Hussey, the father of the subject of the present sketch,
emigrated from Baltimore and settled in Cincinnati, in 1804, subsequently
removing to Jefferson county, Ohio, where J. G. Hussey was born in 1819.
Young Hussey received such an education as the facilities of a rural
neighborhood at that early day afforded, and added to his school knowledge
the practical details of business by becoming clerk in a village store.
Here he acquired those correct business habits that stood him in good
service in after life. In 1840, he opened a store on his own account in
Hanover, Ohio, and was very successful. From Hanover he removed to
Pittsburgh, where he operated in provisions until 1845. In that year there
was much excitement over the mineral discoveries on the south shore of
Lake Superior. The Indian titles to the mineral lands on that lake had
been but a short time before completely extinguished, and the surveys of
Dr. Houghton were bringing the cupriferous riches of the region into
notice. Mining permits were issued under the authority of Congress, those
permits giving the applicant a lease for three years, with a conditional
re-issue for three years more. The lessees were to work the mines with due
diligence and skill, and to pay a royalty to the United States of six per
cent, of all the ores raised. Early in the Spring of 1845, Mr. Hussey
formed a company of miners and explorers, with whom he went to Lake
Superior and opened several copper veins, some of which proved highly
productive and are still successfully worked. In some of these he has
retained an interest to the present time.

[Illustration: Yours Truly, J. G. Hussey]

In the Spring of 1847, he became a member of the private banking firm
of Hussey, Hanna & Co., in Pittsburgh, which did a successful business
for several years. At the same time he became interested in a banking
establishment in Milwaukee under the firm name of Marshall, Hussey &
Ilsley. In 1850, he removed to Milwaukee, to attend to the interest of
that firm, but the climate proving injurions to his health, he sold out
and removed to Cleveland, where he took up his residence in 1851. From
that time he became thoroughly identified with the business interests
of the city.

His first act was to establish the Forest City Bank, under the regulations
of the Free Banking Law of Ohio, and during his connection with the
institution it was eminently successful. During the same summer, he built
and put in operation a copper smelting and refining works, under the firm
name of J. G. Hussey & Co., engaging at the same time in the produce
commission business, under the firm name of Hussey & Sinclair, which
afterwards changed to Hussey & McBride. It is a matter of fact, on which
Mr. Hussey justly prides himself, and to which in great measure he
attributes his success, that he confined himself strictly to the
legitimate conduct of his business as a commission dealer, never
speculating in produce when selling it for others.

In 1859, Mr. Hussey became interested in the discoveries of petroleum in
the creeks and valleys of Venango county, Pennsylvania. With his
characteristic energy he went to the scene of the excitement just breaking
out over the discoveries, and becoming satisfied of their importance, he
immediately commenced the work of exploration, in company with others, who
purchased the McElhenny Farm, on which was struck the noted Empire well,
one of the most famous wells on Oil Creek, that by its extraordinary yield
first added to the petroleum excitement, and then broke down the market by
a supply far in excess of the then demand. The tools were no sooner
extracted than the oil rushed up in a torrent, equal to three thousand
barrels daily. The good fortune of the adventurers was disastrous. It was
more than they had bargained for, and was altogether too much of a good
thing. The demand at that time was very limited, the uses to which
petroleum had been applied being few, and science had not yet enabled it
to be converted into the cheap and useful illuminator it has now become.
One day's flow of the Empire would supply all the demands of the United
States for a week. Barrels, too, were scarce, and when those at hand were
filled tanks were hastily improvised, but were speedily overflowed. Pits
were dug and rapidly filled, until at length the well owners, cursed with
too much good luck, were compelled to turn the oil into the river. Then it
rapidly fell in price, owing to the superabundant supply. It fell, in the
autumn of 1861, to ten cents a barrel, and the oil interest was, for the
time, ruined.

At this juncture Mr. Hussey was induced to erect works for refining the
oil and preparing it as an illuminator. The first establishment was a
small one, but as the demand increased and the oil interest revived, the
capacity was increased until it reached its present limit of from three
hundred and fifty to four hundred barrels per day.

When the second oil excitement broke out in 1864, Mr. Hussey was again one
of the leading explorers and adventurers in the oil regions of
Pennsylvania. Successful wells were put down in Oil Creek and on the
Allegheny river, and a large proportion of the product was brought to
Cleveland to be refined. His interest in this department of industry
became so great and important, that after fifteen years of active
connection with the produce and copper smelting business of Cleveland, he
sold out his interest in both the commission house and smelting works and
devoted his entire attention to oil.

Mr. Hussey is a good example of the success attending faithful,
intelligent and conscientious attention to business. A self-made man, he
never lost sight of the fact that the same scrupulous honesty which gave
him success was necessary to retain it. Debt he looked upon as the road to
ruin, and he scrupulously shunned it. He never bought an article for
himself or his family on credit. His business paper was always good and
never was protested. His engagements were ever punctually kept. His two
cardinal principles were "Time is money," and "Honesty is the best
policy," and these rules of action he carefully impressed on the young men
whom he brought up in business life. The value of his teachings and
example is shown in the fact that those brought up under his business care
during the past twenty years have come to hold a place in the front rank
of business men, and have, by their energy and integrity, accumulated
competence, and even affluence.




[Illustration: Yours Truly, A. B. Stone]


A. B. Stone



Andros B. Stone was born in the town of Charlton, Worcester county,
Massachusetts, June 18, 1824. He is the youngest son of Mr. Amasa Stone,
(now a hale, old man, ninety years of age, in possession of all his
faculties,) and brother of A. Stone, Jr., whose biography has been
sketched in an earlier portion of this work. Mr. Stone's boyhood was
spent in the various occupations of country farm life, where he received
in common with other boys the advantages of a public school education. In
his sixteenth year he left home to try the world for himself, and for a
year and a half worked industriously at the carpenter's trade with his
elder brother, to whom he was apprenticed for four years, to receive
thirty-five dollars the first year, forty the second, forty-five the
third, and fifty the fourth. An unconquerable desire for a better
education forced him to leave this occupation for a time, and enter an
academy, the expenses of which he met in part by teaching a public school
in the winter season, and which left him only five dollars with which to
make another start in the world.

In the meantime, Mr. Stone's brother, to whom he was apprenticed, had been
employed by Mr. Howe, the patentee of the "Howe Bridge," and to Andros was
assigned the keeping of the time of the workmen, and other similar duties,
instead of the more direct labors of the shop. In the autumn of 1842, Mr.
Howe purchased Mr. Stone's unexpired time from his brother, advanced his
pay, and kept him in the same employment as time-keeper, and adding to
this duty that of making estimates, drawing bridge plans, etc., allowing
him in the winter an opportunity of increasing his finances by teaching
school. Subsequently, Mr. A. Boody and Mr. A. Stone, Jr., purchased the
Howe Patent for building bridges in New England, and A. B. Stone, then
about nineteen years of age, made an engagement with the new firm. At
first he was given the charge of a few men in framing and raising small
bridges, but an opportunity soon occurred which enabled him to exhibit his
capabilities in a most advantageous light. Messrs. Boody and Stone were
constructing a bridge over the rapids of the Connecticut river at Windsor
Locks, about fifteen hundred feet in length, in spans of one hundred and
eighty feet. One day the superintendent, who had the immediate charge of
the work, went to Mr. Stone and complained of being so ill that he was
obliged to go home, and desired him to take temporary charge of the men.
Mr. Stone alleged his unfitness for the duty of taking charge of so many
men at the commencement of so important a work, but as the superintendent
said he could not stay longer, Mr. Stone was compelled to assume the
responsibility, against his wishes.

On examining the condition of the work the cause of the superintendent's
severe illness was made manifest. The lower chords or stringers, of about
two hundred and sixty feet in length, had been packed without being
placed opposite each other, one being placed several feet too far in one
direction, and the other about the same distance in the opposite
direction. Here was a dilemma and a difficulty, and an ability in the
mind of the young mechanic to meet it, so that, in a very short time, the
chords were properly adjusted. He then proceeded with the work, and in
three days had nearly completed the first span, when his brother paid a
visit of inspection to the bridge. Not finding the regular superintendent
in charge, he naturally inquired the cause, and when the circumstances
were explained, examined the work very minutely. Without any comments
upon what had been done, Mr. Stone left the place, leaving his younger
brother in charge, a tacit expression of confidence which was most
gratifying, and gave him a self-confidence he had not previously
possessed. About this time Mr. Stone was advanced to the general
superintendence of construction, which position he retained between two
and three years, when his brother admitted him as his partner in the
construction of the bridges on the Atlantic & St. Lawrence railroad. A
year was successfully spent in the prosecution of this work, when a
partnership was formed with Mr. A. Boody for constructing the bridges on
the Rutland & Burlington railroad in Vermont, which, although accompanied
with grave difficulties, resulted in success.

In 1850, Mr. Stone extended the field of his operations by forming a new
partnership with Mr. Maxwell, and purchasing the Howe Patent for building
bridges in the three northern New England States. For two years this field
was profitably and creditably filled, when, dazzled by the ample resources
of the West, New England was abandoned for Illinois. Here another
partnership was formed, with his brother-in-law, Mr. Boomer, and under the
stimulating effect of an undeveloped country, the new firm of Stone &
Boomer soon took a high and honorable rank throughout the entire Western
States. The total amount of bridging built by this firm from 1852 to 1858
was not less than thirty thousand feet. They constructed the first bridge
across the Mississippi river, the longest span of a wooden truss that had
up to that time ever been built. This was done under the most trying
circumstances, the thermometer at times marking 30 degrees below zero. The
longest draw-bridge of its period was also erected by this firm across the
Illinois river, it having a length of two hundred and ninety-two feet, the
whole structure revolving on its centre, and capable of being opened by
one man in one and one-half minutes. During this time they built the roof
of the Union Passenger House, in Chicago, which was of longer span than
had hitherto been built. The organization for the carrying on of their
work was so complete, that it was a common remark among the engineers of
western railroads, "If we want any bridges put up on short notice, we can
get them of Stone & Boomer; they have them laid up on shelves, ready for
erection!" In connection with their bridge business the firm carried on
the manufacture of railroad cars.

In the Spring of 1858, Mr. Stone gave up his home and business in Chicago
for his present residence in Cleveland and his present business as an iron
manufacturer. After carefully investigating the advantages which Cleveland
afforded for such a purpose, and realizing the present and prospective
demands for an increased development for the manufacture of iron, Mr.
Stone availed himself of the opportunity of identifying his interests with
that of the firm of Chisholm & Jones, who at that time had just put in
operation a small mill in Newburg. Here at once opened a new and
delightful opportunity for Mr. Stone to develope his natural love for the
mechanical arts. To manufacture iron required knowledge--was a science,
and to be master of his business was both his duty and his pride, and
claimed all his unflagging energy, his undaunted courage and
determination. Thus the small mill at Newburg grew from the capacity of
turning out thirty tons of re-rolled rails to its present capacity of
sixty tons, beside the addition of a puddling mill, a merchant bar mill, a
wire rod mill, two blast furnaces, spike, nut and bolt works. In the
meantime the small beginning had grown into such large proportions, and so
many railroad corporations had centered here, that it was thought best to
form the same into a stock company, embracing another rolling mill on the
lake shore, within the city limits. This was done, Mr. Stone filling the
office of President of the Cleveland Rolling Mill Company. In 1868, the
Company put into successful operation extensive steel works which they
had been engaged in erecting with great care and expense for nearly two
years. During that time Mr. Stone had made two visits to Europe for more
thorough investigation into the process of making Bessemer steel, and the
success of this undertaking so far has been admitted by all who have
visited the works to be without parallel in the American manufacture of
steel. In addition to this heavy and extended business, Mr. Stone is
president of another rolling mill company in Chicago, in which he is
largely interested, also of a large coal mining company in Indiana, and
vice President of a large iron manufacturing company at Harmony, Indiana,
also president of the American Sheet and Boiler Plate Company.

Mr. Stone is eminently known, and justly so, as a mechanic, and is widely
known as a man who crowns his thoughts with his acts. Still in the prime
of manhood, he stands connected with manufacturing interests, furnishing
employment to thousands of men, all of which has been the outgrowth of
scarcely more than ten years. This eminent success has not been the result
of speculation, or of luck, but the legitimate end of his own hands and
brain. Neither can it be said he has had no reverses. At one time the
failure of railroad companies left him, not only penniless, but fifty
thousand dollars in debt. With an indomitable will he determined to
liquidate that debt, and how well he succeeded need not be told. Mr. Stone
at present stands at the head of iron manufacturing companies, second to
none in the country, possessing almost unlimited credit. This
extraordinary success has by no means affected Mr. Stone's modest nature
for which he is so noted. Gentlemanly and affable in his intercourse with
all ranks and conditions of men, he has won universal respect, and an
enviable position in the business interests of our country.

Mr. Stone was married in 1846 to Miss M. Amelia Boomer, daughter of Rev.
J. B. Boomer, of Worcester, Massachusetts.




[Illustration: Yours truly, Henry Chisholm]


Henry Chisholm



Henry Chisholm is of Scotch origin, having been born in Lochgelly in
Fifeshire, April 27, 1822. There, as in New England, children, if they are
heirs to nothing else, inherit the privilege of some early education. When
he was at the age of ten his father died. At the age of twelve, Henry's
education was finished and he was apprenticed to a carpenter, serving in
an adjoining city five years, at the expiration of which time he went to
Glasgow, as a journeyman. Whilst in Glasgow, he married Miss Jane Allen,
of Dunfermline.

In 1842, he resolved to quit his native land and seek his fortune in the
West. Landing in Montreal, in April, he found employment as a journeyman
carpenter, working at his trade for two years. He then undertook contracts
on his own account, relying wholly on his own resources for their
execution, and all his undertakings proved successful. In 1850, he entered
into partnership with a friend to build the breakwater for the Cleveland
and Pittsburgh Railroad, at Cleveland, the work occupying three years.
This, and other similar contracts, such as building piers and depots at
Cleveland, employed his time and energies until his commencement of the
iron business at Newburg, as one of the firm of Chisholm, Jones & Co. This
company, and its business, have developed into the Cleveland Rolling Mill
Company of Cleveland, with two rail mills, making a hundred tons of rails
and twenty-five tons of merchant iron per day; two blast furnaces, turning
out forty tons of pig iron daily, and a Bessemer steel works,
manufacturing thirty tons of steel per day. Besides these, have been
established the Union Rolling Mills of Chicago, making seventy tons of
rails per day; of this extensive establishment Mr. Chisholm's son,
William, is manager. There are also two blast furnaces and a rolling mill
in Indiana, making forty tons of iron per day. Fifteen hundred acres of
coal land are owned in connection with these works. Of all these
enterprises Mr. Chisholm has been one of the leading managers, and remains
largely interested, his perseverence and energy aiding materially to crown
the undertakings, up to the present time, with the greatest success.

In the midst of a business so large, the social and religions duties of
Mr. Chisholm have not been neglected. He is a zealous and liberal member
of the Second Baptist church. For more than twenty-three years himself and
wife have been professors of religion, and their five surviving children,
the oldest of whom is now twenty-six years old, have become members of the
same church.

The history of the Scotch boy and his success in America should be read by
the youth of England and Scotland, as an example for them to follow. In
these and other European countries such a career would be almost, if not
quite, impossible. Mr. Chisholm has not been made proud by success, but
retains the affability and simplicity of his early days. He has still a
hearty physical constitution, with the prospect of a long life in which to
enjoy, in the retired and quiet manner most agreeable to his tastes, the
good fortune of this world, and the respect of his employees, and
neighbors and friends, which he values more highly than money.




R. P. Myers.



R. P. Myers was born in Schodack, Rensselaer county, New York, January 1,
1820. When between two and three years of age, his parents moved to Sand
Lake, in the same county. His father died May 14, 1823, leaving but very
limited means for the support of the widowed mother and three young
children; and it is to the prayers, counsels and Christian influence of
his mother Mr. Myers is largely indebted for the direction of his life. At
the age of fifteen he left school and became clerk in a village store, but
after one year, being dissatisfied with the business prospects of the
village, he obtained a situation in a dry goods store in Albany.

In 1842, he commenced business in Albany in the same line, with but two
hundred and twenty-five dollars and a good character, for his capital,
under the firm name of Allen & Myers, continuing thus about two years. At
the end of that time, believing the West offered greater inducements to
young men of small means, he removed to Ohio. His partner had previously
made a tour of observation through the West and become favorably impressed
with the business prospects of Akron, Ohio, which was at that time
attracting considerable attention. Mr. Myers, in company with his wife,
passed through Cleveland May 3d, 1844, (being the first anniversary of
their wedding,) on their way to Akron. There he conducted his old business
under the same name as at Albany, for about one year, and then formed a
company for the manufacture of stoves, under the style of Myers, Cobb &
Co., his former partner being the "Co." To this business he gave his
personal attention. The dry goods business was discontinued about a year
after engaging in the manufacture of stoves. In addition to this Mr. Myers
became interested in the manufacture of woolen and cotton machinery,
machine cards, &c., the name of the firm being Allen, Hale & Co. This was
developed into a flourishing business.

[Illustration: Respectfully yours, R. P. Myers]

In 1849, he was instrumental in the formation of the Akron Stove Company,
into which the firm of Myers, Cobb & Co. merged. At the first meeting of
the stockholders Mr. Myers was chosen general agent, in which position he
remained with signal profit to the stockholders, until February 1st, 1859.
This, though a small company, was one of the most successful stock
companies ever formed in this part of the country. Business continued to
expand, causing the company to enlarge its facilities for manufacturing
from time to time, and their products were sold through Ohio, Michigan,
Indiana, and other Western States. The fact that the stock at the time he
retired from the company sold for from four hundred to five hundred per
cent, above par value, after declaring liberal dividends from time to
time, speaks more plainly of its unparalleled success than anything we can
say, and is the best compliment that could be paid to the energy,
enterprise and business capacity of its retiring manager.

After a time, the stove business required his whole attention, and the
machine branch was sold out to one of the other partners; he then bent all
his energies to the invention and perfection of the stoves, and the
vigorous prosecution of the business of the company. After conducting the
business of the company ten years, he felt the want of a larger field for
enterprise, cast around for the most eligible situation, and finally
concluded that Cleveland was destined to be a great stove centre.
Resigning the management of the company February 1st, 1859, but retaining
most of his interest, he came to Cleveland and started an individual
manufactory, at the same time connecting with the stove business the
wholesaling of tin plate, sheet iron, &c., which was conducted with such
energy that a large trade was attracted to Cleveland that had previously
been given to other markets.

The rapid development of business, the demand upon his time in the
manufacturing department, and the need of extended facilities induced Mr.
Myers to associate with him Messrs. B. F. Rouse and James M. Osborn, who
now form the firm of Myers, Rouse & Co. Since the present firm has existed
they have built a new foundry, of large capacity, with all the modern
improvements, on West River street, which is now taxed to its full
capacity to meet the wants of their trade.

The increase of the stove manufacturing of the city is estimated to have
been full four hundred per cent. in ten years, and has fully justified
Mr. Myers' estimate of the natural advantages of Cleveland as a
manufacturing point.

This firm has patented a variety of new stoves that have become very
popular, and hence remunerative, among which are the Eclipse, in 1850,
soon followed by the Golden Rule and Benefactor, the last named having
obtained a most remarkable sale, and the name itself become a household
word throughout the country, and, in 1868, the celebrated Princess stove.

Of course, close attention to the wants of the country in this
direction for about one quarter of a century, has given Mr. Myers a
very valuable experience, which he is continually turning to account to
the benefit of the public and his own enrichment. The shipments of this
firm are to nearly all the markets in the northwest, reaching Council
Bluffs and Omaha.

Mr. Myers is now numbered among the most successful business men of the
city, and his success has been achieved in a department that has added
very materially to the progress of the city. The large number of men
employed, and the still larger number put into requisition in the
production of the material required for the uses of the manufactory, and
to supply the needs of the men, have added to the population and wealth of
Cleveland.

Although so much engrossed in business since coming to Cleveland, Mr.
Myers has found time to be active in many benevolent movements. For thirty
years he has been a useful member of the Baptist church. His Christian
labors have been generously given to the Sunday schools and mission work,
and he is at this time superintendent of the First Baptist church Sunday
school of this city.

Mr. Myers is now forty-nine years old, with a vigorous physical
constitution and strong mind, that give promise of very many years of
usefulness still to come.




M. C. Younglove



From 1837 to 1842, when specie payments were resumed, Cleveland saw her
greatest financial embarrassments; but from the latter year, a new and
more promising era dawned upon her. The land speculator gave place to the
business man, and for many years immediately following, her progress,
though slow, was sure and steady. During these years of depression many
young and enterprising men settled here, who were, of course, untrammeled
by old speculating debts, and their business habits were untainted by the
loose recklessness of the land speculator. Many of these young men are now
to be found among our most substantial, successful and enterprising
citizens, and the gentleman whose name stands at the head of this article
is one of that number.

Mr. Younglove was born in Cambridge, Washington county, New York. His
immediate ancestors on both sides having been officers in the
Revolutionary army, gives him a good title to native citizenship. His
father died before his birth, leaving him sufficient property for all
educational purposes, but none to commence business with. He first essayed
a professional life, and with that view began the study of law, but soon
discovered that a sedentary occupation was uncongenial to him, and
abandoned the profession.

His first business connection, which was formed before his majority, was
with an uncle in his native county. But finding the country village of his
nativity too slow for a sanguine and active temperament, he determined to
try his fortune in the then comparatively unknown West, and in August,
1836, came to Cleveland. After a clerkship of eight months in a dry goods
store, he bought an interest in a book store, and in a few months
thereafter bought out his partner and added job and news printing, and
book publishing, to his other business. At this time he introduced the
first power press into Cleveland--and it is believed the second that was
run west of the Alleghenies--on which he printed for a long time the daily
papers of the city.

In 1848, in connection with Mr. John Hoyt, he built the Cleveland Paper
Mill; the first having steam power west of the mountains, and the first of
any importance in the United States. This innovation on the old mode of
obtaining power for such machinery, called out many prophecies of failure.
But these gentlemen not only made their business a success, but
demonstrated to Cleveland, that she had, in her proximity to the coal
fields, and in the steam engine, facilities for manufacturing unsurpassed
by the best water power in the country--a hint which she has not been slow
to improve upon.

Messrs. Younglove & Hoyt finally united their business with that of the
Lake Erie Paper Company, under the name of the Cleveland Paper Company, of
which latter company Mr. Younglove was elected president, and continued in
the chief management of its business until the Spring of 1867, when he
sold his entire interest, leaving the company with a capital of three
hundred thousand dollars, and one of the most prosperous paper
manufacturing companies in the country.

Mr. Younglove was one of the first of our citizens to perceive the
importance and necessity of a gas company for Cleveland. Learning that a
charter had been obtained by some of our wealthy men, and was laying
dormant in their hands, he, with some associates, bought it up and
proceeded to the erection of the works--himself being one of the
directors. Few, however, know the struggles and discouragements which
these directors encountered in their efforts to furnish the citizens of
Cleveland with one of the greatest conveniences and luxuries of
civilized life. The stock could not be sold here. Aside from that taken
by Mr. Younglove, only five hundred dollars were subscribed by the
citizens, and distributed as follows: James Kellogg, four hundred
dollars, and J. W. Allen, one hundred dollars; and this was subsequently
all taken off the hands of the subscribers by Mr. Younglove before it
was paid up. But the directors, well persuaded of the value and
importance of the work they had in hand, were in no way discouraged, but
pushed on the work till all present funds were exhausted and not a
dollar was left in the treasury to meet the demands of the next
Saturday's pay roll. At this juncture, the Board had a consultation,
which may be fitly termed an "anxious meeting." The question arose,
"What is to be done?" and in answer, each member determined to take such
an amount of stock as he could either pay for or sell. Mr. Younglove
took five thousand dollars, and determined to make another attempt to
sell to the wealthy men of the city, but after four days of industrious
effort he had not one dollar of subscription to reward his labor. Mr.
P. M. Weddell was the only one who gave any encouragement--"He might take
a few hundred dollars at seventy-five per cent."

After this failure, Mr. Younglove mortgaged his lot on Euclid avenue,
where he now lives, and paid up his subscription, thus fulfilling his
promise to his associates, and placing himself on record as the _only_
citizen who would help to supply the city with gas.

In 1850, Mr. Younglove, associated with Mr. Dudley Baldwin, bought of
Howell & Dewitt their machinery for manufacturing agricultural implements.
This establishment was immediately enlarged to do an extensive business.
Mr. Baldwin subsequently sold his interest to his partner, who still
retains his interest in the business, it being at present one of the
largest and most reputable manufactories in the city.

The writer of this has authority for saying, that Mr. Younglove looks upon
his connection with the Society for Savings in this city, from its
organization, as one of the most honorable and reputable of his business
life. It is an association purely benevolent in its objects and action,
managed by men who have no hope or desire of pecuniary benefit, with
matured judgment and an abnegation of self that may well secure for it the
utmost confidence--as it most happily has--of the laboring poor and the
helpless, for whose benefit it is maintained.

Mr. Younglove is one of the most enterprising and intelligent business
men. Having a natural talent for mechanics, he has done much to inaugurate
and encourage the manufactures of our city.





John D. Rockefeller.



Although yet quite a young man, John D. Rockefeller occupies in our
business circles a position second to but few. He began life with few
advantages, save that of honesty of purpose and unflinching morality, and
a determination to succeed, if unremitting effort would secure that end.
He, in connection with M. B. Clark, commenced the produce and commission
business on the dock, with a small capital saved from earnings. For a time
their profits were exceedingly small, but the firm soon gained the
confidence of our citizens and bankers, and at the end of the first year
they had done business to the amount of $450,000. Each successive year
added to their business, and in the fourth, it amounted to something like
$1,200,000, the average being, perhaps, about $700,000.

In the Spring of 1863, Mr. Rockefeller engaged in the oil refining
business, commencing with a capacity of forty-five barrels of crude oil
per day, and gradually increased it until 1865, when the capacity of his
works was a hundred and fifty barrels per day. At this time he sold his
interest in the commission business, and devoted his whole attention to
the oil refining. Every year witnessed an enlargement of his works, and
for the last three years it is believed that his has been the largest of
its kind in the world, the present capacity being twenty-five hundred
barrels of crude oil per day. The growth of the business, dating back to
1865, was such that it became necessary to establish a house in New York
for the disposition of their oil, where they now have warehouses of their
own, and sell and take care of their property.

The effect of such works as those of Mr. Rockefeller in the city may be
imagined when we say that there are about one hundred men regularly
employed in them, besides a force of some fifteen or twenty teams and
teamsters. To these must be added from seven hundred to eight hundred
men around the city employed in making barrels for the oil, and from
$20,000 to $25,000 per year expended among plumbers and various other
mechanics for repairs. The enlargements of their works this year will
cost near $40,000.

Mr. Rockefeller never retrogrades; he has always advanced from the
commencement. Close application to one kind of business, an avoidance of
all positions of an honorary character that cost time, and strict business
habits, have resulted in the success, the fruits of which he now enjoys.
He has worked himself, and kept everything pertaining to his business in
so methodical a manner that he knows every night how he stands with the
world. He was drilled to strict economy as an accountant during hard
times, before his own business history, and he has rigidly adhered to the
principles then learnt.

He has frequently been so situated as to choose between his own judgment
and that of older heads, and where he has followed his own opinions in
opposition to others of more experience he has seen no reason to regret
his choice. The result of his course has been, that, though still young,
he stands at the head of one of the most extensive business establishments
in the city, and is possessed of wealth sufficient to secure a comfortable
maintainance, and a provision against the ordinary mishaps of business.

Mr. Rockefeller is a valued member of the Second Baptist church
having long been a sincere believer in the faith and practice of the
Baptist church.




[Illustration: Fraternally Yours, Peter Thatcher]


Peter Thatcher.



Peter Thatcher derives his descent in a direct line from the Reverend
Thomas Thatcher, the first minister of the Old South Church, in Boston,
who at the age of twelve years left England with his uncle Anthony, and
arrived in New England in 1635.

Peter Thatcher was born in Attleboro, Massachusetts, July 20, 1812. At the
age of nineteen, not liking his father's business of farming, he announced
his intention of seeking other means of livelihood, and, sorely against
his father's wish, he set out in search of fortune. Two days after leaving
his father's roof, he found employment with a house-carpenter, in Taunton,
Massachusetts, to whom he engaged himself to work one year for forty
dollars and board. After two years service in this employ he, in November,
1834, commenced work on the Boston and Providence Railroad, laying track,
in the employ of Messrs. Otis & Co. His industry and ability attracted the
attention of his employers, and he was retained and promoted by them,
remaining in the employ of the firm and their successors, railroad
building, until 1850, with the exception of three years spent on Fort
Warren and Fort Independence, in Boston Harbor, where he superintended the
work of construction under the supervision of Colonel Sylvanus Thayer.
During his career as a railroad builder he was engaged on the principal
railroads on the sea-coast from Maine to Georgia.

In 1850, the firm of Thatcher, Stone & Co. was formed, for the purpose of
building bridges, both in the eastern and western States, an office being
opened in Springfield for the former, and another in Cleveland for the
latter. In 1851, this firm was dissolved and that of Thatcher, Burt & Co.
formed. The patent for building the Howe Truss Bridge in the States of
Ohio, Indiana, Kentucky and Michigan was purchased, and nearly all the
original railroad bridges in Ohio, with the depots and engine houses,
together with many in other States, were built by this firm.

After having for thirteen years carried on the bridge building business,
and added to it a trade in lumber, the firm built the Union Elevator, in
Cleveland, and the new firm of Thatcher, Gardner, Burt & Co., commission
merchants and produce dealers, was formed. This firm was dissolved in
1865, by the withdrawal of Mr. Thatcher.

About this time a company was formed for the purchase of a patent obtained
for the manufacture of a durable paint and fire-proof mastic from prepared
iron ore. Mr. Thatcher was chosen president of the company which at once
entered on a vigorous prosecution of its business and has succeeded beyond
the anticipation of its projectors. The paint is made of Lake Superior
iron ore, ground fine and mixed with linseed oil, with which it forms a
perfect union. It is then used in a thin state as a paint for surfaces,
whether of wood stone or metal, exposed to the weather, and in a thicker
state for a fire-proof mastic. The ore is crushed with machinery of great
strength, and about three tons of the paint are produced daily, besides
the mastic, and find ready market.

In connection with the above Mr. Thatcher has recently purchased a patent,
obtained by Mr. Ward, for the manufacture of "Metallic Shingle Roofing,"
which is now being perfected and introduced to the public, and which, its
inventor claims, will supercede all methods of roofing now in use for
cheapness, durability, weight and effectiveness.

Mr. Thatcher has long been identified with the Masonic order, and has
filled high positions in that body. He is Past M. of Iris Lodge of
Cleveland, Past H. P. of Webb Chapter, has been Treasurer of Iris Lodge for
ten years, Past D. G. H. P. of the Grand Chapter of Ohio, and is now Grand
Treasurer of the Grand Commandery of Knights Templar of Ohio, which
position he has held six years.

Mr. Thatcher is a genial, whole-souled man, having a host of warm friends,
and has enjoyed the respect and confidence of all with whom he has been
connected.




W. C. Scofield,



W. C. Scofield was born near Wakefield, England, October 25, 1821, and
spent the earlier years of his life in Leeds, where he was employed on
machine work until his twenty-first year, when he determined to emigrate
to the Western continent to seek his fortune. On reaching America he found
his way westward until he arrived at Chagrin river in Cuyahoga county,
where he found employment with a Mr. Waite, at eight dollars a month,
working one year at this rate. The next two years were spent in the brick
yard of A. W. Duty. Following this, he was for two years turnkey under
sheriff Beebe, and then established himself in a brick yard of his own on
the west side of the river. One Summer's work in this experiment gave him
a start in business life, and laid the foundation, small though it was, of
his after prosperity.

[Illustration: Yours Respectfully, W. C. Scofield]

After his experiment in the brick making business, he undertook the
charge of the lard oil and saleratus works owned by Mr. C. A. Dean.
After three years, Messrs. Stanley, Wick & Camp bought the
establishment; and shortly after this change, Mr. Scofield purchased
the interest of Mr. Wick, and after a few months Mr. Camp sold his
interest to the remaining partners, who carried on the business until
1857. At that time Mr. Scofield purchased the interest of his partners
and became sole owner of the whole concern and carried on business in
this way for the next five years.

In 1861, he added to his lard oil and saleratus business that of refining
oil, associating himself in this enterprise with Messrs. Halle and
Fawcett. Their refinery was built on the site of the City Forge works, and
the capacity of the works was limited to two eight barrel stills.
Subsequently this land was sold for other purposes and the refinery was
closed, after a very successful career. Previous to that event the firm
built an oil refinery on Oil Creek, with a capacity of about forty
barrels. This is still in operation under the firm name of Lowry, Fawcett
& Co., turning out about sixty barrels of refined oil daily, and proving
from its start a continual success. In 1865, Mr. Scofield became
interested in the oil refining firm of Critchley, Fawcett & Co., in which
he still retains his interest, and which is in successful operation, with
a yield of about one hundred barrels per day. About the same time he
became a partner in an oil commission business in New York, established
under the name of Hewitt & Scofield, which has also proved a success. He
is also interested in the Cleveland Chemical Works, being vice president
of the company, which is doing a heavy business. The extent and importance
of the works may be inferred from the fact, that the buildings
necessitated an outlay of a hundred and sixty thousand dollars.

In 1863, the firm of Alexander, Scofield & Co., was formed, and commenced
operation on the site of the present works, at the junction of the
Atlantic & Great Western Railway with Liberty street. The works were
commenced with a capacity of fifty barrels daily, and gradually enlarged,
until the capacity now reaches six hundred barrels daily.

During the whole of Mr. Scofield's business career, with the extensive
operations of the firms in which he is interested, there has been but one
case of litigation. This is noteworthy, and speaks well for the integrity
and strict business habits of Mr. Scofield. He is not given to jumping
hastily at conclusions or embarking wildly in business schemes. Before
entering on an undertaking, he carefully, though rapidly, studies the
natural effect of the step and having satisfied himself of its probable
success, he prosecutes it with unflagging energy. The course of events
within the past few years offered unusual opportunities for a clear headed
and active business man to advance himself, and Mr. Scofield had the
forethought and energy to take advantage of those opportunities. From
first to last he had to depend on his own energies, having been left an
orphan at sixteen years of age, and from the time of his reaching his
majority, being compelled to push his way unaided, a stranger in a strange
land. The efforts of just such men have made Cleveland what it is to-day.




Levi Haldeman.



Levi Haldeman is a representative of another class of our citizens than
refiners, who have taken advantage of the petroleum enterprise, and are
spending their money in building up the prosperity of the city, turning
its energies into channels that cannot fail to give an impetus to all
branches of trade, and aid in establishing our financial institutions on a
basis of unrivalled strength, and who, at the same time, reap their reward
by putting money into their own pockets.

[Illustration: Respectfully + Truly, L. Haldeman]

The subject of this sketch was born in Chester county, Pennsylvania, Dec.
14, 1809, received a good common school education, and removed with his
father to Columbiana county, Ohio, in 1819. Until he was about twenty-five
years of age he spent his time with his father on his farm, and in
teaching school. He then commenced reading medicine with Drs. Robertson
and Cary of that place; after which he attended lectures at Cincinnati,
and was a private student of Drs. Gross and Parker--the former being now
Professer in Jefferson College, Philadelphia, and the latter Professor in
the College of Physicians and Surgeons in New York. Mr. Haldeman commenced
practice alone in 1839, at Minerva, Ohio, although he had practiced from
1837 with his old preceptor. He soon obtained an excellent practice in
medicine, and was noted for his skill in surgery, performing nearly all
the operations in that part of the country, among them tractreotomy, or
opening the windpipe and extracting foreign matter from it, and difficult
cases of lithotomy.

In 1860, Mr. Haldeman, in connection with Messrs. Hussey and McBride, of
Cleveland, bought the McElhenny Farm, in the Pennsylvania oil regions,
which proved to be very valuable. For the whole farm of two hundred acres
the sum of twenty thousand dollars was paid, subject to some leases, which
were renewed to the lessees. Mr. Funk leased a hundred and thirty acres of
the farm, subdivided it in into acre lots, and sub-lot them to a number of
oil companies, representing an aggregate capital of millions of dollars.
Messrs. Bennet and Hatch, the sub-lessees of one sub-lot, struck the
largest producing well yet found in the oil region the Empire, a three
thousand barrel well, which is estimated to have produced no less than six
hundred thousand barrels of oil and the whole farm is estimated to have
produced two millions of barrels. At the present time the sub-leases have
nearly all been forfeited, through breach of covenant, and the farm has
reverted to the owners, Messrs. Hussey and Haldeman. It is not now worked,
the wells having been flooded by the unexpected influx of water, against
which there had been no provision made by the owners of the wells. It is
expected to remedy this misfortune by plugging the wells below the water
veins, and pumping, with the hope of thus restoring the value of the farm.

The next enterprise was the purchase of the A. Buchanan farm, of three
hundred acres, in connection with others, subject, also, to a lease, but
giving the owners of the farm a royalty of one sixth of the oil produced,
free of cost, and retaining the use of the land for other purposes. On
this farm the town of Rouseville has been built since the purchase. This
has proved a very lucrative investment. The first well struck on it in
1860 is still producing. In company with others, Mr. Haldeman also bought
the royalty of the John McClintock farm for ten thousand dollars in gold,
the Irishman owning it thinking nothing but gold worth having. Mr.
Haldeman sold his thirty-second part of the same for a hundred thousand
dollars; another partner sold his for forty-thousand dollars, the
purchaser subsequently re-selling it for one hundred thousand dollars.
Besides this, Mr. Haldeman became half owner of two hundred acres not yet
developed, and he and his sons own about four hundred acres, supposed to
be excellent oil land. He has also invested about forty thousand dollars
in iron tanking, in the oil region, and has now tankage for four hundred
thousand barrels, in connection with others.

Mr. Haldeman was married in 1840 to Miss Mary Ann Gaves, of Columbiana
county. The oldest and second sons, L. P. and W. P. Haldeman, are engaged
in business with their father, and by their energy, foresight, and close
attention to business, have aided materially in the later successes of the
firm. Mr. Haldeman has, as is evident from the record here given, won for
himself considerable wealth, but it has been secured only by the exercise
of sound judgment and intelligent enterprise, which deserves, though it
does not always achieve, success.




G. Westlake.



The firm of Westlake, Hutchins & Co., composed of G. Westlake, H. A.
Hutchins, C. H. Andrews and W. C. Andrews, stands high among the oil
refining establishments of Cleveland, not only for the extent of their
operations but for their fair dealing in business matters. The firm
commenced the erection of their works in October, 1866, and in June of the
succeeding year began operations with a capacity of two hundred barrels of
crude oil per day. The business improved, and the works had to be enlarged
to keep pace with it, until the present capacity of the works is seven
hundred and fifty barrels per day. In the enlargements, the latest
improvements in the appliances for the refining of oil have been put in.
One still now employed has a capacity of eleven hundred barrels, which is
charged twice a week, and was the first of the kind in the State. Besides
this are ten stills of thirty barrels each, one of two hundred and fifty
barrels, and one, recently completed, forty feet in diameter, of the same
pattern as the monster still just mentioned, and which is calculated for
two thousand barrels. The total capacity of the works, including this
still, is fourteen hundred and sixteen barrels of crude per day, which
will yield, if running to full capacity, two hundred and eighty-eight
thousand barrels of refined oil in a year, or between three and four
millions of dollars in value at the stills. Connected with the works are a
twenty thousand barrel tank, a fifteen thousand barrel tank, two of ten
thousand barrels each, one of six thousand barrels, and several from two
thousand barrels down. When all its improvements in progress are completed
it will be one of the largest refineries in Cleveland and in the United
States, and with enterprise corresponding to the size and importance of
its works. A large number of men are employed, either at the works or in
direct connection with it by providing cooperage and other necessaries for
the business.

Mr. Westlake, the senior member of the firm, was born in Chemung county,
New York, January 11, 1822, received a good education and when a young man
was employed as a clerk in a lumber business for a couple of years. In
1847, he went into the lumber trade on his own account, remaining in that
business until 1866, when he removed to Cleveland, and finding that the
oil refining business held out reasonable prospects of profit, he embarked
in it, and by his energy of character and enterprise has achieved
flattering success, although the time in which he has been engaged in the
business is short. He is still in the prime of life.

Mr. Westlake was married in 1848 to Miss Hatch, of Elmira, Chemung county,
and has three children.




Stephen Buhrer.



Stephen Buhrer, the subject of this sketch, is of immediate German
descent. His father, a native of Baden, and his mother of Wirtemburg,
emigrated to this country in the year 1817. Their acquaintance was first
formed on board of the emigrant ship on their passage hither, and they
were married soon after their arrival in this country. After remaining in
the State of Pennsylvania about two years, they came to make their home
in Tuscarawas county, Ohio, where, on the 26th day of December, 1825,
their son, Stephen Buhrer, was born. That region at that time (fifty
years ago) was remarkably wild and rough, and inhospitable, but since, by
the thrifty German population, by whom it was mainly inhabited, it has
become scarcely inferior to any other part of the State in agricultural
wealth. But the father of Stephen Buhrer was not destined to live to see
this prosperity. He died in the year 1829, leaving his widow and two
young children, Stephen and Catharine, dependent on themselves to make
their way in the world.

From the severe discipline to which Mr. Buhrer was subjected in early
life, and from the difficulties which he had to overcome, he acquired that
energy and force of character which have given him success and by which he
has attained to a high rank as a self-made man.

Mr. Buhrer does not remember that he was privileged to attend any school
after he was ten years of age. All the education which he subsequently
acquired he obtained on Sundays and in evenings, after his day's labor was
over. He has been a citizen of Cleveland since the year 1844. His first
business in this city was at his trade, as cooper, and afterwards he
became extensively engaged, and with success, in the business of purifying
and refining spirits.

In the Spring of the year 1853, he was elected a member of the City
Council, and was twice thereafter re-elected to the same office, the last
time almost without opposition.

By the manner in which he discharged his duty as a member of the City
Council, public attention was directed toward him as a suitable person for
the responsible office of Mayor of the city, to which he was elected, at
the April election, in the year 1867, by a very large majority, although
he did not belong to the dominant political party. It is conceded by all
that he has discharged the duties of Mayor, with a zeal and a devotion to
the interests of the city which have had few examples. Turning aside, on
his election, from the business in which he was engaged, he has allowed
the affairs of the city to monopolize his attention. Placed by his office
at the head of the Board of City Improvements, and having in charge public
works of great magnitude, involving the expenditure of vast sums of money,
invested with the sole control and management of the large police force of
the city, and therefore made responsible for its fidelity and efficiency,
and exercising a supervision over all the departments of the city
government, to promote economy and to lessen taxation, Mayor Buhrer has
found his office to be no sinecure. Among the distinguishing traits of his
official conduct has been his impartiality, his exemption from favoritism
and partizanship, when in conflict with the public interests, and
especially his well-known hostility to "cliques" and "rings," such as
resort to a city government as a rich placer, where they may work to
enrich themselves at the expense of the people. The rigid discharge of
duty which he has required of the police under his charge, and the
avoidance, at the same time, of everything like oppression, or the
exercise of undue severity in office, have received the public
approbation.

[Illustration: Yours Respectfully, Stephen Buhrer]

One of the most prominent institutions of Cleveland will be the House of
Correction, now in progress of construction, and which is humanely
intended to reform and reclaim, as well as to punish, the vicious and the
criminal. To Mr. Buhrer much credit will be awarded for the active and
leading part he has taken in the establishment of such an institution.

At the expiration of his term of office, it was his wish to be relieved
from public care and to devote all of his time to his private pursuits,
and which, the more he expected to do, as no one of his predecessors had
ever been re-elected, or had entered again upon a second term. But
yielding to the solicitations of friends, he again became a candidate, and
at the April election, in 1869, was again elected Mayor of the city of
Cleveland, by nearly three thousand majority. Such a demonstration by the
people is a sufficient commentary upon his character as a citizen, and
upon the public estimation of his official services.




M. B. Clark.



M. B. Clark was born in Malmsbury, England, September 6, 1827. From early
boyhood until he was nearly of age he was employed in all the various
occupations of an agricultural district. About this time the United
States, as a promising country for the working man, was attracting
considerable notice in his native village, and young Clark, being
favorably impressed with reports from America, secretly resolved to
husband his means and follow the example of those who had recently gone.

In the Spring of 1847, he left home with but barely sufficient means for
the expenses of the journey. On the 17th of June in that year he landed at
Boston, amidst martial music and parade of military, celebrating the
battle of Bunker's Hill. This, however, was but poor consolation to the
English lad, who found himself penniless and friendless. He used every
effort to find employment without success, and in the meantime was obliged
to sleep wherever night overtook him. At last he obtained work on a farm,
in the little town of Dover, Massachusetts, at ten dollars per month. He
remained in this situation until October, when, with the regrets of his
employer, he left for the West.

On arriving in Ohio, he first obtained employment at chopping wood and
teaming, in Lorain county. In the following Spring he returned to
Cleveland and obtained a situation as helper in a hardware store. Here it
became apparent to him that he was sadly deficient in an educational point
of view, and that it offered an almost insuperable barrier to his
advancement in life. To remedy this, so far as possible, he devoted all
his leisure hours to study, and on the establishment of the evening
schools the following winter, he availed himself of them, and the
advantage soon became apparent.

With a view to the improvement of his circumstances, in 1851, he engaged
himself to Hussey & Sinclair, with whom he remained six years, when he
returned to his former employers, Otis & Co., and remained with them three
years longer.

In 1859, he established himself in the commission business, associating
with him John D. Rockefeller, the firm name being Clark & Rockefeller;
both young men of limited means. By strict attention and honorable conduct
they soon built up a lucrative business. In 1860, G. W. Gardner became a
member of the firm, and continued as such for two years, when he retired.

In 1863, Mr. Clark's attention was attracted to the manufacture of
petroleum oils, a business then in its infancy. In connection with his
partners, he erected a factory on the Newburg road, the capacity of which
was about fifty-six barrels of crude oil per day. They soon discovered
that there was money in the enterprise, and before the end of the year
they had increased the capacity of their works four-fold; and the
enterprise of this firm has aided materially in making Cleveland what it
is to-day, the successful rival of Pittsburgh in the manufacture of
petroleum oils. In 1865, the manufacturing branch was purchased by his
partner, and the general commission business was continued by Mr. Clark
until 1866, when he sold out his interest, remaining nominally out of the
business until June of that year, when he wearied of idleness and sought
active business once more. Purchasing the controlling interest in another
refinery, he set to work, vigorously, enlarging the capacity of the works
and bringing capital and energy to bear with such effect upon the business
of the firm, that it now ranks among the leading oil refining
establishments of the country.

[Illustration: Yours Respectfully, M. B. Clark]

Mr. Clark has been no niggard with the wealth that has accrued to him
from his business. During the war he contributed liberally and was active
in aiding the cause of the government by giving every practical measure
his cordial and generous support. In other matters he has manifested a
like liberal spirit. In politics he has acted with the Republicans, and
has been active in furthering the success of that party. In 1866, he was
elected member of the city council from the fourth ward, and was
re-elected in 1868. In religions matters he has always connected himself
with the Wesleyan Methodists, and has been a leading supporter of that
congregation in Cleveland.

Still in the vigor of life, Mr. Clark has the opportunity of doing much
more for the prosperity of the city by increasing the manufacturing
business, and this his practical nature leads him to do.

It will be seen that Mr. Clark has been the architect of his own
fortune. His sympathies are with the industrial classes, from which he
sprang, and in return he has the confidence and good will of a large
portion of that class.

Mr. Clark was married in 1853, and has a family of five children.




Jacob Lowman.



Jacob Lowman was born in Washington county, Maryland, Sept. 22, 1810. He
worked with his father on the farm until he was eighteen, at which time he
became an apprentice to the smithing department of the carriage building
trade. At the expiration of his apprenticeship, in 1832, he came to Ohio.
He stopped in Stark county for a few months, and then came to Cleveland,
in search of work, which he readily obtained, with Elisha Peet, on Seneca
street, where Frankfort street now intersects it. He worked about a year
and a half, for which he received nine dollars per month and board. Being
of steady habits, he saved in that time about seventy-five dollars. Mr.
Lowman then bought out his employer, and commenced at once on his own
account, at the same place. After two years, he built a shop where the
Theatre Comique now stands, and remained there eight years. At first he
labored alone, after awhile he had one journeyman, soon adding still
another, and another, till, at the end of the eight years, he employed
about fifteen men. He then removed to Vineyard street, having built shops
there to accommodate his increasing business. This was about the year
1842--3. After moving to the new buildings, his business constantly grew
with the city, and more men were employed. In 1851, Mr. Lowman commenced
the erection of a still larger building to meet his increasing demands; he
was then employing from thirty-five to forty men. About this time too, he
associated with him Mr. Wm. M. Warden, who had then been in his employ for
about ten years. Their facilities were sufficient till about the time of
the war, when they erected a large brick building on Champlain street, now
occupied as a smith shop, trimming shop, store room, etc., since which
they have employed about sixty men. Mr. Lowman, for a number of years, did
little beside a local trade, but for the last five or six years he has
built up quite a large foreign trade, shipping West extensively--Wisconsin,
Illinois, Iowa, Michigan, Nebraska, Indiana and Kentucky, being
the principal markets.

Mr. Lowman has been strictly temperate all his life. He has taken a lively
interest in the Sunday schools of the city, in connection with the
Methodist Episcopal Church, of which he has been a member nearly since he
came to the city.

He was married in 1841 to Miss Minerva E. Peet, by whom he had four
children, three of whom are now living--the oldest son being in business
with his father. He suffered the loss of his partner in life in 1857. He
married again in 1863, to Mrs. Sarah D. Goodwin, of Lorain county, Ohio,
formerly of Vermont.

He attributes his success in business to the fact that he had an object in
view, and endeavored to attain it, strict attention to business, economy,
and studying to give satisfaction by his work.

He is only fifty-eight years of age, and well preserved, and in all
human probability will live to enjoy the fruit of his labor for many
years to come.




[Illustration: Yours Truly W. G. Wilson]


W. G. Wilson.



W. G. Wilson, now president of the Wilson Sewing Machine Company of
Cleveland, was born in Franklin county, Pennsylvania, on the first of
April, 1841. His education was obtained at a village school house. When he
was in his thirteenth year his parents removed to Ohio, and the lad
remained with them until his eighteenth year, when he left home with a
somewhat indefinite idea of doing something for himself, although
possessing neither money nor friends to aid him in his start in life.
Until the year 1864, he wandered from place to place, turning his hand to
various employments, but was dissatisfied with them all, being convinced
that he had not yet found his right vocation or location.

In 1864, he was visiting some friends at Madison county, Ohio, when his
attention was attracted by a cheap sewing machine. Believing that money
could be made by the sale of such machines he purchased one, mastered its
mode of operation, and took a traveling agency. Finding this a more
profitable business than any he had yet undertaken, he prosecuted it with
vigor, and being of an inquiring mind, soon picked up important facts
concerning the business, the manufacture of the machines, and the profits
of the manufacturers and dealers. He discovered that the largest profits
were not made by those who retailed the machines, and, therefore, he set
to work to change his position in the business and so enlarge his profits.

In Fremont, Ohio, he formed the acquaintance of a young man in the grocery
business, who had thought at times of entering on the sewing machine
trade. A partnership was formed. Mr. Wilson contributed his whole
available means, sixty-five dollars, to which he added the experience he
had gained, whilst his partner contributed to the common stock three
hundred dollars. With this slender cash capital, but abundant confidence
in their success, the new firm came to Cleveland, which they selected as
the base of their operations on account of its superior shipping
facilities, and opened a wareroom in Lyman's Block, having previously made
arrangements with manufacturers in Massachusetts to make machines for
them. The new firm of Mather & Wilson were successful beyond their
expectations.

About a year had been passed in this way when suits were brought against
Mather & Wilson, in common with a number of other parties throughout the
West, for an alleged infringement of a sewing machine patent. Under the
pressure of these suits, which were prosecuted with a large capital to
back up the litigating parties, Mr. Wilson endeavored to secure the
co-operation of the more powerful of the defendants, but without success,
each party preferring to fight the battle singly. After a hard fight in
the courts, a compromise was effected, the suit against Mather & Wilson
withdrawn on each party paying his own costs, and they were allowed to
carry on the business unmolested.

Shortly afterwards Mr. Wilson sold out his interest in the firm. A few
weeks subsequently he made an agreement with H. F. Wilson, whereby the
latter was to perfect and patent a low priced shuttle machine, and assign
the patent to the former. In two months the machine was in the patent
office, and in 1867 the manufacture was commenced in Cleveland. No money
or labor was spared in perfecting the machine, which achieved an instant
success and became exceedingly profitable.

In 1868, the Wilson Sewing Machine Company was organized with a paid up
capital of one hundred thousand dollars, the principal portion of their
stock being owned by Mr. Wilson, who is president of the company. The
business of the concern has grown until it now reaches five hundred
machines per week, and branch houses have been established in Boston and
St. Louis, with general agencies in the principal cities of the United
States. Through the rapid development of their business the company have
recently purchased a tract of land at the junction of Platt street and the
Pittsburgh railroad crossing, in Cleveland, for the purpose of erecting a
large building for the manufacture of their sewing machines, that will
give employment to between two and three hundred men.

The Wilson Sewing Machine Company is one of the latest established
manufactories in Cleveland, but promises to take rank among the most
important. It deserves especial mention among the record of Cleveland
enterprises, as producing the first local sewing machine that has
succeeded, although many attempts have been made.




Albert C. McNairy.



This department of the present work would be imperfect without a reference
to the firm of McNairy, Claflen & Co., which ranks among the heaviest and
most important contracting firms in the country.

Albert C. McNairy, the head of the firm and a man of great enterprise and
energy of character, was born June 14, 1815, at Middletown, Connecticut,
and was early engaged in work of a similar character to that now
undertaken by the firm. In 1848, he constructed the famous Holyoke Dam,
across the Connecticut river at Holyoke, which is over a thousand feet
between the abutments, and thirty feet in height. In 1851, he became a
member of the bridge building firm of Thatcher, Burt & Co., of Cleveland,
whose operations in the construction of bridges were very extensive. In
1864, the firm name became McNairy, Claflen & Co., by the admission of
Henry M. Claflen, who had been in the employ of the firm since 1854. In
1866, Mr. Thatcher and Mr. Burt retired and Harvey T. Claflen, (who had
been connected with the establishment since 1852,) and Simeon Sheldon
were admitted.

From 1851 to a recent date, the Howe Truss Bridge was nearly the only
bridge made by the concern. They now are largely engaged in the
construction of iron bridges and all kinds of railway cars. The concern
has built three thousand two hundred and eighty-one bridges--about sixty
miles in the aggregate. The streams of nearly every State east of the
Rocky Mountains are spanned by their bridges, and it is a historical fact
that not one bridge of their construction has fallen.

Three hundred and fifty men are employed by the firm, and the aggregate of
their business reaches two millions of dollars yearly.

The firm is now constructing the New York and Oswego Midland
Railroad, from Oneida to Oswego, a distance of sixty-five miles, and
furnishing the cars.

The general management of the affairs of the company is in the hands of
Messrs. McNairy and Henry M. Claflen. The management of the works is
assigned to Harvey T. Claflen, whilst the engineering department falls to
the particular superintendence of Mr. Sheldon. The Messrs. Claflen are
natives of Taunton, Massachusetts, and Mr. Sheldon of Lockport, New York.




J. H. Morley.



J. H. Morley is a native of Cayuga county, New York. He came to Cleveland
in 1847, and commenced the hardware business on Superior street, under the
firm name of Morley & Reynolds. This firm continued, successfully, for
about twelve years, after which, for some time, Mr. Morley was engaged in
no active business. In 1863, he commenced the manufacture of white lead,
on a limited scale. Three years subsequently, a partnership was formed
with T. S. Beckwith, when the capacity of the works was immediately
enlarged. Every year since that time they have added to their facilities.
Their factory has a frontage on Canal and Champlain streets, of over three
hundred feet. Their machinery is driven by a hundred horse-power engine,
and four hundred corroding pots are run. About one thousand tons of lead
are manufactured yearly, and find a ready market in Ohio, Michigan,
Wisconsin, Iowa and New York.




Telegraphy.



The telegraphic history of Cleveland is mainly written in the story of the
connection with this city of the two leading telegraphers whose
biographical sketches are given in this work. The master spirit of the
great telegraphic combination of the United States, and the chief
executive officer of that combination, have made Cleveland their home and
headquarters. Their story, as told in the immediately succeeding pages, is
therefore the telegraphic history of Cleveland.




Jeptha H. Wade.



Foremost on the roll of those who have won a distinguished position in the
telegraphic history of the West, is the name of Jeptha H. Wade, until
recently president of the Western Union Telegraph Company, and who still,
although compelled by failing health to resign the supreme executive
control, remains on the Board of direction, and is one of the leading
spirits in the management.

Mr. Wade was born in Seneca county, New York, August 11, 1811, and was
brought up to mechanical pursuits, in which he achieved a fair amount of
success. Having a taste for art, and finding his health impaired by the
labors and close application consequent on his mechanical employment, he,
in 1835, turned his attention to portrait painting, and by arduous study
and conscientious devotion to the art, became very successful. Whilst
engaged in this work, the use of the camera in producing portraits came
into notice. Mr. Wade purchased a camera, and carefully studied the
printed directions accompanying the instrument. These were vague, and
served but as hints for a more careful investigation and more thorough
development of the powers of the camera. By repeated experiments and
intelligent reasoning from effects back to causes, and from causes again
to effects, he at length became master of the subject, and succeeded in
taking the first daguerreotype west of New York.

When busy with his pencil and easel taking portraits, and varying his
occupation by experimenting with the camera, news came to him of the
excitement created by the success of the telegraphic experiment of
building a line between Baltimore and Washington. This was in 1844. Mr.
Wade turned his attention to the new science, studied it with his
accustomed patience and assiduity, mastered its details, so far as then
understood, and immediately saw the advantage to the country, and the
pecuniary benefit to those immediately interested, likely to accrue from
the extension of the telegraph system which had just been created.
Without abandoning his devotion to art, he entered on the work of
extending the telegraph system. The first line west of Buffalo was built
by him, between Detroit and Jackson, Michigan, and the Jackson office was
opened and operated by him, although he had received no practical
instruction in the manipulation of the instruments. In the year 1848, an
incident occurred, which, though at the time he bitterly deplored it as a
calamity, was, in fact, a blessing in disguise, and compelled him
perforce to embark on the tide which bore him on to fame and fortune. He
was an operator in the line of the Erie and Michigan Telegraph Company,
at Milan, Ohio, when a conflagration destroyed all the materials and
implements forming his stock in trade as a portrait painter. After a
brief consideration of the subject, he decided not to replace the lost
implements of his art, but to cut loose altogether from the career of an
artist, and hereafter to devote himself solely to the business he had
entered upon with fair promise of success.

[Illustration: Very Truly Yours, J. H. Wade]

The first years of telegraph construction were years of much vexation of
spirit to those engaged in such enterprises. Difficulties of all kinds,
financial, mechanical, and otherwise, had to be encountered and overcome.
There were those who objected to the wires crossing their land or coming
in proximity to their premises, fearing damage from the electric current
in storms. Those who had invested their capital wanted immediate large
returns. Some of those who had to be employed in the construction of the
lines were ignorant of the principles of electrical science, and their
ignorance caused serious embarrassments and delays. Defective insulation
was a standing cause of trouble, and telegraphers were studying and
experimenting how to overcome the difficulties in this direction, but
without satisfactory result. In the face of all these difficulties, Mr.
Wade proceeded with the work of extending and operating telegraph lines.
In addition to the interest he had secured in the Erie and Michigan line.
he constructed the "Wade line" between Cleveland via Cincinnati, to St.
Louis, and worked it with success. The "House consolidation" placed Mr.
Wade's interest in the lines mentioned in the hands of the Mississippi
Valley Printing Telegraph Company, and before long this consolidation was
followed by the union of all the House and Morse lines in the West, and
the organization of the Western Union Telegraph Company. In all these acts
of consolidation the influence of Mr. Wade was active and powerful.
Realizing the fact that competition between short detached lines rendered
them unproductive, and that in telegraphing, as in other things, union is
strength, he directed his energies to bringing about the consolidation,
not only of the lines connecting with each other, but of rival interests.
The soundness of his views has been proved by the unremunerativeness of
the lines before consolidation and their remarkable prosperity since.

Mr. Wade was one of the principal originators of the first Pacific
telegraph, and on the formation of the company he was made its first
president. The location of the line, and its construction through the
immense territory--then in great part a vast solitude--between Chicago and
San Francisco, were left mainly to his unaided judgment and energy, and
here again those qualities converted a hazardous experiment into a
brilliant success. Mr. Wade remained president of the Pacific Company
until he secured its consolidation with the Western Union Telegraph
Company, to accomplish which, he went to California, in the latter part of
1860, and succeeded in harmonizing the jarring telegraphic interests
there. On the completion of this consolidation, Mr. Wade was made
president of the Western Union Telegraph Company, his headquarters being
in Cleveland.

At a meeting of the Board of Directors, in July, 1867, a letter was
received from Mr. Wade, declining a re-election to the office of
president. The following resolutions were unanimously adopted by
the Board:

  _Resolved_, That in receiving the letter of J. H. Wade, Esq., declining
  re-election to the presidency of this company, we cannot pass it to the
  officiai files without recording our testimony to the distinguished
  service he has rendered to the general system of American Telegraphs,
  and especially to the company whose management he now resigns.

  Connecting himself with it in its earliest introduction to public use,
  and interesting himself in its construction, he was the first to see
  that the ultimate triumph of the telegraph, both as a grand system of
  public utility, and of secure investment, would be by some absorbing
  process, which would prevent the embarrassments of separate
  organizations.

  To the foresight, perseverance and tact of Mr. Wade, we believe is
  largely due the fact of the existence of one great company to-day with
  its thousand arms, grasping the extremities of the continent, instead of
  a series of weak, unreliable lines, unsuited to public wants, and, as
  property, precarious and insecure.

  _Resolved_, That we tender to Mr. Wade our congratulations on the great
  fruition of his work, signalized and cemented by this day's election of
  a Board representing the now united leading telegraph interests of the
  nation, accompanied with regrets that he is not with us to receive our
  personal acknowledgements, and to join us in the election of a successor
  to the position he has so usefully filled.

  Office of the Western Union Telegraph Company, New York, July
  10th, 1867.

  William Orton, President.
  O. H. Palmer, Secretary.

As before mentioned, Mr. Wade remains a director and leading spirit in the
Board, where his suggestions are listened to with respect and acted on
without unnecessary delay. In addition to his connection with the
telegraph Company, Mr. Wade is heavily interested in several of the most
important manufactories, in the railroads, and in the leading banks of
Cleveland. The wealth he has accumulated is mostly invested in such a
manner as to largely aid in building up the property of Cleveland, a city
in which he feels a strong interest, not only from the fact that it has
been for the past twenty years his place of residence, but that the wealth
enabling him to enjoy the beautiful home he has secured there, was made in
Cleveland.

It has already been noted that Mr. Wade, when a painter, took the first
daguerreotype west of New York. Soon after his entering upon the business
of telegraphy, he put into practice, for the first time, the plan of
enclosing a submarine cable in iron armor. It was applied to the cable
across the Mississippi, at St. Louis, in 1850. Weights had been applied
to the previous cables, at regular distances, on account of the sand,
change of bottom, drifts, and other difficulties that interfered with the
safety of the cable. Mr. Wade conceived the idea of combining weight and
protection in the cable itself. He constructed it with eighteen pieces of
wire, placed lengthwise around the cable, and bound together with soft
iron wire at intervals. While the spiral cordage of hemp, such as was
used at that time on the cable from Dover to Calais, would stretch, and
allow the strain to come on the cable itself. This invention caused the
strain to come on the armor. It was a complete success, and lasted until
the line was abandoned. Mr. Wade also invented, in 1852, what is now
known as the Wade insulator, which has been used more extensively,
perhaps, than any other.

Among the strong points in Mr. Wade's character, is his readiness and
ability to adapt himself to whatever he undertakes to do. The evidence of
his common sense, business foresight and indomitable perseverance, has
been proved by the success attending the various pursuits in which
circumstances have placed him. Finding, in early manhood, his mechanical
labor undermining his health, he turned his attention to portrait and
miniature painting, to which he applied himself so close that after a
dozen years or more at the easel, he was compelled to abandon it and seek
more active and less sedentary pursuits. Having so long applied himself to
painting--the business of all others the most calculated to disqualify a
man for everything else--but few men would have had the courage to enter
so different a field, but Mr. Wade seemed equal to the task, and with
appropriate courage and renewed energy grappled with the difficulties and
mystories of the telegraph business, then entirely new, having no books
or rules to refer to, and without the experience of others to guide him,
and having, as it were, to climb a ladder, every round of which had to be
invented as he progressed. But nothing daunted him. Through perseverance
and system he succeeded, not only in supplying the United States in the
most rapid manner with better and cheaper telegraphic facilities than has
been afforded any other country on the globe, but in making for himself
the ample fortune to which his ability and energy so justly entitle him.
And when care and over-work in the telegraph business had made such an
impression upon his health as to induce him to retire from its management,
and give more attention to his private affairs, he was again found equal
to the emergency, and has proved himself equally successful as a financier
and business man generally, as he had before shown himself in organizing
and building up the telegraph speciality.




Anson Stager.



One of the most widely known names in connection with telegraphy in the
West--and not in the West alone, but probably throughout the United
States--is that of General Anson Stager. From the organization of the
Western Union Telegraph Company, General Stager has had the executive
management of its lines as general superintendent, and the position has
not only brought him into close relations with all connected in any way
with the telegraph, but has given him a larger circle of business
acquaintances than it falls to the lot of most men to possess. The natural
effect of his position and the extraordinary course of events during his
occupation of that position, have brought him into communication, and
frequently into intimate confidential relations, with the leading men in
commerce, in science, in journalism, in military affairs, and in State and
national governments.

[Illustration: Very Respectfully Yours, Anson Stager]

Anson Stager was born in Ontario county, New York, April 20, 1825. At the
age of sixteen he entered a printing office under the instruction of Henry
O'Reilly, well known afterwards as a leader in telegraph construction and
management. For four or five years he continued his connection with the
"art preservative of all arts," and the knowledge of and sympathy with
journalism which he acquired through his connection with it during this
period of his life, enabled him during his subsequent telegraphic career
to deal understandingly with the press in the peculiar relations it holds
with the telegraph, and has occasioned many acts of courtesy and good will
which the managers of the press have not been backward in recognizing and
acknowledging.

In October, 1846, General Stager changed his location from the
compositor's case to the telegraph operator's desk, commencing work as an
operator in Philadelphia. With the extension of the lines westward, he
removed to Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and then crossed the Alleghenies to
Pittsburgh, where he was the pioneer operator. His ability and
intelligence were speedily recognized by those having charge of the new
enterprise, and in the Spring of 1848, he was made chief operator of the
"National lines" at Cincinnati, a post he filled so well that, in 1852, he
was appointed superintendent of the Mississippi Valley Printing Telegraph
Company. Immediately following his appointment to that position the
company with which he was connected absorbed the lines of the New York
State Printing Telegraph Company, and General Stager's control was thus
extended over that State.

Whilst holding the position of executive manager of the lines of this
company, the negotiations for the consolidation of the competing and
affiliated lines into one company were set on foot. General Stager warmly
favored such a consolidation on equitable terms and set to work vigorously
to promote it. On its consummation, and the organization of the Western
Union Telegraph Company his services in that respect and his general
fitness as a telegraph manager, were recognized by his appointment as
general superintendent of the consolidated company. The position was, even
then, one of great responsibility and difficulty, the vast net work of
lines extending like a spider's web over the face of the country requiring
a clear head, and practical knowledge to keep it free from confusion and
embarrassment, whilst the delicate and complicated relations in which the
telegraph stood with regard to the railroads and the press increased the
difficulties of the position. The rapid extension of the wires increased
the responsibilities and multiplied the difficulties yearly, but the right
man was in the right position, and everything worked smoothly.

The extensive and elaborate System of railroad telegraphs which is in use
on all the railroads of the West and Northwest owes its existence to
General Stager. The telegraphs and railroads have interests in common, and
yet diverse, and the problem to be solved was, how to secure to the
telegraph company the general revenue business of the railroad wires, and
at the same time to enable the railroad companies to use the wires for
their own especial purposes, such as the transmission of their own
business correspondence, the moving of trains, and the comparison and
adjustment of accounts between stations. How to do this without confusion
and injustice to one or the other interest was the difficult question to
be answered, and it was satisfactorily met by the scheme adopted by
General Stager. That scheme, by the admirable simplicity, complete
adaptability and perfection of detail of its system of contracts and plan
of operating railroad telegraph lines, enabled the diverse, and seemingly
jarring, interests to work together in harmony. Telegraph facilities are
always at the disposal of the railroads in emergency, and have repeatedly
given vital aid, whilst the railroad interests have been equally prompt
and active in assisting the telegraph when occasion arises.

The relations between the journalistic interests of the country and the
telegraph, through the various press associations for the gathering and
transmission of news by telegraph, have also given occasion for the
exercise of judgment and executive ability. The various and frequently
clashing interests of the general and special press associations and of
individual newspaper enterprise, and the necessity, for economical
purposes, of combining in many instances the business of news gathering
with news transmission, make the relations between the press and telegraph
of peculiar difficulty and delicacy, and probably occasioned not the
smallest portion of General Stager's business anxieties. It is safe to
say, that in all the embarrassing questions that have arisen, and in all
the controversies that have unavoidably occurred at intervals, no
complaint has ever been made against General Stager's ability, fairness,
or courtesy to the press.

Whilst the Western Union Telegraph Company has been developing from its
one wire between Buffalo and Louisville into its present giant
proportions, General Stager has had a busy life. His planning mind and
watchful eye were needed everywhere, and were everywhere present. The
amount of travel and discomfort this entailed during the building of the
earlier lines may be imagined by those who know what a large extent of
country is covered by these lines, and what the traveling facilities were
in the West before the introduction of the modern improvements in railway
traveling, and before railroads themselves had reached a large portion of
the country to be traveled over.

With the breaking out of the rebellion, a new era in General Stager's life
commenced. With the firing of the first rebel gun on Fort Sumpter, and the
resultant demand for troops to defend the nation's life, the Governors of
Ohio, Illinois and Indiana united in taking possession of the telegraph
lines in those States for military purposes, and the superintendent of the
Western Union Telegraph Company was appointed to represent these in their
official capacity. General Stager acted with promptness and vigor, and no
small share of the credit accorded to those States for the promptness with
which their troops were in the field and striking effective blows for the
Union, is due to General Stager for the ability with which he made the
telegraph co�perate with the authorities in directing the military
movements. When General McClellan took command of the Union forces in West
Virginia and commenced the campaign that drove the rebels east of the
mountains, General Stager accompanied him as chief of the telegraph staff,
and established the first system of field telegraph used during the war.
The wire followed the army headquarters wherever that went, and the enemy
were confounded by the constant and instant communications kept up between
the Union army in the field and the Union government at home. When General
McClellan was summoned to Washington to take command of the Army of the
Potomac, General Stager was called by him to organize the military
telegraph of that department. This he accomplished, and remained in charge
of it until November, 1862, when he was commissioned captain and assistant
quartermaster, and by order of the Secretary of war, appointed chief of
the United States Military Telegraphs throughout the United States--a
control that covered all the main lines in the country. He was
subsequently commissioned colonel and aid-de-damp, and assigned to duty in
the War Department, and was also placed in charge of the cypher
correspondence of the Secretary of War. The cryptograph used throughout
the war was perfected by him, and baffled all attempts of the enemy to
translate it. At the close of the war he left the active military service
of the government, retiring with the brevet of Brigadier General,
conferred for valuable and meritorious services.

At the close of the war the Southwestern and American Telegraph Companies
were consolidated with the Western Union Telegraph Company, and a
re-organization of the latter company effected. The general
superintendency of the Consolidated company was urged upon General Stager,
but as this would necessitate his removal to New York, he declined it,
preferring to live in the west. For a time he meditated retiring
altogether from the telegraph business and embarking in newspaper life,
for which his early training had given him a taste, and towards which he
always maintained an affection. Eventually the company persuaded him to
remain in connection with them, and to suit his wishes, the field of the
company's operations was divided into three divisions, the Central,
Eastern and Southern. General Stager assumed control of the Central, which
covered the field with which he had so long been identified, and which
left him with his headquarters in the home he had for years occupied, in
Cleveland. Early in 1869, the duties of his position rendered it necessary
that he should remove to Chicago, which he did with great reluctance, his
relations with Cleveland business, and its people, being close and
uniformly cordial.

General Stager is a man with a host of friends and without, we believe,
one enemy. His position was such as to bring him into contact with every
kind of interest, and frequently, of necessity, into conflict with one or
other, but his position was always maintained with such courtesy, as well
as firmness, that no ill feeling resulted from the controversy, however it
terminated.

Socially he is one of the most genial of companions; in character the
personification of uprightness and honor; firm in his friendships and
incapable of malice toward any one. Well situated financially, happy in his
domestic circle, of wide popularity, and possessing the esteem of those
who know him best, General Stager is one of those whose lot is enviable,
and who has made his position thus enviable by his own force of character
and geniality of disposition.




City Improvements



Cleveland covers a large extent of territory. The width of its streets and
the unusual amount of frontage possessed by most of the dwellings, made
the work of city improvements in the way of paving, sewerage and water
supply, at first very slow of execution. The light gravelly soil, on which
the greater portion of the city is built, enabled these works to be
postponed, until the increased number and compactness of the population,
and excess of wealth, would render the expense less burdensome.

The first attempts at paving were made on Superior street, below the
Square, and on River street. The paving was of heavy planks laid across
the street, and was at the time a source of pride to the citizens; but
when, in coming years, the planks were warped and loosened, it became an
intolerable nuisance. On River street the floods of the Cuyahoga sometimes
rushed through the warehouses and covered the street, floating off the
planks and leaving them in hopeless disorder on the subsidence of the
waters. It was at last determined to pave these streets with stone.
Limestone was at first chosen, but found not to answer, and Medina
sandstone was finally adopted, with which all the stone paving of the
streets has been since done. Within two or three years the Nicholson wood
pavement has been introduced, and has been laid extensively on the streets
above the bluff. On the low land along the river valley the paving still
continues to be of stone. At the present time there are between seventeen
and eighteen miles of pavement finished or under construction, about half
of which is Nicholson wood pavement, and the remainder Medina sandstone.

Within a few years the work of sewering the city has been systematized
and pushed forward vigorously. At first, the sewers were made to suit the
needs of a particular locality, without any reference to a general system,
and consequently were found utterly inadequate to the growing necessities
of the city. Proper legislation was obtained from the General Assembly,
money was obtained on the credit of the city, the territory was mapped out
into sewer districts, with sewer lines for each district, so arranged as
to form a part of one harmonious whole, and the work commenced. All the
main sewers drain into the lake. There are now about twenty-seven miles of
main and branch sewers finished, and additional sewers are in progress of
construction.

The rapid growth of the city, and the gradual failure, or deterioration,
of the wells, in the most thickly settled parts, rendered it necessary to
find some other source of a constant supply of pure water. It was
determined to obtain the supply from Lake Erie, and for this purpose an
inlet pipe was run out into the lake, west of the Old River Bed. The pipe
is of boiler plate, three-eighths of an inch thick, fifty inches in
diameter, and three hundred feet long, extending from the shore to the
source of supply at twelve feet depth of water, and terminating in the
lake at a circular tower, constructed of piles driven down as deep as they
can be forced into the bottom of the lake. There are two concentric rows
of piles, two abreast, leaving eight feet space between the outer and
interior rows, which space is filled with broken stones to the top of the
piles. The piles are then capped with strong timber plates, securely
bolted together and fastened with iron to the piles. The outside diameter
of the tower is thirty-four feet, the inside diameter is eight feet,
forming a strong protection around an iron well-chamber, which is eight
feet in diameter and fifteen feet deep, which is riveted to the end of the
inlet pipe. An iron grating fixed in a frame which slides in a groove, to
be removed and cleaned at pleasure, is attached to the well-chamber, and
forms the strainer, placed four feet below the surface of the lake,
through which the water passes into the well-chamber and out at the inlet
pipe. A brick aqueduct connects the shore end of the inlet pipe with the
engine house, three thousand feet distant. From the engine house the water
is conveyed to the reservoir, on Franklin, Kentucky and Duane streets,
built on a ridge thirty feet higher than any other ground in the city.

The Cleveland Water Works were commenced on the 10th day of August, 1854,
and were so far completed as to let water on the city on the 19th day of
September, 1856. The time required to build the Works was two years and
thirty-nine days. The capacity of these Works to deliver water is greater
than the originally estimated wants of the population the works were
intended to supply, which was for 100,000. They are, however, capable of
supplying at least 300,000 inhabitants with abundance of water. By an
enlargement of the main pump barrel and plunger to each Cornish engine,
which was contemplated in the plans, the supply may be increased to an
almost unlimited extent. No fear can be entertained that the present
Water Works in the next fifty years will fail to yield a superabundant
supply of water.

The water was first introduced into the city temporarily at the earnest
solicitation of the Mayor, Common Council, and Trustees of Water Works, in
which the citizens generally participated, on the occasion of the State
Fair, on the 24th of September, 1856. Apart from the Fair, this event was
hailed with demonstrations of great joy as the celebration of the
introduction of the waters of Lake Erie into the city of Cleveland. At the
intersection of the road ways, crossing at the centre of the Public
Square, a capacious fountain, of chaste and beautiful design was erected,
from which was thrown a jet of pure crystal water high into the air,
which, as the centre, greatest attraction, gratified thousands of admiring
spectators. It became necessary after the Fair to shut off the water as
was anticipated, to remove a few pipes near the Ship Channel which had
broke in two by the unequal settling of the pipes in the quicksand bed
through which they were laid. These repairs were promptly made, and the
water let on the city again; since which time the supply has been regular
and uninterrupted. The length of pipes laid up to the first of January,
1869, aggregated thirty-nine and one-half miles. The total cost of the
Works to that period was $722,273.33. The earnings, over running expenses,
for 1868, were $36,340.23, being a little over five per cent, on the
capital invested. The preliminary work is now doing for the construction
of a tunnel under the bed of the lake, in order to obtain a water supply
at such a distance from the shore as to be beyond the reach of the winter
ice-field and the impurities collected beneath the ice-crust.

Three commodious and tasteful markets have been erected within a few
years, one on the west side of the river, one in the fifth ward, and the
Central Market, at the junction of Woodland avenue and Broadway.

Four horse railroads are in active operation within the city: the East
Cleveland, organized in 1859, and running from the junction of Superior
and Water streets, by the way of Euclid avenue and Prospect street, to the
eastern limit of the city on Euclid avenue, thence continuing to East
Cleveland. This line has also a branch running off the main line at
Brownell street, and traversing the whole length of Garden street, to the
eastern limit of the city. The Kinsman street line, organized in 1859,
runs from the junction of Superior and Water streets, through Ontario
street and Woodland avenue to Woodland Cemetery. The West Side railroad
runs from the junction of Superior and Water streets, by way of South
Water, Detroit and Kentucky street, to Bridge street, with a branch along
Pearl street. The St. Clair street railroad, the latest built, runs along
St. Clair from Water street to the eastern line of the city. Besides
these, a local railroad, operated by steam, connects the Kinsman street
line with Newburg, and another of a similar character connects the West
Side railroad with Rocky River. Charters have been obtained for a railroad
to connect the Pearl street branch of the West Side railroad with
University Heights, and for a line to run parallel with the bluff
overlooking the north bank of the Cuyahoga from River street, to the
boundary between the city and Newburg township.




[Illustration: Yours very truly, H. S. Stevens]


Henry S. Stevens.



To Henry S. Stevens, more than to any other man, are the citizens of
Cleveland indebted for their facilities in traveling, cheaply and
comfortably, from point to point in the city, and for the remarkable
immunity the Forest City has enjoyed from hack driving extortions and
brutality, which have so greatly annoyed citizens and strangers in many
other cities. To his foresight, enterprise and steady perseverance is
Cleveland indebted for its excellent omnibus and public carriage system,
and for the introduction of street railroads. Both these improvements were
not established without a sharp struggle, in the former case against the
determined opposition of the hack drivers who preferred acting for
themselves and treating the passenger as lawful prey, and in the case of
street railroads, having to overcome interested opposition, popular
indifference or prejudice, and official reluctance to permit innovations.

Mr. Stevens was born in Middlesex county, Massachusetts, January, 1821.
After spending seven years at school in Salem and Boston, his father's
family moved to New Hampshire. He attended school there for two years.
Before he was twenty years of age he developed a desire to visit new
scenes and a propensity for observing strange characters and manners,
which seems to have strengthened with his years. Our railroad system and
ocean steam navigation were then in their infancy, and the first journey
he made was almost equivalent to a journey around the globe at the present
day. He took passage in a packet ship from Boston for the West Indies,
visiting Porto Rico, Matanzas and Havana, thence to New Orleans, the
interior of Texas and Arkansas, and remained a winter at Alexandria, in
western Louisiana. About a year after his return to New Hampshire the
family removed to Maryland, where he resided nine years, and finally came
to Cleveland in 1849, when this city had less than a fifth of its present
population. He was one of the early proprietors of the Weddell House, and
upon his retirement from the business, he established the omnibus local
transit for passengers and baggage at a uniform rate of charge, which
system has been generally adopted in the principal cities in the country.

In 1856, in company with two other gentlemen from New York, he explored
the southern part of Mexico from the Gulf to the Pacific ocean, with
reference to its availability for a railroad and preliminary stage road.
The result was, that two years later he completed an arrangement with the
Louisiana Tehuantepec Company to carry out the provisions of their
charter. He chartered a vessel at New York and shipped mechanics and other
employees, coaches and materials, and in two months thereafter the line
commenced moving a distance of one hundred and twelve miles through the
forests and over the rolling plains of Southern Mexico.

For nearly a year this continued successfully, and it was owing either to
his good fortune or good management, that no accident to passengers or
property was incurred, and of the large number of his employees from the
States, every one returned in good health. The rebellion was then in its
incipiency, and the Southern owners of the route decided to suspend
operations until their little difficulty was adjusted with the North.

Mr. Stevens, however, is better known as having started the street
railroad system here, which has proved so great a convenience to our
citizens, and which has enhanced the price of real estate in this city
more than any other one cause. He built the Prospect street, Kinsman
street and West Side railroads; the first two without aid from
capitalists, and in the face of many discouragements. In the Fall of 1865,
he went to Rio Janeiro for the purpose of establishing street railroads in
that city. These roads are now in successful operation there. In this
journey Mr. Stevens visited many other places in Brazil, including
Pernambuco, Bahia, St. Salvador and Para, on the river Amazon. Returning
by the way of Europe, he stopped at the Cape de Verde Islands, on the
coast of Africa, thence to Lisbon and across Portugal to Madrid. During
his sojourn in Spain he visited Granada, the Alhambra, and many cities in
the south of Spain. His route home was through Paris, London and
Liverpool. Two years later he made an extended tour over Europe, including
Russia, Hungary, and other places of the Danube.

Mr. Stevens has served four years in the city council, and for two years
was president of that body. During his official term he was noted for
regularity and punctuality of attendance, close attention to business,
and watchful care of the public interests. As presiding officer he had
few equals. Dignified, yet courteous, in manner, and thoroughly
impartial, he possessed the respect of all parties in the council, and
was always able to so conduct the deliberations as to prevent unseemly
outbreaks or undignified discussions. Methodical in the disposition of
business, he was able to get through a large amount in a short time,
without the appearance of haste.

Mr. Stevens is one of that class of travelers of whom there are,
unhappily, but few, who not only travel far, but see much, and are able to
relate what they saw with such graphic power as to give those who remain
at home a pleasure only secondary to visiting the scenes in person. His
several wanderings in Mexico and Central America, in South America,
Western Europe, and Russia, have all been narrated briefly, or more at
length, in letters to the Cleveland Herald, which for felicity of
expression and graphic description, have had no superiors in the
literature of travel. This is high praise, but those who have read the
several series of letters with the well known signature "H. S. S." will
unqualifiedly support the assertion. In his journeyings he generally
avoided the beaten track of tourists and sought unhackneyed scenes. These
were observed with intelligent eyes, the impressions deepened and
corrected by close investigation into the historical and contemporary
facts connected with the localities, and the result given in language
graphic, direct, and at the same time easy and graceful. A collection of
these letters would make one of the most delightful volumes of travel
sketches in the language.




Theodore R. Scowden.



Theodore R. Scowden, son of Theodore Scowden, of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
was born June 8, 1815, and was educated at Augusta College, Kentucky.

On leaving college, in 1832, he was apprenticed to the steam engine
business at Cincinnati, and continued at this about four years, when he
engaged as engineer on a steamer plying between Cincinnati and New
Orleans. From the time of commencing engine building, he employed all his
spare moments in studying mechanics, hydraulics and civil engineering. He
remained in the position of engineer on the river for about eight years,
when, in 1844, he turned his attention to the work of designing and
planning engines, and so put into practice the knowledge acquired by
application for the previous twelve years, and, in fact, for which he
more particularly fitted himself while at college. He was then appointed
by the city council of Cincinnati, engineer of water works, the primitive
works then existing being inadequate to the increased wants of the city.
The water was conveyed in log pipes, and the work before Mr. Scowden was
to replace these logs by iron pipes, and to design and erect new works. In
about a year from his appointment his plans were perfected and he was
ready to commence operation. A great difficulty under which he labored,
was, the necessity of keeping up the supply of water all the time, and
being at the same time compelled to place the new reservoir and engine
house in the exact spot of the old. This made the construction extend
through nearly eight years, during which time from forty to fifty miles of
iron pipe were laid, and a reservoir of great capacity constructed. This
was his first great public work completed, and was a perfect success.

The first low pressure engine ever successfully used in the Ohio and
Mississippi valleys, was designed by Mr. Scowden and introduced into these
works. It was found that the sedimentary matter of the Ohio river cut the
valves in the condensing apparatus, and so destroying the vacuum, rendered
the working of the engine ineffective. This Mr. Scowden overcame by
introducing vulcanized india rubber valves, seated on a grating. Since
that time he has designed several low pressure engines for the Mississippi
river, which are still working successfully.

In 1851, Mr. Scowden was commissioned by the city of Cincinnati, to make
the tour of England and France for the purpose of examining the principles
and workings of public docks, drainage, paving and water works. After
returning and making his report he resigned his post and came to
Cleveland, for the purpose of constructing the water works now in
operation in this city. The plan and designs were completed during 1852,
and active operations commenced in 1853. The site of these works is said
to have presented more engineering difficulties than any other in the
country. At the time the tests were made for the foundation of the engine
house, the water was nearly knee deep, and four men forced a rod thirty
feet long and three-quarters of an inch in diameter twenty-eight feet into
the ground. By the aid of five steam engines and pumps he succeeded in
excavating to the depth of fourteen feet, and not being able to proceed
further, he commenced the foundation. It is well to note the fact here,
that the soil was in such a semi-fluid state that it could not be handled
with a shovel, and altogether the chances of success for securing a
permanent foundation looked, to the public, at least, very dubious. The
citizens grew uneasy; they thought it was a waste of public money, but Mr.
Snowden never despaired, though he with his own hand thrust a pole down
twelve feet from the bottom of the excavation.

He laid down over the whole area two courses of timber laid cross-wise,
leaving a space of twelve inches between each timber. The first timber was
drawn by a rope, and floated to its place. In order to get a bed he
scooped a space of two feet in length at one end, which was filled with
gravel. This process was continued through the whole length of the timber.
The second timber was floated to its place, leaving a foot between them,
and the same operation was performed throughout the whole foundation.

All the spaces between the timbers were filled with broken stone and
hydraulic cement; then the cross timbers were laid, filling the spans with
the concrete also. It is to be observed that not a single pile was driven
in all the foundation.

The masonry was commenced upon the timbers, and carried up about nineteen
feet, and, notwithstanding the misgivings of scientific and experienced
contractors and builders, and others, the superstructure was completed in
1855, and from that day to this not a crack in an angle of the building
has been seen, although it may with truth be said that the engine house
floats on a bed of quicksand. There were three thousand feet of aqueduct
from the engine house to the lake, which presented similar difficulties,
as did also the laying of pipes under the Cuyahoga river.

The engines in use in the Cleveland works are the first Cornish engines
introduced west of the Allegheny mountains. After completing the works and
putting them in successful operation, Mr. Scowden resigned his position
here, in 1856.

In 1857, Mr. Scowden commenced the construction of the water works of
Louisville, Kentucky, and finished them in 1860, and for character,
capacity and finish they are acknowledged to be second to none in the
United States, if in the world. The second pair of Cornish engines used
west of the mountains were introduced there.

The next public work of Mr. Scowden was the extension and enlargement of
the canal around the Falls of the Ohio at Louisville, which comprises a
new work, as very little of the old was used. The engineering of the work
was done under the direction of a board of directors, the president of
which was James Guthrie, former Secretary of the Treasury under Pierce,
and late United States Senator.

The locks in these works are the largest in the known world for width,
length, and lift, not excepting the Suez Canal. There are two locks of
thirteen feet lift, and containing fifty-two thousand yards of masonry.
The canal is crossed by iron swing bridges. The work has been inspected by
the United States topographical engineers, and General Wietzel, now in
charge of the work, has pronounced it unsurpassed by anything within the
range of his knowledge, and, what is more remarkable, a like tribute to
the skill of our fellow citizen has been accorded by French, English and
German engineers, and also by the president of the board.

This was his last and greatest triumph of engineering skill; and being a
national work, and he a civilian, he may well feel proud of his
achievement.

After completing the last mentioned work, Mr. Scowden returned to
Cleveland and engaged in the iron trade, constructing a rolling mill at
Newburg, for the American sheet and boiler plate company, with which he is
still connected.

As an engineer, Mr. Scowden stands high. He never was baffled, though
established principles failed, for he had resources of his own from which
to draw. Without an exception, every great public work undertaken by him
has been not only completed, but has proved entirely successful.

As a man he enjoys the respect and confidence of his fellow citizens. His
manner is affable and unassuming, and his disposition kindly. Constant
application for twenty-five years has had its effect upon him, but with
care, he may yet be spared many years to enjoy the fruits of his labors.




John H. Sargent.



John H. Sargent has been, and is, so intimately connected with the
construction and management of some of the most important public
improvements of the city, and notably so with the sewerage system and
water works management, that it is eminently proper he should be noticed
here as a representative man in the department of City Improvements.

[Illustration: Yours with Respect, J. H. Sargent]

Mr. Sargent was born March 7, 1814, at Carthage, near Rochester, New
York. His parents were but recent emigrants from New Hampshire, and when
he was but three years old they removed again toward the land of the
setting sun, taking up their residence in what is now the city of Monroe,
Michigan, but which was then known as River Raisin. In that place they
remained but a year, at the end of which time they removed to Cleveland.
Levi Sargent, the father of the subject of this sketch, was by trade a
blacksmith, and was at one time a partner in that business with Abraham
Hickox, then, and long after, familiarly known to every one in the
neighborhood as "Uncle Abram." He soon removed to the west side of the
river, and thence to Brooklyn, where he built him one of the first houses
erected on that side, on top of the hill. Hard knocks upon the anvil could
barely enable him to support his family, so the boy, at the age of nine,
was sent to the Granite State, where for ten years he enjoyed, during the
Winter months, the advantages of a New England district school, and worked
and delved among the rocks upon a farm the remainder of the year. At the
age of nineteen, with a freedom suit of satinet, and barely money enough
to bring him home, he returned to Cleveland.

Here, after supporting himself, he devoted all his leisure time to the
study of mathematics, for which he had a predilection. Subsequently he
spent some time at the Norwich University, Vermont, at an engineering and
semi-military school, under the management of Captain Patridge.

When the subject of railroads began to agitate the public mind, and the
project of a railroad along the south shore of Lake Erie was resolved
upon, Mr. Sargent was appointed resident engineer upon the Ohio Railroad,
which position he held until the final collapse of that somewhat
precarious enterprise, in 1843. Sandusky City had already taken the lead
in Ohio in the matter of railroads, having a locomotive road in operation
to Tiffin, and horse road to Monroeville. Upon the reconstruction and
extension of this last road Mr. Sargent was appointed resident engineer,
and while there, seeing the advantages that Sandusky was likely to gain
over Cleveland by her railways, at the solicitation of J. W. Gray, he sent
a communication to the Plain Dealer, illustrating the same with a map,
urging the construction of a railroad from Cleveland to Columbus and
Cincinnati. He also advocated the project in the Railroad Journal, but
that paper discouraged the matter, as it was likely to be too much of a
competing line with the Sandusky road already begun. But the agitation
continued until the preliminary surveys were made, the greater part of
them under Mr. Sargent's immediate charge. When the project hung fire for
a time, Mr. Sargent, in company with Philo Scovill, spent two seasons
among the copper mines of Lake Superior. When the Cleveland, Columbus and
Cincinnati railroad was begun in good earnest, he was called upon once
more and located the line upon which it was built. Mr. Sargent remained
upon the road until opened to Wellington, when he went upon the Michigan
Southern and Northern Indiana railroad, where, for nearly five years, he
was engaged in extending and reconstructing that road, and in locating and
building its branches.

Since 1855, most of his time has been spent in Cleveland, in engineering
and works of public utility. While city civil engineer he strongly
advocated, though for the time unsuccessfully, the introduction of the
Nicholson pavement, and introduced and established the present system of
sewerage, a work, the importance of which to the health and comfort of the
citizens, can not be overestimated.

Mr. Sargent has been chosen one of the commissioners for enlarging and
extending the water works so as to meet the altered circumstances and
enlarged demands of the city.

In politics Mr. Sargent is, and has always been, a Democrat, but never
allows party prejudices to sway him, and is in no sense a professed
politician. The honesty of his convictions and his uprightness of conduct
have won for him the respect and friendship of men of all parties, who
have confidence in his never permitting party considerations to interfere
with his honest endeavor to serve the public interests to the best of his
ability, whenever placed in a position to do so. During the rebellion he
was zealous and untiring in his support of the government, and aiding, by
all the means in his power, to crush out the rebellion.




Military.



Previous to the rebellion, Cleveland had the honor of possessing military
companies famous for their drill and efficiency, and which were the pride
of the citizens and a credit to the State. At the outbreak of the
rebellion, the Cleveland companies were foremost in tendering their
services, were among the first Ohio troops that rushed to the scene of
danger, and were in the first skirmish of the war between the volunteer
troops of the North and the organized troops of the rebels--that at
Vienna. The first artillery company organized in the West was formed in
Cleveland, and kept its organization up for many years before the war. The
breaking out of the war found this artillery organization ready for
service, and scarcely waiting for authority, it was speedily on its way to
the point where its services seemed most needed. To its promptness and
efficiency is largely due the swift expulsion of the rebels from West
Virginia and the saving of that State to the Union cause. As the war
progressed, companies first, and then whole regiments, were rapidly
organized, and sent forward from Cleveland, until at length every portion
of the field of war had Cleveland representatives in it. Those who
remained at home eagerly aided those in the field. Money was raised in
large sums whenever wanted, to forward the work of enlistment, to provide
comforts for the soldiers in the field, and to care for the sick and
wounded. Busy hands and sympathetic hearts worked together in unison,
enlarging their field of operation until the Cleveland Soldiers' Aid
Society became the Northern Ohio Soldiers' Aid Society, and that again
developed into the Western Branch of the Sanitary Commission.

In the imposing ceremonies of the inauguration of the Perry statue on the
Public Square in Cleveland on the tenth of September, 1860, a few months
before the breaking out of actual hostilities between the North and
South, the whole military force of the city participated. The
organizations represented were the First Regiment Cleveland Light
Artillery, under command of Colonel James Barnett and Lieutenant Colonel
S. B. Sturges, composed of the following companies: Co. A, Capt. Simmons;
Co. B, Capt. Mack; Co. D, Capt. Rice; Co. E, Capt. Heckman. [Co. C, Capt.
Kenny, belonged to Geneva. It took part in the ceremonies, under the
general command of Colonel Barnett, but at that time retained its old
organization as Independent Battery A.] Brooklyn Light Artillery, Capt.
Pelton; Cleveland Light Dragoons, Capt. Haltnorth; Cleveland Grays, Capt.
Paddock; Cleveland Light Guards, Capt. Sanford; Hibernian Guards, Capt.
Kenny. Of these the Cleveland Grays had achieved the greatest reputation
in past years for its drill and efficiency. It had been the pet of the
citizens, and in its ranks, at one time or another, had been found the
very best class of the people of Cleveland, who continued to take pride in
the organization, and contribute to its maintenance, long after they
ceased to be actually connected with it.

When President Lincoln's call for troops was received, the Cleveland Grays
and Hibernian Guards promptly tendered their services, and the first named
company started for the field without a single hour's unnecessary delay.
It was formed with the First Ohio Volunteer Infantry, and was in the
skirmish at Vienna. On the re-organization of the Ohio troops into three
years' regiments, a large proportion of the Cleveland Grays found
positions as officers in new regiments, where their knowledge of drill and
discipline was of great value in bringing the masses of raw volunteers
into speedy use as efficient soldiers. The Hibernian Guards followed the
Cleveland Grays and did good service throughout the war. Many of the
original members of this company also became gradually scattered
throughout other regiments as company or staff officers. The Cleveland
Light Guards formed the nucleus of the Seventh Ohio, whose history is
identical with that of its two principal officers, which will be found in
subsequent pages. The story of the Cleveland Light Artillery is mainly
told in that of General Barnett, its commander and leading spirit.

It is, of course, impossible to furnish an exact account of the number of
men furnished by Cleveland to the army of the Union, or even to designate
the particular organizations belonging to that city. Clevelanders were to
be found scattered through a number of regiments not raised in this
vicinity, and among the regiments organized in Cleveland camps many were
almost entirely composed of men from beyond the city, or even county
lines. To the 1st Ohio Infantry Cleveland contributed the Cleveland Grays.
The 7th Ohio was organized at Camp Cleveland, and contained three
companies raised exclusively in Cleveland. The 8th Ohio, organized in
Cleveland, contained one Cleveland company--the Hibernian Guards. The 23d
and 27th Ohio, organized at Camp Chase, contained Cleveland companies. The
37th Ohio, (German) was organized in Cleveland, and a large part of its
members enlisted at this point. The 41st Ohio was a Cleveland regiment,
recruited mainly in the city. The 54th Ohio, organized at Camp Dennison,
contained one Cleveland company. The 58th Ohio, (German,) also contained a
Cleveland contingent. Clevelanders also were in the 61st, organized at
Camp Chase. The 67th Ohio had a considerable proportion of Clevelanders.
The 103rd Ohio was organized in Cleveland, and was, to a large extent, a
Cleveland regiment, in both officers and men. The 107th Ohio, (German,)
was organized and largely recruited in Cleveland. The 124th Ohio was
organized in Cleveland, most of its companies recruited there and the
regiment officered mainly by Cleveland men. The 125th Ohio was organized
in Cleveland, with some Cleveland recruits. The 128th Ohio, (Prisoner's
Guards,) was recruited and organized in Cleveland. It did duty on
Johnson's Island. The 129th Ohio was organized in Cleveland, having been
partially recruited and officered in the same place. It was organized for
six months' service. The 150th Ohio, National Guard, for one hundred days'
service, was organized in Cleveland, and contained eight companies from
the city, (the 29th Ohio Volunteer Militia,) with one from Oberlin, and
another from Independence. It garrisoned some of the forts around
Washington and took part in the repulse of the rebel attack in June, 1864.
The 177th Ohio, one year regiment, was organized and partly recruited in
Cleveland. The 191st, organized at Columbus, was commanded and partly
recruited with Clevelanders. The 2nd, 10th and 12th Ohio Cavalry regiments
were organized and partially recruited in Cleveland. The 1st regiment of
Ohio Light Artillery was made out of the 1st regiment Cleveland Light
Artillery. Besides these Cleveland furnished to the service, in whole or
part, the 9th, 14th, 15th, 19th and 20th Independent Batteries. Other
regiments were organized at the Cleveland camps, but probably contained no
members that could be credited to Cleveland, and mention of them is
therefore omitted here. In addition a large number of recruits were
obtained for the regular army, and for the navy, besides contributions to
the colored regiments raised during the war. A number of Clevelanders, for
one reason or another, also took service in regiments of other States.




Colonel Charles Whittlesey.



Although Colonel Whittlesey was trained to the profession of arms, and
has a military record of which he may well be proud, it is not in the
field of battle that he has won the honors he prizes most, but in the
broader fleld of science. It is among the heroes who have achieved
distinction in grappling with the mysteries of nature and who have
developed means for making life more useful and comfortable, that Colonel
Whittlesey would have preferred taking position, rather than among those
whose distinction comes rather of destruction than construction or
production. But the exigencies of this work prevent the formation of a
distinct scientific department, and the military services of Colonel
Whittlesey have been such that he could not, without injustice, be
omitted from this department of our work.

Charles Whittlesey was born in Southington, Connecticut, about midnight
of October 4-5, 1808, being the first born of Asaph and Vesta Whittlesey.
When four years old he was sent to the old red school house "to be out
of harm's way," whilst his father was in the Ohio wilderness, exploring
for a home.

The location was found, and in 1813 the family removed to Talmadge, Summit
county, Ohio. There the young boy trudged from home to the log school
house, south of Talmadge Centre, until 1819, when the frame academy was
finished and the eleven year old lad attended school in the new building
during the Winter, and in Summer worked on the farm. This mode of life
continued until 1824.

In 1827, he was appointed a cadet at West Point.

During his second year at West Point, a fiery Southerner made a Personal
assault upon a superior officer, the military punishment for which is
death. He was condemned by a court-martial to be shot. While the sentence
was being forwarded to Washington for approval the culprit was confined in
the cadet prison, without irons. Cadet Whittlesey was one evening on post
at the door of the prison, and as he passed on his beat, his back being
for a moment towards the door, the prisoner, who was a powerful man,
sprang out and seized the sentinel's musket from behind. At the same
instant the muzzle of a pistol was presented to the ear of the young cadet
with an admonition to keep quiet. This, however, did not prevent him from
calling lustily for the "corporal of the guard." Cadet O. M. Mitchel, of
subsequent fame, happened to be in charge of the guard as corporal and
then coming up stairs with the relief. With his usual activity he sprang
forward and the scion of chivalry ran. The guns of the sentinels at West
Point are not loaded. The escaping prisoner could not, therefore, be shot,
but in the pursuit by Cadet Whittlesey he had nearly planted a bayonet in
his back when the guard seized him.

[Illustration: Yours Truly, Chas Mattingly]

After passing through the regular course of instruction at West Point, he
graduated, and, in 1831, was made Brevet Second Lieutenant of the Fifth
United States Infantry, and served in the Black Hawk campaign of 1832. He
afterwards resigned, and for the next quarter of a century his record is
wholly a scientific one. Recognizing the right of the government to his
military services in national emergencies he offered to resume his old
rank in the Florida war of 1838, and in the Mexican war of 1846, but his
offers were not accepted.

In 1837, he was appointed on the geological survey of Ohio, and was
engaged on that work two years, the survey eventually terminating through
the neglect of the Legislature to make the necessary appropriations.
Incomplete as the work was, the survey was of immense importance to Ohio,
as the investigations of Colonel Whitlesey and his associates revealed a
wealth of mineral treasures hitherto unsuspected, and enabled capital and
enterprise to be directed with intelligence to their development. The
value of the rich coal and iron deposits of North-eastern Ohio was
disclosed by this survey, and thus the foundation was laid for the
extensive manufacturing industry that has added enormously to the
population, wealth and importance of this portion of the State. It was
with the important results of his labors in Ohio in mind, that the State
Government of Wisconsin secured his services for the geological survey of
that State, which was carried on through the years 1858, 1859 and 1860,
terminating with the breaking out of the war. From this survey also very
important results have already followed, and still more will be arrived at
in the course of a few years.

From 1847 to 1851, both inclusive, Colonel Whittlesey was employed by the
United States government in the survey of Lake Superior and the upper
Mississippi in reference to mines and minerals. In addition to this he has
spent much time in surveying particular portions of the mineral districts
of the Lake Superior basin, and has, in all, spent fifteen seasons on the
waters of Lake Superior and upper Mississippi, making himself thoroughly
familiar with the topography and geological character of that portion of
our country.

Colonel Whittlesey was at home in Cleveland quietly pursuing his
scientific studies and investigations, when the national trouble
commenced. When the entrance of President Lincoln into Washington was
threatened by violence in February, 1861, he was an enrolled member of one
of the companies tendering their services to General Scott. Seeing that
war was inevitable, he personally urged the Governor and Legislature of
Ohio to prepare for it before the proclamation of April 15, 1861, and on
the 17th he joined the Governor's staff as assistant quartermaster
general. He served in the field in Western Virginia, with the three months
levies, as State military engineer with the Ohio troops under Generals
McClellan, Cox and Hill, and at Scary Run, on the Kanawha, July 17, 1861,
behaved with great gallantry under fire, and conducted himself with
intrepidity and coolness during an engagement that lasted two hours, and
in which his horse was wounded under him. At the expiration of the service
of the three months troops he was appointed Colonel of the 20th regiment
Ohio volunteers, and detailed by General O. M. Mitchel as chief engineer
of the department of the Ohio, where he planned and constructed the
defences of Cincinnati, which he afterwards volunteered to defend, in
September, 1862. At the battle of Fort Donelson he was with his regiment,
and was complimented by General Grant on the morning of the surrender by
being put in charge of the prisoners. A published correspondence from the
prisoners proves with what kindness and courtesy to the unfortunate this
task was performed. A testimony to a similar effect is the correspondence
from the leading residents of the rebel counties of Owen, Grant, Carroll
and Gallatin, in Kentucky, which in the Winter of 1861, were placed under
his command, and which he ruled with such firmness, yet moderation, that
both Union men and rebels bore witness to his conservative, moderate, and
gentlemanly course, as well as to his promptness and decision.

At the battle of Shiloh, Colonel Whittlesey, on the second day of that
desperate fight, commanded the third brigade of General Wallace's
division. The part borne by this brigade in the battle has become
historic. It was composed of Ohio troops, the 20th, 56th 76th, and 78th
regiments, and it was against their line that General Beauregard attempted
to throw the whole weight of his force for a last desperate charge, when
he was driven back by the terrible fire poured into him. General Wallace,
in his officiai report, makes especial and honorable mention of the
important part taken by this brigade and its commander in the battle.

Soon after the battle Colonel Whittlesey sent in his resignation, which
he had intended sending in earlier, but withheld because he foresaw some
important military movements in which he desired to take part. The
critical condition of his wife's health and his own disabilities, which
had reached a point threatening soon to unfit him for any service
whatever, compelled him to take this step. After the battle of Shiloh,
when he could resign with honor and without detriment to the service, he
sent in his resignation. General regret was expressed by the officers with
whom he had been associated and by his old command. The application was
endorsed by General Grant "We cannot afford to lose so good an officer."
General Wallace, General Cox, and General Force added their commendations
of his abilities and services, and few officers retired from the army with
a clearer or more satisfactory record, or with greater regret on the part
of his military associates.

Since his retirement, Colonel Whittlesey has been leisurely engaged in
scientific and literary pursuits, has again spent much time in geological
explorations in the Lake Superior and Upper Mississippi country, has
organized and brought into successful operation the Western Reserve
Historical Society, of which he continues to be president, and has
accumulated in its spacious hall a good collection of historical works
relating to the West, and a rich collection of geological and antiquarian
specimens, gathered in Ohio and the Northwest.

Colonel Whittlesey has contributed largely to scientific literature, and
his works have attracted wide attention, not only among scientific men of
America, but of Europe. His published works are to be found in the
Geological Reports of Ohio, 1838-9; United States Geological Surveys of
the Upper Mississippi, D. D. Owen, 1847, 1849; United States Geological
Surveys of Upper Peninsula of Michigan, Foster and Whitney, 1850, 1851;
Life of John Fitch, Spark's American Biography, new series, Volume 6,
1845; Fugitive Essays, mainly historical, published at Hudson, Ohio, 8vo.,
pp. 357, 1854; Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge;--Ancient Works of
Ohio, 1852; Fluctuation of Lake Levels, 1860; Ancient Mining on Lake
Superior, 1863; Fresh Water Glacial Drift, 1866. In addition to these are
an essay on the Mineral Resources of the Rocky Mountains, in 1863; a
handsome and valuable volume on the Early History of Cleveland, in 1866,
and about thirty essays, reports, and pamphlets, besides very numerous and
valuable contributions to newspapers and scientific journals.




General James Barnett.



James Barnett was born on the 21st of June, 1821, at Cherry Valley, Otsego
county, New York. He came to Cleveland when about four years of age, and
after receiving a common school education commenced his business career by
entering the hardware store of Potter, Clark & Murfey, where he served
three years as clerk. At the end of that time he went into the hardware
house of George Worthington, and has for many years been a member of the
firm of George Worthington & Co. As a business man and good citizen he
stands very high in the estimation of the people of Cleveland, but it is
with his military record that we have now chiefly to deal.

In 1840, an independent Company of artillery was organized in Cleveland,
and at its start was made a part of the old Cleveland Grays, afterwards
the artillery part formed a company by itself, which had for its
commanders D. L. Wood and A. S. Sanford. This organization was kept up
until the breaking out of the war, and was, without doubt, the best
drilled and equipped artillery organization west of the mountains; the
State supplied the guns, harness and caissons, but the expenses for
horses, the meeting and drill houses, and equipments, and all their
expenses, were paid by themselves. They drilled regularly, took an
excursion every year, visited Niagara, Syracuse, Sandusky, Wooster, and
also Chicago, on the occasion of the assembling of the River and Harbor
Convention. At every point they visited they never failed to infuse a
military spirit into the people, and to create a desire for similar
companies. Nearly all the artillery organizations of the West sprang out
of this little nucleus at Cleveland, for at the places visited and
instructed by the Cleveland company, men were obtained at the breaking out
of the war who were to some extent familiar with artillery drill, and many
of them became, because of this, commanders during the rebellion. Such
commanders were to be found throughout the service.

About two years before the war, the Ohio militia law was so amended as to
permit the organization of artillery companies, with one gun to a company,
every six guns to form a command, entitled to elect a colonel,
lieutenant-colonel, and major. The Cleveland Light Artillery took
immediate advantage of this by organizing into the First, Regiment Light
Artillery, O. V. M., with the following officers: Colonel, James Barnett;
Lieutenant Colonel, S. B. Sturges; Major, Clark Gates; Quartermaster, Amos
Townsend; Quartermaster's Sergeant, Randall Crawford; Co. A, Captain Wm.
R. Simmons; Co. B, Captain John G. Mack; Co. C, Captain D. Kenny; Co. D,
Captain Percy Rice; Co. E, Captain F. W. Pelton. The three city companies
drilled at what is now the Varieties, on Frankfort street, Captain
Pelton's company at Brooklyn, and Captain Kenny's at Geneva.

In the Winter of 1860, the regiment tendered their services to the State
authorities in case of difficulty, as the rebels in West Virginia were
assuming a threatening attitude. This offer was accepted, but the opinion
expressed in the acceptance, that the proffered services would probably
not be needed. Five days after the fall of Fort Sumter the order came for
the regiment to report with its six guns to Columbus. On the second day
after the date of the order the organization, with full complement of men
and guns, passed through Columbus en route to Marietta, where a rebel
demonstration was expected. Here it remained a little over a month, when a
detachment with two guns, under command of Lieutenant Colonel Sturges,
crossed into West Virginia at Parkersburg, and the remainder, under
command of Colonel Barnett, crossed the river at Benwood and proceeded to
Grafton, West Virginia. The two guns under Lieutenant Colonel Sturges went
up the Baltimore and Ohio line to Philippi, and in the affair at that
place did telling service. Theirs was the first artillery fired in the
field by the National forces in the war of the rebellion. About a month
after, the detachment rejoined the main body of the regiment, and the guns
of the artillery did good service in the attack on the rebels at Laurel
Hill, the result being the hasty flight of the enemy.

In the pursuit from Laurel Hill, two pieces pushed over the mountains and
pressed their rear guard with great energy for two days, during nearly the
whole time in a drenching rain, deep mud, and through fords, the men all
anxiety to overtake the fleeing foes. The rebels had felled trees to
obstruct the road. Some chopped the trees asunder, some helped the guns
through the mud, and all worked like desperate men. Finally the
transportation of the rebels stuck fast in quicksand and stopped the whole
train. The rebels were compelled to make a stand to protect their baggage.
To effect this they drew up their forces on a little table land, near
Carrick's Ford--the position being hid by a row of bushes on the edge of
the hill, and overlooking the line of Colonel Barnett's command. The head
of the column was pushing on with great impetuosity when they were
suddenly opened upon from the point of land on their right hand, but,
fortunately, from the elevation, their fire mostly passed over their
heads. The troops were immediately put into position to repel the attack;
the guns, to give them scope, were wheeled out into the field and opened
fire immediately with canister. Although fired upon by two pieces of
artillery from the eminence, they lost no one, and after a few rounds the
rebel guns were silenced, and the gallant attack by the infantry under
Colonel Steadman of the 14th Ohio, Colonel Dumont, 6th Indiana, and
Colonel Milroy, 9th Indiana, at the same time, drove them from their
position. When taken, it was found that the gunner of one piece had been
killed and was lying across the trunnions of the piece with the cartridge
only half rammed--the horses having been killed at the same time and in
falling broke the pole, so that it was impossible to get the gun away. Our
men soon improvised another pole and harness, hitched some mules to the
piece, and brought it away, together with the captured supplies. The
pursuing column returned to camp at Laurel Hill.

Immediately after this, Colonel Barnett was ordered to report to General
McClellan in person, at Beverly. There a consultation was had on the
policy of taking the artillery on a campaign up the Kanawha, after General
Wise. There was some question about ordering them on the campaign, from
the fact that they were not in the United States command, their
organization then not having been recognized by the General Government.
They were Ohio troops, and their invasion of West Virginia was excused on
the plea that it was necessary to the "defence of the State," for which
purpose only they were mustered into the State service.

While the matter of a new campaign was being submitted to the command, the
battle of Bull's Run took place, and McClellan was peremptorily ordered to
Washington to take command of the army of the Potomac. Colonel Barnett
returned to Columbus with his command, which was mustered in and mustered
out of the United States service on the same day.

This affair, in connection with the operation at Rich Mountain, under
Rosecrans, closed the campaign made by General McClellan in Western
Virginia, and preserved the State to the Union.

Colonel Barnett and his command returned to Cleveland, bringing with them,
by permission of Governor Dennison, the piece of artillery captured at
Carrick's Ford, which still remains in Cleveland and is used for firing
salutes. On reaching Cleveland the returning soldiers were received with
public demonstrations of joy, and a vote of thanks, couched in the
strongest terms of commendation, was unanimously adopted by the city
council at their regular meeting, July 30, 1861.

Governor Dennison had strongly urged the General Government to grant him
permission to furnish a twelve battery regiment of artillery as part of
the State quota of troops. This was steadily refused for a considerable
time, but at length a Mr. Sherwin, of Cincinnati, was granted permission
to raise such a regiment, provided he could do it within a stated time.
The attempt proving a failure, Governor Dennison obtained permission from
the War Department to appoint Colonel Barnett to the task. Colonel Barnett
at once left for Columbus, and in August, 1861, commenced the work of
recruiting and equipping, the batteries being sent to the field as rapidly
as they could be got ready. Co. A and Co. C reported to General Thomas in
time to participate in the battle of Mill Springs, Kentucky. The other
batteries were sent to different commands in Western Virginia and
Kentucky, as soon as ready.

Colonel Barnett reported to General Buell, at Louisville, the following
Spring, with a portion of the command, and on the arrival of the army at
Nashville, in March, he was placed in command of the Artillery Reserve of
the Army of the Ohio, in which capacity he served until ordered to Ohio,
in July, 1862, on recruiting service, and was in command through the
campaign embracing the battles of Pittsburgh Landing, Corinth and other
affairs, up to the time of the occupation of Huntsville by Buell's army.

After having obtained the requisite number of recruits for his regiment,
he was assigned to duty, in September, upon the staff of General C. C.
Gilbert, at that time commanding the centre corps of the Army of the Ohio.
After the battle of Perryville, the Colonel was transferred to the staff
of Major General McCook, as Chief of Artillery, which position he filled
until November 24, 1862, when he was designated by General Rosecrans,
Chief of Artillery of the army of the Cumberland.

In the battles of Stone River, Chickamauga, Mission Ridge, and the various
other operations of the grand old army of the Cumberland, Colonel Barnett
was constantly and actively engaged, and is mentioned with special
commendation by General Rosecrans in his official report, and received the
confidence and support of the final commander of that department, the
sturdy and gallant Thomas.

After the close of operations around Chattanooga, Colonel Barnett was put
in command of the artillery of the department, requiring reorganization
and remounting, which was formed in two divisions, consisting of six
batteries in a division; the first division being batteries in the regular
service; the second division being volunteer batteries, and principally
composed of batteries of the First Ohio Light Artillery, having their
camps near the city of Nashville, where they were thoroughly drilled,
reorganized and equipped, and held in readiness for the field at any
moment on requisition of the department commander; which command he
retained until mustered out of the service, October 20, 1864.

Colonel Barnett also participated in the battle of Nashville, in which,
however, he acted in a volunteer capacity, the battle having taken place
subsequent to his muster out of the service.

Subsequently he was awarded a Brevet Brigadier Generalship, in
consideration of his eminent abilities and the valuable services he had
performed. On his return home he resumed his position in the old firm,
having, by the generosity of his partners, been allowed to retain his
interest without detriment during the whole time of his service.




Colonel Wm. H. Hayward.



Wm. H. Hayward was born at Lebanon, Connecticut, in 1824, was brought to
Cleveland in 1826, received a good common school education, and at the
age of fifteen became an apprentice to the printing business in the
office of Sanford & Lott. At the end of his five years apprenticeship he
was admitted as partner, solely because of his proficiency, not having
any capital to put in. Mr. Lott retired on account of ill health, and the
firm became Sanford & Hayward, which it has ever since remained, and
which has steadily built up a large and profitable blank-book and
lithographing business.

From boyhood Mr. Hayward had a taste for military studies, and he was
early connected with the military organizations of the city. In the early
days of the Cleveland Light Artillery, when it was under the command of
his partner, General A. S. Sanford, he was First Lieutenant. When
permission was received for the organization of the First Ohio Artillery
as a three years regiment, Mr. Hayward was tendered, and from a sheer
sense of duty to the country accepted, the Lieutenant Colonelcy of the
regiment. He took an active part in recruiting, drilling, and organizing
the men as fast as received, and sending them to the front. When the
regiment was divided and sent in different directions his command was
ordered to the Shenandoah Valley to report to General Shields. Under this
command he took part in the fight at Port Republic, June 12, 1862, fought
whilst another battle was going on at Cross Keys, seven miles distant.
Soon afterwards he and his command became part of the Army of the Potomac,
being attached to the Third Division under General Whipple, who was
subsequently mortally wounded at Chancellorsville. On being assigned to
that Division, Colonel Hayward was made Chief of Artillery. At the time of
the battle of Gettysburg Colonel Hayward was assigned to duty in
Washington.

His health, never good, having completely broken down, he was compelled to
resign and return home. Here he remained attending his business duties and
rendering such aid as lay in his power until the call for hundred days
troops to defend Washington. At the time he was in command of the 29th
Regiment Ohio Volunteer Militia, organized for just such emergencies, and
which contained eight companies. With these two other companies were
Consolidated, and the organization styled the 150th Ohio National Guards.
Colonel Hayward led it to Washington, and took a leading part in the
repulse of Early. The attack of the rebel forces was mainly against that
part of the defences garrisoned by the 150th Regiment. There were no hopes
of permanently keeping the rebels out of Washington with so small a force,
but the main object was to keep them at bay until succor could arrive. To
do this strategy was adopted. About eight hundred quartermaster's men,
darkeys and teamsters, were sent off from Washington to swell the force;
these men were kept marching and counter-marching around a piece of wood,
then wheeled around and brought again into the view of the rebels, who,
thinking there was a large force being massed there, deferred the attack
till morning, when the veteran Sixth corps came up to their relief, and
Early was driven back in discomfiture.

On the expiration of their term of service the 150th National Guards
returned to Cleveland, and Colonel Hayward resumed business life.




Colonel Wm. R. Creighton.



No Infantry regiment raised in Cleveland became so thoroughly identified
with Cleveland as the "Fighting Seventh." This was in great measure due to
the fact that it was the first complete regiment sent from Cleveland, and
that it contained a large number of the spirited young men of the city,
taken from all classes of the population. The fortunes of the Seventh were
followed with deep interest, their successes exulted in, and their losses
mourned over. No public sorrow, saving that for the death of President
Lincoln, was so general and deep as that which followed the news of the
fall of the gallant leaders of the "old Seventh," as they led their
handful of men, spared from numerous murderous battles, in the face of
certain death up the hill at Ringgold. Grief for the loss was mingled with
indignation at the stupidity or wanton cruelty that had sent brave men to
such needless slaughter.

William R. Creighton, with whom the history of the Seventh is identified,
was born in Pittsburgh, in June, 1837. At ten years old he was placed in a
shoe store where he remained two years and then was placed for six months
in a commercial college. From there he entered a printing office, where he
served an apprenticeship of four years, and came to Cleveland, where he
entered the Herald office, remaining there, with the exception of a few
months, until just previous to the breaking out of the war.

In 1858, he became a member of the Cleveland Light Guards and rose to
become a lieutenant in that organization. He was a great favorite with his
fellow members of the company, and was not only a genial companion, but an
excellent disciplinarian. At the breaking out of the war, he organized a
company with the old Cleveland Light Guards as a nucleus, and soon had so
many applications that his company was full and a second company was
organized. A third company was also recruited. This was the beginning of
the Seventh Ohio.

On a beautiful Sunday morning, in May, 1861, the Seventh marched through
the streets of Cleveland, the first full regiment that had left the city,
on the way to the railroad. The whole population turned out to bid them
farewell. The regiment went to Camp Dennison, unarmed, without
uniforms--except such uniforms as belonged to the old independent
organizations--and with but temporary regimental organization. When but a
few days in Camp Dennison, the call came for three years troops, and the
regiment, with but few exceptions, volunteered for the three years
service, with E. B. Tyler as Colonel, and Wm. E. Creighton as Lieutenant
Colonel. The places of those who declined to enlist for three years were
soon filled by fresh recruits.

The regiment was ordered to West Virginia to take part in the campaign to
be opened there. Colonel Tyler had gone in advance, and Lieutenant Colonel
Creighton took the regiment to Clarksburg, where he turned it over to his
commanding officer. At Glenville he again took command, drilling the men
daily when in camp, and bringing them into a high state of proficiency.
Hard marching and many privations were endured until the regiment reached
Cross Lanes.

On the 21st of August orders were received to join General Cox, at Gauley
Bridge. The regiment, then under command of Colonel Tyler, had reached
Twenty-mile Creek when word was received that the rebels, four thousand
strong, were preparing to cross the river at Cross Lanes, which the
Seventh had so recently left. A counter-march was ordered. About six miles
from Cross Lanes the regiment was attacked by an overwhelming force, and
after a desperate fight was broken, and compelled to retreat in two
different directions, with a loss of a hundred and twenty men in killed,
wounded, and prisoners. Creighton was among those who escaped.

The scattered companies re-united at Charleston, West Virginia, where they
remained waiting orders, and were in the meantime thoroughly drilled by
Lieutenant Colonel Creighton, who was in fact, if not in title, the
commanding officer of the regiment. An order coming for five hundred
picked men of the regiment to join in the pursuit of Floyd, he was sent in
command of the detachment, was given the advance in the pursuit, and
followed Floyd's trail hotly for several days, marching on foot at the
head of his men. Soon after this Tyler became Brigadier General and
Creighton was made Colonel of his regiment, which was ordered to the East.

At Winchester, Creighton led his regiment, the first in the famous charge
of the Third Brigade, having a horse shot under him, and then fighting on
foot with a musket, among his men, until the time came to assume the
position of commanding officer again. In the march to Fredricksburgh and
the return to the Valley he shared every privation and hardship the men
were obliged to encounter, always refuse to take advantage of his
privileges as an officer. He endeavored to procure every needful comfort
for his men, but when they were barefooted and hungry he shared his
stores with them, and fought and marched on foot with them. At Port
Republic he headed his regiment in five desperate charges, in each of
them driving the enemy. In the battle of Cedar Mountain Creighton handled
his regiment with a dexterity that told fearfully on the ranks of the
enemy. He was finally severely wounded, and compelled to leave the field.
In doing so, he kept his face to the foe, saying that "no rebel ever saw
his back in battle; and never would." He was taken to Washington, where
the bullet was extracted from his side, which was an exceedingly painful
operation. Soon after this he came to his home; but while still carrying
his arm in a sling, he reported to his regiment. While at home the battle
of Antietam was fought, which was the only one in which he failed to
participate. Soon after his return, the affair at Dumfries occurred,
where, through his ingenuity and skill, Hampton's cavalry command was
defeated by a mere handful of men. For this he was publicly thanked by
Generals Slocum and Geary. He took part in the battle of
Chancellorsville, where he won new laurels. It is said that being ordered
by General Hooker to fall back, he refused to do so until able to bring
Knapp's Battery safely to the rear; for which disobedience of orders he
was recommended for promotion. This battery was from his native city, and
in it he had many friends. Next he was at Gettysburg, where he fought
with his accustomed valor. He was also at Lookout Mountain and Mission
Ridge, in "Hooker's battle above the clouds."

After this battle came the pursuit of Bragg, whose rear-guard was
overtaken at Ringgold, Georgia, where it was securely posted on the top of
Taylor's Ridge--a naked eminence. It was madness to undertake to drive
them from this hill, without the use of artillery to cover the assault;
but in the excitement of the moment the order was given. In this assault
Creighton commanded a brigade. Forming his command he made a speech.
"Boys," said he, "we are ordered to take that hill. I want to see you walk
right up it." After this characteristic speech, he led his men up the
hill. It soon became impossible to advance against the terrible fire by
which they were met; he therefore led them into a ravine, but the rebels
poured such a fire into it from all sides, that the command was driven
back. Reaching a fence, Creighton stopped, and facing the foe, waited for
his command to reach the opposite side. While in this position he fell,
pierced through the body with a rifle bullet. His last words were: "Oh,
my dear wife!" and he expired almost immediately. The brigade now fell
rapidly back, carrying the remains of its idolized commander with it.

Lieutenant Colonel Crane fell in the same fight and but just after
Creighton fell.

The bodies were taken to the rear and sent to Cleveland, where they were
given such a reception and funeral as had never been witnessed in
Cleveland before, or after. The whole city was in mourning, and after
lying in state in Council Hall, to be visited by thousands, the mortal
remains of the dead heroes were borne, amid the firing of minute guns, the
tolling of bells, and the solemn dirges of the band, to their last resting
place in Woodland cemetery.

Colonel Creighton was killed on November 27th, 1863, in the
twenty-seventh year of his age.




Lieutenant Colonel Orrin J. Crane.



Orrin J. Crane was born in Troy, New York, in 1829. When he was three
years old his parents removed to Vermont, where his father died soon
after, leaving his wife and children poorly provided for. Young Crane was
taken, whilst still a small boy, by an uncle, and about the year 1852, he
came in charge of his relative to Conneaut, where he worked as a mechanic.
He left Conneaut at one time for the Isthmus of Panama, where he spent a
year, and on returning found work as a ship carpenter in Cleveland, where
he became connected with one of the military organizations of the city.

At the fall of Sumter he entered the service as first-lieutenant in
Captain Creighton's company; and on his promotion, was made captain. He
early devoted himself to the instruction of his company; and it can be
said that it lost nothing of the efficiency it acquired under the
leadership of Creighton.

After the regiment entered the field, his services were invaluable. If a
bridge was to be constructed, or a road repaired, he was sent for to
superintend it. If the commissary department became reduced, he was the
one to procure supplies. No undertaking was too arduous for his iron-will
to brave. All relied on him with the utmost confidence, and no one was
ever disappointed in him.

At the affair at Cross Lanes, where he first came under fire, he behaved
with great valor, and inspired his men with true courage. They stood like
a wall, and fell back only when ordered by their leader, then dashed
through the strong lines of the enemy, and were brought off with safety
out of what was seemingly certain destruction. He kept his men well
together during the long march to Gauley Bridge.

After his arrival at that point he was sent out to the front, up New
River, where he rendered valuable service. He was in every march and
skirmish in both Western and Eastern Virginia, until the battle of
Winchester. In this engagement he showed the same indomitable courage. He
held his men to the work of carnage so fearfully, that the enemy's slain
almost equalled his command.

He shared in every battle in which his regiment was engaged in the East;
Port Republic, Cedar Mountain (where he was slightly wounded), Antietam,
Dumfries, Chancellorsville, and Gettysburg. In all of these he never sent
his men forward; he led them on.

At the battle of Antietam, he commanded the regiment, and during the
latter part of the engagement, a brigade. Before the regiment left for the
West, he was made lieutenant-colonel; a position which his ability and
long, as well as faithful, service of his country rendered him eminently
qualified to fill.

Arriving at the West, he commanded the regiment in the battles of Lookout
Mountain and Mission Ridge, where he added new laurels to his already
imperishable name. At fatal Ringgold, he again commanded the regiment. He
led it up the steep ascent, where the whistling of bullets made the air
musical; and where men dropped so quietly that they were scarcely missed,
except in the thinned ranks of the command. The regiment had not recovered
from the shock produced by the announcement of the death of Creighton,
when Crane himself fell dead at the feet of his comrades, pierced through
the forhead by a rifle bullet. He fell so far in the advance, that his men
were driven back before possessing themselves of his body but it was soon
after recovered, and shared with the remains of Colonel Creighton the
honors of a public funeral.




Other Military Men of Cleveland.



In selecting the five subjects for the foregoing military biographical
sketches it was not intended to single them out as all that were worthy of
mention for their services. There are numerous others deserving a place,
but the materials for full biographical sketches were wanting for most of
them, and it was thought best, therefore, to confine the separate sketches
to those military men who, for one reason or another, have come to be
considered the representative men in the military history of the city. We
add here brief mention of a few others, from such material as is in our
posession, and must then, doubtless, omit many equally worthy a place.

Brevet Brigadier Russell Hastings, though not entering the army from
Cleveland, is now a resident of the city and holds the position of United
States Marshal. He was commissioned Second Lieutenant in the 23rd Ohio
Infantry, commanded at first by Major-General Rosecrans and subsequently
by General Hayes, rose by regular promotion to the Lieutenant-Colonelcy,
and was subsequently made Brevet Brigadier General "for gallant and
meretorious services at the battle of Opequan, Virginia." General Hastings
was permanently disabled by a bullet wound in the leg.

Brevet Brigadier Robert L. Kimberly was on the editorial staff of the
Cleveland Herald when he joined the 41st Ohio Infantry, as Second
Lieutenant under Colonel Hazen, was rapidly promoted to Major, in which
rank he had charge of his regiment during the greater part of the time,
and sometimes acting as brigade commander. He was made Lieutenant Colonel
January 1, 1865, and Colonel of the 191st Ohio Infantry in the succeeding
March. He participated with distinction in several engagements, and for
these services was breveted Brigadier General.

Brigadier General Oliver H. Payne was commissioned Colonel of the 124th
Ohio Infantry January 1, 1863. His regiment was distinguished for its
discipline and for the care taken of the men by Colonel Payne and
Lieutenant Colonel James Pickands, and also for its gallant services under
those leaders. At Chickamauga Colonel Payne was wounded and, being unable
to rejoin his regiment, resigned his position in November, 1864. He was
subsequently breveted Brigadier General for meritorious services.

Among those who distinguished themselves in the service, but who stopped
short of null rank of those mentioned above, may be mentioned Major James
B. Hampson, who commanded the Cleveland Grays in the three years'
organization of the 1st Ohio Infantry, and subsequently was Major of the
124th Ohio. Lieutenant Colonel James T. Sterling, who commenced his
military career as company commander in the 7th Ohio Infantry and
subsequently became Lieutenant Colonel of the 103rd Ohio, from which
position he was appointed null General on the staff of General Cox.
Captain Joseph B. Molyneaux, who served with gallantry in the 7th Ohio
Infantry. Captain Mervin Clark, the fearless "boy officer" of the same
regiment, who braved death on every occasion, and fell, colors in hand,
when leading a forlorn hope over a rebel work at Franklin. Lieutenant
Colonel Frank Lynch, of the 27th Ohio Infantry. Lieutenant Colonel G. S.
Mygatt, of the 41st Ohio Infantry, who died of disease contracted in
serving his country. Major J. H. Williston, of the same regiment. Captains
G. L. Childs, Alfred P. Girty, and G. L. Heaton, of the 67th Ohio Infantry.
Lieutenant Colonel John N. Frazee, of the 84th and 150th Ohio Infantry.
Lieutenant Colonel H. S. Pickands, of the 103rd Ohio Infantry, and Colonel
James Pickands, of the 124th Ohio, who reached their positions by active
service in various ranks throughout the war. Captain Isaac C. Vail, of the
103rd Ohio Infantry, who died in service. Major George Arnold of the 107th
Ohio Infantry, (German,) who fought with great gallantry. Surgeon C. A.
Hartman, whose skill as a surgeon was fully equalled by his valor as a
soldier, and who, unable to content himself as a non-combatant, engaged in
the thickest of the fight at Winchester and was killed in the terrible
slaughter the regiment experienced. Captain Wm. C. Bunts, of the 125th
Ohio Infantry. Lieutenant Colonel E. A. Scovill, of the 128th Ohio
Infantry, rendered important service in charge of the null affairs of the
great prison for the rebels on Johnson's Island. Major Junius R. Sanford
was in service in this regiment. Lieutenant Colonel George L. Hayward, of
the 129th Ohio Infantry, had seen active service as company commander in
the 1st Ohio Infantry. In the Cavalry service Cleveland furnished among
other leading regimental officers Colonel Charles Doubleday, Lieutenant
Colonel G. G. Minor, Major Albert Barnitz, now in the United States
service, Major L. C. Thayer, who died soon after his leaving the service,
and Major J. F. Herrick. To the Artillery service, in addition to General
Barnett and Lieutenant Colonel Hayward, Cleveland contributed Lieutenant
Colonel Walter E. Lawrence, who declined promotion and died deeply
regretted by his comrades in arms and by a host of warm friends at home.
Major Seymour Race, who ably assisted in the organization of the regiment
and left Camp Dennison January 10, 1862, with two batteries and reported
to General Buell at Louisville; had command of the camp at the Fair
Grounds, composed of seven batteries from Ohio, Indiana and Wisconsin;
left Louisville February 10, with three batteries on steamers, and
reported to General Nelson at the mouth of Salt River accompanying him to
Nashville; was Chief of Artillery of General T. J. Wood's Division at
Pittsburgh Landing and the siege of Corinth and continued in that position
in the division through Northern Alabama and back to Louisville;
participated in the battles of Perryville and Stone River; was highly
commended by his Division commander for valuable services in all these
actions; and was also in command of the fortifications at Nashville for
about five months; Major Warren P. Edgerton, Major W. F. Goodspeed,
Assistant Surgeon Charles E. Ames, Captains Wm. A. Standart, Louis
Heckman, Norman A. Baldwin, Joseph C. Shields, Frank Wilson, Louis
Smithnight, William Backus, and a long list of Lieutenants. From the fact
that the Cleveland Light Artillery organization was the origin of the
Light Artillery service of the State, and that the Artillery had long been
popular in the city, the Ohio Light Artillery service in the war was very
largely officered and heavily recruited from Cleveland. In the 5th U. S.
Colored Infantry, officered by white soldiers of Ohio, Gustave W. Fahrion,
who had done good service in an Ohio regiment, was appointed Captain, and
did hard service with his men in Virginia and North Carolina.




Journalism



It would require more space than can be given here to merely enumerate the
different newspaper ventures that have been set afloat in Cleveland, some
to disappear almost as soon as launched, others to buffet the waves for a
few months, or even years, and then to pass away and be forgotten. In the
days when nothing more was required to start a newspaper than a few pounds
of type and a hand press, or credit with the owner of a press, new
journals appeared and disappeared with great rapidity. Even now, when it
is hopeless to think of attempting the establishment of a journal without
first sinking a large capital, there are people venturesome enough to try
the experiment of starting a newspaper upon little or nothing. The end of
such experiments is always the same.

The first newspaper issued in Cleveland was the Cleveland Gazette and
Commercial Register, commenced July 31, 1818. It was ostensibly a weekly
publication, but the difficulty of procuring paper with the desired
regularity, and other untoward circumstances, sometimes caused a lapse of
ten, fourteen, and even more days between each issue. In October, 1819,
the Cleveland Herald was started as a weekly, by Z. Willes & Co.

In the Summer of 1836, the Daily Gazette was issued. This ran until March
22, 1837, when its owner, Charles Whittlesey, united it with the Herald,
under the name of the Daily Herald and Gazette, the new firm being
Whittlesey & Hull, and after a few days Whittlesey & J. A. Harris. The
Gazette title was subsequently dropped, and that of the Herald preserved,
Mr. Harris being the sole proprietor and editor. Messrs. W. J. May, A. W.
Fairbanks, G. A. Benedict and John Coon were at different times added to
the firm, Mr. May and Coon afterwards retiring, and being followed after
some years by Mr. Harris, who was the veteran editor of the city. The
Herald is now the oldest paper in the city, and the oldest daily in
Northern Ohio. It was always Whig or Republican in politics.

The Cleveland Plain Dealer was the natural successor of the Cleveland
Daily Advertiser, a Democratic paper published about a third of a century
since, by Canfield & Spencer. The Plain Dealer was owned and edited from
its start by J. W. Gray, who made it a sharp and spicy journal. His
declining health compelled him to take less interest in his paper, which
soon lost prestige, and having gone into incompetent hands after Mr.
Gray's death, it was before long compelled to suspend. Being purchased,
after a short suspension, by Mr. Armstrong, it was resuscitated, and is at
present, under the ownership and management of Messrs. Armstrong & Green,
a successful enterprise.

The Leader dates its origin on one side to the True Democrat, an
Independent Free Soil paper, dating back over twenty years, and on the
other to the Daily Forest City, a "Silver Gray Whig," started about 1852,
by Joseph and James Medill. After some coquetting an alliance was formed
between the two papers, and the name of Forest City Democrat adopted for
the Consolidated paper which was afterwards changed to the Leader. None of
those connected with either of the original papers are now connected with
the Leader. Of those who became the publishers of the latter paper Mr. E.
Cowles retains his connection and is the largest proprietor.

The German Wachter am Erie completes the list of regular daily papers now
published in Cleveland. The Herald is published morning and evening, there
being two editions of the evening issue. The Leader is issued in the
morning with an evening edition under the name of the News. The Plain
Dealer publishes two editions in the afternoon, and the Wachter am Erie
one afternoon edition.




[Illustration: Yours Truly, A. W. Fairbanks]


A. W. Fairbanks.



A. W. Fairbanks, the senior proprietor of the Cleveland Herald, was born
March 4, 1817, in Cornish, now Claremont, Sullivan county, New Hampshire.
When twelve years old he entered a printing office in Waterford, Saratoga
county, New York, with the purpose of learning the business. In those days
it was held necessary to serve a regular apprenticeship as a preliminary
to becoming a journeyman printer, and the apprentice had to pass through
an ordeal to which the learner of the present day is a total stranger.
There were then no machine presses out of the city of New York, nor
rollers for inking. The types were inked by dabbing with buckskin balls,
as had been done since the invention of printing. Rollers were, however,
introduced within a short time of our young apprentice entering on his
course of education as a printer.

The office in which he worked, owned by a man named Johnson, was for book
and job printing, thus affording the apprentice an opportunity of
acquiring a more extensive and varied knowledge of the business than could
have been acquired in a newspaper office. He had a taste for the life on
which he had entered, and soon made rapid headway in obtaining a knowledge
of the "art preservative of all arts." He remained in the same office
until it was discontinued. He afterwards went to Schenectady, Ballston,
Spa, and Troy, following the fortunes of the man he was apprenticed to,
before finishing his trade. His first situation, as a journeyman, was in
Rochester, New York.

In 1836, he removed from Rochester to Michigan, then a territory, and
assumed charge of the job department of the Detroit Advertiser. In this
position he remained for a year, when he was induced to remove to Toledo.

Some time previously an attempt had been made to establish the Toledo
Blade as a newspaper. The town was young, and though giving promise of
vigorous growth, was yet unable to make such a newspaper enterprise an
assured success. About fifty numbers were issued, under several
ownerships, and then the enterprise sank, apparently to rise no more. Mr.
Fairbanks saw his opportunity and availed himself of it. Possessing
himself of what remained of the Blade establishment, he announced its
revival, got up and got out the first number himself, working it off on a
hand press, and announced to the public that the Blade had this time "come
to stay." In spite of difficulties and discouragements he persisted in the
work he had undertaken, and in a short time had secured for the paper a
good circulation. There was in the office scarcely enough type to get out
a single issue; there was no imposing stone on which to make up the forms,
and but one press to do all the work of the office. Mr. Fairbanks worked
diligently with brain and hands, wrote matter for the Blade, managed its
mechanical details, and at the same time spent time, labor, and money in
enlarging the capabilities of the office and building up a valuable
job-printing business. In fourteen years he built up out of nothing, or
next to nothing, a newspaper with a profitable circulation and a wide
reputation, a job office admitted to be one of the most complete in the
State, having five presses and material abundant in quantity and
unsurpassed in quality. The office had made money every year since his
connection with it, except in 1840, when he gave all his labor to the
Harrison campaign.

In 1850, Mr. Fairbanks left Toledo for Cleveland, and became connected
with the Cleveland Herald, then edited by J. A. Harris and W. J. May. He
found the establishment without a press, the newspaper being printed on
the press of M. C. Younglove, under a contract, giving him twelve and a
half cents per token, Mr. Younglove having the only steam press in the
city. Land was purchased on Bank street and the present Herald building
erected. The entire book and job office of Mr. Younglove was purchased, a
Hoe cylinder press for working the Herald purchased, and the establishment
placed on a footing for doing a greatly enlarged and constantly increasing
business. Additional and improved facilities were furnished yearly, to
keep pace with the rapidly increasing demands, the single cylinder
newspaper press was changed for a double cylinder, and that had been
running but a short time when it proved insufficient for the rapid
increase of circulation, and its place was taken by a four cylinder, which
remains the only press of the kind in Ohio outside of Cincinnati, and
which is capable of running off ten thousand impressions per hour. From a
small part of the building this establishment grew until it crowded out
all other occupants; then the building itself was altered so as to
economise room, and finally additions made, doubling its size, the whole
of the space being immediately filled with material, presses and machinery
containing the latest improvements. From an entire valuation of six
thousand dollars the establishment has reached an inventory value of about
a hundred and fifty thousand dollars; and from a newspaper without a press
it has grown to an office with ten steam presses, a mammoth four-cylinder,
and a large building crowded full with the best machinery and material
required in a first-class printing office, giving employment to
ninety-five men, women and boys, and sending out the Morning Herald and
two regular editions of the Daily Herald, every day, except Sunday,
besides a Tri-Weekly Herald and Weekly Herald.

The entire mechanical details of the establishment have, from his first
connection with the office, been under the control of Mr. Fairbanks, and
he feels a just pride in the perfection to which these details have been
brought. His heart is in his profession, and it is his constant study. No
improvement in it escapes his observation, and he is ever on the alert to
avail himself of everything promising to increase the efficiency of his
establishment. It is a noticeable fact, that the Herald has never missed a
daily issue, although at times during the war the scarcity of paper was so
great that the issue of the Morning Herald, then but a recent venture, had
to be suspended for a day or two.

The firm, which, when Mr. Fairbanks became connected with it, was Harris,
Fairbanks & Co., is now Fairbanks, Benedict & Co., Mr. Fairbanks being the
only member of the original firm yet connected with the concern.




J. W. Gray.



J. W. Gray was born in the village of Bradport, Addison county, Vermont,
on the 5th of August, 1813. When only two years of age his parents removed
to Madrid, St. Lawrence county, New York, where his early life was passed,
receiving such meagre education as those early days afforded, during the
Winter months, to farmer lads. He afterwards became a pupil in the
Institutes at Potsdam and Governeur, founded by the New York State
Association for Teachers, where he made rapid progress, his mind,
naturally fond of study grasping knowledge intuitively. His scholastic
career terminated here, the pecuniary means being wanting to enable him to
prosecute a collegiate course, and he was soon after launched upon the
world to carve, with nothing but his own right arm and resolute will, the
future high public and social position he subsequently attained.

In 1836, he came to Cleveland, then, though recently incorporated as a
city, in reality but a flourishing village, and was soon engaged as a
teacher in one of the public schools, the old Academy, on St. Clair
street, being the scene of his first labors. He continued here but two or
three terms, when a more advantageous position was offered him as
instructor of a district school in Geauga county, to which he repaired and
where he continued about a year. On his return to the city, having fitted
himself in part previously, he entered the null of Hon. H. B. Payne and
U. S. Judge Willson, who were then associated under the law firm of Payne &
Willson, and after a little over a year under their preceptorship, during
which time his remarkable talents attracted the attention of many, he was
admitted to the bar, and almost immediately after receiving his diploma
commenced the practice of his profession. He soon formed a law connection
which led him to the State of Michigan, where, however he remained but a
short time.

On January 1st, 1842, in connection with his brother, A. N. Gray, he
purchased the Cleveland Advertiser, which he converted into the Cleveland
Plain Dealer.

In July, 1845, the firm of A. N. & J. W. Gray was dissolved, the latter
becoming sole proprietor and editor. The bold, poignant and dashing
talents he brought to bear, soon made the Plain Dealer widely known as a
political journal and placed its editor among the foremost men of his
party in the State. In 1853, he received the appointment of post master of
Cleveland from President Pierce, which position he continued to hold till
the Summer of 1858, when, owing to his refusal to advocate the infamous
Lecompton constitution of Mr. Buchanan, he was beheaded with the scores of
other martyrs who remained true to Senator Douglas and the constitutional
rights and liberties of the people.

In 1858, he received the Democratic nomination for Congress against Hon.
B. F. Wade, his successful competitor. In 1860, he was chosen, with Hon.
H. B. Payne, delegate from this district to the Charleston-Baltimore
convention where he labored with untiring devotion for the nomination of
Judge Douglas. When the revolt was raised by the traitorous South, he
rallied at once to the support of the constitution and Union, and,
following the example of Douglas buried the partizan in the noble struggle
of the patriot for the preservation of the liberties of the country.

Of the Silas Wright school of politics, he labored during his editorial
career of over twenty years, for his cherished principles. The friend of
Mr. Pierce, he was the beloved and confidential exponent of the great
Douglas. No man possessed the friendship and esteem of the Illinois
statesman in a larger degree than did Mr. Gray. The Plain Dealer was Mr.
Douglas' recognized organ--more so than any other paper published in the
country, and the close intimacy which existed between them was never
interrupted, and continued to the hour of that statesman's death.

Mr. Gray died May 26, 1862. He had been feeble for a few days previously,
and for a day or two before his death had not left the house, yet nothing
serious was apprehended by his family or physicians, and though the nature
of his illness was such as to have long made him an invalid, the hope was
firmly entertained that he would regain his general health. On the morning
of the day of his death, however, paralysis seized his heart and lungs,
soon depriving him of speech, and under which he rapidly, but gently, sank
away and died at fifteen minutes past two of the same day.

His life affords another example to the rising young men of the day, of
the power of will to triumph over all obstacles, when to indefatigable
industry are added those exemplary virtues, strict integrity and
temperance.




George A. Benedict.



George A. Benedict, of the printing and publishing firm of Fairbanks,
Benedict & Co., and editor-in-chief of the Cleveland Herald, is a native
of Jefferson county, New York, having been born in Watertown, August 5,
1813. Mr. Benedict was well educated and in due course entered Yale
College, from which he has received the degree of A. B.

When eighteen years old he commenced the study of law with Judge Robert
Lansing, in Watertown, finishing his legal education in the office of
Sterling & Bronson. He was admitted to practice in New York, and
immediately thereafter, in 1835, removed to Ohio, taking up his residence
in Cleveland. Here he entered the office of Andrews & Foot and
subsequently of that of John W. Allen, being admitted to practice in the
Ohio Courts in the year 1836.

As soon as admitted to the Ohio Bar a partnership was formed with John
Erwin, under the name of Erwin & Benedict; this arrangement continued
three years. On its dissolution Mr. Benedict formed a partnership with
James K. Hitchcock, the firm of Benedict & Hitchcock continuing until
1848, when Mr. Benedict was appointed Clerk of the Superior Court, Judge
Andrews being the Judge. With the adoption of the new constitution of the
State this court became extinct.

Immediately after the termination of his duties as Clerk of the Superior
Court, Mr. Benedict purchased an interest in the Herald establishment,
and became co-partner with Messrs. J. A. Harris and A. W. Fairbanks. The
subsequent retirement of Mr. Harris from editorial life left Mr.
Benedict as editor-in-chief of that paper, a position he has from that
time retained.

In 1843, Mr. Benedict was a member of the City Council, and president
of that body. For one term previous to that time Mr. Benedict was
city attorney.

In August, 1865, Postmaster General Dennison, of Ohio, tendered to Mr.
Benedict the office of Postmaster of Cleveland. The appointment was
accepted, and at this writing, 1869, he still holds the office.

Mr. Benedict is impulsive in temperament, but his impulses are more of a
friendly than unkindly character. He is warm-hearted, quick to forgive a
wrong atoned for, and still quicker to apologize for and atone an injury
done to others. In nearly a score of years editing a newspaper he has
never intentionally done injustice to any man, no matter what
differences of opinion might exist, and has never knowingly allowed the
columns of his newspaper to be the vehicle of private spite. Nor has he
ever refused any one, fancying himself aggrieved, the privilege of
setting himself right in a proper manner in the same columns in which
the alleged injury was inflicted. He has the genuine and unforced
respect and esteem of those employed by him, for his treatment of them
has always been kind and considerate, and although no newspaper
conductor can possibly avoid creating prejudice and temporary
ill-feeling. Mr. Benedict has probably no real enemy, whilst among those
who best know him he has none but warm friends.

In addition to his editorial abilities, Mr. Benedict is one of the few
really good writers of an occasional newspaper letter, and in his
journeyings from home his letters to the Herald are looked for with
interest and read with keen relish.

Mr. Benedict was married June, 1839, to Miss Sarah R. Rathbone, of
Brownsville, Jefferson county, New York, and has three children, the
oldest, George S. Benedict, being one of the proprietors and in the active
business management of the Herald.




[Illustration: Yours Truly, J. H. A. Bone]


J. H. A. Bone



John H. A. Bone is a native of Cornwall, England, having been born in
that county October 31, 1830. He received a good education, being first
intended for the army, but an accident having permanently crippled his
right arm, that purpose had to be abandoned. He resided awhile in London
and Liverpool, during which time he was connected with the press of
those cities, and contributed to periodicals. Having married in his
native place, he left England in the Autumn of 1851, for the United
States, and after a brief stay in New York, arrived in Cleveland in
October of that year.

Early in the Spring of 1857, he joined the editorial staff of the
Cleveland Herald, to the columns of which he had for some years previous
been a frequent contributor. At the same time he had contributed to the
pages of the Knickerbocker Magazine, Godey, Peterson's, the Boston Carpet
Bag, then conducted by B. P. Shillaber ("Mrs. Partington,") and G. C.
Halpine ("Miles O'Reilly,") and other literary papers of Boston, New York
and Philadelphia, as well as to a Cleveland magazine, the New American
Monthly, and was a regular contributor to the Cincinnati Pen and Pencil, a
handsome weekly magazine of more than ordinary merit that was run for some
time under the editorship of W. W. Warden.

Mr. Bone, on joining the Herald, took charge of its commercial, local,
amusements and literary departments. As the business of the paper
increased he resigned those departments, one after another, to others, and
on the retirement of Mr. Harris, transferred his labors to the leading
editorial department, retaining charge of the literary department also.

In addition to his daily duties on the Herald, Mr. Bone has found time to
furnish papers to the Atlantic Monthly on matters of scholarly interest
and historical importance, has for the past three years been on the
regular staff of Our Young Folks, contributing to it a number of
historical articles, prepared with much care and research, and is an
occasional contributor to other periodicals.

Mr. Bone published, about sixteen years ago, a small volume of poems,
mostly written in boyhood. His after verses, of various characters, are
scattered through newspapers and magazines and have never been collected.
With the exception of a few political squibs, he has for some years
abandoned verse. A work on the oil regions was issued in 1864, and a
second, enlarged edition, was published in Philadelphia, in 1865.

Aside from his professional duties as a journalist and the fulfilment of
his engagements as a magazine writer, Mr. Bone's literary tastes are
chiefly with the older works of English literature. He is a close student
of what is known as Early English, delighting in his intervals of leisure
to pick from the quaint and curious relics of the earliest English
literature bits of evidence that serve to throw some light on the actual
social and intellectual condition of our English ancestors four or five
centuries ago. He has been for years, and still is, connected with English
literary societies for the bringing to light and publishing for the use of
the members, unpublished documents of historical and literary value. Of
what is know as Elizabethean literature he has been a diligent student. At
present he is connected with the management of the Cleveland Library
Association and Western Reserve Historical Society.




William W. Armstrong.



William W. Armstrong, one of the present proprietors of the Cleveland
Plain Dealer, is a native Buckeye, having been born in New Lisbon,
Columbiana county, Ohio, in 1833. In his fifteenth year he removed to
Tiffin, Seneca county, with the purpose of learning the printing business.
In 1852-3, he was appointed to the position of Registrar of the Bank
Department in the State Treasurer's office at Columbus. In 1854, he
returned to Tiffin and purchased the Seneca County Advertiser, which he
made noticeable among the Democratic papers of the State for its vigor and
ability. He was recognized among the Democrats of the State as one of
their rising men, and in 1862, he was chosen as the Democratic candidate
for Secretary of State, and was elected.

In 1865, having completed his term of office and returned to editorial
life, he purchased the material and good will of the Plain Dealer, which
had suspended publication, and set about bringing it back to its old
prosperity and position among the journals of the State. His efforts were
crowned with success. The reputation of the paper for boldness and
ability, which had been affected by the death of its founder, was
restored, and the business knowledge and tact which Mr. Armstrong brought
to bear upon its management before long put its affairs in a healthy state
and established the journal on a good paying basis. Although a strong
partisan in politics, Mr. Armstrong recognizes the importance of fairness
and courtesy, and hence he has the personal good will of his professional
and business rivals as well as associates.

In 1868, Mr. Armstrong was elected delegate at large to the Democratic
National Convention which nominated Horatio Seymour for the Presidency.




Frederick W. Green.



Frederick W. Green, the associate of Mr. Armstrong in the proprietorship
and editorship of the Plain Dealer, was born in Fredericktown, Frederick
county, Maryland, in 1816. In 1833, he removed to Tiffin, Seneca county,
Ohio. Becoming identified with the Democratic party he was elected by that
party Auditor of Seneca county, and retained that position six years. In
1851, he was elected to Congress from the Seneca district, and in 1853,
was re-elected. At the close of his term he was appointed Clerk of the
newly organized United States District Court for the Northern District of
Ohio. In this position he remained twelve years.

In 1867, he purchased an interest in the Plain Dealer, and at once entered
upon editorial duties on that paper in connection with Mr. Armstrong.
Their joint labors have made the paper the Democratic organ of Northern
Ohio. Mr. Green, during his fourteen years residence in Cleveland, has
been reckoned among its most respectable citizens, and possesses many warm
friends irrespective of political differences of opinion.




Index.



Historical and Statistical.


History of Cleveland
Trade and Commerce
Ship Building
The Bench and Bar
Educational
Railroading
The Coal Interest
Religious
Medical
Manufacturing
Telegraphy
City Improvements
Military
Journalism



Biographical Sketches.


Those marked with an asterisk (*) are illustrated with portraits.


*Aiken, S. C.
 Adams, S. W.
*Allen, J. W.
*Andrews, S. J.
*Abbey, G. N.
 Alcott, Leverett.
 Armstrong. W. W.
 Blair, John.
 Barnett, Melancthon.
 Baldwin, Dudley.
 Baldwin, Norman C.
*Bradburn, Charles.
 Beardsley, D. H.
*Bradley, Alva.
 Barr, John.
 Bingham, Wm.
 Beckwith, T. S.
*Baldwin, E. I.
 Brayton, H. F.
*Bolton, Thomas.
 Backus, F. T.
*Bishop, J. P.
*Beckwith, D. H.
*Bousfield, John.
*Buhrer, S.
 Barnett, James.
 Benedict, G. A.
*Bone, J. H. A.
 Cutter, Orlando.
*Chapin, H. M.
*Crittenden, N. E.
*Cooke, W. P.
 Cobb. J. B.
 Colwell, A. G.
*Cannon, A. V.
 Childs, O. A.
 Coe, S. S.
 Coe, C. W.
*Case, Leonard.
*Coffinberry, J. M.
*Collins, W.
*Case, William.
*Crawford, L.
 Cross, D. W.
 Cassels, J. L.
 Castle, W. B.
*Chisholm. H.
*Clark, M. B.
 Creighton, W. R.
*Dangler, David A.
*Dodge, H. H.
 Dickman, F. J.
 Delamater, John
 Edwards, Wm.
*Ely, George B.
 Errett, Isaac
*Freese, Andrew
*Farmer, James
*Fairbanks, A. W.
 Garretson, Hiram
 Gordon, W. J.
*Goodrich, W. H.
*Garlick, Theodatus
 Green, F. W.
 Hilliard, Richard
 Hickox, Charles
*Handy, T. P.
 Hanna, Robert
 Hurlbut, H. B.
*Hoyt, J. M.
*Humiston, R. F.
*Hart, William
*Hussey, J. G.
 Haldeman. L.
 Hayward, W. H.
*Johnson, Levi
*Jenness, B. W.
*Johnson, S. W.
*Jones, James M.
*Kelley, Alfred
*Kelly, Moses
*Kirtland, J. P.
 Lyon, Richard T.
 Lester, S. F.
 Long, David
 Lowman, Jacob
 Merwin, Noble H.
*Mygatt, George
 Morgan, E. P.
*McDermott, James
*Martin, John
*Morris, David
*Myers, R. P.
 McNairy, A. C.
 Morley, J. H.
*Newberry, J. S.
 Otis, William A.
 Otis, W. S. C.
 Other Military Men
 Perkins, Joseph
*Peck, E. M.
*Palmer, C. W.
*Perkins, Jacob
 Philpot, William
*Price, W. I.
*Quayle, Thomas
*Robison, J. P.
 Raymond, S.
 Redington, J. A.
 Ranney, R. P.
*Rice, Harvey
*Rhodes, D. P.
 Rouse, Benjamin
 Rockefeller, J. D.
 Scovill, Philo
 Scranton, Joel
*Sheldon, S. H.
 Sackett, Alexander
 Scott, M. B.
*Sims, Elias
 Severance, J. L.
*Sanford, D.
 Strong, S. M.
 Starkweather, Samuel
*Sherman, C. T.
*Spalding, R. P.
*Smyth, Anson
*Stone, Amasa, Jr.
*Streator, W. S.
*Seelye, T. T.
*Stone, A. B.
*Scofield, W. C.
*Stager, Anson
*Stevens, H. S.
 Scowden, T. R.
*Sargent, J. H.
 Townsend, Amos
 Tilden, D. R.
 Thome, J. A.
*Thatcher, Peter
 Weddell, P. M.
 Winslow, Richard
 White, Moses
 Walton, T. A.
*Worthington, George
 Wick, Henry
 Warner, J. F.
 Wood, Reuben
 Willey, John W.
*Willson, H. V.
*Witt, Stillman
 Woolson, C. J.
 Westlake, G.
*Wilson, W. G.
*Wade, J. H.
*Whittlesey, C.
 Younglove, M. C.











End of Project Gutenberg's Cleveland Past and Present, by Maurice Joblin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLEVELAND PAST AND PRESENT ***

***** This file should be named 9328-8.txt or 9328-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/3/2/9328/

Produced by Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
