The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punchinello, Vol. 1, Issue 10, Saturday,
June 4, 1870, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Punchinello, Vol. 1, Issue 10, Saturday, June 4, 1870

Author: Various

Posting Date: January 18, 2013 [EBook #9544]
Release Date: December, 2005
First Posted: October 7, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCHINELLO, JUNE 4, 1870 ***




Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Sandra Brown, and Project
Gutenberg Distributed Proofreaders from material generously
made available by Cornell University











PUNCHINELLO, Vol. I, Issue 10

SATURDAY, JUNE 4, 1870.

PUBLISHED BY THE

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY,

83 NASSAU STREET, NEW-YORK.





[Illustration: Vol. I. No. 10.]






CONANT'S

_PATENT BINDERS_

FOR

"PUNCHINELLO,"

to preserve the paper for binding, will be sent, post-paid, on receipt
of One Dollar, by

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,

83 Nassau Street, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO NEWS-DEALERS.

PUNCHINELLO'S MONTHLY.

THE FIVE NUMBERS FOR APRIL,

Bound in a Handsome Cover,

IS NOW READY. Price, Fifty Cents.

THE TRADE

SUPPLIED BY THE

AMERICAN NEWS COMPANY,

Who are now prepared to receive Orders.

       *       *       *       *       *

HARRISON BRADFORD & CO.'S

STEEL PENS.

These pens are of a finer quality, more durable, and cheaper
than any other Pen in the market. Special attention is called
to the following grades, as being better suited for business purposes
than any Pen manufactured. The

"505," "22," and the "Anti-Corrosive,"

We recommend for bank and office use.

D. APPLETON & CO.,

_Sole Agents for United States_.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: See 15th page for Extra Premiums.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_Will Shortly appear: Our New Serial, written expressly for
Punchinello,
by ORPHEUS C. KERR, Entitled, "The Mystery of Mr. E. Drood." To be
continued weekly during this year._


APPLICATIONS FOR ADVERTISING IN

"PUNCHINELLO"

Should be addressed to

J. NICKINSON,

Room No. 4,

83 NASSAU STREET.

       *       *       *       *       *

Notice to Ladies.

DIBBLEE,

Of 854 Broadway,

Has just received a large assortment of all the latest styles of

Chignons, Chatelaines, etc.

FROM PARIS.

Comprising the following beautiful varieties:

La Coquette, La Plenitude, Le Bouquet,

La Sirene, L'Imperatrice etc.,

At prices varying from $2 upward.

       *       *       *       *       *

PHELAN & COLLENDER,

MANUFACTURERS OF

Standard American Billiard Tables.

WAREROOMS AND OFFICE,

738 BROADWAY, NEW-YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW-YORK CITIZEN

AND

ROUND TABLE,

A Literary, Political, and Sporting paper, with

the best writers in each department. Published every Saturday.

PRICE--Ten Cents.

32 Beckman Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: [Hercules with club and Apple of the Hesperides]
COPYRIGHT SECURED.]

HERCULES MUTUAL
LIFE ASSURANCE
SOCIETY
OF THE UNITED STATES.

No. 240 Broadway, New-York.

POLICIES NON-FORFEITABLE.

All Policies

Entitled to Participation in Profits.

Dividends Declared Annually.


JAMES D. REYMERT, President.

ASHER S. MILLS,
Secretary.

THOMAS H. WHITE, M.D.,
Medical Examiner.

ACTIVE AGENTS WANTED.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE
MERCHANTS
Life Insurance Company
OF NEW-YORK.

OFFICE, 257 BROADWAY,

ORGANIZED UNDER THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW-YORK.

Issues all kinds of Life and Endowment Policies on the Mutual System, free
from restriction on travel and occupation, which permit residence
anywhere without extra charge.

Premiums may be paid annually, semi-annually, or quarterly in cash.

All Policies are non-forfeitable, and participate in the profits of the
Company.

Dividends are made annually, on the Contribution plan.

Pamphlets containing Rates of Premium, and information on the subject of
Life Insurance, may be obtained at the office of the Company, or any of
its Agents.

Parties desiring to represent this Company in the capacity of Agents
will please address the New-York Office.


WILLIAM T. PHIPPS

_President_.

A.D. HOLLY, _Secretary_.

HENRY HILTON, _Counsel_.

O.S. PAINE, M. D. _Medical Examiner_

C.H. KING, M.D. _Asst. Med Ex._


_Each Agent in direct communication with the New-York Office._

       *       *       *       *       *

Mercantile Library

Clinton Hall, Astor Place,

NEW-YORK.


This is now the largest circulating Library in America, the number of
volumes on its shelves being 114,000. About 1000 volumes are added each
month; and very large purchases are made of all new and popular works.

Books are delivered at members' residences for five cents each delivery.


TERMS OF MEMBERSHIP:

TO CLERKS,

$1 Initiation, $3 Annual Dues.

TO OTHERS, $5 a year.

SUBSCRIPTIONS TAKEN FOR

SIX MONTHS.


BRANCH OFFICES

AT

NO. 76 CEDAR STREET, NEW-YORK,

AND AT

Yonkers, Norwalk, Stamford, and Elizabeth.

       *       *       *       *       *

AMERICAN

BUTTONHOLE, OVERSEAMING,

AND

SEWING-MACHINE CO.,

572 and 574 Broadway, New-York.


This great combination machine is the last and greatest improvement on
all the former machines, making, in addition to all work done on best
Lock-Stitch machines, beautiful

BUTTON AND EYELET HOLES,

in all fabrics.

Machine, with finely finished

OILED WALNUT TABLE AND COVER

complete, $75. Same machine, without the buttonhole parts, $50. This last
is beyond all question the simplest, easiest to manage and to keep in
order, of any machine in the market. Machines warranted, and full
instruction given to purchasers.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: HENRY SPEAR. PRINTER-LITHOGRAPHER STATIONER
BLANK BOOK MANUFACTURER.  82 WALL ST. NEW YORK.]

       *       *       *       *       *

J. NICKINSON

begs to announce to the friends of

"PUNCHINELLO"

residing in the country, that, for their convenience, he has
Made arrangements by which, on receipt of the price of

ANY STANDARD BOOK PUBLISHED.

the same will be forwarded, postage paid.

Parties desiring Catalogues of any of our Publishing Houses
can have the same forwarded by inclosing two stamps.

OFFICE OF

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.

83 Nassau Street,

[P.O. Box 2783.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[ILLUSTRATION: WHAT WE MAY CONFIDENTLY LOOK FOR.

_Jurywoman_. "I BEG TO INTERRUPT THE COURT WITH THE REQUEST THAT, BEFORE
THE CASE PROCEEDS ANY FURTHER, THE SHERIFF BE DIRECTED TO PROVIDE THE
JURYMAN ON MY RIGHT WITH A BOTTLE OF LURIN'S EXTRACT, OTHERWISE THE
FEMALE MEMBERS OF THE JURY WILL NOT BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
CONSEQUENCES," etc., etc.]

       *       *       *       *       *

A CONSISTENT LEAGUE.

Immediately upon McFarland's acquittal, the Union League of Philadelphia
determined to give a grand ball. And they did it. And, what is more,
they intend to do it every time the majesty of any kind of Union is
vindicated. Except, of course, the union of the "Iron interest" and the
public good.

One of the most valuable and instructive features of this ball was, the
grand opportunity it offered to the members of the League to show their
respect and affection for the spirit of the Fifteenth Amendment,
Accordingly, they invited a large number of colored ladies and
gentlemen, and the accursed spirit of caste was completely exorcised by
the exercises of the evening. The halls were grandly decorated with
blackberry and gooseberry bushes, and other rare plants; sumptuous
fountains squirted high great streams of XX ale and gin-and-milk;
enormous piles of panned oysters, lobster salad, Charlotte Russe, and
rice-pudding blocked up half the doorways, while within the dancing hall
the merriment was kept up grandly. The ball was opened by a grand
Cross-match waltz in which Hon. MORTON MCMICHAEL and Mrs. DINAH J--N;
GEORGE H. BOKER and Miss CHLOE P--T--N; WILLIAM D. KELLEY and Aunty Di.
LU-V-I-A-N; A. BORIE and Miss E. G--N; Gen. TYNDALE and Miss MAY OR--TY,
and several other distinguished couples twirled their fantastic toes in
the most reckless _abandon_. Virginia reels, Ole Kentucky break-downs,
and other characteristic dances diversified the ordinary Terpsichorean
programme, and the dancing was kept up to a late hour. It was truly
gratifying to every consistent supporter of the enfranchisement of the
African race, to see such gentlemen as _Senator_ REVELS, FREDERICK
DOUGLASS, Mr. PURVIS, and other prominent colored citizens, in the halls
of this patriotic and thoroughly American Society. The members of the
League were evidently of the opinion that it would be a most flagrant
shame, on an occasion of this kind, for them to deny to their colored
fellow citizens the rights and privileges that they are so anxious shall
be accorded them by every one else; and, while they do not believe that
they are bound to invite any one--black or white--to their private
reunions on account of political considerations, they do not attempt to
deny that, on an occasion of this kind--a celebration in fact of the
success of a political party--it would be most shameful to ostracize the
very citizens for whom that party labored and conquered. Therefore it
was that they so warmly welcomed, within their gorgeous halls, their
colored fellow-citizens, and by so doing won for themselves the
approbation of every consistent American. It was one of the most
affecting sights of the evening to see these gentlemen of the League,
nobly trampling under their feet all base considerations of color and
caste, and walking arm and arm with their colored sisters; smelling the
exotics; admiring the groups of statuary; sipping the coffee and the
punch; pricing the crimson curtains; inhaling the perfumes from the
cologne-water fountains; ascending and descending the grand walnut
staircase (arranged for this occasion only); listening to the birds in
the conservatories; and fixing their hair in the magnificent
dressing-rooms. When, in the midst of the festivities the band struck up
the beautiful air, "Ask me no more!" the honored guests of color looked
at each other with pleasant smiles which seemed to denote a perfect
satisfaction. And so, whatever may be said of the friends of the colored
race in other parts of the country, it must be universally admitted that
the Union League of Philadelphia has done its duty!

       *       *       *       *       *

Good Reading for Topers.

MR. GREELEY's "Recollections of a Boozy Life."

       *       *       *       *       *

Sporting Intelligence.

A NEWSPAPER item says that "a Mexican offers to shoot JUAREZ for $200."

That's nothing. TAYLOR, of Jersey City, offers to shoot any man in the
world for $2000.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Favorite Drink of the Canadian Government.

CABINET Whiskey.

       *       *       *       *       *

Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1870, by the
PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY, in the Clerk's Office of the District
Court of the United States, for the Southern District of New-York.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PUNCHINELLO CORRESPONDENCE.]

The public still labor under misapprehensions of our character and
calling. We are in daily receipt of letters of the most heterogeneous
description, the task of answering which we are compelled to utterly
forego.

We subjoin a few specimens:

"MR. PUNCHINELLO. _Dear Sir_: My wife died yesterday, and would you be
so kind as to come and make her will? I would not give you the trouble
of coming, but the young woman I intend to marry next is going away
to-morrow, and I don't want to leave home. My wife had five hundred
dollars which I want left to me, and a feather bed, which you may divide
amongst the children.

"Yours in affliction,

"SOLOMON SNIPP."


"SIR: I calculate to give a funeral down at my place shortly, that is,
if things go right; but we have no preacher to do the work. Would you
please to send us one? Not particular what kind, so long as the work is
_sure_. Party is not dead yet, but I make arrangements beforehand as I
expect to be insane. Good pay for good work.

"Sincerely,

"P. MCFINIGAN.

"P. S. Do preachers warrant their burials?"


"DEAR MR. PUNCHINELLO:--You were so good as to prescribe a hot pitch
plaster for the baby's mouth. Next day I took the prescription to your
office, but failed to get it made up, as the devil, they told me, was
busy. Will you please inform me when you will be at leisure? Meanwhile
baby yells.

"Yours truly,

"C. PUGSBY.

"P.S. _Later_. Mrs. PUGSBY says if I apply that plaster she will go
insane. True, she does not understand fire-arms, but then I should be
afraid to drink any coffee for a month. In the meantime, if the baby
keeps on, I shall go crazy myself; so there is likely to be a casualty
somewhere. What's to be done? Shall I bring the child to you?

"C. P."


_Answer_. At your peril. Go crazy and shoot it; then we will go crazy
and turn counsel for the defence. The result will probably be that you
are handed over to the ladies to be kissed into reason; but if you would
rather be hung, you must do the shooting over in New-Jersey.

       *       *       *       *       *

"BEAUTIFUL SNOW."

Circumstances having rendered it probable that the dispute respecting
the authorship of the poem "Beautiful Snow" may shortly be revived,
PUNCHINELLO takes this opportunity of setting the public right on the
subject, and silencing further controversy regarding it for ever.

It is the production of Mr. PUNCHINELLO, himself; was composed by him so
long ago as July, 1780, and copyrighted in August of the same year. It
may be asked how the idea of snow-flakes happened to occur to him in
July. That question is easily settled. The day was sultry; thermometer
98 deg. in the arbor. Drowsed by the sultry air--not to mention the iced
claret--Mr. PUNCHINELLO posed himself gracefully upon a rustic bench,
and slept. Presently the lovely lady who was fanning him, fascinated by
the trumpet tones that preceded from his nose, exclaimed: "Beautiful
Snore!" This was repeated to him when he awoke, and hence the origin of
the poem.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fish Culture.

The Grand Duke ALEXIS, of Russia, proposes to come to these shores and
inspect the American system of fish culture. With this end in view, he
will, of course, be the particular guest of Gen. GRANT, and will, no
doubt, be surprised to find that our principal FISH is a cultivated man.
But he will better understand our FISH system by witnessing its
operations in Spanish and Canadian waters, as also in those of Sault St.
Marie.

       *       *       *       *       *

Linsey-Woolsey.

The regular troops for the Canadian Red River Expedition have been
supplied by Gen. LINDSEY, and are commanded by Col. WOLSLEY--a fact
oddly co-incidental with the reported flimsy character of the
expedition, so far as it has gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: TOO TRUE! Scene-Academy. Time-Spring of 70. Miss Smith.
"WHAT DOES 'N.A.' MEAN AFTER SOME OF THESE ARTISTS' NAMES?" Miss Brown.
"N.A. WHY IT MUST MEAN 'NEEDY ARTISTS.' POOR FELLOWS!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

Bivalvulor Intelligence.

It is stated that the clams along the Stratford shore are dying by
thousands of a malignant disease, which a correspondent of the
Bridgeport _Standard_ calls "clam cholera." This is a sad c'lamity for
the people of the Stratford shore.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Fifteenth Amendment.

The appointment of colored postmasters in Maryland may be all very well;
but PUNCHINELLO would like to know whether the Post-office authorities
intend to revive the custom of Blackmailing.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PLAYS AND SHOWS.

[Illustration: C]

Comedy personified, in Mr. CLARKE, has now reigned at BOOTH'S for nearly
six weeks. During that time there has been a perceptible change in the
metaphorical atmosphere of the house. The audience no longer wears the
look of subdued melancholy which was once involuntarily assumed by each
mourner for the memory of SHAKSPEARE, who passed the solemn threshold.
The ushers no longer find it necessary to sustain their depressed
spirits by the surreptitious chewing of the quid of consolation, and are
now the most pleasant, as they were always the most courteous, of their
kind. Persons have even been heard, within the past week, to allude to
BOOTH'S as a "theatre," instead of a "temple of art;" and though the
convulsions of nature which attend the shifting of the scenery, and
cause castles to be violently thrown up by volcanic eruptions and
forests to be suddenly swallowed by gaping earthquakes, impart a certain
solemnity to the brightest of comedies, still there is a general
impression among the audience that BOOTH'S has become a place of
amusement. And in noting this change PUNCHINELLO does not mean to jeer
at the former and normal character of BOOTH'S. BEETHOVEN'S Seventh
Symphony, DANTE'S Inferno, JEFFERSON'S Rip Van Winkle, and EDWIN BOOTH'S
Hamlet are not amusing, but it does not follow that they are therefore
unworthy of the attention of the public, which is pleased with the
rattle of De Boots, and tickled with the straw of Toodles.

FOX vs. GOOSE is a three act comedy in which Mr. CLARKE last week made
his audience laugh as freely as though the tomb-stones of all the
Capulets were not gleaming white and awful in the lamplight of the
property-room; or, at all events, would be gleaming if any body were to
hunt them up with a practicable lantern. The opening scene is the
tap-room of an inn, where Mr. FOX FOWLER, an adventurer, is taking his
ease and his unpaid-for gin-and-milk.

_Enter Landlord, presenting his bill_. "Here, sir, you've been drinking
my beer for several years, and now I want you to pay for it."

_Fox_. "My friend! why ask me to pay bills? Do you not perceive that I
wear a velvet coat? And, besides, even if I wanted to pay I could not
until my baggage, which I gave to an expressman ten years ago, shall
reach me. It will probably arrive in a month or two more."

_Landlord_. "Here comes Sir GANDER GOSLING. I'll complain to him of your
conduct."

(_Enter Sir Gander_.)

_Fox_. "My dear Sir GANDER. Allow me to embrace you."

_Sir Gander_. "I don't know you. I'm not my son JACK."

_Fox_. "But I am Jack's dearest friend. I have saved him from drowning,
from matrimony, from reading the _Nation,_ from mothers-in-law, and all
other calamities mentioned in the litany."

_Sir Gander_. "Describe him to me, if you know him so well."

_Fox_. "He is tall, dark, slender, and quiet in manner."

_Sir Gander_. "My dear fellow he is short, fat, light, and noisy. I am
convinced that you know him. Permit me to pay your bill, lend you money,
and tell you all about our dear JACK'S intended marriage." (_He pays,
lends, and narrates accordingly. A terrific rattling of dishpans
simulates the arrival of a train. Sir_ GANDER _departs and_ JACK GOSLING
_enters._)

_Fox_. "My dear JACK, allow me to embrace you."

_Jack_. "I don't know you. I'm not my father."

_Fox_. "But I am your father's dearest friend. Sit down and have a
bottle of wine, and tell me all about ROSE MANDRAKE, your intends bride.
'Rose! Rose! the coal black Rose!' as MILTON finely remarks." (_They sit
down and_ JACK _immediately gets very drunk, thereby affording another
proof of the horribly adulterated condition of the liquor used on the
stage, which infallibly intoxicates an actor within two minutes after it
is imbibed. [Let the Excise authorities see to this matter.] Finally_
JACK _falls, and the curtain immediately follows his example.)

Critical Young Man, who reads all the theatrical "notices" in the Herald
in the leisure moments when he is not selling yards of tape and ribbon_.
"I don't think much of CLARKE. He ain't half the man that NED FORREST
is. There ain't a bit of spontanatious humor in him. Them San Francisco
Minstrels can beat him out of sight."

_Accompanying Young Female Person_. "Yes, I think so, too. I hate to see
a man act drunk. It's so low and vulgar. I like pretty plays, like they
have at WALLACK'S."

_Respectable Old Gentleman_. "PLACIDE--BLAKE--BURTON--"

_Every Body Else_. "Well, this is real humor; I haven't laughed so much
since I heard BEECHER preach a funeral sermon."

The second act takes place in the house of Major MANDRAKE. Fox has
successfully assumed the character of JACK GOSLING, and is having a
pleasant chat with the family, when the gardener enters to inform the
Major that a flock of crows is in sight.

_Major Mandrake_. "I love the pleasures of the chase. Bring my gun, and
I will shoot the crows." (_He goes out, and shoots_ JACK, _who is
climbing over the gate. Re-enter Major and men carrying_ JACK.)

_Major_. "Alas! I have missed the crow over the cornfield, and lost the
crow over my shooting which I would otherwise have had. Also I have shot
a man out of season, and the sportsmen's club will prosecute me."

_Jack_. "I am not dead, though my appearance and conversation might
induce you to think so. My name is JACK GOSLING. The chap in the velvet
coat is an impostor."

_Major, Fox, and other dramatis persons_. "Away with the wretch! He
himself is the impostor. Call a policeman who will club him if he makes
no resistance."

JACK is dragged away, but perpetually returns and denounces his rival.
He is bitten by suppositious dogs cunningly simulated by stage
carpenters, who remark "bow wow" from behind the scenes. He is cut by
ROSE MANDRAKE, and also by rows of broken bottles, which line the top of
the wall on which he makes a perilous perch, not having a pole or rod
with which to defend himself against the dogs. He is challenged by Fox
and seconded by Miss BLANCHE BE BAR in naval uniform. Finally he takes
refuge in the china closet, and hurls cheap plates and saucers at his
foes. With the exhaustion of the supply of crockery, the act naturally
comes to an end, and, as frequently occurs in similar cases, the curtain
falls.

_Comic Man_. "Why does CLARKE, when he slings china at the company,
remind you of the Paraguayan war? Of course you give it up. Because he
carries on a war on the Plate. Do you see it? Crockery plates and the
river Plate, you know. Ha! ha!"

And two ushers, reinforced by a special policeman, drag the miserable
man away, and lead him to MAGONIGLE'S private room, there to be dealt
with for the hideous crime of making infamous jokes in BOOTH'S theatre.
He is never seen again, and so the Philadelphia _Day_ loses its
brightest ornament.

The third act consists of a duel between JACK and FOX, each of whom is
too cowardly to fight. They therefore follow the safer example of rival
editors, and swear and scold at each other. At last a small millennium
of universal reconciliation takes place, and the usual old comedy "tag"
ends the play.

(Parenthetically, why "tag?" Does it receive this name because its
invariable stupidity suggests those other worthless commodities "rag"
and "bob-tail," which, outside of theatres, are generally associated
with the name.)

And every body goes away murmuring of the genial humor of CLARKE, the
magical violin of MOLLENHAUER, the elegance, convenience and comfort of
the theatre, the matchless memory of BOOTH'S Hamlet and Iago, and the
golden certainty of the coming of Rip Van Winkle. And every body is
supremely satisfied, and says to every body else, "This theatre needs
only a company, to be the foremost theatre of either continent."

MATADOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

Remarks by Our Stammering Contributor.

The up-town theatrical sensation is, we hear, produced "regardless of
expense." We had reason to think that its managers would show more
Frou-frou-frugality.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PISCATORY DISCUSSION.

_Uncle Walton_. "THAR! DIDN'T I TOLE YER? KNOW'D HE COULDN'T KETCH NO
FISH WID DAT 'AR BUGGY-WHIP OF A THING!"

_Isaac_. "YAH! DON'T TALK!--WAIT TILL HE TURNS DAT 'AR CRANK, AND SEE IF
DE PEERCH DON'T COME A-WINDIN' IN!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

COMIC ZOOLOGY.

THE MONKEY TRIBE.

Of this genus there are countless varieties, differing widely in the cut
of their monkey jackets, as the untravelled American naturalist will
doubtless have observed on traversing his native sidewalk. The educated
specimens met with in our cities are upon the whole well Organized, and
appear to have music in their soles. For its feats _a pied_, the tame
monkey is indebted to a Piedmontese who accompanies him.

To behold the monkey race in their glory, however, they must be seen in
their native woods, where they dwell in genteel independence, enjoying
their entailed estates and living on their own cocoa nuts. There will be
found the Gibbon, whose Decline and Fall when yielding the Palm to some
aspiring rival is swifter than that of the Roman Empire; the Barberry
Ape, so called from feeding exclusively on Barberries; the
Chimpanzee--an African corruption of Jump-and-see, the name given to the
animal by his first European discoverers in compliment to his alertness;
the Baboon, a melancholy brute that, as you may observe from his visage,
always has the blues; to say nothing of a legion of Red Monkeys, which
are particularly Rum Customers.

Some men of science have advanced the theory that man is the climactic
consequence of innumerable improvements of the monkey; the negro as he
now exists being the result of the Fifteenth Amendment. These
philosophers erect a sort of pyramid of progress, placing an Ape at the
base and a Caucasian at the Apex. This wild hypothesis of a monkey
apotheosis can of coarse only be regarded Jockolarly, in other words,
with a grin. Nevertheless the Marmozet is sufficiently like a little
Frenchwoman to be called a Ma'amoiselle, and there are (in New-Zealand
for instance) human heathen with a craving for the Divine, to whom the
Gorilla, though not a man, is certainly a brother. Possibly the Orang
Outang, if able to express his thoughts in an harangue, might say with
Mr. DICKENS, "I am very human." He certainly looks it.

There is a strong facial resemblance among the simious races--_Simia
Similibus_. This likeness does not, however, extend in all cases to the
opposite extremity. Some monkeys have no tails. Of the tailless Apes it
is said that they originally erased their rear appendages by too much
sitting--perhaps as members of the "Rump" in some Anthropoid Congress.
Be that as it may, the varieties that have retained their tails seem
disposed to hang on to them, and will doubtless continue to do so by
hook or by crook.

The natives of Africa believe that the monkeys would converse with them
if they were not afraid of being set to work; but it is quite apparent
that they are not averse either to labor or conversation, inasmuch as
among themselves they frequently Mow and Chatter.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GREAT AFRICAN TEA COMPANY.

MR. PUNCHINELLO: If I can induce you to take a few shares in the
above-named Co. (at a merely nominal price, I assure you,) I think I
shall do you a very great favor, and at the same time secure to the Co.
the benefit of your enormous influence.

The Grand Points, in this unequalled Scheme, may be explained as
follows:

The Tea is from the new African Tea Fields, (that is the holds of ships
in which it has spoiled, or become musty, or lost its bouquet, and the
old chests of the usual dealers,) and is delivered in our ware-rooms for
a mere song, so to speak: say the Song of Sixpence (a pound.)

At a small additional outlay, we dye and scour this Tea, or otherwise
Renovate it to such an extent that Nature herself would be deceived, at
least till she began to sip the decoction from it, when, perhaps, she
would conclude not to try any further issues with this Co.

These African Tea Fields (cultivated by Ourselves) are "situated near
the Cape of Good Hope." From the recent appreciation of African
Interests (and, of course, technology,) you will perceive that in our
Name and Scheme is Good Hope indeed, for the Stockholders, if not the
tea-drinkers.

Our system of business embraces, in part, the following ingenious and
strictly novel features: By means of circulars and extensive advertising
we convince the public (an easy task) that, in consequence of Raising
the Tea Ourselves, from "Our Own Tea Fields," (and thus saving a great
many profits to different absorbents of the people's money,) we can
afford it at ruinously low prices, yet the Tea is always A. 1. (which,
in familiar language, might be construed as A Wonder especially to the
Chinese.) We make a great variety out of the same stock! One may always
know the Great A. Co.'s Tea from the circumstance of it's never having
either odor or flavor. We find, after ample experience, that the
presence of either of these qualities directly injures the sale. Give it
plenty of Astringency (an easy knack) and it will be sure to go down in
this country. It is our experience (and that of many other Operators of
our kind--or _upon_ our kind, if you prefer the phrase,) that people
_like to be imposed upon,_ and can always be taken with the Economical
hook. If an article (of Tea, for instance) is only "cheap" enough, it
may be ever so nasty and unwholesome, and yet it will Sell! Sell? Bless
you! you can't produce it fast enough--even from your Own Tea Fields!

We make an article of Coffee (which we have almost decided to call
Cuffee) that has as much Color in one pound as the real (an inferior)
article has in six! Boarding-house keepers praise it! It goes far, and
is actually preferred to Mocha! We sell it for less than the latter
could be bought for at wholesale, in Arabia, and yet you will readily
believe we make money by it.

A few shares will be sold to you for a mere fraction of their nominal
value. Call and see us, at the sign of the GREAT AFRICAN (TEA CO.)

T. T. T. (for the Co.)

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR CUBAN TELEGRAMS.

We are happy to inform our readers that we have made a special
arrangement with the telegraph companies, by which we shall receive the
only reliable news from Cuba. The following telegrams from Havana, which
were received at this office at a late hour last night, will show how
full and accurate our Cuban news will henceforth be:

FIRST DISPATCH.

HAVANA, May 26th, 9 P.M.--(_From a Cuban Patriot_.)--A great battle was
fought yesterday between the National army and the Spanish Cut-throats.
General CESPEDES, with five hundred men, attacked VALMESEDA, who had
eleven thousand men in a strong position, and completely routed him. The
Invaders lost ten thousand in killed and wounded, and nine hundred
prisoners. Twenty pieces of artillery were captured. This blow will
crush the Spanish brigands, and make certain the independence of the
island. Our loss was trifling--only a drummer-boy or two.

SECOND DISPATCH.

9:30 P.M.--(_From the Spanish Authorities_.)--A great battle was fought
yesterday between the loyal army and the rebel hordes. General
VALMESADA, with five hundred men, attacked CESPEDES, who had eleven
thousand men in a strong position, and completely routed him. The
brigands lost ten thousand in killed and wounded, and nine hundred
prisoners. Twenty pieces of artillery were captured. This blow will
crush the rebels, and make certain the establishment of order in the
island. Our loss was trifling--only a sutler or two.

THIRD DISPATCH.

10 P.M.--(_From a Cuban Patriot_.)--Our victory was more complete than
at first believed. Only two Spaniards escaped. Our only loss was one
drummer-boy slightly wounded.

FOURTH DISPATCH.

10:30 P.M.--(_From the Spanish Authorities_.)--Our victory was more
complete than was at first believed. Only two rebels escaped. Our only
loss was one sutler somewhat demoralized.

FIFTH DISPATCH.

11 P.M.--(_From a Cuban Patriot_.)--CESPEDES had only two hundred men,
and VALMESADA eight thousand. The latter is reported killed. The victory
was complete.

SIXTH DISPATCH.

11:30 P.M.--(_From the Spanish Authorities_.)--VALMESEDA had only two
hundred men, and CESPEDES eight thousand. The latter is reported killed.
The victory was complete.

SEVENTH DISPATCH.

12 M.--(_From a Cuban Patriot_.)--The battle was not so bloody as was at
first reported. The Patriots had fifty men, and were greatly
outnumbered. Several dead Spaniards were left on the field. No artillery
was captured, but a great quantity of supplies was taken.

EIGHTH DISPATCH.

12:30 A.M.--(_From the Spanish Authorities_.)--The battle was not so
bloody as was at first reported. The loyal force consisted of only fifty
men, and many dead rebels were left on the field. No artillery was
captured, but a great quantity of bananas was taken.

NINTH DISPATCH.

1 A.M.--(_From a Cuban Patriot_.)--It is now known that the battle was
only a skirmish. The Spaniards attacked our men in order to seize upon
their extra linen. They were repulsed however.

TENTH DISPATCH.

1:30 A.M.--(_From the Spanish Authorities_.)--It is now known that the
battle was only skirmish. The rebels attacked a hen-roost in search of
eggs, but were repulsed.

ELEVENTH DISPATCH.

3 A.M.--(_From a Cuban Patriot_.)--The rumor of a battle seems to have
originated in a fight between a Patriot and a mob of blood-thirsty
Spaniards in an alley in this city. The latter managed to escape.

TWELFTH DISPATCH.

2:30 A.M.--(_From the Spanish Authorities_.)--The rumor of a battle
evidently grew out of a fight in an alley of this city, between a
Volunteer and a mob of rebel sympathizers. The latter were all arrested.

THIRTEENTH DISPATCH.

3 A.M.--(_From the American, Consul_.)--Yesterday a Cuban boy threw a
stone at a dog belonging to one of the volunteers. The dog ran away. All
is quiet in the city, and elsewhere on the island.

At this point we were compelled to go to press. The above dispatches,
however, furnish the latest and only reliable intelligence from Cuba.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: ONE VIEW OF THE QUESTION.

_Nervous Man_. "UP FOUR FLIGHTS OF STAIRS, AND THROUGH NO END OF CROOKED
PASSAGES. HOW AM I TO GET OUT IN CASE OF FIRE?"

_Polite Waiter_. "NO OCCASION WHATEVER FOR ANXIETY, SIR; THE HOUSE IS
FULLY INSURED."]

       *       *       *       *       *

A Good Turn Meant.

THERE is some talk of reviving the Tournament in this region, and the
young men are expected to show their skill in "riding at the ring." If
our young men were to put any number of good sharp lances through a few
of our City Rings, they would be noble and chivalrous fellows, surely.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Dumb Beasts' Friend.

Mr. BERGH, the philodoggist, is an honest oracle in his way, and when he
opes his mouth we hope no cur will be ungrateful enough to bark. He says
in his last lecture that dumb animals are creatures like unto himself.
That accounts for Mr. BERGH being Deer to the quadrupeds, and such a
Terrier to their enemies.

       *       *       *       *       *

Land and Water.

An Ocean Cable Company has just asked Congress for a grant of lands. The
request is natural, as the Company, of course, wants to see its cable
well Landed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Kellogg Testimonial.

Gifts should be seasonable. We therefore signify our highest approval of
the judgment of those "keyind" friends who lately gave to Miss CLARA
LOUISE KELLOGG, our own beloved nightingale, an elegant "Fruit
Receiver." Birds, as a rule, are prohibited by law from partaking of
fruit, but that is only while it is the on branches; and, perhaps, if
EVE had only possessed an elegant "Fruit Receiver," she might have put
the apple into it, instead of eating that most unfortunate pippin, so
greatly to human distress and detriment. And, now that Miss CLARA has
such a beautiful article to hold them, we suggest that, at her next
benefit, instead of the fading and comparatively worthless bouquets, she
be presented with a bushel of the very best pippins--and we intend to do
it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Latest About Garibaldi.

It is stated, now, that GARIBALDI, foiled in his attempts to join the
Italian insurgents, is about to throw himself, sword in hand, among the
Red River malcontents. This rumor has its origin, probably, in the fact
that GARIBALDI usually wears a red shirt.

[Illustration: (Man about to stomp on mole marked "Arcade RR.") BROADWAY
SAVED! GOVERNOR HOFFMAN PUTS HIS FOOT DOWN UPON THE MOLE THAT WAS GOING
TO UNDERMINE OUR GREAT THOROUGHFARE.]

       *       *       *       *       *

Stridor Dentium.

The Massachusetts Dentists (excellent men, not to be spoken of without a
shudder) have been holding an annual meeting in Boston. They talked,
discussed, suggested and explained; and then, to show that they were
physicians who could heal themselves, they partook together of a most
beautiful dinner. We are not told so, but we suppose that the viands on
this occasion were of the very toughest description--geese of venerable
age, fried heel tops, and beef like unto the beef of a boarding-house.
Whether, considering their facilities for mastication, a landlord should
not charge the members of a Dental Association double, is a question for
casuists.

       *       *       *       *       *

English News.

It is noted, as a very remarkable fact, that "the Member of Parliament
for Sheffield first entered that town as an Italian image boy." He was
the image of his mother.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Air.

_Voice at Rome_. "I am the infallible PIO Nono."

_Echo, everywhere_. "'No! no!'"

       *       *       *       *       *

Ancient Inscription on the Throne of Spain.

M. T.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ROBINS.

[_Compare a much more "poetic" effusion, under this head, in all the
American newspapers_.]

  There's a screech upon the housetop, a creak upon the plain,
  It's a libel on the sunshine, its a slander on the rain;
  And through my brain, in consequence, there darts a horrid thought
  Of exasperating wheelbarrows, and signs, with torture fraught!
  So, all these breezy mornings through my teeth is poured the strain:
  _Confound the odious "Robins," that have now come back again!_

  They bring a thought of strawberries, which I shall never taste;
  Plums, cherries, ditto, ditto, which these maurauders waste--
  Who never _will_ catch worms and flies, as smaller "warblers" do,
  But want precisely those nice things which grow for me and you!
  I muse on all their robberies, and mutter this fierce strain:
  _Confound these odious "Robins," that have now come back again!_

  Oh, bah! What bosh these "poets" write, about this humbug pet!
  Firstly, they're _not_ true "Robins," but a base, inferior set;
  Second, there is no music in their creaking, croaking shriek;
  Third, they are slow and stupid--common birds from tail to beak!
  Tis said, "they come so early." Well, I'd rather they'd come late.
  They're simply made for pot-pies, and deserve no better fate.

  Who ever thought to welcome the ingenious, sprightly Wren?
  With his pretty, joyous carol, which should thrill the heart of men?
  Now _that_ is _music_, mind you! And how small the throat that
  sings!
  Besides, he lets your fruit alone, and lives on other things!
  Inspired by this trim fairy, many souls will swell the strain:
  _Confound the odious "Robins," that have now come back again!_

       *       *       *       *       *

CAUTION!

There is shortly to arrive in Paris a dwarf aged about fifty-five years,
having a beard reaching to his feet, but with only one arm and a
completely bald head. He possesses 2,000,000 francs, which he is willing
to share with any young girl about twenty years old, who is pretty and
good tempered.

The person above alluded is, unquestionably, our eldest son, Mr.
PUNCHINELLO, Jr. He is--we say it with many tears--as great a rascal as
any in the world, although no child was ever flogged more regularly and
affectionately. His conduct broke his mother's head; and he was put
under bonds to keep the peace at the age of two years. After a long
period of flagrant insubordination, he ran away with a part of our
money, and of his plunder he may possibly have 2,000,000 francs
left--but we don't believe it. This is to warn all tradesmen in Paris
from trusting him on our account, as we shall pay no debts of his
contracting.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE NEW PLEA FOR MURDER

MAN WITH REVOLVER. "OF COURSE I'VE KILLED HIM, BUT IT'S NO MURDER, FOR
I'M INSANE. IF YOU DON'T BELIEVE IT, THERE'S MY MARRIAGE CERTIFICATE!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

CONDENSED CONGRESS.

SENATE.

[Illustration: D]

DRAKE quacked according to his custom--this time about the propriety of
hanging people in the Southern States. There were several people in
Missouri whom he particularly desired to see extinguished. He referred
to the fiends in human shape, whose hands were dripping with loyal gore,
and whom the unrepentant rebels of his State actually desired to send to
the Senate, in the place of himself. He lacked words to express his
sense of so gross an outrage. He thought that he could be comparatively
happy if forty thousand men were hanged or otherwise "disabled" from
voting against him. That would make his reelection a pretty sure thing.

Mr. FERRY said he really thought this thing had gone far enough. People
were coming to understand that the general run, he did not refer to Bull
Run, of the Northern army was just about as good, and no better, than
the general run, he did not refer to Gettysburgh, of the Southern army.
As for DRAKE, he was a _canard_, and his statement was another. He did
not approve of the bloody Drakonian code.

Mr. MORTON said FERRY was very easily crossed. As for him he considered
that FERRY was a Copperhead.

Mr. REVELS was in favor of removing disabilities as soon as it could be
done with safety. They all knew what he meant by safety. As soon as not
only his calling, which was formerly clerical, although now legislative,
and election were made sure, he was ready to let everybody vote. While
his election was doubtful, he was in favor of keeping out votes enough
to insure it. He believed that to be the view of every Senator. (Hear.
Hear.)

Mr. SAWYER thought his opinion as good as REVELS'S, if he was white. He
considered that he was safe in South Carolina, and he disapproved of the
glut of Republican Southern Senators. Upon these grounds he went for the
removal of the disabilities.

HOUSE.

Mr. DAWES did a neat thing. He represented that the Naval Appropriation
bill contained a number of most nutritious jobs (as indeed it turned out
that it did.) Upon this hint SCHENCK agreed to let the tariff "pass" for
the present, though he reserved the right to order it up at any time.
Thereupon the astute DAWES moved to postpone it indefinitely, to the
huge disgust of Mr. SCHENCK, who said he ought to be ashamed of himself.
Here was the oyster pining for protection, the peanut absolutely
shrivelling on its stalk under the neglect of Congress, and the American
hook-and-eye weeping for being overrun by the imported article. He hoped
the pig-iron, whose claims they had refused to consider, might lie heavy
on their souls.

KELLEY was too full of pig-iron for utterance.

       *       *       *       *       *

SPENCERIAN CHAFF.

BY A CONFIRMED GRAHAMITE.

  If, in the "opening" of my learned friend
          (Whose record I intend
  Most handsomely and warmly to defend,)
  You fancy that you now and then perceive
  A word or phrase one hardly can conceive
          Was uttered "by your leave;"
  If--going further in my supposition--
          You fancy his condition
  In some respects was not above suspicion;
  If (Ah! there's virtue in an "if" sometimes--
          As there may be in crimes,)
  You think it strange, what men will do for dimes;
          Why, it is plainly due
                To you,
          And noble SPENCER, too,
  That I should straightway boil with legal rage
  At such injustice, and at once engage
  To right the matter, on this virtuous page.

          I fear, my captious friend,
  (To speak the truth,) you do not comprehend
          The Majesty of Law!
  Of Reason it is clearly the Perfection!
          It is not merely Jaw!
  Great Heaven! (excuse the interjection,)
  If for this thing you have no greater awe,
          You need correction!
  Pray, do you fully realize, good Sir,
  The Legal is a Gentlemanly cur?
  True, we are sometimes forced to treat a Judge
  As though he were a plain American.
          But, fudge!
  _He_ never minds; he's not a gentleman!
  True, it is now and then our legal lot
  To teach a stupid witness what is what,
          Or show that he (or she)
  Is rather worse than he (or she) should be;
          We find it necessary,
                Very,
  To blacken what we have no doubt is white,
  And whiten what is very black indeed.
                Agreed!

  But ask the Client what _he_ thinks is right!
  He may not care to see us fairly _fight,_
          (It _is not_ a pleasant sight,)
  Or hear us curse till all is black as night,
  For the whole Jury might perchance take fright;
  But _he_ knows whether he is ably served!
  Stern Duty's line, he'll tell you (if he's bright)
  Is always either angular or curved.
          Now, pray, no bosh
  About the _habit of defending crime_
  Dulling the sensibilities in time!
          The theory won't wash!
  Once place my colleague on the other side,
  You'd say, This lawyer should be deified!
  Oh, what a conscience he would then reveal!
  Sinners would tremble at his dread appeal!
          You would perceive
  (At least, you would be ready to believe,)
  That, noting all the most abhorred deeds
  Known to our records, this affair must needs
  Be judged the blackest. Nothing like, since Cain.
          And then, again----

  But, pshaw! coming to look at you, I see
  You're one of those odd folks who don't agree
  With _any_ body. _You_ are not to pass
  On these high questions; plainly, you're an ass.
  I'd like to have you on the stand a minute!
          You'd think the deuce was in it!
  _I'd_ shake the humdrums out of you, I guess!
          You'd presently confess
          You thought that No was Yes.
  It's just your sort--provided there's no hurry--
          We like to worry.
  In twenty minutes, Sir, you wouldn't know
          Your father from JIM CROW,
  Or your illiterate self from LINDLEY MURRAY!
          And now then, dunce,
          Please move your boots, at once!
  If 'twere not for some twinges of the gout,
          I'd _kick_ you out!

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A NEAT TURN

_Mrs. Twigg_. "GOOD GRACIOUS! JOHN--YOU'VE BEEN DRINKING!"

_Mr. Twigg_. "NORADROP, MY DEAR, _hic_, NORADROP. I'VE ONLY COME UP
_hic_, BY THE _hic, hic_, EL'VATED RAILWAY!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR PORTFOLIO.

Since "gin-and-milk" has been declared to be an uncanonical beverage,
much uncertainty prevails among the brethren of the cloth as to what
refreshment would be considered orthodox and proper. There is no doubt
that some men are so constituted as to require fluid aids to religion.
To deprive them of it would be to strike a blow at popular piety. As the
laborer is worthy of his hire, so is the minister, whose throat becomes
parched by reason of much exhortation, worthy of the liquid balm which
is to renew his powers and strengthen his organs. PUNCHINELLO has had
under consideration the question of inventing some drink which might
happily satisfy the wants of the thirsty and avoid the scandal which
"gin-and-milk" has created among the godly. Many correspondents have
suggested to him various decoctions, but, as they all involved
spirituous ingredients, he has felt compelled to reject them. After
considerable trial, he flatters himself, however, that he has fallen
upon a discovery which may remove every objection. It is very simple,
and that of itself should be a strong recommendation.

Take some raw potatoes; thoroughly extract the juice; mix with it about
three ounces of horse-radish, (this to give it pungency,) flavor the
same with any aromatic root to suit the taste, and then let the whole
boil for one hour. After cooling, tightly bottle the mixture, and within
twenty-four hours it will be fit for use. The process then will be to
drink it in the same quantity that one would take either gin or whisky,
being careful to hold to the nose during the act of swallowing, a sponge
well saturated with pure alcohol. Between the pungency communicated to
the taste by the horse-radish and the fumes of the spirit invading the
nasal avenues, the illusion of a good "square drink" will be complete.

       *       *       *       *       *

An instance of singularly vitiated taste has just come to the knowledge
of PUNCHINELLO. A caterer in Baxter Street provides juvenile boot-blacks
with the hind legs of rats, and declares that his guests eat them with
great avidity and experience no ill effects. They are rolled in
pulverized crackers, and cooked in lard. The dish is considered a great
dainty, and is only within the reach of the aristocratic portions of
that community. One chief cause of this culinary success is the fact
that the provider keeps the knowledge of it to himself, going upon the
French principle of "eat what's put before you and ask no questions."
Fried horse liver has risen to great popularity with Americans in Paris,
owing to the adoption of a similar caution. Fastidious tourists have
been known to smack their lips over horse tenderloin, under the
impression that the peculiarity of its flavor was to be attributed
entirely to the devices of a Parisian _cuisine_.

This pleasant hypothesis has unquestionably prevented many a stomach
from revolting, and increased the reputation of French cooks. It is
related of the astronomer LALANDE that he often ate caterpillars and
spiders, affirming that the former tasted like almonds and the latter
like walnuts; but no American who ever feasted inadvertently on horse
liver or a savory sirloin of the same flesh, has yet been found to
acknowledge the fact, much less to promote a taste for it by any
seductive comparison. The Baxter Street purveyor imitates the Parisian
_restaurateur_ in the mystery with which he surrounds his art, and so
both prosper.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.

_Georgia_. Mistaken. The columns of PUNCHINELLO are not for sale. If you
want to buy editorial columns you should apply to the managers of the
Washington _Chronicle_. For tariff of rates consult Governor BULLOCK of
your State, who is thoroughly informed on the subject.

_Anxious Inquirer_. Our story of the "Mystery of Mr. E. DROOD," will
shortly be published in weekly parts, and it would be unfair to Mr.
DICKENS as well to Mr. ORPHEUS C. KERR to tell you the Mystery.

_Traveller_. We believe that the Street Car Conductors are obliged to
pass a preliminary examination in packing herrings, before a car is
given to them.

_Dramatical_. Can you tell me the origin of the expression, "Let's have
a smile," meaning of course, to take a drink?--Yes; it is from _Julius
Caesar_, where CASSIUS says to BRUTUS:
                       --"Farewell BRUTUS!
  If we do meet again we'll Smile, indeed."
_Act V. Scene 1._

_Hoyle_. The old remark, "When in doubt play a trump," has fallen
through, as, when in doubt, the player generally plays the Deuce.

_Henry Jones_. No. You are wrong. _Sic semper tyrannis, does not_ mean
_"Tyrants are always sick."_

_Villikens_. Mr. HORACE GREELEY, although an intimate personal friend of
WESTON, the pedestrian, is not, as you suppose, the Compiler of WALKER'S
Dictionary.

_Cornet_. The critic was wrong in attributing "freshness" to the air of
"Walking down Broadway." If you walk down Broadway at this season you
will find the air any thing but fresh.

_Gin-and-Milk_. It is a mistake. THEODORE TILTON never sang Comic Songs
in a Houston Street Free-and-Easy.

_Chutney_. Somebody has been "selling" you. BABOO BRAHMIN CHUNDER SEN is
not a relation of HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN.

_Sculp_. Is it in your power to give the proportions of a perfect human
figure?

_Answer_. Your question implies a doubt of the genius of a great
American Sculptor. It is _in_ our Power. Look at his figure of the Greek
Slave.

_Richard III_. My friends think that I have a decided talent for the
stage. How can I be fitted for it?

_Answer_. By a theatrical costumer. Pay great attention to "Measure for
Measure."

_Debrett_. Who were the Knight's Companions of the Bath?

_Answer_. Towels and Soap.


       *       *       *       *       *

NAPOLEON'S LATEST MANIFESTO TO THE FRENCH PEOPLE.

[Illustration: T]

  True citizens of France I've the very great felicity--
    It almost overpowers me as you well can understand;
  To give to the proud triumph of my policy publicity,
    Majority six millions. Ah! _Mon Dieu!_ but it is grand.

  'Tis true the Empire's Capital, the centre of authority,
    Went against me in a fit of Red Republican romance;
  But the Provinces in rolling up their glorious majority
    Have proved, despite of precedents, that Paris is not France.

  Self-contained and unembarrassed, I awaited at the Tuileries
    The issue, for I trusted the Nation's Common Sense;
  And although the rowdy _Faubourgs_ tried a few of their Tom-fooleries,
    My soldiers soon let light into each trumpery defence.

  I smile in cold contempt at the Old-time Barricade tricks--
    Each street, did I so order, were a cannon-swept defile,
  I've bound Fortune to my Chariot, and defying all her jade tricks,
    More in pity that in anger hear the roar of the _Canaille_.

  The _Drapeau Rouge is down_--HUGO, BLANC and LEDRU ROLLIN
    Are as harmless as three kittens with their teeth and talons drawn;
  And now my own loved France, with returns from every poll in,
    I bid thee hail of Liberty the true and genial dawn.

  Though the Left's intemperate oracles, political and clerical,
    Deny there's force or purpose in the People's mighty "Aye!"
  They stultify their principles, for by ordeal numerical
    Their Creed declares all policy should either live or die.

  To France I said, "My Country, behold I freely tender thee
    All swords e'er won for freedom in the ages long ago,
  All prerogatives that clash with it I offer to surrender thee,
    Wilt take or spurn the guerdon? prithee, answer 'yes' or 'no.'"

  She has answered, France has answered, in thunderings articulate,
    From the Alps and either Seaboard, to the Pyrenees, the Rhine;
  And though a horde of demagogues may bellow and gesticulate,
    They _know_ this is a victory of the PEOPLE'S RIGHT DIVINE.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Dominion Again.

What a set of grumblers the Canadians are. They seem never to be
satisfied with their public men. First they were berating the minister
of Justice for too large a practice at the Bar. Now they have turned
their attention to the gentleman (Mr. LANGEVIN) who is to engineer the
domestic relations between the Confederate Provinces, on the ground of
looking after his own Domestic Relations first. Surely, this is
"factious opposition," as their Mr. HOLTON would say.

       *       *       *       *       *

SCIENCE FOREVER!

MR. PUNCHINELLO is pleased to observe that there is to be a meeting of
the Western Social Science Association in Chicago, and he hereby
announces his intention of attending as a Volunteer Delegate. He will,
if he is well treated by the Convention, so that he may reach the
elevation of soul necessary, read exhaustive and exhausting papers on
the following subjects:

1. On the complete removal of the buildings now constituting the City of
Washington to Chicago.

2. On Free Drinks; their origin, history, purpose, and influence.

3. On a curious fluid known as Drinking-Water; observed in other parts
of the world, but entirely unknown in Chicago.

4. On Virtue its Own Reward, as exemplified in the Lives and Adventures
of the Chicago Police.

5. On the Various Smells to be observed in Chicago (with pungent
experiments.)

6. On the Exact Trigonometrical Measurement of a Corner in Grain.

7. On the feasibility of working an Elevator entirely by whisky power.

MR. PUNCHINELLO has prepared forty-nine other papers on different
scientific subjects, including Pugilism, Base Ball, the Velocipede,
Female Suffrage, and Lake Navigation; and he now awaits on invitation
from Chicago to come on with his largest drum and his most melodious
trumpet. He is aware of the general impression among the Children of the
West that they already know every thing. He hastens to assure them that
they labor under the most hideous of delusions.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Midsummer Reading of Shakspeare.

  It must have been in "fly-time" that Shakspeare wrote--
      "When we have Shoo-flied off this mortal coil."

       *       *       *       *       *

A Dead Beat to the Windward.

MR. ASHBURY of "Cambria" fame.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FISHERY QUESTION.

[Illustration: S]

Some trouble with regard to the Gulf fisheries appears to be
anticipated, and loud calls are being made upon Government by the
fishermen, who demand that immediate steps be taken for securing their
rights. The unmasterly inactivity of President GRANT, in the matter, is
considered by the fishermen as indicating a want of Porpus. They are
also very much chagrined with the Government for sending out to the
fishing-banks a dispatch boat bearing the inappropriate name of
"Frolic." There is a levity about this quite out of keeping with the
serious character of the question, and it is doubtful whether the
fishermen would not prefer a fight on the banks to a Frolic.

Although the Government appears to Flounder sadly in the mud-banks of
this fishery question, still there is some hope that coercive measures
may yet be taken for restraining the Dominion fishermen from having
every thing on their own hook. Rumor has it that the monitor
Miantonomah, Captain SCHUFELDT, is awaiting orders for a cruise to the
troubled waters. This will doubtless prove to be a very summary and
complete way of settling the difficulty, inasmuch as a few broadsides
from the huge thunderer referred to would kill every fish upon the
banks, and blacken each particular fisherman into an OTHELLO with an
"occupation gone." The Canadian fishermen, of course, would suffer
equally with those of our own shores. They are a light-hearted people,
though, are these Canadians, fond of music and dancing, and they would
doubtless find consolation for their troubles by addressing the skipper
of the Miantonomah in a grand MASANIELLO strain, chorussed with
"SCHUFELDT don't bother us!"

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: DEPLORABLE ACCIDENT TO THAT FASHIONABLE YOUNG MAN
ALGERNON TYBALT PIPKINS, WHOSE HAT HAS BEEN BLOWN THROUGH THE RAILINGS
OF WASHINGTON PARK JUST AS THE MISSES ABINGDON ARE PASSING.]

       *       *       *       *       *

OF MYTHOLOGY.

Mythology is the term by which the ancient Greek or Roman used to
distinguish hiss religion from the rival religions of other and
heretical pagans. Just as Orthodoxy, according to DEAN SWIFT, means "my
doxy," and Heterodoxy, the doxy of other people; so the pious Roman used
to speak of "my thology" as the only genuine religion; the "thologies"
of other men being cheap and worthless counterfeits of the real article.
The classic mythology had a large and varied assortment of deities, from
which every man could select a supply to suit himself. Thus the lawyer
could place a bust of Mercury, the god of chicanery, in his office, and
so secure the patronage of the god and save the expense of a tin sign
announcing his profession. The editor could dedicate his paper to the
service of Janus, the two-faced deity, and thus pursue his business
without perilling his reputation for religious consistency. The
advantages of this sort of thing need hardly be enlarged upon.

We propose to give easy and familiar descriptions of the more important
gods of classic mythology, for the benefit of our younger readers. We
therefore begin without further delay, with the chief deities of
Olympus, the celestial Tammany Hall of the period. The Olympians formed
a sort of Ring which governed the entire celestial and infernal world,
and as they were the only judges of elections, they retained the power
undisturbed.

JUPITER. This individual was a jolly, good-tempered, old Olympian who
lived in great terror of his wife, JUNO, and was sadly addicted to
surreptitious beer, and undignified flirtations with the female
servants. He was fond of disguising himself, and staying out late at
night in search of adventures. It is difficult, however, to believe that
he really disguised himself as a swan, in order to present his bill to
LEDA. The story, doubtless, originated in the fact that JUNO called him
"an old goose," to which he very probably replied that "other woman
appreciated him better, and that LEDA, for example, would be more apt to
call him a duck or a swan, than a degraded and abject goose." So, too,
in regard to the story that he disguised himself as a bull, and in that
eccentric costume made love to EUROPA. One legend expressly states that
he pretended to be an Irish bull. This is, of course, a figurative way
of saying that he proclaimed himself an Irish gentleman, a descendant of
BRIEN BORU and a graduate of Trinity College. EUROPA was probably a
child's nurse, and the fascinating Irish gentleman was accustomed to
meet her in the Park, and enliven her with his national witticisms. One
can easily believe that he made love to DANAE by throwing a shower of
gold in her lap--a story which shows that women were much the same in
ancient times as they are to day. There is no denying that JUPITER was a
sad old dog, and that he would have been killed a dozen times by insane
husbands had he not been immortal. However, he was pretty severely
punished by JUNO, who was the leader of the Olympian Sorosis, and who
used to hear of all his disreputable flirtations from the respectable
spinsters of that Wild Goddess Association, and would keep him awake
night after night, with curtain lectures on the subject. JUPITER was,
_ex-officio_, the chairman of the Olympian Society, and he once crushed
a rebellion of the Titans, who were the Roughs of the period, by locking
them out of the Olympian Hall, and shying all sorts of heavy missiles,
such as charters--a Greek word signifying a mountainous burden--out of
the upper chamber at them. He had a large number of relatives whom he
placed in all the fat offices, and though there was some dissatisfaction
with his government, it was generally agreed that he was better fitted
for his position than anyone of the Titans would have been. No one knows
what was the ultimate fate of JUPITER. He was, however, dethroned by the
Emperor CONSTANTINE, and was never afterwards heard of; though it is
well known that the inhabitants of certain inland counties of New Jersey
still believe in his existence, and have not yet heard of CONSTANTINE'S
reformation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Imperial Conundrum with an Irreconcilable Answer.

Why is Paris the greatest place in the world for the prosecution of
newspaper enterprises?

Because there all newspaper enterprises are prosecuted.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Hanging that Ought to be "Played Out."

That practised by the "hanging committee" of the Academy of Design.

       *       *       *       *       *

Apropos of Theodora Thomas' Concerts.

Come into the garden Maudlin.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO OUR READERS.

Many complaints have been made to the Publishers of PUNCHINELLO
regarding the price asked for the paper by news-dealers in some parts of
this city, as well as elsewhere--viz.: Fifteen Cents a single copy.

Now, the price of a single copy of PUNCHINELLO is Ten Cents, and no
newsman has a right to charge more for one, seeing that his profit on it
at the regular price is equal to that made by him on any other
illustrated paper.

However gratifying it may be to us to know that our paper is considered
by dealers as being more valuable than any other one of a similar class,
it has become necessary for us to correct the abuse referred to. The
best way of effecting this is for our readers to send in their
subscriptions directly to this office. To every subscriber who sends in
$4, PUNCHINELLO shall be sent for one year, together with a splendid
premium; particulars respecting which will be found on last page of this
number.

By following this arrangement, readers will get the paper regularly at
their respective addresses, and will avoid the possibility of being
imposed on.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. T. STEWART & CO.

ARE OFFERING

EXTRAORDINARY BARGAINS IN

French and English Carpets, Carpetings,
Cocoa and Canton Matting,
English and Domestic Oil Cloths,
PLAIN AND BROCHE SATIN
DAMASKS, BROCATELS,
TAPESTRIES, REPS, ETC., Imported expressly for

Furniture Coverings and Curtain Materials.

BROADWAY,

Fourth Ave., Ninth and Tenth Sts.

       *       *       *       *       *

HOUSEKEEPING GOODS.

SHIRTING LINENS, PILLOW-CASE
LINENS, SHEETINGS,

Damasks, Napkins,
_Towels, Towelings, Blankets,
Quilts,_

COUNTERPANES, FLANNELS.

ALSO

FRENCH AND BARNSLEY SHEETINGS, EXTRA
QUALITY DRESDEN DOUBLE DAMASK
TABLE-CLOTHS AND
NAPKINS.

EMBROIDERED, LACE AND NOTTINGHAM
CURTAINS, GUIPURE CURTAINS, AND
SWISS DRAPERY BY THE YARD.

THE ABOVE ARE OFFERED
At Greatly Reduced Prices.

A.T. Stewart & Co.,

BROADWAY,
4th Ave., 9th and 10th Sts.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. T. STEWART & CO.

ARE OFFERING

AT A GREAT REDUCTION FROM
FORMER PRICES,

LADIES' PARIS-MADE SILK AND POPLIN DRESSES.
MISSES' AND CHILDRENS' PARIS, LONDON
AND DOMESTIC-MADE PLAIN, BRAIDED
AND EMBROIDERED PIQUE SUITS AND DRESSES,
LADIES' PLAIN AND EMBROIDERED
SKIRTS, EXTRA RICH,
LADIES' AND MISSES' SILK AND FANCY CLOTH
SACQUES, CLOAKS, ETC.

Paris and Domestic-Made Bonnets.

_Plain Centre, with Handsome Borders,_

REAL INDIA CAMELS HAIR SHAWLS, FROM
$50 UPWARD.

BLACK ARABIAN LUSTERS, IRON GRENADINES,
BLACK CASHMERES, TAMISE CLOTHS,
BLACK ALPACAS, PRINTED FOULARDS, ETC.

The above will be exhibited on separate counters in the 10th
Street, section.

BROADWAY,

Fourth Avenue, Ninth and Tenth Streets.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. T. Stewart & Co.

HAVE FOR SALE

A SPLENDID STOCK OF EVERY VARIETY
OF BOYS' CLOTHING.

ALSO

_Cloths, Cassimeres, Linen Drills,
Twills, White Corduroys, Fancy
Cloakings, Tailors' Trimmings,
Ladies' Dress and Cloak Trimmings,
Gimp, Fringes, Braids,
Buttons, Superior Quality
Spool Cotton, Perfumery,
Toilet Articles, etc., etc._

At Popular Prices.

BROADWAY,

Fourth Avenue, Ninth and Tenth Streets.

       *       *       *       *       *

SPECIAL

PUNCHINELLO PREMIUMS.

By special arrangement with

L. PRANG & CO.,

we offer the following Elegant Premiums for new Subscribers to
PUNCHINELLO:

"Awakening." (A Litter of Puppies.) Half Chromo, size,
8 3-8 by 11 1-8, price $2.00, and a copy of PUNCHINELLO for
one year, for $4.00.

"Wild Roses." Chromo, 12 1-8 by 9, price $3.00, or any
other $3.00 Chromo, and a copy of the paper for one year for
$5.00.

"The Baby in Trouble." Chromo, 13 by 16 1-4,
price $6.00 or any other at $6.00, or any two Chromos at $3.00,
and a copy of the paper for one year, for $7.00.

"Sunset,--California Scenery," after A. Bierstadt,
18 1-8 by 12, price $10.00, or any other $10.00 Chromo, and
a copy of the paper for one year for $10.00. Or the four Chromos,
and four copies of the paper for one year in one order, for
clubs of FOUR, for $23.00.

We will send to any one a printed list of L. PRANG & CO.'S
Chromos, from which a selection can be made, if the above is not
satisfactory, and are prepared to make special terms for clubs to
any amount, and to agents.

Postage of paper is payable at the office where received, twenty
cents per year, or five cents per quarter in advance; the CHROMOS
will be _mailed free_ on receipt of money.

Remittances should be made in P.O. Orders, Drafts, or Bank
Checks on New-York, or Registered letters. The paper will be
sent from the first number, (April 2d, 1870,) when not otherwise
ordered.

Now is the time to subscribe, as these Premiums will be offered
for a limited time only. On receipt of a postage-stamp we will
send a copy of No. 1 to any one desiring to get up a club.

Address

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,

P. O. BOX 2783. No. 83 Nassau Street, New-York.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A DISTRESSING SITUATION.

_Bridget, (responsively to Kate_.) "WHAT'S THE MATTHER WID ME, IS
IT? AH! THEN, THERE'S MATTHER ENOUGH. HERE'S THE MISSIS GONE OUT WID THE
KAY OF HER WARDROBE, AND ME OBLEEGED TO GO IN ME OULD DUDS AND SHOW
CINTRAL PARK TO ME COUSIN DINNIS JUST COME OUT FROM CORK!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

"The Printing House of the United States."

GEO. F. NESBITT & CO.,

General JOB PRINTERS,

BLANK BOOK Manufacturers,
STATIONERS Wholesale and Retail,
LITHOGRAPHIC Engravers and Printers,
COPPER-PLATE Engravers and Printers,
CARD Manufacturers,
ENVELOPE Manufacturers,
FINE CUT and COLOR Printers.

163, 165, 167, and 169 PEARL ST.,
73, 75, 77, and 79 PINE ST., New-York.

ADVANTAGES. All on the same premises, and under immediate
supervision of the proprietors.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bowling Green Savings-Bank,

33 BROADWAY,

NEW-YORK.

Open Every Day from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.


Deposit of any sum from Ten Cents to Ten
Thousand Dollars, will be received.


Six Per Cent Interest, Free of
Government Tax.


INTEREST ON NEW DEPOSITS

Commences on the first of every month.

HENRY SMITH, _President_.

REEVES E. SELMES, _Secretary_.

WALTER ROCHE,)
EDWARD HOGAN,) _Vice-Presidents_.

       *       *       *       *       *

SARATOGA "A" SPRING WATER.

A POSITIVE CURE FOR HEADACHE!--A GREAT
REMEDY FOR INDIGESTION AND DYSPEPSIA.--

Keeps the blood cool and regulates the stomach. Persons subject
to headache can insure themselves freedom from this malady
by drinking it liberally in the morning before breakfast.

Sold by JOHN F. HENRY, at the U.S. Family Medical
Depot, 8 College Place, New-York.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRANG'S CHROMOS are celebrated for their close resemblance to oil
paintings. Sold in all Art Stores throughout the world.

PRANG'S LATEST CHROMOS: "Four Seasons," by J. M. Hart. Illustrated
catalogues sent free on receipt of stamp by

L. PRANG & CO., Boston.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUNCHINELLO.

TERMS TO CLUBS


WE OFFER AS PREMIUMS FOR CLUBS

FIRST:

_DANA BICKFORD'S PATENT FAMILY SPINNER,_

The most complete and desirable machine ever yet introduced for spinning
purposes.

SECOND:

_BICKFORD'S CROCHET AND FANCY WORK MACHINES._

These beautiful little machines are very fascinating, as well as useful;
and every lady should have one, as they can make every conceivable kind
of crochet or fancy work upon them.

THIRD:

_BICKFORD'S AUTOMATIC FAMILY KNITTER._

This is the most perfect and complete machine in the world. It knits
every thing.

FOURTH:

_AMERICAN BUTTONHOLE, OVERSEAMING, AND SEWING-MACHINE._

This great combination machine is the last and greatest improvement on
all former machines. No. 1, with finely finished Oiled Walnut Table and
Cover, complete, price, $75. No. 2, same machine without the buttonhole
parts, etc., price, $60.

WE WILL SEND THE

Family Spinner,                     price, $3, for 4 subscribers and $16.
No. 1 Crochet,                        "     8,  "  4      "       "   16.
 "  2   "                             "    15,  "  6      "       "   24.
 "  1 Automatic Knitter, 72 needles,  "    30,  " 12      "       "   43.
 " 12     "        "     84    "      "    33,  " 13      "       "   52.
No.3 Automatic Knitter, 100 needles, price,37, for 15 subscribers and 60.
No.4      "       "    2   cylinders )  "  40,  "  16      "       "  64.
                        1  72 needles )
                        1 100 needles )

No. 1 American Buttonhole and Overseaming Machine, price $75, for 30
                                                    subscribers and $120.
No.2         "   without buttonhole parts, etc.,        60,  "  25
                                                      "       "      100.

Descriptive Circulars

Of all these machines will be sent upon application to this office, and
full instructions for working them will be sent to purchasers.

Parties getting up Clubs preferring cash to premiums, may deduct
seventy-five cents upon each full subscription sent for four subscribers
and upward, and after the first remittance for four subscribers may send
single names as they obtain them, deducting the commission.

Remittances should be made in Post-Office Orders, Bank Checks, or Drafts on
New-York City; or if these can not be obtained, then by Registered Letters,
which any post-master will furnish. Charges on money sent by express must
be prepaid, or the net amount only will be credited.

Directions for shipping machines must be full and explicit, to prevent
error. In sending subscriptions give address, with Town, County, and State.

The postage on this paper will be twenty cents per year, payable quarterly
in advance at the place where it is received. Subscribers in the British
Provinces will remit twenty cents in addition to subscription.

All communications, remittances, etc., to be addressed to

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY,

P.O. Box 2783. No. 83 Nassau Street,

NEW-YORK

       *       *       *       *       *

S. W. GREEN, PRINTER, CORNER JACOB AND FRANKFORT STREETS.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punchinello, Vol. 1, Issue 10,
Saturday, June 4, 1870, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCHINELLO, JUNE 4, 1870 ***

***** This file should be named 9544.txt or 9544.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/5/4/9544/

Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Sandra Brown, and Project
Gutenberg Distributed Proofreaders from material generously
made available by Cornell University


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
