Project Gutenberg's Punchinello, Vol. 1, No. 3, April 16, 1870, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Punchinello, Vol. 1, No. 3, April 16, 1870

Author: Various

Posting Date: January 18, 2013 [EBook #9549]
Release Date: December, 2005
First Posted: October 8, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCHINELLO, APRIL 16, 1870 ***




Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Ronald
Holder and the Online Distributed Proofreaders











"The printing House of the United States."


GEO. F. NESBITT & CO.,


General JOB PRINTERS, BLANK BOOK Manufacturers, STATIONERS, Wholesale
and Retail, LITHOGRAPHIC Engravers and Printers, COPPER-PLATE Engravers
and Printers, CARD Manufacturers, ENVELOPE Manufacturers, FINE CUT and
COLOR Printers.


163, 165, 167, and 169 PEARL ST., 73, 75, 77, and 79 PINE ST., New-York.


ADVANTAGES. All on the same premises, and under the immediate
supervision of the proprietors.


       *       *       *       *       *

WALTHAM WATCHES.

3-4 PLATE.

16 and 20 Sizes.

To the manufacture of these fine Watches the Company have devoted all
the science and skill in the art at their command, and confidently claim
that, for fineness and beauty, no less than for the greater excellences
of mechanical and scientific correctness of design and execution, these
watches are unsurpassed any where.

In this country the manufacture of this fine grade of Watches is not
even attempted except at Waltham.

FOR SALE BY ALL LEADING JEWELLERS.

       *       *       *       *       *

MOLLER'S PUREST NORWEGIAN

COD-LIVER OIL.

"Of late years it has become almost impossible to get any Cod-Liver Oil
that patients can digest, owing to the objectionable mode of procuring
and preparing the livers.... Moller, of Christiana, Norway, prepares
an oil which is perfectly pure, and in every respect all that can be
wished."--DR. L.A. SATRE, before Academy of Medicine. See _Medical
Record_, December, 1869, p. 447.

SOLD BY DRUGGISTS.

W.H. SCHIEFFELIN & CO.,

Sole Agents for the United States and Canada.

       *       *       *       *       *

Vol. 1 No. 3.

PUNCHINELLO

[Illustration: PUNCHINELLO Will Exhibit Every Saturday Admission 10 cts]

SATURDAY, APRIL 16, 1870.

PUBLISHED BY THE

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY,


83 NASSAU STREET, NEW-YORK.

PUNCHINELLO.

APRIL 16, 1870.

APPLICATIONS FOR ADVERTISING IN

"PUNCHINELLO"

SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO

J. NICKINSON,

Room No. 4,

83 NASSAU STREET.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE

"BREWSTER WAGON."

The Standard for Style and Quality.

BREWSTER & COMPANY,

of Broome Street.

WAREROOMS,

Fifth Avenue, corner of Fourteenth Street.

ELEGANT CARRIAGES,

_In all the Fashionable Varieties,_

EXCLUSIVELY OF OUR OWN BUILD.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thomas J. Rayner & Co.,

29 LIBERTY STREET,

New-York,

MANUFACTURERS OF THE

_Finest Cigars made in the United States._ All sizes and styles. Prices
very moderate. Samples sent to any responsible house. Also importers of
the

"FUSROS" BRAND,

Equal in quality to the best of the Havana market, and from ten to
twenty per cent cheaper.

Restaurant, Bar, Hotel, and Saloon trade will save money by calling at

20 LIBERTY STREET.

       *       *       *       *       *

GEO. BOWLEND,

ARTIST,

Room No. 11,

No. 160 FULTON STREET,

NEW-YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

WEVILL & HAMMAR, Wood Engravers,

No. 208 BROADWAY,

NEW-YORK.

PUNCHINELLO.

       *       *       *       *       *

With a large and varied experience in the management and publication
of a paper of the class herewith submitted, and with the still more
positive advantage of an Ample Capital to justify the undertaking, the

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.

OF THE CITY OF NEW-YORK,

Presents to the public for approval, the

NEW ILLUSTRATED HUMOROUS AND SATIRICAL

WEEKLY PAPER,

PUNCHINELLO,

The first number of which will be issued under date of April 2, 1870,
and thereafter weekly.

PUNCHINELLO will be _National_, and not _local_; and will endeavor to
become a household word in all parts of the country; and to that end has
secured a

VALUABLE CORPS OF CONTRIBUTORS

in various sections of the Union, while its columns will always be open
to appropriate first-class literary and artistic talent.

PUNCHINELLO will be entirely original; humorous and witty, without
vulgarity, and satirical without malice. It will be printed on a
superior tinted paper of sixteen pages, size 13 by 9, and will be for
sale by all respectable newsdealers who have the judgment to know a good
thing when they see it, or by subscription from this office.

The Artistic department will be in charge of Henry L. Stephens, whose
celebrated cartoons in VANITY FAIR placed him in the front rank of
humorous artists, assisted by leading artists in their respective
specialties.

The management of the paper will be in the hands of WILLIAM A. STEPHENS,
with whom is associated CHARLES DAWSON SHANLY, both of whom were
identified with VANITY FAIR.

ORIGINAL ARTICLES,

Suitable for the paper, and Original Designs, or suggestive ideas or
sketches for illustrations, upon the topics of the day, are always
acceptable, and will be paid for liberally.

Rejected communications can not be returned, unless postage-stamps are
inclosed.

Terms:

One copy, per year, in advance $4 00 Single copies, ten cents. A
specimen copy will be mailed free upon the receipt of ten cents. One
copy, with the Riverside Magazine, or any other magazine or paper price,
$2.50, for 5 50 One copy, with any magazine or paper price, $4, for 7 00

       *       *       *       *       *

All communications, remittances, etc., to be addressed to

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,

No. 83 Nassau Street,

NEW-YORK,

P. O. Box, 2783.

_(For terms to Clubs, see 16th page.)_

Mercantile Library,

Clinton Hall, Astor Place,

NEW-YORK.

This is now the largest circulating Library in America, the number of
volumes on its shelves being 114,000. About 1000 volumes are added each
month; and very large purchases are made of all new and popular works.

Books are delivered at members' residences for five cents each delivery.

TERMS OF MEMBERSHIP:

TO CLERKS,

$1 Initiation, $3 Annual Dues.

TO OTHERS, $5 a year.

SUBSCRIPTIONS TAKEN FOR SIX MONTHS.

BRANCH OFFICES

AT

NO. 76 CEDAR STREET, NEW-YORK,

AND AT

Yonkers, Norwalk, Stamford, and Elizabeth.

       *       *       *       *       *

AMERICAN

BUTTONHOLE, OVERSEAMING

AND

SEWING-MACHINE CO.,

563 Broadway, New-York.

This great combination machine is the last and greatest improvement on
all former machines, making, in addition to all the work done on best
Lock-Stitch machines, beautiful

BUTTON AND EYELET HOLES;

in all fabrics.

Machine, with finely finished

OILED WALNUT TABLE AND COVER

complete, $75. Same machine, without the buttonhole parts, $60. This
last is beyond all question the simplest, easiest to manage ant to keep
in order, of any machine in the market. Machines warranted, and full
instruction given to purchasers.

       *       *       *       *       *

HENRY SPEAR

STATIONER, PRINTER

AND

BLANK BOOK MANUFACTURER.

ACCOUNT BOOKS

MADE TO ORDER.

PRINTING OF EVERY DESCRIPTION.

82 Wall Street

NEW-YORK.

THE PLAYS AND SHOWS.

FROU-FROU.

[Illustration with letter 'T']

This nice little French drama has now been running at the FIFTH AVENUE
THEATRE more than seven weeks. It is the story of a man who killed the
seducer of his wife, and then forgave and received back again the guilty
woman.

The same tragic farce was played in Washington some eleven years ago.
The actor who played the part of the outraged husband made an effective
hit at the time, but he has never repeated the performance. Since then
he has become a double-star actor in a wider field, There are those who
insist that he is an ill-starred actor in a general way; but as he has
left the country, we can leave those who regard his absence as a good
riddance of bad rubbish, and those who call it a Madriddance of good
rubbish, to discuss his merits at their leisure.

After the execution of unnecessary quantities of noisy overture by the
orchestra, the play begins. Soon after, the audience arrives. It is a
rule with our play-goers never to see the first scene of any drama.
This rule originates in a benevolent wish to permit the actors to slide
gradually into a consciousness that somebody is looking at them; thus
saving them from the possibility of stage-fright. Simple folks, who do
not understand the meaning of the custom, erroneously regard it as an
evidence of vulgarity and discourtesy.

The first act is not exciting. Mr. G.H. CLARKE, in irreproachable
clothes, (the clothes of this actor's professional life become him, if
any thing, better than his acting,) offers his hand to FROU-FROU, a
small girl with a reckless display of back-hair, and is accepted, to the
evident disgust of her sensible sister, LOUISE.

_Sympathetic Young Lady who adores that dear Mr. Clarke_.--"How sweetly
pretty! Do the people on the stage talk just like the _real_ French
aristocracy?"

_Travelled friend, knowing that persons in the neighborhood are
listening for his reply_--"Well, yes. To a certain extent, that is."
(_It suddenly occurring to him that nobody can know any thing about the
Legitimists, he says confidently_.) "They haven't the air, you know, of
the genuine old Legitimist _noblesse_. As to BONAPARTE'S nobility, I
don't know much about them."

_He flatters himself that he has said a neat thing, but is posed by an
unexpected question from the Sympathetic Young Lady, who asks--_"Who are
the great Legitimist families, nowadays?"

"Well, the--the--(_can't think of any name but St. Germain, and so says
boldly_,) the St. Germains, and all the rest of 'em, you know." (_He is
sorely tempted to add the St. Clouds and the Luxembourgs, but prudently
refrains_.)

The second act shows the husband lavishing every sort of tenderness and
jewelry upon the wife, who is developing a strong tendency to flirt.
She insists that her sister LOUISE shall join the family and accept the
position of Acting Assistant Wife and Mother, while she herself gives
her whole mind to innocent flirtation.

_Worldly-wise Matron of evident experience_--"The girl's a fool. Catch
me taking a pretty sister into my house!"

_Brutal Husband of the Matron suggests_--"But she might have done so
much worse, my dear. Suppose she had given her husband a mother-in-law
as a housekeeper?"

_Matron, with suppressed fury_--"Very well, my dear. If you can't
refrain from insulting dear mother, I shall leave you to sit out the
play alone."

(_Sh--sh--sh! from every body. Curtain rises again_.) More attentions to
pretty wife, repaid by more flirtation at her husband's expense. Finally
FROU-FROU decides that LOUISE manages the household so admirably that
misery must be the result. As a necessary consequence of this logical
conclusion, she rushes out of the house with a gesture borrowed from RIP
VAN WINKLE, and an expressed determination to elope.

_Jocular Man remarks_--"Now, then, CLARKE can go to Chicago, get a
divorce, and marry LOUISE."

_This practical suggestion is warmly reprobated by the ladies who
overhear it, one of whom remarks with withering scorn_--"Some people
think it _so_ smart to ridicule every thing. To my mind there is nothing
more vulgar."

_The Jocular Man, refusing to be withered, assures the Travelled Man
confidentially that_--"The play is frightful trash, and as for the
acting, why, your little milliner in the Rue de la Paix could give MISS
ETHEL any odds you please." (_Both look as though they remembered some
delightfully improper Parisian dissipation, and in consequence rise
rapidly in the estimation of the respectable ladies who are within
hearing_.)

After the orchestra has given specimens of every modern composer, the
fourth act begins. FROU-FROU is found living at Venice with her lover.
Her husband surprises her. He is pale and weak; but, returning her the
amount of her dower, goes out to shoot the lover.

_Rural Person announces as a startling discovery_--"That's Miss AGNES
ETHEL who's a-playin' FROW-FROW. Well, now, she ain't nothin' to LYDDY
THOMPSON."

_Jocular Man says to his Travelled Friend_--"The idea of Miss ETHEL
trying to act like a French-woman! Did you hear how she pronounced
_Monsieur_?"

_Travelled Man smiles weakly, conscious of the imperfections of his own
pronunciation. To his dismay, the Sympathetic Young Lady asks_--"What
does that horrid man mean? How do you pronounce the word he talks
about?"

_Travelled Man, with desperation_--"It ought to be pronounced m--m--m--"
(_ending in an inaudible murmur_.)

"What? I didn't quite hear."

_The Travelled Man will catch at a straw. He does so, and says_--"Excuse
me, but the curtain is rising."

FROU-FROU, in a dying state and a black dress, with her back-hair neatly
arranged, is brought into her husband's house to die. He kneels at her
feet. "You must not die. I am alone at fault. Forgive me sweet angel,
and live." With the only gleam of good sense which she has yet shown,
FROU-FROU refuses to live, and dropping her head heavily on the arm of
the sofa, with a blind confidence that the thickness of her chignon will
save her from a fractured skull, she peremptorily dies.

_Subdued sobs from the audience, with the single exception of the
Jocular Man, who says_--"Well, if that's moral, I don't know what's
immoral; and I did think I had lived long enough in Paris to know that."

With which opinion we heartily coincide, adding also the seriously
critical remark that though Messrs. DAVIDGE and LEWIS play their comic
parts with honest excellence, and though Mr. CLARKE is really a good
actor in spite of his popularity with the ladies of the audience, Miss
ETHEL, upon whom the whole play depends, is so obviously incompetent to
personate a brilliant and _spirituelle_ Parisienne that one wonders at
the popularity of FROU-FROU. The majority of the audience are ladies.
Can it be that they like the play because it teaches that the sins of a
pretty woman should be condoned by her husband, provided she looks well
with her back-hair down?

MATADOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUNCHINELLO AND THE ALDERMEN.

The City Aldermen have called in a body to pay their respects to
PUNCHINELLO. PUNCHINELLO has not returned the compliment, since he likes
neither their looks, their diamonds, or their diamond-cut-diamond ways.
They curb streets by resolution, but they have not resolution enough to
keep the streets from curbing them. They gutter highways, but oftenest
let Low Ways gutter them. They wear fine shirt-fronts, but resort
to sorry and disreputable shifts in order to procure them. They are
gorgeously and gorged-ly badged with the City Arms in gold, but no city
arms open to badger them with golden opinions; and, altogether, the
Aldermen pass so many bad things that PUNCHINELLO can afford to let
them pass like bad dimes, before they are nailed to the counter of that
Public Opinion to which they run counter.

       *       *       *       *       *

Will the Aldermen Respond?

Do they who took up the SEWARD intend to perish by the SEWARD?

[Footer: Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1870, by the
PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY, in the Clerk's Office of the District
Court of the United States, for the Southern District of New-York.]

HINTS FOR THE FAMILY.

Since the first publication of the hints to economically disposed
families, PUNCHINELLO has received a great number of letters from all
parts of the country, cordially indorsing his course. One gentleman
writes that he has already saved enough money from the diminution in the
cost of his wife's pins (in consequence of her having adopted the plan
of keeping them stuck into a stuffed bag) to warrant him in subscribing
to this paper for a year. Many of the readers of our first number write
us that they now never take a meal except from a board, or a series of
boards, supported by legs, as PUNCHINELLO recommended. Highly encouraged
by this evidence of their usefulness, PUNCHINELLO hastens to offer
further advice of the same valuable character.

It may have been frequently noticed that all families require food at
certain intervals, generally three times a day, and in the case of
children even oftener. The cost of providing this food at the butcher,
baker, and provision shops is necessarily very great, and it is well,
then, to understand how a very good substitute for store-food may be
prepared at home. In order to make this preparation, procure from your
grocer's a quantity of flour--ordinary wheat flour--buying much or
little, according to the size of your family. This must then be placed
in a tin-pan, and mixed with water, salt, and yeast, according to taste.
If the mass is now placed by the fire, a singular phenomenon will be
observed, to which it will be well to draw the attention of the whole
family; old and young will witness it with equal surprise and delight.
The whole body of the soft mixture will gradually rise and fill (and
sometimes even overflow) the pan! When not in view by the household,
it will be well to cover the pan with a cloth, on account of dust
and roaches; but it must be observed that a soft and warm bedlike
arrangement will thus be formed, and if the family cat should choose to
make it her resting-place, the mixture will not rise.

After this substance is sufficiently light and spongy, it must be taken
out of the pan and worked up into portions weighing a few pounds each.
But it must _not be eaten_ in this condition, for it would be neither
palatable nor wholesome. It should be put in another pan and placed in
the oven. Then (if there be a fire in the stove or range) it will be
soon hardened and dried by the action of the heat, and will be fit to be
eaten--provided the foregoing conditions have been perfectly understood.
When brought to the table, it should be cut in slices and spread with
molasses, jelly, butter, or honey, and it will be found quite adequate
to the relief of ordinary hunger. A family which has once used this
preparation will never be content without it. Some persons have it at
every meal.

PUNCHINELLO has read with great pleasure a recently published book, by
CATHARINE BEECHER, and her sister Mrs. STOWE, the object of which is
to teach ingenious folks how to make ordinary articles of household
furniture in their leisure hours. One article not mentioned by these
ladies is recommended by PUNCHINELLO to the attention of all economical
families. It having been observed that it is a highly useful practice to
provide for the regular recurrence of meals, bedtime and other household
epochs, an instrument which shall indicate the hour of the day will be
of the greatest advantage. Such a one may thus be made on rainy days or
in the long winter evenings. Procure some thin boards and construct a
small box. If it can be made pointed at one end, with two little towers
to it, so much the better. Make a glass door to it, and paste upon the
lower part of this a picture representing a scene in Spanish Germany.
Paint a rose just under the scene. Then get a lot of brass cog-wheels,
and put them together inside of the box. Arrange them so that they shall
fit into each other and wrap a string around one of them, to the end of
which a lump of lead or iron should be attached. Then put a piece of
tin, with the hours painted thereon, on the upper part of the box,
behind the door, and get two long bits of thin iron, one shorter than
the other, and connect them, by means of a hole in the middle of the
tin, with the cog-wheels inside. Then shut the door, and if this
apparatus has been properly made, it will tell the time of day. Any
thing more convenient cannot be imagined, and the cost of the brass, by
the pound, will not be more than fifteen cents, while the wood, the tin,
and the iron may be had for about ten cents. In the shops the completed
article would be very much more costly.

In his "Hints" PUNCHINELLO always desires to remember the peculiar needs
of the ladies, and will now tell them something that he is sure will
please them. They have all found, in the course of their shopping, that
it is exceedingly difficult to procure at the dry goods stores, any sort
of fabric which is so woven as to fit the figure, and they must have
frequently experienced the necessity of cutting their purchases into
variously-shaped pieces and fastening them together again by means of a
thread. Here is an admirable plan for accomplishing this object. Take a
piece of fine steel wire and sharpen one end of it. Now bore a hole in
the other end, in which insert the thread. If the edges of the cloth are
now placed together, and the wire is forced through them, the operator
will find, to her delight and surprise, that the thread will readily
follow it. If the wire is thus passed through the stuff, backward and
forward, a great many times, the edges will be firmly united. It will
be necessary, on the occasion of the first puncture, to form a hard
convolution at the free end of the thread, so as to prevent it passing
entirely through. This method will be found much more convenient than
the plan of punching holes in the stuff and then sticking the ends
of the thread through them. In the latter case, the thread is almost
certain to curl up, and cause great annoyance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dies Irae.

The Philadelphia _Day_, on account of the immense success of
PUNCHINELLO.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sporting Query.

Was the fight between the "blondes" and STOREY of Chicago a Fair fight?

       *       *       *       *       *

Prospect of a Short Water Supply Next Summer.

A convention of milk dealers met this week at Croton Falls to prevent
the adulteration of milk by City dealers.

       *       *       *       *       *

LATEST FROM WASHINGTON.

Commissioner Piegan, of Montana, submits the outline of a treaty with
the Indians, which embraces the following provisions, (the embracing of
provisions being strictly in character:)

1. No infant under three months of age, and no old man over one hundred
and ten, to be killed by either party in battle.

All women to be killed on sight.

Where the small-pox is raging, the field to be left to the Small-Pox.

2. Presents to Indians to consist chiefly of arms, ammunition, and
whisky.

3. Liquor-sellers and apostles to be encouraged on equal terms.

4. Amateur sportsmen to be warned against killing Indians during the
breeding season.

5. Quakers and VINCENT COLLYER to be assigned to duty at Washington.

6. Four months' notice to be given of any intended attack on a White
camp.

7. In scalping a lady, the rights of property in waterfall and switch to
be sacredly regarded.

8. Declarations of love (during a campaign) to be submitted in writing.

9. The usual atrocities to be observed by both parties.

10. Hostilities to terminate when the last Indian lays down his
tomahawk, (to take a drink,) unless sooner shot by his white brethren,
or removed to a new reservation by the small-pox.

Action on this treaty is expected to take place in about ten years.

[Illustration: RATHER PERSONAL. _Ardent Lover._ "THEN, WHY, OH! WHY, DO
YOU SCORN MY HAND?" _Young Lady._ "I HAVE NO FAULT TO FIND WITH YOUR HAND,
BUT I _do_ OBJECT TO YOUR FEET."]

A DISTINGUISHED VISITOR.

IT is now settled that PIERRE BONAPARTE, who has been sentenced by the
High Court of Tours to leave France, is coming to New-York with the
intention of opening a pistol-gallery in partnership with REDDY the
Blacksmith. As the Prince is known to have "polished off" at least four
men with his revolver, his reception by the occupants of "Murderer's
Block" and other famous localities of the city will doubtless be very
enthusiastic. A suite of apartments is now being fitted up for his
accommodation in East-Houston Street--The rooms are very tastefully
decorated with portraits of the late lamented BILLY MULLIGAN and other
celebrated knights of the trigger. The Prince, it is understood, will
drop his title on his arrival here, and enter society as plain PETER
BONAPARTE--thus Englishing PIERRE, because it is French for stone, and
he thinks that his exploits entitle him to take rank in New-York as a
Brick.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Beginning and Ending of a Chicken's Life. HATCHET.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Best Envelope for a Sweet Note. "CANARY laid."

       *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN, PAST AND PRESENT.

DR. LORD, in a lecture lately delivered by him in Boston, on PHILIPPA,
the mother of the BLACK PRINCE, (who was a white woman,) told about
JANE, Countess of MONTFORT, (you all know who _she_ was,) and how She
once defended a fortress and defied a phalanx with eminent success. Of
her the lecturer said,

"Clad in complete armor, she stood foremost in the breach."

She did that, did she, this JANE of old? Tut, sir! that's nothing to our
modern JANES, crowds of whom are now yearning to stand "foremost in the
breeches."

       *       *       *       *       *

A Bill that the Young Democracy Couldn't Settle. BILL TWEED.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cool.

ENGLAND has a Bleak house, but New-York has a Bleecker street.

       *       *       *       *       *

A SOROSIAN IMPROMPTU.

One of the sisters of Sorosis, at the last meeting of the club, was
delivered of the following touching "Impromptu on some beautiful
bouquets of flowers:"

  "With hungry eyes we glanced adown
  The table nicely spread;
  Our appetites were very keen,
  And not one word was said,


  "Till of a sudden "Ohs!" and "Ahs!"
  Gave token of delight,
  As, from a magic flower-bed.
  Bright buds appeared in sight.


  "May this sweet thought suggest the way
  In which to spend life's hours;
  And we endeavor every day
  To scatter fragrant flowers."

The first verse reminds us not a little of several olden nursery rhymes
of a prandial and convivial character, of which the most prominent
is that relating to little JACK HORNER, who sat in a corner eating a
Christmas pie. But even he is not described as having "hungry eyes,"
though there is small doubt but that he had a good appetite, and was
"hungry o' the stomach." It is pleasant to know that the table was
nicely spread, though not as "keen appetites" would have demanded, with
bread and butter; but, as the subject calls for, with flowers--food of a
very proper character for hungry eyes to feed upon. Nor is it any wonder
that those of the sisterhood who went to the table expecting to find
something more substantial than flowers set before them, should at first
sight have been unable to utter one word. And only, after their first
astonishment and disappointment was over, the magical letters O's and
R's, which, we may presume, was a short way of calling for Old Rum,
to restore their drooping spirits, though our poetess, with a woman's
perverseness, would have us believe they were intended as "tokens of
delight."

Of the last verse we can only say that it is an evident plagiarism of
the well-known juvenile poem, commencing,

  "How doth the little busy bee
  Improve each shining hour,
  And gather honey all the day
  From every opening flower!"

We confess, though, that we are unable to discover the "sweet thought"
that is to "suggest the way"

"In which to spend life's hours!"

Moreover, we believe it would be tiresome and monotonous to be occupied
"every day" in scattering "fragrant flowers," even if we were certain
that the lovely members of Sorosis would regard them with "tokens of
delight."

"We regard this Impromptu as a failure, and call upon ALICE, and PHEBE,
and CELIA, and other tuneful members of the Sorosis Club to come to the
rescue of their unfortunate sister--the perpetrator of the above verses."

       *       *       *       *       *

Suggestive.

Our sheriff's initials--J.O.B.

       *       *       *       *       *

How to Rise Early.

Lie with your head to the (y)east.

       *       *       *       *       *

Query for Barney Williams.

Is the "Emerald Ring" a Fenian Circle?

       *       *       *       *       *

Not During Lent.

IT is hardly probable that General GRANT will dismiss FISH from the
Cabinet during Lent.

THE REAL ESTATE OF WOMAN.

DEAR PUNCHINELLO: We would not for the _World_--no, nor even for
PUNCHINELLO--cast any reproaches upon the vigorous movement made in
these latter days to find the real estate of woman; but why, tell us
why, should we find enlisted in this cause at present, as members of
the various _Sorosis-ters_, so many single sisters with pretensions to
youth?

[Illustration: THE TOURS OF MRS. JIFFKINS. _Tour_ 1.--SHE SEARCHES FOR A
MAN.]

We have always looked upon the champions of woman's righteousness, those
who believe in the _fee-male absolute_ as the real estate of woman, as
principally married women, whose housekeeping has proved a failure,
(except in the single item of hot water,) and certain ladies who have
lived to mature age without reference to men, and whom no man would take
even with the best of reference.

There surely must be something wrong, somewhere, when those in the
younger walks of age take on this armor.

Where is the need?

Why should they who have never had their young lives blighted by a
husband linger pathetically over the tyranny of the sterner sex?

Instead of shedding all these tears over other people's husbands, they
ought rather to rejoice that they have been spared such inflictions in
the past, and give exceeding great thanks that they are beyond danger of
such in the future.

[Illustration: _Tour_ 2.--SHE SEARCHES FOR A FIRE. "THERE'S SOMETHIN' A
SINGEIN'!"]

There may be other young women (if I may so speak) who are so
heart-broken because of the oppression of their sex, as wives, so
disgusted with the state matrimonial under the present constitution of
society, that they would not marry--oh! no.

Now, we all remember the cogent reason why John refused to partake of
his evening repast, and we assure these young persons that they have
nothing whatever to fear. The danger is past, and they are safe beyond
the possibility of a peradventure.

They are not the kind that men devour. And yet we can not help feeling
pity for them; their experience has been _trying_, but in vain; they
know what it is "to suffer and be strong"-minded; they have learned "to
labor and to wait," and it is well; for in all probability they will
wait for some time.

It may be that the poor creatures are afflicted by the thought
that _perhaps_ they may be called upon to make warning examples of
themselves, and marry; and that _perhaps_ the man they marry may be a
tyrant, and--but the contingency is too remote.

Some tell us that their youthful ardor is to uphold the standard of
woman's mission: they want to work.

Well, all we can say is--_go it_! for under the circumstances, with no
one to work for them, the best possible thing they can do is to work for
themselves. But couldn't they do more, or at least as much, without so
much noise? If they only had plenty to do, and not so much spare time to
talk about what they are going to do, wouldn't they be better off, and
poor frail man be the gainer thereby?

If they could only resolve upon such a course, and stick to it, don't
you think they would receive more aid, material and moral?

Many would gladly contribute of their substance in such a cause, with
overflowing hearts; and the world of man will gladly guarantee to those
who avow their determination not to marry, entire immunity from any
temptation in that direction.

As to the rest--those weak creatures who _will_ be satisfied with
good husbands and broad home-missions--they know no better; they will
continue to move in their limited spheres, benighted but happy, and
every thing will be satisfactory.

Lawyers tell us that since the statutes of 1848, a woman's _real estate_
has been within her own control; we take a broader view: we think it
_always_ has been within her own control by virtue of that old first
statute given to our gentle mother, EVE.

       *       *       *       *       *

AN OLD BAILEY PRACTITIONER.

In England they have an institution called the Old Bailey. It dealt from
time immemorial in such queer animals as "four-footed recognizances,"
and in such strong assistance to justice as "straw bail" affords. The
court-room of the Old Bailey may be called a historical vat of crime.
Until recently, New-York was Old Bailey-less. Now detectives go about
the streets singing an air which reminds one forcibly of the tune called
"Unfortunate Miss BAILEY," only that it is Mister BAILEY they have
missed. Old BAILEY is really like JOHN GILPIN in two respects; all
rumors about him begin by calling him "a citizen of credit and renown;"
and they generally end by referring to him as a man who was gone to
"dine at--where?"

Our New-York Old BAILEY has disappeared. Either the FULLERTON earthquake
has swallowed him up, or he has gone to the unknown land to which most
Spiritual mediums migrate. There never was a greater Spiritual medium
than Old BAILEY. He has had spirits on the brain during several years
past. He throve on spirits. He had only to rap on casks of spirits, and
greenbacks would rustle therefrom like trailing garments out of the
Spirit-world. He had assistant mediums in all the Federal officers. And
now the question asked of Commissioner DELANO, (who, by the way, in this
respect would gladly become DELA-yes) is "Canst thou call 'spirits from
the vasty deep?' and if thou canst, where is Old BAILEY?" Banker
CLEWS is one of his sureties, but he owns no Clews to his principal's
whereabouts. Do not PUNCHINELLO'S subjects all know that whisk brooms
sweep clean, and that no broom swept cleaner the Augean stables of
Federal plunderers than that wretched Old BAILEY'S whisky broom? There
is, however, an old proverb which claims that industrious brooms soon
wear out. But BAILEY is unlike a broom, in that no one can find a handle
to his whereabouts.

PUNCHINELLO has heard a great deal about the practice of the Old Bailey
in London. He thinks it likely that so long as the Administration
continues to protect Federal plunderers, and to cover their tracks
by attacks against alleged city and State abuses, these Old Bailey
practices recently introduced into the United States Courts and United
States procedure, within or without revenue offices, must soon entitle
a large number of Federal officers, all over the country, to be happily
styled "Old Bailey Practitioners."

       *       *       *       *       *

A Gay Young Joker.

Thus spake the old Republican Machiavel, THURLOW WEED, a day or two
since, to W.H. SEWARD, the sly old fox with the "little bell."

"TWEED 'l win."

"Tweedle-dee!" retorted SEWARD. "What d'ye mean by that?"

"I mean," rejoined THURLOW, "that his name, T. WEED, is identical with
one that erstwhile loomed largest in the sovereignty of the State of
New-York."

SEWARD smiled.

PHILADELVINGS.

"Mother! mother!" screamed a little girl from above stairs to her
maternal parent in the parlor. "Mother, I've been crying ever so long,
and HANNAH won't pacify me!" And now PUNCHINELLO notices that it is not
only little girls who act in this charming manner; for the Hon. WILLIAM
D. KELLEY, of Philadelphia, has just screamed over the Congressional
banisters that he must be pacified, or he will no longer serve the good
people of the Fourth District of Pennsylvania. Therefore some fifteen
hundred of his constituents have written him a letter, and have said
to him, "Dat he sall, de poo itty-witty darling-warling, have his
placey-wacey as longey-wongey as he wants it, and the nasty-wasty
one-legged soldiers sha'n't trouble him for situations any more, so they
sha'n't." So the poor fellow straightens himself up, ceases his sobbing,
and consents to be pacified and take his three thousand a year for a
little while longer. This may do very well for once in a while; but
the Honorable WILLIAM D. announces that, not only does he desire to be
pacified in regard to the people who expect him to get them situations,
but that he wants to be with his family for more than six months in a
year, and that his property affairs are a little mixed. Now, what if he
should ask, next time, that his family shall be assigned apartments in
the Capitol, and that he shall be put on the Grant Category, and be
presented with an estate by his grateful constituents? And suppose he
should declare that he would serve no more unless General LOGAN should
be included among the number of those from whose importunities he is to
be defended? The good Irish blood of WILLIAM D. has always boiled at
the sound of the slogan, for it generally means fight, and he
wants--pacifying. PUNCHINELLO respectfully presents his condolences to
the people of the Fourth District of Pennsylvania, and hopes that they
will have a happy time of it with WILLIAM D.

He has also noticed that the Philadelphians are having a lively and
brotherly dispute over their new public buildings; they don't know where
to put them. Most of the citizens are very much opposed to doing any
thing on the square; that is to say, Independence Square, where the
citizens assert their freedom by treading down all the grass, and making
a mud-flat of what was intended to be a turfy lawn. Some folks want the
buildings on PENN Square--so called because it is split in the middle,
and answers its intended purposes only on paper. But the good Quakers
hate to interfere with the rights of the blacks, whether they be men or
women, and so many of the latter make this square their abiding place
every summer, that it would seem like a violation of the spirit of the
Fifteenth Amendment to disturb them. But there is no doubt that the good
Philadelphians will have their new buildings some day, for they are
very enterprising. Witness the disposition of one of their leading men,
"Slushy" SMITH by name, who wants fifty thousand dollars with which to
open an avenue from the Delaware to Sixth street, basing his claims
upon the fact that such avenue will lead to Fairmount Park! Now, as the
nearest point of the park is two miles and a half from Sixth street, the
vigor of the scheme and the foreseeing character of the projectors are
worthy of a metropolis.

PUNCHINELLO is furthermore delighted to see that a son of PENN has
decided the great question of the Pope's infallibility, which so vexes
our OEcumenical fellow-creatures. POPE has been beheaded at Harrisburg,
and of course there is no further need to discuss his infallibility.
When a man loses his head, he is fallible. To be sure, the case was only
one of a picture of GRANT and his Generals, which hung in the State
Library, and in which POPE'S head was painted out, and Governor GEARY'S
substituted; but the act shows, on the part of the adherents of the
leaden-legged governor, a head-strong determination to proceed to
extremities which has given rise to the gravest apprehensions; but
PUNCHINELLO hopes for the best. It is expected that the Legislature will
soon compel the inhabitants of the City of Fraternites to send their
children to school, whether they like it or not. This is certainly
progression, and PUNCHINELLO now looks confidently forward to a law
compelling all Philadelphians to wash their pavements twice a day; to
have white marble front-steps (without railings) to all their houses; to
build said houses entirely of red brick, with green shutters; to make
their sidewalks of similar bricks, laid unevenly, to agitate passers-by
and so prevent dyspepsia, and that each house shall have at least one
little gutter running over its pavement.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Lost at Sea."

BOUCICAULT when he wrote the play.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER FROM A FRIEND.

FRIEND PUNCHINELLO:

Thee is right welcome; but thee should look upon this as a city of
Friends, and not place it in thy wicked pages, but rather in thy
Good Books--all the more since thee claims to exalt the good things
pertaining to pen and pencil, and this is the great City of Penn and
Pennsylvania.

If thee should come this way next summer, to ruralize, thee might
behold our swollen Schuylkill, and say, Enough! Thee might see our City
Fathers, and say, Good! Doubtless thee has heard of our butter? Well,
thee might then taste it, and also say, Good!--if thee likes. It is
cheap. Thee will understand me, friend, that it is cheap to say "Good"
and good to say "Cheap."

If thee will but talk "plain language," thee may circulate freely in
our streets, and behold our horses and dogs rubbing noses against the
fountains; nay, refreshing themselves thereat by the sight and sound of
little water!

Cruelty to Animals is Prevented--but thee knows this; for has thee not
thy BERGH? Thee does with _one_ BERGH, but we have two--Pittsburg and
Harrisburg--and, moreover, a proverb which says, "Every man thinketh
his own goose a SWANN" If thee needs, we can spare thee Harrisburg, and
trust to the laws of Providence.

But, friend PUNCHINELLO, if thee comes here, thee must be careful what
thee does. If thee does _nothing_, thee may be restrained. Thrift
accords not with idleness.

We permit none but official corner loungers and "dead beats;" and,
having a very FOX for a Mayor--whose police are sharp as steel
traps--thee comes into danger, unless thee be a Repeater. True, thee
might disguise thyself in liquor and--as friend Fox taketh none--escape.

This epistle is written out of kindly regard for thee, and because the
Spirit moveth me to wish thee well and a long life; although thee may
not live long enough to behold our new Public Buildings, the site of
which no man living can foresee.

I remain, thine in peace,

PHINEAS BHODBRIMME,

PHILADELPHIA, 3d Month, 29th, 1870. Mulberry Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Consolation for Contemplated Changes in the Cabinet. There are as good
Fish in the sea as ever were caught.

       *       *       *       *       *

Revels in the President's Mansion. The Black man in the White house.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nothing Like Leather.

A leather-dealer in the "Swamp" writes to us, asking whether we cannot
administer a good leathering to the prowlers who infest that district at
night. We don't know. Had rather not interfere. Suppose the poor thieves
find good Hiding-places there. Let the leatherist guard his premises
with a good-sized Black--and tan.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Raising Cain."

The Southern papers announce that cane-planting is generally finished,
which is more than can be said in this section, where it looks as though
the cane was about to usurp the place of the pen. We are not surprised,
however, to be informed that not half as much cane has been planted in
the South this year as there was last season, owing to the fact, no
doubt, that the Government has gone into the business of "raising Cain"
so extensively in that section.

       *       *       *       *       *

Good for a "Horse Laugh."

What is the difference between the leading _equestrienne_ at the Circus
and ROSA BONHEUR?

The one is known as the "Fair Horsewoman;" the other, as the "Horse Fair
Woman."

       *       *       *       *       *

A Drawn Battle.

Any fight that gets into the illustrated papers.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Suggestion.

It is proposed to transport passengers by means of the pneumatic tunnel.
In view of the dampness of this subterranean way, would it not be proper
to call it the Rheumatic tunnel?



THE UMBRELLA. (CONCLUDED.)

It has been suggested that should a select party from the Fee-jee
Islands, who never before had wandered from their own delightful home,
be thrown into London, they might immediately erect the copper-colored
flag, or whatever their national ensign might be, and take possession of
that populous locality by right of discovery. So, in like manner, should
you leave your umbrella where it would be likely to be discovered--say
in a restaurant, or even in your own hall--the fortunate and
enterprising explorer who should happen to discover it would have in
his favor the nine points of the law that come with possession, and the
remaining points by right of discovery--a good thing for dealers in
umbrellas, but bad for that small portion of the general public not
addicted to petty larceny.

DICKENS, in one of his Christmas stories, tells us of an umbrella that a
man tried to get rid of: he gave it away; he sold it; he lost it; but
it invariably came back; despite his moat strenuous exertions, like bad
_incubi_, it remained upon his hands.

This strange incident does not come within our present treatise; it is
of the supernatural, and we are seeking to write the natural history of
the umbrella.

The man who, has an umbrella that has grown old in his service is a
curiosity--so is the umbrella. If a man borrow an umbrella, it is
not expected that he will ever return it; he is a polite and refined
mendicant. If a man lend an umbrella, it is understood that he has no
further use for it; he is a generous donor whose right hand knows not
what his left hand doeth--neither does his left hand.

A reform with regard to umbrellas has lately been attempted. A very
expressive and ingenious stand has been patented, in which if an
umbrella be once impaled there is no chance of its abduction except by
the hands of its rightful owner. A friend of ours, who owned such a one,
placed all his umbrellas in its charge, and went his way joyfully with
the keys in his pocket. During his absence, a facetious burglar called
and removed umbrellas, stand, and all. Our friend concludes that it is
cheaper to lend umbrellas by retail.

Despite the apparent severity of these remarks, there may be much
romance connected with the umbrella. Many a young man immersed in love
has blessed the umbrella that it has been his privilege to carry over
the head of a certain young lady caught in a shower. In such a case the
umbrella may be the means of cementing hearts. Two young hearts bound
together by an umbrella--think of it, ye dealers in poetical rhapsodies,
and grieve that the discovery was not yours!

How many agreeable chats have taken place beneath the umbrella! how many
a _confessio amantis_ has ascended with sweet savor into the dome of the
umbrella and consecrated it for ever!

The romance alluded to may be spoiled if there be great disparity in
height. If the lady be very tall and you be very short, (so that you
can't afford to ride in an omnibus,) you will be apt to spoil a new hat;
and if, on the other hand, the lady be very short and you be very tall,
you will probably ruin a spring bonnet and break off the match.

Again, if you should happen to carry an umbrella of the vast blue
style--to your own disgust and the amusement of the multitude--and,
under such circumstances, you meet a particular lady friend, your best
course will be to pass rapidly by, screening yourself from observation
as much as possible.

It would also be awkward should the day be windy, and, as you advance
with a winning smile to offer an asylum to the _stricken dear,_ the
umbrella should blow inside out.

The poet has raised the umbrella still higher by making it the symbol of
the marriage tie. He says,

  "Just as to a big umbrella
  Is the handle when 'tis raining.
  So unto a man is woman.
  Though, the handle bears the burden,
  'Tis the top keeps all the rain off;
  Though the top gets all the wetting,
  'Tis the handle still supports it.
  So the top is good for nothing
  If there isn't any handle;
  And the case holds _vice versa_."

All will appreciate the delicate pathos of the simile. Speaking of
similes reminds us that there is one on Broadway. An enterprising
merchant has for his sign an American eagle carrying an umbrella.

Imagine the American eagle carrying an umbrella! As well imagine JULIUS
CAESAR in shooting-jacket and NAPOLEON-boots. The sign was put up in war
times, and was, of course, intended as a Sign of the times, squalls
being prevalent and umbrellas needed. Now that the squalls are over, let
us hope that the umbrella may speedily come down. Just here we close
ours.

[Illustration: ALAS! POOR CUBA! _Messrs. Fish and Sumner_. "LET HER STAY
OUT IN THE COLD."]

       *       *       *       *       *

"Ironing Done Here."

CAPTAIN EYRE'S conduct has raised the Ire of the whole civilized world.

       *       *       *       *       *

Right to a Letter.

THE Collector of the Thirty-second District is charged with having
committed larceny as Bailee.

[Illustration: THE DESCENT OF THE GREAT MASSACHUSETTS FROG UPON THE
NEWSPAPER FLIES.]

[blank page]

AN OLD BOY TO THE YOUNG ONES.

[Illustration with letter 'T']

To-day I'm sixty-nine--an Old Boy. But, bless you! I was three times as
old--I thought so then--when I entered on my nineteenth year. I tell
you, boys--but perhaps you know it already--that the oldest figure we
ever reach in this world, the point at which we can look over the head
of METHUSELAH as easy as you can squint at the pretty girls, is at
eighteen and nineteen. Every body else around about that time amounts to
little, and less, and nothing at all. What's the "old man"--your father,
at forty-five--but an old fogy who doesn't understand things at all?
Of course not; how could he be expected to? He didn't have the modern
advantages. He didn't go to school at five, the dancing academy at
seven; nor did he give stunning birthday parties at nine--not he. He
didn't wear Paris kid-gloves in the nursery, learn to swear at the
tailor at ten, smoke and "swell" at twelve, and flirt at Long Branch,
Newport, or Saratoga at thirteen. The truth is--you think so--the Old
Man was brought up "slow." And, to tell the truth, you had much rather
not be seen with him outside the house.

You are "one of the boys" now. I was, fifty years since. A long time
ago, that; but I've lived long enough to see and know that I was a great
fool then. You'll come to that, if you don't run to seed before. I see
now that what I then thought was smartness, was mere smoke; and it was
a great deal of smoke with the smallest quantity of fire. The people I
thought amounted to nothing, and whom I symbolized with a cipher, were
merely reflections of my own small, addled brain. I, too, thought the
old man slow, _passe_, stupid. I took him for a muff. He must have known
I was twice that. What does one of the boys at nineteen care for advice?
_I_ didn't--_you_ don't. It went in at the right ear and out over the
left shoulder. Old gent said he'd been there; I said I was going. I
did go. So did his money. My talent--if that's what you call it--was
centrifugal, not centripetal. I was a radical out-and-outer, as to
funds. I made lots of friends--you should have seen them. They swarmed--
when there was any thing in my pocket. They left me alone in solitude at
other times. At twenty-nine I got pretty well along in life. But I find
I did not know so much as at nineteen. I had seen something of the
world, and also something of myself. The more I saw and studied the
latter individual, the less I thought of him. I began sincerely to
believe he was a humbug. At thirty-nine, I knew he was; or rather had
been. By that time he had begun to mend--had he? He had married, and
there was call for mending, equally as to ways, means, and garments.
From that hour I cultivated in different fields. My wild oats were all
_raked_ in. I was getting away from nineteen very rapidly--happily
receding from the boy of _that_ period. Mrs. BROWNGREEN beheld a man
devoted to domestics and the dailies. The clubs I left behind me--twice
a week. I was at home early--in the morning. I kept careful watch of my
goings and comings--so did my curious neighbors. I had my family around
me--also sheriffs and trades-people. I stood tolerably well in the
community; for I was straight in those times even when in straits. But
there was one stand I never did like to take--anywhere in sight of my
tailors. They were ungrateful. I _gave_ them any amount of patronage,
and they turned on me and wanted me to pay for it. That's the way of the
world. It wants much, and it wants it long; and when its bills come in,
it is found to be the latter dimensions with an emphasis.

Well, boys, when you get out of the nineteens, you will begin to learn
something. First of all, that you don't know much of any thing. That's
the beginning of wisdom, though twenty is pretty well on to begin at a
good school. You will learn that frogs are not so large as elephants,
and that a gas-bag is sure to end in a collapse. You will learn that the
greatest fool is he who thinks he sees such in everybody else. You
will learn that all women are _not_ angels, nor all people older than
yourself "old fogies." You will see that humanity--or its best type--is
not made of equal parts of assurance, twenty-five cent cigars, Otard
punches, swallow-tail coats, and flash jewelry; and that the chances, in
the proportion of nine to one, are that "one of the boys" at nineteen is
one of the noodlest of noodles.

Truly,

JEREMIAH BROWNGREEN, _An Old Boy of Sixty-nine_.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE INDIAN.

Indians were the first inhabitants of this country. "Lo!" was the first,
only, and original aboriginal. His statue may be seen outside of almost
any cigar-store. His descendants are still called "Low," though often
over six feet in height. The Indian is generally red, but in time of war
he becomes a "yeller." He lives in the forest, and is often "up a tree."
Indians believe in ghosts, and when the Spirit moves them, they move
the Spirits. (N.B. They have no excise law.) They have an objection to
crooked paths, preferring to take every thing "straight." Although fond
of rum, they do not possess the Spirit of the old Rum-uns. They
are deficient in all metals except brass. This they have in large
quantities. The Indian is very benevolent; and believing that "uneasy
lies the head that wears a crown," he often scalps his friends to allow
them to sleep better. This is touching in the extreme. He is also very
hospitable, often treating his captives to a hot Stake. This is also
touching--especially to the captive. He is very ingenious in inventing
new modes of locomotion. Riding on a rail is one of these. This is done
after dinner, in order to aid the digestion, although they often "settle
your hash" in a different way. Indians are independent, and can "paddle
their own canoes." It is very picturesque to see an Indian, who is a
little elevated, in a Tight canoe when the water is High. (No allusion
to LONGFELLOW'S "Higherwater" is intended.) Indians are pretty good
shots, often shooting rapids. Their aim is correct; but as Miss CAPULET
observes, "What's in an aim?" (Answer in our next.) They are also
skilful with the long-bow. This does not, however, indicate that they
take an arrow view of things. Not at all. Sometimes, when reduced by
famine, they live on arrow-root. Sometimes they dip the points of their
arrows in perfume, after which they (the arrows, not the Indians) are
Scent. That this fact was known to Mr. SHAKESPEARE is shown by his line,

"Arrows by any other name would smell as wheat."

What is meant by the allusion to wheat is not quite clear; but it
probably refers to old Rye. An Indian may be called the Bow ideal of a
man. And then, again, he may not. It is a bad habit to call names. The
Western people have given up the Bow, but still retain the Bowie. "Hang
up the fiddle and the bow," (BYRON.) Perhaps it is arrowing to their
feelings. Perhaps it is not. The Indian is different from the Girl of
the Period. He has "two strings to his bow," while she has two beaux "on
a string."

       *       *       *       *       *

CAUSE AND EFFECT.

When the _Daily Trombone_ warns the POPE of Rome that his course is
prejudicial to the interests of true Catholics, the venerable prelate
doubtless adopts a new policy forthwith. When the _Evening Slasher_
informs NAPOLEON that unless he conciliates the people of France his
dynasty will be overthrown, the Emperor doubtless at once confers with
his Minister of State concerning the advice thus proffered. When the
_Morning Pontoon_ warns VICTORIA that her persistent seclusion is
damaging to the cause of the throne, Her Gracious Majesty, without
doubt, changes her habits of life instanter. When the _Sunday Blowpipe_
sagely informs BISMARCK that he is a blunderer, the great diplomatist is
probably thrown into convulsions by the appalling intelligence. When the
_Weekly Gasmeter_ coolly accuses the Czar of Russia of insincerity and
double-dealing, that potentate doubtless writes a private note to the
editor, defending his honor and policy. When the _Gridiron_ advises
VICTOR EMMANUEL to be less rigid in his diplomacy, or he will regret
it, beyond question V.E., alarmed and chagrined, reverses his policy in
accordance with the advice tendered. When the _Daily Pumpkin_ informs
GRANT that the people are disappointed in him, he simply smokes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Very Fishy!

An English exchange speaks of the Emperor of Russia as "a queer fish."
Must we infer from this that he is a Czar-dine?

[Illustration: RATHER A HARD HIT.

_Emily, (in conflict with the new Parson.)_ "THAT FASHIONS MAY BE
CARRIED TO EXTREMES, I ADMIT; BUT WOMEN, AT LEAST, TRY TO DISPLAY
_their_ PHRENOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTS TO THE BEST ADVANTAGE.]

       *       *       *       *       *

HIGH CHURCH AND LOW CHURCH.

We are frequently asked what is the difference between High Church and
Low Church?

We inquired of a Low Churchman for his definition of a High Churchman.

Well, said he, a High Churchman is a----Well, he is a----Well, I should
say he was a----Well, hang me, he is a----a High Old Pharisee.

We next inquired of a High Churchman what made a brother Low Churchman?

Well, he is a----Well, I say he is a----Well, some people call him a----
Yes, he is a----Well, he is a darned Low Pharisee.

We hope our efforts in getting at the truth are eminently satisfactory
to all interested, as they are to us.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Seasonable Hint.

One of the correspondents speaks of being ushered into the august
presence of the President. April presence would have been the more
appropriate expression--not to say First of April presence.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The Long, Long, Weary Day."

The Philadelphia _Day_.

       *       *       *       *       *

WEATHER PROPHECIES FOR MAY.

About the first of the month look out for squalls and damp weather. The
sun's rays may be warm, but the beefsteak will be cold. There will be
more or less cloudy days throughout the month--especially more. If the
mornings are not foggy, they will be clear--that is, if the almanacs are
not steeped to the covers in deceit. If we prophesy pleasant weather,
and it should prove stormy and disagreeable, you can have redress by
calling at the office of PUNCHINELLO.

       *       *       *       *       *

GREELEY ON BAILEY.

The _Tribune_ extenuates the defalcations of Collector BAILEY, on the
ground that "he fought the crowd" (other revenue defaulters) "zealously,
effectively, persistently," etc. Suppose that Mr. GREELEY, while
pursuing his wild career in the dire places of the city, should fall
in with a gang of pickpockets, and get hustled. Suppose that a strong
fellow came along and drove away the thieves. Suppose that the strong
fellow then "went through" Mr. GREELEY, and eased him of his purse,
watch, and magnificent diamond jewelry. Would Mr. GREELEY extenuate
the outrage because the strong fellow had previously "fought the crowd
zealously, effectively, persistently"?

       *       *       *       *       *

California Bank Ring.

The California Bank went back on the greenbacks. Congress, being not so
green, went back on the California Bank Ring. It was not a Ring of the
true metal.

       *       *       *       *       *

In Vino, etc.

Wine merchants should never advertise. "Good Wine needs no Push."

       *       *       *       *       *

INTERESTING TO BONE-BOILERS.

Comparative osteology has ever been a favorite study with PUNCHINELLO in
his lighter hours. He loves to compare a broiled bone with a devilled
bone, and thinks them both good; but he fails to hit upon an adequate
comparison for the boiled bones that poison the air of certain city
localities with their concentrated stenches. Why don't the Health
Inspectors make a descent upon the boilers of bones, and Bone their
boilers?

       *       *       *       *       *

"Jersey Lightning"

That most of the so-called foreign wines sold here are made in
New-Jersey, is proved by the strong Bergen-dy flavor possessed by them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sutro the Dore(r).

Sutro, having bored Congress to grant him a royalty on all the ore taken
out of the Comstock lode, now proposes to bore the Nevada mountains. He
says there are loads of silver in that lode. The principal metal thus
far shown by SUTRO is native brass. SUTRUO asks only the Letter of the
law--the royal--T.

       *       *       *       *       *

Query.

Does it follow that a FREAR charter will secure a Freer municipal
election?

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOK NOTICES.

A BATTLE OF THE BOOKS. Edited and published by GAIL HAMILTON.

New York: HURD & HOUGHTON.

A regular equinoctial Gail goes whirling and tearing through tin leaves
of this smart book. Its aim is to riddle and rip up the system by which
certain publishing houses crush authors, and defraud them of their
proper dues. The book is written with spirit, and has been issued in a
very attractive form by the Riverside Press.

HANS BRETTMANN IN CHURCH, WITH OTHER NEW BALLADS. By CHARLES G. LELAND.
Philadelphia: T.B. PETERSON & BROTHERS.

Mr. LELAND, so well known as one of the most learned of our German
scholars, has made a specialty of the character known in this country
as a "Dutchman." The little volume under notice, which has been very
tastefully set forth by Messrs. PETERSON, contains much amusing matter,
couched in that queer compound of German and English in the manufacture
of which Mr. LELAND excels.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are indebted to Messrs. GURNEY & SON for a number of photographs of
public characters, executed in the best manner of the art. The "mugs"
issued by Messrs. GURNEY are quite equal, if not superior, to that most
celebrated of all mugs, the "Holy Grail."

CONDENSED CONGRESS.

SENATE.

[Illustration with letter 'A']

Action in Congress has not been very lively of late. It is Lent; and the
exhilarating sort of entertainment provided by the "high requiem" of
a SUMNER, or the wild warbling of a DRAKE, is considered to be
unseasonable. The Senate is not a faster, though Senator SUMMER'S tongue
goes faster than any body else's in it; nor yet a prayer, though Senator
YATES is undeniably Prairie in his oratory; but it is a humiliation. As
Lord ASHBURNHAM well remarked when he saw it in its fresh hey-day,
we may repeat in its old salt-hay-day, "'Pon mee sole, uno, it is a
pudding-headed lot of duffers."


PUNCHINELLO finds nothing to make his weekly abstract and brief
chronicle of this asylum for elderly and uninteresting lunatics about
without making it too weakly. In the language of Bishop POTTER, when
asked by the Rev. Dr. DIX what he would do in the event of a heart
turning up, "I'll pass" to--

THE HOUSE,

which never fails to amuse and instruct. Mr. COX has been making a
shocking speech about the tariff. Mr. COX remarked that he once thought
there was nothing like it. But I have been travelling about since, he
said, with a summer-mote in my own buck eye in search of Winter Sunbeams
in my Corsican brother's. I have been in Corsica, and of Corsican find a
parallel of the latitude of this tariff in the leg ends of the robbers,
by which I do not mean the ankles of the Forty Thieves, whom I had
the pleasure of seeing in company with my "constituents of the Sixth
Congressional District of the City of New-York." Well, then, there was
a robber in Corsica of the name of PELEG HIGGINS, who found that his
business in the Robbin Rednest line was suffering from the opposition
of several other robbers in the neighbor and robbin' hood, who "went
through" his victims, to use an expressive phrase common among my
constituents, before he had his chance. PELEG thereupon went to the
priest of the parish, who assessed the sins of the robbers of that
vicinity, and offered him half the proceeds of his future crimes if
he would increase his tariff of penances on the opposition firms. The
priest drew up a schedule of the Whole Duties of Man. It was practically
prohibitory on murders, and robberies were assessed from sixty to eighty
per cent _ad valorem_. The other robbers remonstrated. The priest said
he would protect his parishioners. PELEG is now very much respected,
and owns an iron and log rolling establishment. The other robbers were
driven out of the business. That, Mr. COX said, was the origin of the
Protective Tariff.

Mr. KELLEY wished to know how much British Gold Mr. COX had received
for his infamous harangue. As for him, he was bound to protect his
constituents (Mr. COX, "Parishioners;" and laughter on the Democratic,
or other, side of Mr. KELLEY'S mouth.) As to the charge that he was
behind the age, it was absurd. Every Philadelphian knew that nobody
could be behind the Age. He advocated the principle expressed by the
Pennsylvanian bard,

  You tickle me and
  I'll tickle you.

Mr. LOGAN said the army ought to be reduced; and he treated with scorn
General SHERMAN'S intimation that it ought not to be reduced. General
SHERMAN had once told him that there was a Major-General whom the army
could spare. He (LOGAN) was a Major-General at the time. He did not know
whom General SHERMAN meant. He did not see the use of the regular army,
or of West-Point. In his State a man could get along just as well
without knowing any thing; and what was the sense of teaching officers?
The more they knew, the more they wanted to know. Give them an inch, and
they would take an ell. He didn't know what an ell an ell was, and he
didn't want to. He was willing to provide a staff, but not a crutch.

Mr. SLOCUM said he hoped it was not unparliamentary to observe that the
gentleman who preceded him didn't know what he was talking about. The
French staff is larger than our staff. So is the British United Service
Club. So is the Irish shillelagh. If the reductions proposed were
carried "out," the staff would stick at nothing. The arms of the service
might get on without a staff, but how about the legs.

       *       *       *       *       *

Allurements of the Period.

Novelty and nakedness are the elements to which modern managers of plays
and shows chiefly look for success. A new song, the name if which it is
unnecessary to give, has brought fresh fame and renewed fortune to the
proprietors of a celebrated minstrel theatre. Legs have contributed
their might to fill the coffers of some of our leading theatrical
managers--legs of the feminine gender, with much display about them, but
no drapery. Thus it will be seen that New Ditty in the one case, and
Nudity in the other, have taken the great public by the forelock and
led it to where the minstrels gesticulate, and the legs and footlights
quiver. And now the "lower animals" are touched by the whim of the
period, a leading attraction on the bills of the Circus being an
equestrian performance with "four naked horses."

       *       *       *       *       *

Sartorial.

A TAYLOR carried through the Mexican war; a DRAPER writes the history of
the civil war. Drapers and Taylors such as these understand how to mend
national Breaches.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Fatal Technicality.

"Wimming" have their rights in Wyoming; but then Wyoming can never
become "Woming" Territory. And what's to prevent it? Y, don't you
see?--that letter won't let her.

       *       *       *       *       *

BROADBRIM TO ABORIGINE.

  Friend PIEGAN! with the war-paint on thy cheek,
  I am thy friend; pray listen, then, to me--
  Nay, do not scalp me!--may a Friend not speak?
  Put up thy knife: I draw no knife on thee.


  Friend PIEGAN! can thee count the forest leaves?
  For every leaf, thee counts a Pale Face too!
  Full many strokes the Red Man now receives:
  But, PIEGAN friend, what can the Red Man do?


  The Small-Pox and the Fever strike him down;
  The White Man is his foe: he cannot live!
  For the Great Spirit tells him, with a frown,
  All men shall perish that will not forgive!


  The Pale Face has been here? thy child is killed?
  But little scales are hanging to thy belt!
  Say, when thy father's heart with wrath was filled,
  Did not thee know how thy White Brother felt?


  Now, PIEGAN friend! thee has enough of war!
  Bury the hatchet, and thy arrows break;
  Wait for the Happy Hunting Grounds afar--
  A Reservation that they cannot take!



The Latest from Albany.

'All--O.K. till December.

* * * * *

Up and Down.

The almost universal cry, "Down with the taxes!" is inconsistent in one
sense, because if taxes were Down, they would certainly be extremely
light.

       *       *       *       *       *

Running and Reid-in.

And now MAYNE REID is announced as having a lecture on BYRON. At this
rate we shall soon have BYRON'S memory embalmed in Stowe-Reid greatness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Good Roaming Catholics.

The Sisters of Charity.

A VISIT TO "SHERIDAN'S RIDE."

PHILADELPHIA, March 26, 1870.

DEAR PUNCHINELLO:

Taking my way along Chestnut Street a few days since, I found my
progress arrested at Tenth Street by a great current of humanity, that
swept with resistless force into the entrance to the Academy of Fine
Arts.

I, too, entered, and, passing around the familiar group of the "Centaurs
and Lapithae," which stands beneath the dome, was hurried breathlessly
onward by the throng, until I found myself face to face with that
_chef-d'oeuvre_ of modern art, T. BUCHANAN READ'S painting of
"SHERIDAN'S Ride."

Give the reins to your imagination, now, (a little horse-talk is
appropriate here,) and behold one thousand men and women, of refined
and cultivated tastes, doing tearful homage to the genius of the great
Poetaster--pardon me, Mr. T.B.R., Poet-artist was what I meant to have
said.

From these my critical orbs now wandered to the painting; from the
painting to PUGH, (the astute "engineer" of the "show,") and then to the
painting again. "What drawing!" remarked I. (PUGH smiled, and glanced
approvingly at the audience.) "There is much freedom and boldness in
it," continued I. "It is very broad, rich in color, and--" "In a word,"
interrupted a friend of mine, whose grandfather was a Frenchman, "full
of _chic_!" (PUGH blushed.)

Admirable and truthful, indeed, is the expression imparted by the artist
to the fleet General who suddenly became famous by being Twenty Miles
away from the Post of Duty!

The flashing eye; the close-cut military style of the hair; the fierce
moustache; the row of three buttons marking exalted grade; the vigorous
yet graceful movement of the sword-arm, and the cap disappearing in
the distance, indicative of the remarkable time making by the
"horsenman"--all these are admirable points in the picture, and worthy
of being closely studied by the student of Art.

As I gazed, a shock-headed young man, with a very red nose, whom I at
once recognized as a student of the Life Class, sneeringly observed that
the "flourish of the sword smelt a little of the foot-lights." (Artists
are ever jealous.)

It is easy to see that the clever painter of "SHERIDAN'S Ride" has
meaning in the flourish of the sabre. It indicates that his fleet hero
uses the weapon, not to "fright the souls of fearful adversaries," but
to accelerate with frequent whacks the speed of his heroic charger.
The horse has observable points, too, and especially one that might
be called by the superficial critic "faulty drawing." I refer to the
extraordinary fore-shortening--if the expression is in this case
allowable--of that part of the animal which extends from the saddle
backward. In this, again, there is a touch of nature that genius only
can impart. For what is more conceivable than that the hinder parts of
the heroic steed might have been cut away by an unlucky slash with the
edge of the sabre? There is precedent for this. Every schoolboy can
recall a similar accident which befell the horse of MUNCHAUSEN as he
dashed beneath the descending portcullis. And, as from that famous
steed's hind-quarters there sprang an arborescent shelter, so, also, as
a result of SHERIDAN'S "scrub race," do laurels shade that hero's brows.

My views of the cause of this fore-shortening are enforced when I state
that there is a fine atmospheric effect about the horse's tail, which
seems to indicate that it was considerably in the rear.

There can be no greater tribute to the powers of the artist, or the
worth of the heroic "horsenman," than the crowds which daily, in these
heretofore silent and hallowed precincts, "wake the echoes with sounds
of praise."

Yonder is "Death on the Pale Horse." As I gazed, Death smiled with
approval at "SHERIDAN'S Ride," and the stony figure of GERMANICUS "leant
upon his sword and wiped away a tear."...

Suddenly a pistol-shot rang through the vaulted aisles, and, amid the
shouts of men and shrieks of affrighted women, I ascertained that
a daring rebel, (one EARLY,) moved by the wondrous fidelity of
the picture, had drawn a revolver, and fired at the "counterfeit
presentment" of the man who had humbled him at Winchester.

Amid the confusion, a manly voice shouted, "Three cheers for the Hero of
Winchester!"

"That's Wright!" yelled the shock-headed young man with the red nose....

Then I left the scene, pondering as I went, "What manner of painter is
this, who can so deftly limn the features of a hero as to draw tears
from his worshippers and bullets from his foes?" And, as I pondered,
that abstruse conundrum of CHURCH, the artist, came to my mind: "What
if, after all, READ, your brush should steal the laurels from your pen?"

"What," indeed?

CHROMO.

[Illustration: CHARLEY, WHO HAS HAD HIS HAIR DRESSED AT THE BARBER'S,
SHOWS HIS LITTLE BROTHER, WITH THE AID OF THE CRUET-STAND, HOW IT IS
DONE.]

A Long Look-out.

The dome on the new court-house is expected to be completed by Domesday.

       *       *       *       *       *

Appropriate.

Lester Wallack has his "Tayleure" travelling with him during his
"starring" trip.

       *       *       *       *       *

"PLEASE THE PIGS."

Foreign Pig, we observe, furnishes a topic just now for writers in the
daily papers. IRON-ically speaking, pig, in the sense referred to, means
a lump of metal; but the _World_ of March 26th has an accidental,
though none the less curious, "cross-reading," which brings foreign pig
directly into contact with domestic. It says, (the _World_, not the
pig.)

"Protected foreign pig in New-York, $32."

Precisely on a line with this, in the next column, appears the
following.

"What between hogs and policemen, drunken women are being rapidly
exterminated in Philadelphia."

The _World's_ cross-reading is a capital one, bringing the pigs together
nicely, and suggesting the following remarks:

"Protected foreign pig in New-York, $32," very aptly applies to the
gangs of imported burglars and ruffians of all sorts who run riot in our
midst, and who can generally insure the "protection" of the police by a
_douceur_ so paltry even as $32.

Such hybrids as Philadelphia drunken women, "between hogs and
policemen," must be extremely disagreeable objects, and we are glad to
learn that they are nearly extinct. Here we are much worse off. Rowdy
characters, that may well be compared to "hogs," but are not often to
be seen "between policemen," are far too plentiful in New-York, and the
sooner they are "exterminated" the better.

       *       *       *       *       *

By a Broom.

Nassau street is in such a filthy condition as to suggest a change of
its name to Nausea Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Radical Ames.

To be Military Commander, and then United States Senator from
Mississippi.

A.T. Stewart & Co. HAVE OPENED THEIR STORE,

COVERING THE ENTIRE SQUARE BOUNDED BY BROADWAY, Fourth Avenue, Ninth and
Tenth Streets,

AND ARE DAILY REPLENISHING ALL THE VARIOUS STOCKS WITH

ELEGANT NOVELTIES, Imported and Selected Expressly for the Occasion.

       *       *       *       *       *

A.T. Stewart & Co. HAVE OPENED 5 Cases Extra Quality

_FRENCH PLAID BAREGES,_ Only 25 cents per Yard.

ALSO

FRENCH AND IRISH POPLINS, PARIS MADE

SILK FOULARDS AND BAREGE DRESSES, SOME VERY ELEGANT.

Ladies' Paris-Made Hats, Bonnets, Feathers, Flowers, etc.

BROADWAY, Fourth Ave., Ninth and Tenth Sts.

       *       *       *       *       *

Extraordinary Bargains IN CARPETS.

A.T. Stewart & Co.

ARE OFFERING

5 Frame English Brussels at $2 per Yard. Tapestry English Brussels at
$1.50 per Yd. Velvets at $2.50 and $2.75 per Yard. Royal Wiltons at
$2.50 and $3 per Yard. Moquettes and Axminsters at $3.50 and $4.

INGRAINS, THREE-PLYS, Etc., AT GREAT REDUCED PRICES.

ELEGANT NOVELTIES RECEIVED BY EVERY STEAMER.

BROADWAY, Fourth Avenue, and Tenth Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The two great objects of a learner's ambition ought to be to speak a
foreign language idiomatically, and to pronounce it correctly; and these
are the objects which are most carefully provided for in the_ MASTERY
SYSTEM.

The Mastery of Languages;

OR,

THE ART OF SPEAKING LANGUAGES IDIOMATICALLY.

BY THOMAS PRENDERGAST,

_ I. Hand-Book of the Mastery Series. II. The Mastery Series. French.
III. The Mastery Series. German. IV. The Mastery Series. Spanish._

PRICE 50 CENTS EACH.

_From Professor E.M. Gallaudet, of the National Deaf Mute College._

"The results which crowned the labor of the first week were so
astonishing that he fears to detail them fully, lest doubts should be
raised as to his credibility. But this much he does not hesitate to
claim, that, after a study of less than two weeks, he was able to
sustain conversation in the newly-acquired language a great variety of
subjects."

FROM THE ENGLISH PRESS.

"The principle may be explained in a line--it is first learning the
language, and then studying the grammar, and then learning (or trying to
learn) the language."--_Morning Star_.

"We know that there are some who have given Mr. Prendergast's plan a
trial, and discovered that in a few weeks its results had surpassed all
their expectations."--_Record_.

"A week's patient trial of the French Manual has convinced us that the
method is sound."--_Papers for the Schoolmaster_.

"The simplicity and naturalness of the system are obvious."--_Herald_
(Birmingham.)

"We know of no other plan which will infallibly lead to the result in a
reasonable time."--_Norfolk News_.

FROM THE AMERICAN PRESS.

"The system is as near as can be to the one in which a child learns to
talk."--_Troy Whig_.

"We would advise all who are about to begin the study of languages to
give it a trial."--_Rochester Democrat_.

"For European travellers this volume is invaluable."--_Worcester Spy_.

Either of the above volumes sent by mail free to any part of the United
States on receipt of price.

D. APPLETON & CO., Publishers,

90, 92, and 94 Grand Street, New-York.

       *       *       *       *       *

RED AS A ROSE IS SHE.

_Third Edition._

D. APPLETON & CO., 90, 92, AND 94 Grand Street, Have now ready the Third
Edition of

RED AS A ROSE IS SHE.

By the Author of "Cometh up as a Flower."

1 Vol. 8vo. Paper Covers, 60 cents.

From the New-York _Evening Express_. "This is truly a charming novel;
for half its contents breathe the very odor of the flower it takes as
its title."

From the Philadelphia _Inquirer_. "The author can and does write well;
the descriptions of scenery are particularly effective, always graphic,
and never overstrained."

D.A. & Co. have just published:

A SEARCH FOR WINTER SUNBEAMS IN THE RIVIERA, CORSICA, ALGIERS, AND
SPAIN. By Hon. S.S. Cox. Illustrated. Price, $3.

REPTILES AND BIRDS: A POPULAR ACCOUNT OF THEIR VARIOUS ORDERS, WITH A
DESCRIPTION OF THE HABITS AND ECONOMY OF THE MOST INTERESTING. By Louis
Figuier. Illustrated with 307 wood-cuts. 1 vol. 8vo. $6.

HEREDITARY GENIUS: AN INQUIRY INTO ITS LAWS AND CONSEQUENCES. By Francis
Galton. 1 vol. 8vo. $3.50.

HAND-BOOK OF THE MASTERY SERIES OF LEARNING LANGUAGES.

I. THE HAND-BOOK OF THE MASTERY SERIES. II. THE MASTERY SERIES, FRENCH.
III. THE MASTER SERIES, SPANISH.

Price, 50 cents each.

Either of the above sent free by mail to any address on receipt of the
price.

       *       *       *       *       *

BURCH'S

Merchant's Restaurant

and

DINING-ROOM,

310 BROADWAY,

BETWEEN PEARL AND DUANE STREETS.

_Breakfast from 7 to 10 A.M._ _Lunch and Dinner from 12 to 3 P.M._
_Supper from 4 to 7 P.M._

M.C. BURCH of New-York. A. STOW, of Alabama. H.A. CARTER, of
Massachusetts.

       *       *       *       *       *

HENRY I. STEPHENS,

ARTIST,

No. 160 Fulton Street,

NEW-YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

Important to Newsdealers!

ALL ORDERS FOR

PUNCHINELLO

Will be supplied by

OUR SOLE AND EXCLUSIVE AGENTS,

American News Co.

NEW-YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

J. NICKINSON

BEGS TO ANNOUNCE TO THE FRIENDS OF

"PUNCHINELLO"

RESIDING IN THE COUNTRY, THAT, FOR THEIR CONVENIENCE HE HAS MADE
ARRANGEMENTS BY WHICH, ON RECEIPT OF THE PRICE OF

ANY STANDARD BOOK PUBLISHED,

THE SAME WILL BE FORWARDED, POSTAGE PAID.

Parties desiring Catalogues of any of our Publishing Houses can have the
same forwarded by inclosing two stamps.

OFFICE OF

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,

83 Nassau Street.

[P.O. Box 2783.]

PUNCHINELLO.

APRIL 16, 1870.

[Illustration: ALARMING APPARITION OF SACHEM TWEED, TO A COMMITTEE OF
THE YOUNG DEMOCRACY.

_(Commissioner McLean was the only one of the fugitives our Artist could
catch, the rest having vanished around the corner.)_]

       *       *       *       *       *

Harper's Periodicals.

Magazine. Weekly. Bazar.

Subscription Price, $4 per year each. $10 for the three.

An Extra Copy of either the MAGAZINE, WEEKLY, or BAZAR will be supplied
gratis for every Club of Five Subscribers at $4 each, in one remittance;
or Six Copies for $20.

       *       *       *       *       *

HARPER'S CATALOGUE

May be obtained gratuitously on application to Harper & Brothers
personally, or by letter, inclosing six cents in postage-stamps.

HARPER & BROTHERS, New-York.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOWLING GREEN SAVINGS-BANK

33 BROADWAY,

NEW-YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

Open Every Day from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.

       *       *       *       *       *

Deposits of any sum, from Ten Cents to Ten Thousand Dollars, will be
received.

       *       *       *       *       *

Six Per Cent Interest, Free of Government Tax.

       *       *       *       *       *

INTEREST ON NEW DEPOSITS Commences on the first of every month.

HENRY SMITH, President. BEEVES B. SELMES, Secretary. WALTER ROCHE, Vice
Presidents. EDWARD HOGAN.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUNCHINELLO:

TERMS TO CLUBS.

       *       *       *       *       *

WE OFFER AS PREMIUMS FOR CLUBS

FIRST: DANA BICKFORD'S PATENT FAMILY SPINNER, The most complete and
desirable machine ever yet introduced for spinning purposes.

SECOND: BICKFORD'S CROCHET AND FANCY WORK MACHINES. These beautiful
little machines are very fascinating, as well as useful; and every lady
should have one, as they can make every conceivable kind of crochet or
fancy work upon them.

THIRD: BICKFORD'S AUTOMATIC FAMILY KNITTER. This is the most perfect and
complete machine in the world. It knits every thing.

FOURTH: AMERICAN BUTTONHOLE, OVERSEAMING, AND SEWING-MACHINE. This great
combination machine is the last and greatest improvement on all former
machines. No. 1. with finely finished Oiled Walnut Table and Cover,
complete, price, $75. No. 2, same machine without the button hole parts,
etc., price, $60.

WE WILL SEND THE

  Family Spinner,                     price, $8, for  4 subscribers and $16.
  No. 1 Crochet,                        "     8,  "   4      "       "   16.
  "  2    "                             "    15,  "   6      "       "   24.
  "  1 Automatic Knitter, 72 needles,   "    30,  "  12      "       "   48.
  "  2     "        "     84    "       "    33,  "  13      "       "   52.
  No. 3     "        "    100 needles, price $37, for 15 subscribers and $60.
  "  4     "        "     2 cylinders
  1 72 needles )"    40,  "  16      "       "   64.
  1 100 needles)

No. 1. American Buttonhole and Overseaming Machine, price, $75, for
20 subscribers and $120. No. 1. American Buttonhole and Overseaming
Machine, without buttonhole parts, etc., price $60, for 25 subscribers
and $100.

Descriptive Circulars

Of all these machines will be sent upon application to this office, and
full instructions for working them will be sent to purchasers.

Parties getting up Clubs preferring cash to premiums, may deduct
seventy-five cents upon each full subscription sent for four subscribers
and upward, and after the first remittance for four subscribers may send
single names as they obtain them, deducting the commission.

Remittances should be made in Post-Office Orders, Bank Checks, or Drafts
on New-York City; or if these cannot be obtained, then by Registered
Letters, which any post-master will furnish. Charges on money sent by
express must be prepaid, or the net amount only will be credited.

Directions for shipping machines must be full and explicit, to prevent
error. In sending subscriptions give address, with Town, County, and
State. The postage on this paper will be twenty cents per year, payable
quarterly in advance, at the place where it is received. Subscribers
in the British Provinces will remit twenty cents in addition to
subscription.

All communications, remittances, etc., to be addressed to: PUNCHINELLO
PUBLISHING COMPANY P.O. Box 2783. No. 83 Nassau Street, New-York.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punchinello, Vol. 1, No. 3, April 16,
1870, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCHINELLO, APRIL 16, 1870 ***

***** This file should be named 9549.txt or 9549.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/5/4/9549/

Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Ronald
Holder and the Online Distributed Proofreaders


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
